Lewis Hamilton has said he wants to play a fundamental part in Formula One’s ambitious and radical plans to address the climate emergency. Hamilton has repeatedly made his concern for the environment clear and has committed to pursuing a sustainable lifestyle. The British driver, who goes into this weekend’s Brazilian Grand Prix having won his sixth world championship, believes F1 faces a difficult challenge but one on which he is committed to working. This week Formula One announced its intention to reach a target of becoming carbon neutral by 2030. The plan – announced by Chase Carey, chief executive of the F1 owner, Liberty Media – is a major initiative for the sport, which undertook a comprehensive study of its environmental footprint over the past 12 months. “I don’t see why it won’t happen,” Hamilton said. “I am definitely open to working with F1 and the FIA. I have been talking to Chase for nearly three years saying we have to do something together. We haven’t figured out what that role is but it is something in this area.” Hamilton believes a concerted effort was required across the sport. “Anything is possible as long as they mean it,” he said of the proposals. “You have to put your mind to it. It’s not like we have a lack of money to make the changes, the teams have to want to do it. My team, Mercedes, does. “I’ve not heard about Ferrari or any of the other teams but they need to be on the same journey because it is going to take the whole of the sport to make the change.” F1’s review revealed the sport produced 256,000 tons of CO2 in a season. With 10 teams competing across 21 races around the world and the calendar expanding to 22 meetings next year, achieving the target of a net carbon impact of zero in 11 years will be a major task. Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel was also vehement the sport should be acting swiftly. “It’s a great message and it’s about time,” he said. “It’s great to see people can make decisions and make a change. It is an ambitious target but I would like to see some of the goals achieved sooner. It is a must in our times and we can’t afford to wait. “The challenge is quite clear. To improve our sport, enhance the show, grow passion based on the values that we share but make them sustainable. It is an incredible challenge but about time.” F1 has also committed to making all grands prix fully sustainable events by 2025. The carbon zero target is to be pursued by the development of a carbon neutral power unit using synthetic fuel; using renewable energy across the sport’s facilities, offices and factories; ensuring the logistics and travel are as efficient as possible and using carbon capture and tree-planting to offset anything that cannot be eliminated.