Have You Heard George’s Podcast? (BBC Sounds)How’s Work? With Esther Perel (Spotify) Much trumpeting from the BBC to herald the second series of Have You Heard George’s Podcast?, five episodes of which were released on BBC Sounds last week. The trumpeting is justified, given that George Mpanga (AKA George the Poet)’s independently produced first series, which came out at in 2018, won four gold awards at the British Podcast awards, plus two silvers and the podcast of the year. The BBC has swept in, gathered George to its voluminous bosom, and, I hope, paid him and producer Benbrick actual money to produce the second series. Mpanga, being Mpanga, has responded to his new sponsor by telling it to eff off. He actually yells “Fuck you, BBC!” in the fifth episode of this new series, A North West Story. This is quite a shock, not because of the words, but because of the anger. Mpanga has been careful to keep any rage reined in during his first series, but in this episode, which addresses who his listeners might be and why they might be listening, there are moments when he seems properly furious. He’s a man who is in touch with his feelings, and is able to express them in many different forms, whether subtle or in-your-face. Actually, he plays with them, and, so, us. He beguiles with his intelligence; he confuses with his flights of fancy; he questions our assumptions, draws us into his subconscious and sends us spinning out across continents, before taking the mickey out of himself and us for listening at all. But let’s rewind. George’s Podcast is, as you may have guessed, an experimental one. Flipping between forms, using poetry, fiction, news, history and music, he is telling us a larger story than the one contained in each individual show. And he’s more explicit about what his true aim in this series is: he wants to enlighten and empower the next generation of BAME kids. He used to want to be a politician. Now he knows that he is more likely to achieve his goal through entertainment. He covers all this in the first episode of the new series, Sabrina’s Boy, which uses the biography of a real-life rap star (I’m not revealing who it is) to explore a larger discussion of blaxploitation films, Reaganomics and why drug dealing and murder can seem the only options for black youth, whether in the 1970s and 80s US or contemporary UK. Over the next three episodes, things get weirder: we essentially take a ride around Mpanga’s head, partly while he’s sleeping. Some of this works well, some less so (the journey through his snoozy brain gets a bit The Numskulls), but at all times, the dynamics and tone keep you listening. Plus, there’s his self-awareness: that episode ends with two of his friends dragging him about whether anyone will understand what he’s trying to say. And then the fifth episode uses Mpanga’s own history of growing up on St Raphael’s estate in Neasden, London, to explain his current and constant state of mind. There’s so much packed into this podcast, and yet, you feel, Mpanga still has reams more to say. Another favourite podcaster returned last week. Esther Perel, the couples’ psychotherapist who persuades her clients to let us listen in to sessions, has a new series on Spotify: How’s Work? This opens with emotional clips from her interviewees and is, interestingly, very like her couples’ therapy series Where Should We Begin?, but for work. The first episode is about friends – two men – who built an oil company together. Now one of them has a new idea and the other isn’t keen… so should they split up? If you’re a dream team, did you succeed because of the dream, or because of the team? Not quite as absorbing as Where Should We Begin?, simply because running a business isn’t such a universal experience, but it’s enlightening to hear Perel skewering, with kindness, an “I did it all” ego. “Once you accept you are not the source of all failure,” says Perel, “you have to accept you are not the source of all success.” Her candid truth is like a douse of cold water. Fabulous. The SlowdownFive minutes of poetry, every day. Presented by Tracy K Smith, this is a US podcast, produced in partnership with the Poetry Foundation. Smith herself was the US poet laureate from 2017-19 and won the Pulitzer prize for her collection Life on Mars. She has a lovely reading voice, and her introductions are thoughtful and aware of larger cultural and political themes. Unsurprisingly, the poems chosen are not from the usual white male canon. With more than 250 episodes to choose from, if five minutes isn’t enough, you can keep going for hours. The VerbRadio 3’s long-running “cabaret of the word”, which features poetry, performance and new writing. Ian McMillan, in his delightful Yorkshire tones, along with umpteen other poets and authors who read with relish, keeps the verse fires burning even as other literary programmes are decommissioned. With episodes stretching back to 2007, the archive is sans pareil, and if you like early morning tweets that describe, beautifully, what’s out there in nature and human life, then @IMcMillan is your man. A wonderful show. First WordsBroadcast last Monday on Radio 4, this is an inspiring documentary about Young Identity, a Manchester-based poetry group, and Shirley May, Young Identity’s leader, who started out herself in the spoken-word scene. May’s life energy lights up the programme, and her interviews with her young protégés are inspiring. One barely spoke for the first six months at the club, another decided to become a writer while standing in a hole, shit-shovelling. They all refer to Young Identity as family.