What’s your job?I manage our department’s engineering graduates, year-in-industry engineering students, summer-placement students and work-experience candidates. I support graduates from induction through to their first appointment at the end of our two-year programme, helping them align their objectives to the Engineering Council’s UK Standard for Professional Engineering Competence (UK-Spec) and making clear what’s expected of them. Graduates sign up to a training agreement which helps them work towards qualifying as chartered or incorporated engineers. My role is to help them achieve a broad experience across the company to further them on that training journey. So they’re working towards a professional accreditation?Yes. You may have a degree but that does not make you an experienced and competent engineer. A professional qualification as a chartered engineer or an incorporated engineer is recognised on the world stage. How did you find Andrew?He applied for our graduate scheme through our national recruitment campaign. He put himself through a degree with the OU, which he self-funded while working full-time. It’s very admirable. He’s had to work incredibly hard to get here. Do OU students stand out from other graduates?Definitely. A mature student who has chosen to study while working and taking care of a family often has a different mindset to a young person with little work experience. Does his drive to succeed impact his work?Absolutely, yes. Andrew is originally from Doncaster but accepted a place on our graduate programme in Milton Keynes and that’s another sign of his commitment – his willingness to spend time away from his family in order to achieve his aim. He has now taken up a permanent position in York so it worked out really well for him in the end. His attitude made him stand out. How?He was very quick to understand that he needed to build a professional network, and he did so very successfully. He went to every extra-curricular event he could, whereas not all graduates apply themselves to all the opportunities available to them. He also made some major changes to the way track maintenance is done, and these have been rolled out across the company. What were you doing before working for Network Rail?I’d been working in a factory that makes ingredients for pet food for eight years and I had one of those epiphany moments. I didn’t want to become an old man and look back and think that’s all that I ever did. When you’re earning good money, it’s difficult to make a change but I felt I had more to give than that. How did you engage with the OU?I chanced upon it, really. I was at my mum’s house and my sister and brother-in-law had a load of textbooks. They’d started courses with the OU so I asked them about it. We weren’t on a ton of money and my wife wasn’t working but I funded it myself. How did your company react to you becoming a student?As part of studying engineering, you’re supposed to look for mentorship and try to get hands-on experience so I went to speak to the engineering manager but, by the end of the conversation, he basically told me he didn’t think I’d ever make an engineer. They wouldn’t even release me to attend my final exams each year; I had to take annual leave. It must have been difficult to motivate yourself without supportSomething like that can push you one of two ways. You either think: “I’m going to show him he’s wrong”, or you throw it in. I’m the kind of person that if someone tells me I can’t do something – unless it’s actually physically or technically impossible – I’m going to give it a try. I think that’s why I stayed the course. How long did it take you to complete your degree?Six years studying part-time (eight hours per week minimum) while working full-time days and nights in 12-hour shifts. I’d want to employ anyone who does that! How did you manage?One of the big things I learned was time management. There have been times when the family are out in the garden with the paddling pool and I’m at the kitchen table studying. And in the canteen, while all the other lads were playing cards, I was sat in the corner reading a book. What happened when you graduated?When I got to the end of my studies, I needed to make it all pay off. A lot of engineering jobs ask for three years’ experience, which I didn’t have, and there weren’t that many jobs going due to the recession. I looked for information on graduate schemes and decided to apply for one a day until I got something. I applied for the Network Rail graduate scheme and did online testing and a video interview and then I got invited to a graduate assessment centre in Glasgow. How did it go?I got a response saying I hadn’t been selected but they’d put me on the shortlist. A few weeks later, they phoned me up and offered me a place on the graduate scheme based in Milton Keynes. How did you manage working in Milton Keynes and living in Doncaster?It’s a three-hour commute so I looked into staying in Milton Keynes throughout the week but renting one room in a house was going to cost £550 a month. A friend I went to school with had moved there and she offered me their box room for £200 a month. I went down on a Monday morning and came back on a Friday afternoon, so I was able to put the hours in. I acted like a sponge and got to have lots of conversations about engineering with technical experts, which gave me a really good grounding from day one. During my graduate scheme, I did a free short course in data analysis and learned to use a programming language called Python, and now I’m in the top 1% in the organisation for being able to do data analysis. So your drive to learn has helped you to continue achieving?That’s engineering though, isn’t it? If there’s a problem and it can be solved, that’s what you’re driven to do. People say there’s no social mobility any more but I come from a working class background and I got my hands dirty for 14 years making pet food. Now I am an asset engineer providing a track engineering support service. But if people hadn’t taken the time to sit down and have those conversations with me … I’m thankful to Network Rail and the OU for helping me get here.