“Now if you’re a Democratic primary voter, I know what you’re thinking,” said Seth Meyers on Monday’s Late Night. “You’ve been watching the rampant corruption of the Trump presidency, the catastrophic failure of the Trump administration, and the destructive influence the wealthy have had on politics and you’re saying to yourself: you know what can fix this? A different rich guy.” That self-appointed rich guy of the moment would be former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, who has filed paperwork to enter the Democratic primary field, “because if we’ve learned one thing from the last decade of politics – from the financial crisis to the Trump presidency – it’s that rich people, with zero exceptions, know what they’re doing,” joked Meyers. Bloomberg is mulling a campaign because he’s dissatisfied with the current Democratic field – despite, according to Meyers, polls showing that voters feel differently. “There just doesn’t seem to be an appetite right now for another billionaire president to swoop in and save us from the current Democratic candidates,” Meyers explained. “People want to change the system, but it’s hard to convince someone that a system is broken when that system gave them billions of dollars.” But billionaires such as Bloomberg are concerned about the candidacies of Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, who have openly called for tax increases on the uber-wealthy. Which perhaps explains why Bloomberg’s main supporter is, reportedly, the Amazon founder Jeff Bezos. “Wow, he just ordered up a presidential candidate – what level of Amazon Prime is that?” Meyers said. “People aren’t just mad at billionaires out of jealousy or because candidates demonize them. They’re real-world examples that are informing people’s doubts that the wealthy can solve everything,” Meyers continued. He pointed to Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, who stumbled in testimony before Congress when pressed on Facebook’s new policy to not factcheck political advertisements on its platform, and the JP Morgan chief, Jamie Dimon, who deflected any responsibility for the 2008 financial crisis and made $31m last year. “We’re living in an unprecedented era of massive inequality, and there’s a hunger among voters for a candidate who will fight for systemic change,” Meyers concluded. “Voters don’t seem to want a self-appointed billionaire savior to ride in and save them and if you think you are that savior, you might actually just be,” to quote a heckler of billionaire potential candidate Howard Schultz, an “egotistical billionaire asshole”. On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah also addressed Michael Bloomberg’s potential presidential candidacy, stemming from his dissatisfaction with current Democratic candidates. “You have to admit,” Noah said, “that’s such a billionaire thing to do.” If one billionaire 2020 candidate wasn’t enough for you, we have some good news: pic.twitter.com/ijhHFobX8g “If a normal person is worried about someone’s incompetence, like, what do we do? We just hope for the best. We’d just be like, ‘Oh, I don’t think this pilot can land the plane. I’m just gonna text my family.’” But a billionaire is “just like, ‘I just bought the plane and fired the pilot, now I’ll land it myself.” Meanwhile, the current Democratic candidates are not giving Bloomberg a warm welcome into the primary. At a recent rally, Bernie Sanders said simply: “Sorry! You ain’t gonna buy this election.” Noah gets it, he said. “The only reason it’s even possible for Bloomberg to jump into the race so late isn’t because he has like a groundswell of popular support behind him; it’s that he has $53bn to spend.” According to Recode, Bloomberg is considering a run after being personally called by Bezos. And “whatever you think of Bloomberg, you have to admit: it’s not a great look for him and Jeff Bezos to be teaming up on this presidential run,” said Noah. “I mean, can you even imagine what it sounds like when two guys with a combined net worth of $160bn hatch a plan together?” In Los Angeles, Kimmel recapped a weekend of distractions for the president, starting with his Twitter feed, on which he posted 80 tweets on Saturday. “You know, people thought it was magnanimous when he decided not to take a presidential salary,” said Kimmel. “Turns out it’s because he doesn’t do any presidential work.” Ahead of the first televised impeachment inquiry hearing on Wednesday, Trump announced that he will release a transcript from another call with the Ukrainian president, Volodomyr Zelenskiy. “Sequels are rarely better than the original,” said a skeptical Kimmel. “The reason they’re releasing it tomorrow instead of today is that they need time to finish writing it. “What he thinks this will prove, I have no idea. Just because you release a transcript of a second call where you didn’t break the law, doesn’t mean you’re off the hook for the first.” Also over the weekend, Trump announced a Maga rap challenge, tweeting that the winner of the contest would be received at the White House. Kimmel played several of the submissions, with lines such as “I’ve been on the Trump train and it’s a freakin’ ride / and if Trump keeps it up, I’ll never leave his side.” To be clear, Kimmel said: “Trump said he’s going to meet the winners of the contest at the White House. Which means he definitely won’t meet the winners of the contest at the White House.”