Hong Kong’s justice minister, Teresa Cheng, fell to the ground after being surrounded by furious pro-democracy demonstrators outside an event in London. The incident on Thursday night was the first direct altercation between demonstrators and a government minister since the protests, now in their sixth month, erupted in the international finance hub. Video of the incident outside the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators in Bloomsbury Square showed protesters surrounding and yelling “Shame on you” at the deeply unpopular cabinet official. She is then seen falling to the ground, though it is not clear if she was pushed. She regained her feet moments later and was escorted away with no visible signs of injury. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, said in a statement that Cheng had suffered “serious bodily harm” during the altercation. She described the behaviour of the protesters involved as “barbaric” and a violation of “the principles of a civilised society”. The Chinese embassy in the UK said Cheng was pushed to the ground and sustained a hand injury. “(Cheng) was besieged and attacked by dozens of anti-China and pro-independence activists,” the embassy said in a statement. The incident showed that the “violent and lawless perpetrators” were taking their violence abroad, it said. China has lodged a formal complaint with Britain and urged British authorities to investigate. Cheng is in London on a visit to promote Hong Kong’s role as a dispute resolution and deal-making hub. Cheng, whose department is in charge of prosecuting protesters who have filled city streets for months, is the first senior Hong Kong official to be injured in scuffles since the unrest began in June. She is one of the most unpopular government officials in Hong Kong, seen as playing a key role in pushing forward the now-shelved extradition bill to China, which sparked the unrest. The protests have tipped into worsening violence with two people dead in a week and further protests planned for Friday. For a fifth straight day on Friday, protesters caused widespread disruption with barricades and rallies. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report