Roland Rudd has stepped away from the People’s Vote campaign, leaving two of his allies in charge of the organisation. The City executive and head of Finsbury PR resigned as the chairman of Open Britain, one of the pro-EU groups campaigning for a second referendum and the largest constituent organisation under the People’s Vote umbrella. Open Britain’s new chair is Anne Weyman, a former chief executive of the Family Planning Association, the Times disclosed. Her deputy is Geeta Sidhu-Robb, the founder of Nosh Detox, a nutrition business. There still appears to be no obvious route back for the two former staff members who were ousted by Rudd and his supporters, the campaign’s former director, James McGrory, and the former head of communications, Tom Baldwin. They were kicked out last month in a “boardroom coup” and have been prevented from returning to its offices in Millbank, central London. The move prompted a walkout of staff, most of whom are still to return. Lord Mandelson, Alastair Campbell and Trevor Phillips were among the remain luminaries who criticised Rudd’s tactics. Staff claim that Rudd’s coup was possible because he had quietly taken control of Open Britain using another company, Baybridge. The two warring sides have been trying to come to a compromise, but cannot agree on basic facts. While Rudd’s supporters say he also resigned on Friday as the chair of the People’s Vote campaign, staff insist he was never installed in that position. “It would be like Idi Amin resigning as the King of Scotland,” said one. A source close to staff members opposed to Rudd said they had made an offer to management in the last 24 hours which would allow them to return but were yet to receive a response. “We want to get this campaign back on track but have been prevented from doing so because of boardroom machinations and a hostile City-style takeover of a popular movement. “The changes at Open Britain are just window dressing because Roland Rudd still controls Baybridge. “A meaningful deal has been on the table for 24 hours … we are still awaiting a response from the Open Britain board,” the source said. A friend of Rudd said he had always planned to step down and was pleased that two women would now take the organisation forward. “He said on several occasions that he wished to leave the organisation in good hands,” the friend said.