Few of us have the creative vision needed to turn a featureless box with no side windows into an urban des res. But Neil McLachlan is an interior designer and discovering a property’s hidden potential is his trade. So when the New Zealander spotted an ad for a “surprisingly affordable” apartment on the ground floor of a vast, inter-war mansion block in Bloomsbury, in central London, he sensed an opportunity. A modest side entrance and a long, unpromising corridor lead to the 65m2 space, which originally served as the caretaker’s workshop. “I was worried it would be very dark, but the last owner was a photographer who’d added the skylights,” says McLachlan. “The apartment is south-facing so it always feels bright. For me, it’s about volume and light. This place had both, so I knew I could make it work.” McLachlan, who divides his time between London and Wellington, originally studied fashion and had an eponymous label in the late 1980s (stockists included Barneys in New York) until he decided that, like his father, the Modernist architect Ron McLachlan, he preferred “buildings to the bonkersness of fashion”. Known in New Zealand for his expressive, unstuffy interiors, the Anglophile Kiwi has built country houses from scratch and turned decaying mansions into award-winning boutique hotels. As a student in Paris, he persuaded his mother, heiress to a gelatine business, to buy him an attic, which he converted into a bijou bolthole. “Not an entirely realistic start to life,” he admits. He approached this property like a set designer, deploying a career’s worth of devices to add space and surprise so that arriving for the first time most people’s reaction (mine included) is “Wow!” as you plunge into its heady, palm court exoticism. “I don’t have a particular style. I like the architecture to dictate the look of a place. This project was all about maximising the space,” he says. The starting point was a pair of antique French doors, found on eBay, which frame the salvaged fireplace in the sitting room. “They added gravitas,” says McLachlan. Vertical mirrors, “an old trick that goes a long way,” help amplify the space, while the floral wallpaper compensates for the lack of windows. “It creates the illusion of an outside. It’s amazing how easy it is to trick the eye.” The bird prints were blown up from inexpensive engravings. Colourful floor tiles, which look encaustic but are printed, are another stylistic sleight. “You’d think that adding more pattern would feel claustrophobic. In fact, it has the opposite effect.” The back wall joins the buttresses that support this behemoth of a corner building (there are 500 apartments, all smaller than this). To disguise its curve and to add symmetry, McLachlan designed the floor-to-ceiling storage that lines the entire wall; the top shelves are reached by antique library steps on wheels. All the household paraphernalia – crockery, kitchen utensils, bedding – is concealed behind doors camouflaged by wallpaper. Even the washing machine lurks, like a hobbit, in its own “cave”. The old kitchenette is now a study, the loo has become a compact shower room. “I got out the tape measure and thought, ‘How can I fit everything in?’ It works, just.” From here, tiled steps descend to the spare bedroom, set in the old darkroom. It’s a sliver of a space, but the clambering wallpaper and porthole in the bathroom door make it feel as cocooning as a cabin. “Even friends who are used to large, grand houses like staying here.” The main bedroom, set behind one of the French doors, has a different feel. It is a prototype for a new venture specialising in interiors designed to relieve stress, which the entrepreneurial McLachlan founded with Maxine Hamilton Stubber, an osteopath who has a clinic at Buckingham Palace. McLachlan designed the birch-ply bed that folds down to create a meditation platform and added the “living wall” of greenery. The skylight is masked in light-diffusing Japanese paper; the mural of a mist-wreathed lake is based on a photograph by New Zealander Craig Potton. Minutes away, lorries thunder down an arterial road. Here it all feels very Zen. Next door, the Art Deco piano reminds him of 20-something days in London when he played jazz in local hotels. McLachlan has always felt at home in this area. “It hasn’t changed much, it’s youthful, but not madly fashionable.” The antique furniture is equally “unfashionable”, which is why he was able to buy the Lloyd Loom chairs and 19th-century dining table “for almost nothing”. There are heirlooms, too, including an English hunting horn and a silver tea set. A portrait of his mother, with her pet parrot on her shoulder, once resided in the family’s Modernist house, which his father designed. “I’ve lived in large homes and small ones,” he reflects. “It’s about adapting to the space, and making it work for you.” neilmclachlan.co.nz This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.