Gloucester head coach Johan Ackermann expects a backlash from Saracens and thinks his side are unlucky to be facing them after a dramatic week. Saracens were handed a 35-point deduction and fined more than £5m for breaching salary cap regulations on Tuesday, although both sanctions are suspended while the club mounts an appeal. The defending Gallagher Premiership champions visit Kingsholm on Saturday and Ackermann thinks they will have a point to prove. He said: “We’re probably not the lucky ones to be in the week they’ve got that news because now they’re going to be backs-against-the-wall and they’re probably going to start this weekend as must-win games. “They haven’t got the luxury of slipping in a game and making it up elsewhere. Every point is going to count so they’re going to be a desperate side but hopefully that will add a bit of pressure on them and be something we can exploit.” Bath are bottom of the Premiership standings after three rounds and face early leaders Northampton at the Rec on Saturday. While it might be too early for returning World Cup stars Sam Underhill, Anthony Watson and Jonathan Joseph to be back in contention, Bath’s director of rugby Stuart Hooper said: “The important thing is them and how they fit into our plans as a team. They’ve been on an incredible journey – obviously the England guys have been on a journey which ultimately ended in disappointment for them and Francois [Louw] has been on a journey that ended in elation for him. “They’re all different people and different athletes so I will manage their time coming back into the programme, I’ll meet with all of them this week and work out the best time for them to come back.” Centre Max Clark is a long-term injury absentee after undergoing back surgery while prop Henry Thomas is a doubt. Will Chudley and Chris Cook are back in contention. Northampton hooker Dylan Hartley announced his retirement on Thursday after his longstanding knee injury and Saints head to the Rec looking to win their fourth match from four. Worcester have an increasing injury list ahead of their trip to Harlequins in Saturday’s other game. Centre Ryan Mills (shoulder), full-back Chris Pennell (leg), fly-half Duncan Weir (hand), back-row forwards Sam Lewis (concussion), Marco Mama (leg) and prop Ethan Waller (hand) are all doubts for the game. Their director of rugby Alan Solomons said: “I am not ruling anyone out completely at this particular moment but we will make a decision and we will put out the injured list so you will get to see everything there.” Harlequins’ head of rugby Paul Gustard will also have several enforced changes. He told his club’s website: “We picked up a few injuries last weekend which, although is frustrating and disappointing, it also presents a tremendous opportunity for other players to put their best foot forward and seize the opportunity. We have faith in our players and I believe in them.”