Imagine if you could tune into a daily TV show that (more or less) predicts the future, localised (more or less) to your house. We’d all be overnight billionaires like Biff Tannen in Back to the Future Part II. But when said TV show is merely foretelling something as yawnsome as the weather, few care, even though the technology to forecast the weather is … Actually, who knows how they forecast the weather, but you can bet it’s really expensive and complicated and uses all sorts of anemometers and barometers and other expensive and complicated things ending in “ometers”? These days, most people simply combine the old school (look out of the window, which is surprisingly up-to-date) with the new (look at your phone, which neatly sums everything in an icon). Hence the Weather is only really watched by true weather aficionados or people waiting for The One Show to start. The first televised weather report was given in 1954 by George Cowling, famous for being, erm, the first BBC TV weatherman. In the 70s and 80s, weathermen resembled geography teachers on their way home from a disco, apart from Barbara Edwards (the first lady weatherman in 1974) who looked as if she taught home economics. Who can forget poor Michael Fish categorically denying the Great Storm of 1987? (Erm, everyone under 30?). There have been further controversies of course. Louise Lear got the giggles in 2016, leaving her in tears while chatting about incoming storms across Reading. Simon King felt some pressure when he unveiled his new hair transplant in February 2019. And gay icon Tomasz Schafernaker risked a notable chill factor coming in from the south by stripping for Attitude in 2010, the same year he was caught sticking his middle finger up at newsreader Simon McCoy. But the Weather’s real jump-the-shark moment had less to do with the presenters and more to do with what they were pointing at. The days are long gone when weathermen slapped magnetic clouds on to paper cutouts of the UK. Computer images came into play in 1985, satellite in 2000, and 3D imagery in 2005. Things trundled along until March 2018 when, after 95 years of buying in its weather from the Met Office (the Rolls-Royce of weather services), the BBC controversially decided to save cash by renegotiating with whichever cheaper private weather organisation (in this case MeteoGroup) seemingly threw in the most unwanted extras. Gasp! at the new flat-map projection, meaning that Scotland is no longer out of proportion. Cry! at the improvements in high-res mapping, including key roads and urban areas. Yet, on its launch more than a thousand cynical comments were left on the BBC’s website within 10 days, branding the new service “the opposite of improvements”, “utterly laughable”, “cluttered and confusing” and “woefully inaccurate”. Now we’re left with weather bulletins that blow whatever the weather.