The integrity and credibility of Shane Sutton, the former British Cycling and Team Sky head coach, has been called into question on the second day of Richard Freeman’s medical tribunal. Mary O’Rourke QC, representing Freeman, said she had been approached this week by individuals with information against Sutton, one of the key witnesses against Freeman, and that she would be going into Sutton’s “integrity, credibility and various other issues” during the hearing at the Medical Practitioners Tribunal Service in Manchester. O’Rourke also revealed she had written to Damian Collins – the author of a damning digital, culture, media and sport select committee report into British Cycling and Team Sky last year – because she had “been given to believe he received a quantity of information which did not get published which related to Mr Sutton”. On a day when the General Medical Council case against Freeman formally opened after several days of legal argument, the doctor accepted 18 of the 22 charges against him, including that he ordered 30 sachets of Testogel, a product banned by the World Anti‑Doping Agency, in May 2011. As had been flagged last week, Freeman also accepted he attempted to cover up the order, subsequently lied to UK Anti-Doping and that he had failed to keep proper medical records while at British Cycling and Team Sky. However, Freeman, who faces being struck off, will maintain he did not obtain the Testogel “knowing or believing” it was to be given to an athlete to enhance performance. Instead he is expected to say he was pressured into ordering the Testogel at the request of Sutton. O’Rourke told the tribunal that Dr Steve Peters, the head of medical at British Cycling, and Phil Burt, a physiotherapist, had given statements relating to bullying at the organisation. However in his witness statement, Sutton, who is expected to give evidence next week, denied knowledge of the delivery and denied the testosterone was intended for him. O’Rourke revealed she had recently received important information related to Sutton from three individuals and she was in the process of investigating it. She also said she had written to Collins as a matter of urgency. “We want to check that information out,” she said. “We can’t guarantee it is correct but when we have that information we must pursue it. Some relates to 2011, some to 2012 and some to what happened later at the DCMS.” Collins said in response he had received the request only after parliament had been dissolved because of the general election and would not be able to help. “A committee is not able to release materials it has received that have not first been reported to the House,” he said. Intriguingly, Freeman’s legal team also said they would consider making a section 35A legal application to an unnamed national newspaper, compelling them to hand over a document relating to the case it may hold, within 14 days. “I wouldn’t make an unfocused and wishy-washy vague application,” O’Rourke said. “I will name the legal person involved. I will give details of the approximate time it came into existence and I will name the author of the document. It will be made properly. We need to check on two or three sources first.” O’Rourke said the section 35 was “a very wide power to search and seize” and the publication would have to hand over the document if requested. Freeman was granted an application by the tribunal that he could be treated as a “vulnerable witness”. It means he will be shielded from the public gallery – where the media sit – by a screen when giving evidence and that he will also be shielded from Sutton if he is present. Freeman has also been allowed to give evidence for no more than three hours a day and will be granted breaks in the morning and afternoon in addition to the lunch break. The tribunal, which was adjourned until Friday morning, is expected to continue until mid-December.