It’s hard to meet Richard McCourt and Dominic Wood – better known as children’s TV presenters Dick & Dom – without a sense of apprehension. Specifically, I’m worried people might spot us and start screaming the word ‘bogies’. For the uninitiated, ‘bogies’ was a game popularised by the duo where each takes it in turn to say the word in increasing volume until someone chickens out. Some of the more memorable televised renditions include bogies in a library in Glasgow, bogies among old people or – my personal favourite – bogies at a yummy-mummy yoga class in Primrose Hill. It became the signature skit of Dick & Dom in Da Bungalow, the Saturday morning children’s television show known for its chaotic improvisation, pointless world-record attempts (sadly Wood no longer holds the record for putting on the most pants in one minute) and toilet humour so extreme it is hard to believe now it was ever aired. Though it only ran for five series between 2002 and 2006, Da Bungalow turned the two into national celebrities, carving themselves into the psyche of a generation of young Brits. Bogies in particular caught on like wildfire – in my school the game was banned, with any pupil heard even whispering the word immediately sent out of class – but it wasn’t just teachers who were riled by the show. The BBC received 40 complaints after a sketch in which McCourt pretended to give birth to plastic doll babies covered in “muck muck”. When Wood wore a T-shirt emblazoned with “Morning Wood” the show was reprimanded. And that’s before the sketch where the two pretend they’re flashers. The controversies even made their way to Parliament. In 2005, a senior Tory MP questioned then-culture secretary Tessa Jowell on how the BBC could justify spending public money on such “lavatorial” content. Despite this, the show picked up two Baftas. “We would be in the papers every single week,” recalls Wood. “And then,” says McCourt, “we just disappeared. Or that’s how it must have seemed.” That was until this summer, when a number of clips circulated of the pair commanding huge festival crowds as drum’n’bass DJs. Their sets were similar to the show: high-energy, fist-pumping gigs that got the audience into a frenzy. One viral clip from Standon Calling shows the two playing Insomnia by Faithless to a vast crowd pogo-ing. “Come on!” shouts Wood. “Look at that!” Us being amazing at ⁦@chalfest⁩ #DJbattle pic.twitter.com/MYKjBrdJ3m McCourt is not surprised the videos went viral. “The kids that watched our shows grew up – they’re millennials now. As far as they were aware we just stopped. And then suddenly we pop up on their Twitter, absolutely having it to some drum’n’bass.” I tell them I am one of these millennial fans – although I was too old to enjoy the show as a child. Instead, I found myself watching it as a hungover, brain-frazzled student. “Da Bungalow was massive with students because it was so odd,” says McCourt. “It really was very weird,” adds Wood. “I saw a clip the other day where a big rubber cow gave birth to Dick and he came out with the afterbirth. Then I rip off the cow’s head, go up its backside and put my head out of its neck. Melvin Odoom, who’s now a big ITV star, was there dressed as Queen Elizabeth I. The whole thing was bizarre.” McCourt and Wood’s close connection is apparent from the minute we meet. They speak in harmony, punctuating each other – one makes a point, the other emphasises. McCourt is the godfather to Wood’s sons; they share a Twitter feed; and at one point they were flatmates, living, working and DJing together. “We probably spend more time together than we do with [our wives and girlfriends],” notes McCourt. The pair were both kids TV and Radio 1 geeks. McCourt was born in Sheffield and worked on hospital radio there from the age of 12, before landing a job as a runner on children’s TV and swiftly working his way into a presenting role. Wood, a few years younger, was living in his hometown of Exeter and working as a magician. McCourt was asked to interview him about his tricks, and their chemistry was obvious to the people in charge. “They thought we had something special,” says McCourt. “We’d only just met.” The pair bonded not just over work but raving, too (“I got Dom into electronic music,” says McCourt. “He liked rock before, and Boyzone probably. Then I came along with my happy hardcore cassettes.”) They would DJ at parties and in clubs, and while away their downtime in London’s many record shops. Is this, then, a return to old times? “It’s not the same,” says Wood. “We used to turn up to the club looking like DJs. We’d have our heavy bag of vinyl, and you’d show your records to the crowd. They’d go nuts. Now, you just stick a USB in. We don’t really drink at the DJ gigs now either.” “The rock and roll’s gone,” chips in McCourt. Besides, back then they were still Richard and Dominic, not Dick & Dom. They credit “Les the prop master” with their nicknames: “He was a proper cockney geezer,” says McCourt. “If he saw us around, or if we’d mess up he’d say ‘typical Dick and Dom.’ It stuck.” In 2002, to compete with the likes of Nickelodeon and the Disney Channel, BBC launched its own children’s television channel, CBBC. They had hours of airtime to fill. The pair were hired as the double act Dick & Dom and their show’s name was, apparently, inspired by the popularity at the time of Sacha Baron Cohen’s Ali G In Da House. “It had to be bungalow. Because there’s nothing upstairs,” chips in Wood. Was that really the reason? “No! That was just something Anne Robinson said to us once.” According to the pair, not much about Da Bungalow was thought out – that was its beauty. There were no rehearsals, and, according to Wood, scripts tended to go “straight in the recycling bin … they were happy just to let us get on with it.” Do they think a show like Da Bungalow could ever exist again? “I think children’s TV has lost a lot of its unpredictability,” says McCourt. “Taking risks is the only way you come up with really original content. That’s slowly coming to a halt which is a real shame.” Does it frustrate them to still be remembered for the show, despite a career that has involved Radio 1 and game shows on Sky? “Not at all,” says Wood. “It’s our New York, New York moment. It doesn’t mean we’ll never do anything else great again.” “It’s a joy for us,” adds McCourt. “Children’s TV has such an impact when you’re that age.” You sense he means it. Neither seems particularly overwhelmed or damaged by their experience of being young and thrust into the limelight. “Can’t remember!” laughs Wood. “It was a rollercoaster. We didn’t take it all in, just got on with it.” These days they’re moving away from work for children. Their next project is a gameshow podcast called Cash From Chaos. Their goal is to get the format on television while continuing to DJ. “That clip from Standon Calling,” says Wood, “when we arrived, we were like, ‘is this it?’ There were only 50 people and we’re normally on the main stage. But we did what we did, and look what happened.” After the festival, Standon Calling posted the clip with a caption “Dick & Dom to headline 2020?” The timing might be perfect for them. “Because the millennials have had their own kids, they’re showing them bogies on YouTube and their kids are starting to play it in school,” enthuses McCourt. “It’s happening again. A resurgence!” Cash From Chaos is available to listen to now.