Save for the odd guffaw or sharp intake of breath, the Observer/Cape graphic novel prize is judged in priestly silence, the panel sitting around a large table, each of us passing the longlisted entries on our pile left-to-right as we finish reading them. At some point, we’ll realise that we’ve gone full circle – everyone has read everything – and then the quiet lifts, and we begin to talk about what we liked, and what we didn’t. The whittling, in other words, begins. Sometimes, this whittling is tricky. But in this, the 12th year of the prize, picking a winner was easy. (Our regular judges – Dan Franklin, the publisher of Jonathan Cape’s graphic novel list, Suzanne Dean, creative director at Vintage Books, Paul Gravett, who runs the Comica festival, and yours truly – were this year joined by the playwright and director Patrick Marber, and the illustrator and a former winner of the prize Isabel Greenberg: thank you to both of them.) As you’re about to discover, Memories of Limón by Edo Brenes is that perfect thing: a short comic that is both beautifully drawn, and which has a beginning, a middle and an end. Quietly nostalgic, it made us smile, too – not with a loud, jokey punchline, but by capturing a quirk of human behaviour that we all recognised. Memories of Limón flicks between past and present, as a TV journalist asks an elderly couple for their memories of growing up in Costa Rica. Their stories have mostly to do with the bicycles that they used to ride everywhere – cycles for which they were then required by the state to have a licence plate – and on the surface of it, what they reveal to him is utterly ordinary. But then Brenes switches to the present, and we realise that they’re also telling us – wittingly or unwittingly – about the dynamics of their relationship. “It’s autobiographical,” says 34-year-old Brenes, who grew up in Costa Rica (having trained as an animator, he came to the UK in 2009 to study at the University of Sunderland, and now lives in Cambridge). “The interviewer in the story is really me, and though the couple are not exactly my grandparents, I did hear stories from them about Costa Rica in the 1940s that were just like these.” Brenes works first pencil and then in ink; after this, he mixes a colour palette in acrylic, before transferring it to his computer (he then uses the computer to colour his panels). “I chose pastels here, so it wouldn’t feel too modern. It took me a long time to get the time shifts right, so it was important that the colour felt right, too. It’s a very simple, quiet story. This is how people talk – or at least, people who do not want to overcomplicate their lives.” His favourite cartoonists are Chris Ware, the American graphic novelist who brought us Jimmy Corrigan, the Smartest Kid on Earth, and Jesse Jacobs, the Canadian artist best known for his psychedelic aliens. But in his own work, he is really more influenced by film-making. “For Memories of Limón, I was inspired by Giuseppe Tornatore [the Italian director of Cinema Paradiso] and Wong Kar-Wai [Chinese director of In the Mood for Love].” Is he pleased to have won the prize? “Yes. It’s so exciting. I rarely enter competitions. But this one seemed like a great opportunity, and I already had the storyline in my head. It was only after I’d finished and sent it in that I discovered who’d won it in the past. I’m amazed to be in their company.” Brenes hopes that he will now be able to find a British publisher for a graphic novel he has already completed. I said that choosing a winner was easy. Picking a runner-up, however, proved rather more difficult this time around – the judges were split – and in the end, we went, Booker prize-style, with two. Four Hands by Jessika Green will strike a chord with anyone who has ever visited a nail bar or waxing salon and found the experience vaguely humiliating (it made me laugh out loud). The Devil’s Deal by Dominic Linton and Fred Morris is set in contemporary London, and casts Satan as a particularly slick and plausible conman: for the full effect, it should be read twice. Congratulations to all three.