Labour has condemned separate unprovoked attacks inflicted on two party activists in their 70s as they were out canvassing over the weekend. The first incident occurred in Herefordshire on Saturday morning, while the second took place early the following evening in South Yorkshire. Police said a man had been arrested on suspicion of grievous bodily harm in relation to the second. “These unprovoked attacks were completely unacceptable. Our thoughts are with those affected and we wish them a speedy recovery,” said a Labour party spokesman. “We take the wellbeing and safety of our elected representatives, campaigners and activists extremely seriously and we have issued advice on safe campaigning and security.” West Mercia police did not respond to a request for comment on the first incident, but the Hereford Times quoted Insp James Ashton of the force as saying: “We received reports that a woman canvassing for the general election on the high street in Bromyard had been assaulted at about 11.30am on 23 November. “Officers attended and spoke to the victim, who said that she didn’t wish for charges to be brought. We continue to engage with both parties to ensure an appropriate outcome for the victim.” South Yorkshire police confirmed they had been called out to reports of a 70-year-old man being assaulted in Rotherham shortly after 4pm on Sunday. Officers said he was taken to hospital with a suspected broken jaw, adding that a 51-year-old man was in custody after being arrested. Sophie Wilson, the Labour candidate in Rother Valley, said the victim of the second incident wished only to be identified by his forename: Bob. She visited him in hospital and later said he had been the object of a “truly vicious attack”. The Labour candidate added that the incident had been upsetting for people involved with her campaign, describing the victim as a “kind and gentle man” who uses a walking stick to get around. It followed the attack in the North Herefordshire constituency, where the local party said one of its activists suffered “marked bruising” after being pushed against a parked car by a woman who had insulted her. Liz Lever, a local party official, said the woman was “very shaken up” by the attack. “The perpetrator had already verbally abused a group of seven Labour supporters, including a teenager, calling them Marxists and defacing a banner … before crossing the street and laying into the female Labour supporter,” she said.