John Forsyth (Letters, 8 November) says he would vote for the party that opts to move on from the constraints imposed by the built fabric of the “mother of parliaments”. Writing from Penzance, he generously suggests parliament should be moved to the Midlands or the north. I agree, but the first step is to prevent the ludicrous waste of public funds about to be spent on turning Richmond House on Whitehall into a replica parliament while the historic site is worked on. Not only is Richmond House Grade II*-listed, it represents a vast amount of embodied energy, all of which will be lost because parliamentarians cannot conceive of anything other than the division arrangements they have now.Judith MartinWinchester, Hampshire • I agree with John Forsyth. Now would be an opportune moment to move parliament into a modern, purpose-built building appropriate for the 21st century in the Midlands or the north. At the same time, how about including adequate living accommodation close by for MPs: pleasant, simple, small flats? I bet in the long run that would save a lot of public funds. The present building could be preserved for posterity and for special occasions. A second chamber, an elected one, could also be rehoused. Indeed, if the Commons were located here in Sheffield (what better place?)then perhaps the elected second chamber could be in the Midlands. But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. First, we need a government committed to reform. The location of parliament is but one piece of a complicated jigsaw. The voting system, the voting age, the powers of devolved bodies, the tax-raising powers of such bodies, the monarchy/head of state and more need to be addressed. I hope the Labour manifesto will get the ball rolling. A commitment to reform and the use of a constitutional convention would do that and would enable Simon Jenkins (If you want my vote, give me true radicalism, Journal, 8 November) and others, myself included, to “punch the air and cry, ‘Bring it on!’”.Jol MiskinSheffield • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition