What if Juliet’s end was a new beginning? That’s the question & Juliet answers by giving Juliet (Miriam-Teak Lee) a second chance at life. When Shakespeare (Oliver Tompsett) is persuaded by his wife, Anne Hathaway (Cassidy Janson), to change Romeo and Juliet’s ending, Juliet goes on a wild trip from Verona to Paris with Anne, May (Arun Blair-Mangat) and Nurse (Melanie La Barrie). Things go awry when an unlikely love triangle unfurls and Romeo (Jordan Luke Gage) miraculously comes back to life. The amusing twists and turns are bolstered by seismic pop hits by the Swedish super-producer and writer Max Martin. The play weaves a selection of his best-known tracks, including hits he created for Britney Spears (...Baby One More Time and Oops!... I Did It Again), Ariana Grande (Break Free, Problem) and Kesha (Blow). Each song is performed earnestly but with the sense that everyone is aware how hilariously the songs intersect with the narrative, not least when Nurse and Lance (David Bedella) reignite an old fling to Katy Perry’s Teenage Dream; Shakespeare and Anne debate the ending of the play to I Want It That Way by the Backstreet Boys; and Juliet reacts to Romeo’s return with a powerful rendition of Kelly Clarkson’s Since U Been Gone. There are poignant moments, such as a rousing rendition of the coming-of-age ballad I’m Not a Girl, Not Yet a Woman by May, a character who struggles with gender and identity. The musical also highlights some of Martin’s more underappreciated compositions – Anne’s stunning performance of Céline Dion’s That’s the Way It Is, and an intense exchange between May and Francois (Tim Mahendran) set to Adam Lambert’s Whataya Want from Me are standouts. Lee’s version of Juliet is strong and Janson’s interpretation of Anne full of charisma. & Juliet packs a lot of fun into its sharp, witty story of self-discovery. Its best message? That bubblegum pop, far from being manufactured filler, is a worthy accompaniment to the greatest of storytellers. • At the Shaftesbury theatre, London, until 30 May 2020