Confession time. Until Tuesday morning, The Fiver didn’t know the Southeast Asian Games are currently taking place in the Philippines, but it seems we weren’t the only ones wallowing in ignorant bliss. The biennial sporting extravaganza also seems to have caught the Philippines by surprise, which is rather a shame as it is the Pearl of the Orient that was appointed to host the Games, which officially begin following next Saturday’s opening ceremony in Bocaue, Bulacan. Unofficially, the men’s and women’s football tournaments have already begun, a state of affairs that became all too apparent when photos of Cambodia’s players sleeping on a hotel floor emerged on social media disgraces, followed by loud and public grumbles from the coaches of Malaysia, Vietnam, Myanmar, Singapore and Thailand about the chaos into which their players have been parachuted. Among the kind of shortcomings that would get that little vein in Roy Keane’s temple throbbing like the bassline on Blondie’s Heart of Glass, airport pick-up forgetfulness, traffic chaos, insufficient food and water, poor training facilities and overcrowded accommodation have been cited as some of the more pressing problems players have had to overcome as they go about the business of trying to win medals. Even the host nation has been affected, with members of the Philippines women’s team forced to pack four or five players into twin rooms. “Sad that we’re the host team and this is how we’re being treated,” sighed defender Hali Long on FaceSpace. “I cannot imagine how other countries must feel.” Hungry, by all accounts, Hali. They’re feeling hungry. In fact Vietnam’s complaint that they weren’t being fed enough prompted their hotel to tell them to get written authorisation for bigger food portions from the Games organisers. Called upon to explain how an event his closest aide had promised would show what a terrific job he is doing as premier of the country, Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte pushed a hapless spokesman out into a hail of bullets. Salvador Panelo apologised for “unintentional inconvenience suffered by our athlete guests” and said his boss “will not offer any excuses”. And while it seems unfair that footballers should be forced to endure such hardship, it is in the direction of the ladies and gentlemen of the Fourth Estate that The Fiver’s heart goes out. After complaining about having to attend a press conference in what appeared to be an unfinished warehouse with no ventilation, football writers working at the tournament have now been moved to a smaller, air-conditioned working area. Whatever about upsetting the players participating in the Games, it’s the hacks covering it organisers desperately need to keep sweet. “The nature of the football sector where teams regularly travel great distances for fixtures, in addition to having international playing staff and managers who frequently fly … is a recipe for a high carbon footprint” – Andrew Welfle, a climate researcher from the University of Manchester, after finding that air travel by the top 20 players nominated for the Ballon d’Or has been responsible for producing 505 tonnes of CO2 emissions this year alone. It’s David Squires on … José Gerry Francis Mourinho. You can catch up on the latest Football Weekly podcast right here. Vote! Vote! Vote! And … Vote! Vote! Vote! “Re: yesterday’s Still Want More? Your writers would be better off channelling Mick Jones, rather than Joe Strummer, given that it was Mick’s mangled vocals that made Should I Stay or Should I Go so winsome. And like many managers, he was sacked. Definitely go, in his case” – Nick Austin. “There’s something strange about nostalgia and memories of old football. Looking back at the top 10 summer transfers of 1996 in the Premier League, La Liga and Serie A, it turns out that we (‘we’ being Sheffield Wednesday) only spent half a million less on Huddersfield legend Andy Booth than Juventus spent on Zinedine Zidane and Real Madrid spent on Clarence Seedorf. To be fair though, spending like that did get us where we belong” – Noble Francis. “After the recent sad passing of the great celebrity photographer Terry O’Neill, I chanced upon the archive of his photographs and what a veritable treasure trove it is; Johan Cruyff in his pomp, Paul Gascoigne looking like his Madame Tussauds waxwork circa 1992 and this really should have been made into a hit TV detective series (based on the classic novels of Newcastle manager Bernard Cribbins). Apropos of nothing, do any of The Fiver’s 1,057 pedants have any idea who ‘unknown’ is in this photo of ITV’s 1974 World Cup pundits?” – er, Noble Francis. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day is … Noble Francis, who bags a copy of An A to Z of Football Collectibles. We’ve got more prizes to give away, so get scribbling. Pep Guardiola doesn’t want to see Mikel Arteta leaving his role as Manchester City No 2 for another gig this season. “I’d like him to stay with us,” he cooed. “Manchester City has a person of incredible value to work here in the future. But professional desires are professional desires.” Brighton like the cut of Graham Potter’s jib and have extended his contract through to 2025. “I’ve had a tremendous welcome from everyone connected to the club – staff, players and fans – and have found it very easy to settle,” he trousered. Pope’s Newc O’Rangers chairman Dave King is stepping down. “I cannot overemphasise how stressful [it] has been for me personally and to my fellow directors on the board as we had to juggle our personal finances to make funds available to the club at short notice,” he tooted. “It is a private joke between [deputy chairman] Douglas Park and myself that every time I meet him I ignore the customary handshake and put my hand straight into his pocket. Thankfully it was always filled with cash.” Carlisle have appointed assistant manager Chris Beech as their new head coach after Steven Pressley was sacked a fortnight ago. Craig Gardner will become Birmingham City first-team coach in July once he has retired from playing at the end of the season. “To be given this opportunity is a privilege and this club is a great place to be,” he cheered. And Lyon’s owners are in talks to buy NWSL franchise Reign FC. “Our ambition has always been to operate the best women’s football club in the world,” whooped Reign co-owner Bill Predmore. “This is a distinction long held by OL, making them the perfect organisation to help us achieve our long-term objectives for the club.” Valencia’s Maxi Gómez gets his chat on with Sid Lowe. La Liga president Javier Tebas gets his chat on with Sachin Nakrani. Wilfred Ndidi is the driving force behind Leicester’s surge up the table, writes Ben McAleer. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! Tickets are still available for the Football Weekly Christmas Special [on Wednesday! – Fiver Grinch Ed], live in London. Get them here.