Ben Stokes has left England concerned about his ability to play as an all-rounder this winter after experiencing pain in his troublesome left knee. The 28-year-old went into the second Test against New Zealand admitting he was managing some discomfort after bowling 26 overs during the gruelling innings defeat in Mount Maunganui. He then sent down just two overs on day one in Hamilton, a spell which left him clutching the joint and grimacing in pain. Though clearly worth his place as a batsman alone – he is currently the only member of the England team in the top 10 of the world rankings – a serious problem that prevents Stokes from bowling would leave England needing to rebalance their side come the four-Test series in South Africa that starts on Boxing Day. “Ben’s overs are not just a bonus. We want him at full tilt if we can, because at his best he’s world-class,” said Chris Woakes, whose own recall in place of Jack Leach, as part of an all-seam attack, was clearly influenced by the management’s concerns over Stokes. “There’s a bit of a gap between the end of this Test match and the start of the South Africa series, so hopefully the medical team can get him as close to 100% as possible.” Stokes, who has been given permission by England to miss the first warm-up on the South Africa tour to attend the BBC Sports Personality of the Year awards on 15 December, had surgery on the same knee back in 2016 after suffering torn cartilage. It was the injury that led to a breakthrough summer in Test cricket for Woakes, picking up 41 wickets at 25 apiece. But the Warwickshire all-rounder, while the leader of the World Cup-winning attack in one-day cricket, has slipped down the Test pecking order since and is battling to make England’s second winter tour. Picking up two wickets on day one, including the New Zealand captain Kane Williamson, and being the pick of the attack on a rain-affected first day, made for a timely intervention with both Jimmy Anderson and Mark Wood returning to fitness after respective calf and side problems. Woakes, who learned of his recall on the morning of the match, added: “Considering I haven’t had much match practice on the tour, I felt in reasonably good rhythm. Whenever you get an opportunity is an opportunity for you to put your case forward. “That South Africa tour is looming. There’s guys coming back from injury so whenever you get the opportunity you try to put in a performance out in the middle. You do all you can in the nets in practice but there’s nothing better than putting in performances on the field.”