As Shakespeare so very nearly said, shall I compare thee to an Asian jumping spider? Last week news broke about a newly-identified species of creepy-crawly found in the Indian provinces of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat, that has been named after Sachin Tendulkar. It is probably about time cricket, which shares its name with a similarly-sized critter, was provided with another link to the world of the mini-beast even if Tendulkar himself is surely more lovely and more temperate than this one. “I named it because Sachin happens to be my favourite cricketer,” trilled Dhruv Prajapati, a junior researcher with the Gujarat Ecological Education and Research Foundation, who spotted the spider in 2015 – the arachnid has only recently been included in the World Spider Catalogue and leapt to stardom. Still, there are certainly more obvious ways of honouring your favourite cricketer, whether it be a tattoo, some heartfelt fan-mail or presenting them with a lovely bunch of Jack Hobbses, or perhaps a bouquet of Larwoods. There are several cricketers who have blossomed in the most literal sense, with news of one breaking in 1927, when the Scotsman sent a reporter to the National Sweet Pea Society’s annual exhibition in London. “I was specially interested in the classes open only to lady members for a decoration of sweet peas for the dinner table,” they wrote. “A new variety which attracted much attention was a pink and white ‘frilled’ flower named after the famous cricketer Jack Hobbs, who had doubtless never imagined it possible that stumps, cricket bat and ball could be so effectively reproduced in massed sweet peas!” Hobbs himself turned up to see this eye-catching display, even though he was not new to having flowers named after him: two years earlier “a giant decorative dahlia of a creamy white colour, which measured 10 inches across” was named in his honour at the annual show of, yes, the National Dahlia Society. In 1931 an “incurved yellow chrysanthemum” was named after Harold Larwood; in 1938 both a pink hybrid tea rose, “said to be very free blooming”, and a gladiolus, “light apricot, suffused with salmon, and the throat carmine and lemon”, were named after Donald Bradman, and in 1939 a pair of dianthus were named after Len Hutton (“a sturdy plant, bearing blooms of velvety reddy brown”) and Eddie Paynter (“crimson, the shade of a Lancashire rose, fringed with white”). In 1987 Denis Compton was similarly honoured, though only after the least subtle of sledgehammer hints. To casually drop into conversation one’s lifelong desire to have a sweet pea named after you is perhaps innocent enough, but less so when the person you are conversing with is the national treasurer of the Sweet Pea Society. “I’m a lifelong Compton fan and some time ago when I dined with Denis I learned that the veteran cricket star is a secret gardener and his ambition was to have a sweet pea given his name,” explained John Pratt, the man in question. “So I made a few inquiries behind the scenes and now Boltons, the sweet pea growers, have decided to give their premier sweet pea for 1988 the Compton name.” According to the Sweet Pea Book a Compton is both “frilly soft pink, pale cream at the centre” and “strongly scented”, though whether this is also true of the man himself is for others to answer. Not everything named after a cricketer has taken root. In the 1980s a new development on the grounds of the former King Edward VI Grammar School in Stourbridge was given the name Cricketers Green, and all the roads named after former players. Cowdrey, Jardine, Laker and Hammond all got small streets, but the largest was named after Herbert Sutcliffe, who had died only a few years earlier. Sadly the 1980s were not a good time to name anything after someone called Sutcliffe; locals were furious that the Yorkshire Ripper was being honoured and bombarded the local council with petitions and protests. Sutcliffe Drive was swiftly renamed Kenyon Close, after the more obscure but significantly safer Don Kenyon, once of Stourbridge, who played eight Tests in the 1950s. Then there is the case of Grimsby’s Crampin Steam Fishing Company, which in the 1930s launched the Famous Cricketer Fleet. For a few years there was a constant stream of cricket-themed steamers being produced by the Selby shipyard Cochrane and Sons, starting with the Larwood – “of the latest type for fishing in Iceland waters” – the Paynter – boasting “latest type large steam trawl winch” – and the Patsy Hendren – “the fastest trawler afloat”. The then Middlesex star sent a telegram to the new boat’s crew. “I am honoured,” he wrote, “but it’s strange to have a ship called after me seeing that I am the worst sailor alive.” The Bradman was launched in January 1937, on the same day that the Australian it was named after scored his 270 against England in Melbourne. Douglas Jardine promised to take part in his steamer’s maiden voyage, but eventually sent his apologies, citing convenient family illness, as well as a pair of tankards and a wish that the crew would drink “success to the vessel, happy voyages, and big hauls.” On its first outing the Jardine set a new British trawler speed record of 13.52 knots. In all there were six boats in the fleet, though not for very long. The trawlers were pressed into military service during the second world war, and as such became targets for the German air force. On 25 April 1940 the Bradman was bombed by the Germans and sunk off the coast of Norway; the following day the Hammond was hit, and three days after that the Larwood was set on fire by an incendiary bomb and abandoned. The Jardine was bombed on 30 April and skittled by the British, and in the space of a single week six had become two. Crampin was not put off, launching the Norman Yardley, another Bradman, a Statham and finally a Trueman in the years after the war, but his cricket-themed trawlers have long since disappeared. They might have been much bigger and grander than a humble jumping spider, but they also turned out to be much more likely to become extinct. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.