Lucy McCormick pulls her elbow back and closes her left eye. Whoosh, twang, thud: the arrow pierces the bullseye and a cheer explodes behind her. McCormick looks back with a grin – she didn’t realise she had an audience. The performance artist’s shows are riotous, ugly, sexy, loud and very attentive to the crowd watching them. McCormick’s theatre is not just in your face but in your lap, wrapped around your shoulders, pulling at your hair with fake painted nails. Her latest show, Post Popular, follows her search for and re-creation of heroic women in history, railing against the traditionally masculine idea of heroism. That’s why, on a cold night at the start of winter, we’re at an archery range in London to see if we have what it takes to be a hero. She is late to arrive at Experience Archery and misses the safety briefing. That’s fitting: McCormick’s shows feed off reluctance and resistance. “I like doing things in spaces that you’re not supposed to do,” she says. “I like playing with risk and rules.” Our patient instructor, Kevin Wong, is somewhat less keen, especially when our photographer crosses the safety line as McCormick poses with her bow pulled taut. “Someone told me that [performance artist] Kim Noble said, ‘I don’t stop until someone tells me I’ve gone too far.’ I’ve sort of taken that on as my mantra.” McCormick has a cult following from her live art days with the company Get in the Back of the Van. Developed via the queer club scene and standup, her shows have recently entered the mainstream. In the spectacularly messy Triple Threat in 2016, she performed as Jesus in an X-rated take on the New Testament. She plays a heightened version of herself in Post Popular, addressing the audience simultaneously as if we are her dolls, her enemies and her superfans. At one point, she takes the role of Boudica and storms into the audience who are cast as the Roman army. Is audience intimidation ever an aim? “No,” she cries. “I want you to love me! I’m just desperately trying to entertain.” It is weird to sort of feel OK being naked in front of 160 people, but feel vulnerable with one other person On the archery range, we’re getting worse. One arrow sails past the target and into a tangle of curtains at the back of the hall. Wong drags our targets further away and pins balloons to each one. Underneath the bravado of her persona in Post Popular, McCormick reveals anxiety, which is just as over the top as her hyper, nearly naked self running around the theatre but, she says, just as true. “The performances have become a space to be a stronger, better version of myself.” She pulls at her sleeves. “It is a weird way round: to sort of feel OK with being quite naked in front of, like, 160 people, but feel very vulnerable and insecure with one other person.” On stage, these contradictions manifest as aesthetic chaos, with mud, muck and kitchen condiments as bodily fluids flung around. “It’s that thing of ‘grotesque girls’. I just can’t get enough of it. We’re not actually allowed to make a mess in lots of parts of our lives. I try to build up the performances so I feel really sexy outside of the usual ways you’re supposed to,” McCormick says. “I feel attractive because of what I’m doing and what I’m saying, not because of how I look.” She draws another arrow and a balloon bursts with a satisfying pop. “Archery is all about consistency,” Wong says encouragingly. “You’re trying to do the same thing every time.” Perhaps surprisingly, the discipline of practice also underpins McCormick’s work. Her formal training at East 15 Acting School still informs her shows, and she continues to work as an actor alongside her comedy and club work. “Plays are more experimental,” she says with a shrug, comparing traditional fourth-wall productions to free-flowing performance art. “Arriving? Pretending no one’s in the same room as you? That is experimental. The least weird thing to do is come out on stage and be like, ‘Hi everyone, you alright?’ But not looking at anyone? Pretending you’re in this fake world? That is fucking weird.” She laughs. “People might say about my show, ‘It’s so bonkers.’ But the world is bonkers. I think my show is the sanest way to describe how we all live life.” Post Popular is at Attenborough Centre for the Creative Arts, Brighton, on 22 November; and at Soho theatre, London, 3-14 December and 10-22 February.