The problem with Jeremy Corbyn’s “neutral” position on Brexit (Corbyn ‘neutral’ on Brexit as PM attacked on trust, 23 November) is not, as critics erroneously aver, that it displays any lack of leadership. Rather, it is too nuanced and considered for the simplistic analysis seen in much of the media, and he should be given credit for being brave enough to adopt such a position. The finest and most successful leaders today – in business, education, sport and elsewhere – are facilitators and enablers, not the outdated and misguided purveyors of the “This is what I say and this is what we are going to do and you will follow me, or else” school that too many people still believe we need. I am not a supporter of Mr Corbyn, but leadership is also about vision and conviction – and, whatever we may think about the Labour manifesto for this election, it certainly presents a very clear and bold vision for the future of our nation.Richard BryantLondon • Jeremy Corbyn’s ability to have facilitated a generally acceptable position for most Labour party members should be applauded for its bravery in an era of governmental totalitarianism and its “all-knowing”, complicit advisory management consultants. Your readers should look at The Facilitator’s Handbook by John Heron. This lays out in plain terms the disadvantages of our current hierarchical leadership system and the advantages of facilitating change instead. Boris Johnson and Jo Swinson rebuke Corbyn’s neutral leadership when all it seeks is to find mutual ground on which to tackle society’s underlying problems. Mike JoslinDorchester, Dorset • At the passing of the second amendment to the US constitution, Thomas Paine argued that on great issues of the day government should remain neutral, and thereby be ready to execute the will of the people. Where there is a contest of fundamental social values, only those with an immediate interest could legitimately state their position – government, of course, should have no material interest of its own that is independent of the citizenry. The free play of democracy, therefore, is best served without the intervention of the governing elite. Theresa May and Boris Johnson distorted that by insisting that Brexit was partisan, and that by projection government had a position opposed to other parties. This reverses Paine’s principle. Corbyn is right that neutrality is a mature position – certainly legitimate. Prof Saville KushnerLiverpool • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition