Chingford and Woodford Green “It feels very personal to me,” says Faiza Shaheen of her decision to stand for Labour in Chingford and Woodford Green, in north-east London. For one – unlike the incumbent Iain Duncan Smith, who lives in a mansion in Buckinghamshire – Shaheen grew up in the area, raised in north Chingford by parents from Fiji and Pakistan, and she lives not far from the quiet cafe where we meet in Highams Park. What makes this campaign even more personal is the fact that in 2017, shortly before Shaheen was asked to stand, her mother died. “My mum was really affected a lot by the cuts,” she explains. “She had a heart condition, and because of the changes that Iain Duncan Smith brought in, she got majorly harassed. She was in the heart transplant ward, and there were assessors coming to the house and reassessing her benefits. After she died, I found letters where she was arguing with people about not being able to get proper social care. It’s a very common story.” Before Jeremy Corbyn took over as Labour leader, Shaheen felt as if she had no home in any political party. She had studied PPE at Oxford, where the economics being taught struck her as “cold and individualistic”, and went on to do a PhD on economic inequality at Manchester. After working at thinktanks including the New Economics Foundation, she took over the Centre for Labour and Social Studies in 2015. Two years later, a space opened up. “I didn’t think we’d ever have a political hook for the ideas we were working on, but there it was in Labour’s manifesto.” She is keenly aware of the problems that need to be addressed in her constituency. “Our local school here in Highams Park had a £1.8m cut under the Conservatives, equivalent to 17 teachers. The local hospital in Whipps Cross needs proper redevelopment, and better infrastructure around that in terms of social care. In south Chingford, the more working-class part, the public transport is really bad. I know exactly how it feels, getting on that bus and it taking forever to get to Walthamstow Central.” It can be hard, though, to keep the focus on local matters. In the cafe, a young mother on the table next to us tells Shaheen that she would love to vote for her but doesn’t want Jeremy Corbyn as prime minister. Moments later, she interrupts Shaheen to ask what she thinks about Brexit. Shaheen acknowledges the conflicts raging around both questions, but argues that the most important thing to focus on is booting the Tories out – a challenge which, locally, was helped last week when the Green party candidate stepped aside to encourage tactical voting. “I wouldn’t want to spend all my time on the doorstep talking about Jeremy Corbyn,” Shaheen says. “I need to make the case as to why they should vote for me.” The focus, she adds, should be on the policies, not individual personalities, “and those are policies and principles that I couldn’t be prouder of.” On antisemitism within the Labour party, she says: “We didn’t deal with it fast enough. I’m not going lie and act like prejudices have somehow gone away from the party. Unfortunately there are people that are going to say awful things, and they need to be dealt with quickly. But it did highlight to me how an organisation needs to deal with institutional prejudice, because Labour is not the only one: there are very few institutions that are good at doing that.” As for Brexit, which Shaheen considers “an epic waste of time”, the question does come up, she says. “But to be honest, on the doorsteps, the things that people mostly want to talk about are the cuts to the schools and hospitals.” Does she feel optimistic about her chances, and the next few years? “It’s like the best of times and the worst of times. When I see hundreds of volunteers turning up to our office, it just makes my heart buzz and I think, we can do this. But if the country votes for a Boris Johnson majority…” She shakes her head. “We don’t have five years to waste on the climate, on education, on the NHS… So I get moments of severe anxiety about what’s going to happen if they win. But we need to block out the negativity. We need to get IDS out on 12 December. Let’s keep focused on that.” Who’s your political hero?Nelson Mandela or Muhammad Ali. From an early age I was told that, when you see an injustice, you fight for what’s right, no matter the consequences. And because I experienced racism at a really young age, I found an affinity with people like Mandela and Ali who were fighting racism. Where do you get your news?A combination of what’s trending on Twitter, and the Financial Times and the Guardian. I don’t always agree with everything in the FT, but they put things in a very factual way, and I appreciate that. The New York Times as well, just to get a sense of what’s going on in the world. Facebook is a problem for all kinds of reasons, but I’ve got quite a lot of friends who are activists in different parts of the world and their Facebook posts have become trusted sources to me. I do listen to the Today programme on Radio 4 for a bit in the morning, just to get a sense of how they’re framing things, but it drives me nuts and I always shout at the radio. One thing you always take with you when doorstep campaigningThere’s a leaflet that’s a bit old now that has a picture of me with my two old teachers, Mr Osborne and Mr Mahir, and I think people really connect with that. And it always makes me smile. They really encouraged me and saw potential in me and are just such an important part of my story. How do you get away from politics?I watch Netflix. I’m rewatching Glee. Killian Fox North Belfast “It obviously had a very defining influence on me,” says John Finucane, the current lord mayor of Belfast, who is standing for Sinn Féin in North Belfast against Nigel Dodds, the DUP’s parliamentary leader. He is talking about the death of his father, who was murdered by the Ulster Defence Association, in collusion with the British security services, in February 1989. Pat Finucane was eating a Sunday meal when two masked gunmen broke in and opened fire, shooting the human rights lawyer 14 times in front of his family, including John, who was eight at the time. What followed was a 30-year quest for justice, in which the family sought to clear Finucane’s name (he was accused of being an IRA member) and to prove that the British state had colluded in the killing. David Cameron apologised to the family in 2012 but a full public inquiry has never been granted. “It exposed me to the very worst of politics,” says Finucane, “but also the best of politics. It showed me that when people come together and work towards a common goal, progress can be achieved.” Finucane went on to become a lawyer in Belfast, like his father, but moved into politics in 2017, when he made his first attempt to unseat Dodds. The bid wasn’t successful, but he won Sinn Féin’s best ever result in North Belfast, closing the gap to just over 2,000 votes, which, he says, “made people see that what was once a very safe unionist seat is no longer safe”. Earlier this year, Finucane, who is 39, ran for Belfast city council and was elected lord mayor in May. He believes his diverse background – his father was a Catholic from the Falls Road, his mother, Geraldine, a middle-class Protestant from east Belfast – makes him an ideal candidate to represent this still-divided city. “I’m very comfortable in my political skin, with speaking and engaging with unionists and loyalists,” he says, describing himself as “mayor for all”. If this election is to be defined by Brexit, that, Finucane believes, will give him an advantage in North Belfast, where the remain vote was marginally stronger in 2016. “The brand of politics that Nigel Dodds represents belongs in the past,” he says. “We have watched the DUP’s destructive pact with the Tories and their clear attacks on the Good Friday agreement – not to mention the threat to our economy, to our rural and farming communities, and the way of life that we’ve enjoyed since 1998.” For me to become an MP in a constituency where my father was killed would be exceptionally significant By contrast, Finucane is pitching himself as a candidate of the future. “I see a city that is progressive and forward-looking, that enjoys its European status and the rights that come with being in Europe. We want to make sure that our peace process is protected at all costs.” To achieve this, he is comfortable with Sinn Féin’s decision to stand down in constituencies where rival candidates have a better chance of defeating the DUP. “I think that’s common sense; it’s reacting to what voters want,” he says. “If the DUP return with the same strength and hold the balance of power, then I think we are looking at a very dark future for our children, for our economy.” Aside from the Brexit fallout, Finucane wants to tackle urgent social problems in North Belfast such as “housing, mental health, suicide, dependency on prescription drugs”. In this, he does not discriminate between communities. “Loyalism has been failed in North Belfast as well. There are people in the loyalist areas who go to the food banks, just as people on the other side of the peace wall do. They don’t have academic achievement to the level that they should, they don’t have people going into jobs or traineeships. These are all problems that need to be addressed.” Since Finucane stepped into politics, the past has echoed around him in unsettling ways. “I’ve had death threats,” he says. “Recently banners went up [on the Shankhill Road] trying to associate me with a very violent past – a reminder that there are those in our society who wish to drag us back.” Some of the reaction “has probably worried and upset my mum,” he admits, “and I have to advise my kids to be careful at times”, but otherwise his family has been “fairly relaxed and very supportive” of his bid, and he insists he is undeterred. If Finucane does win, it will, he says, open a positive new chapter in a traumatic family history. “It would be exceptionally significant,” he says, “in a constituency where my father lived and was killed, as a result of collusion with the state, that his son then goes on to become an MP.” Who’s your political hero?Martin McGuinness. I don’t think there would be a peace process without him. He showed tremendous leadership, specifically forming that relationship with Ian Paisley, which people would not have thought possible. He was committed to delivering political solutions to everybody in society here and it’s a shame that wasn’t reciprocated. Do you have a favourite political pundit?Brian Feeney, a columnist for the Irish News and a former SDLP councillor, is very astute. He’s good at analysing current situations and seeing what’s coming down the line. One thing you always take with you when doorstep campaigning?Pen and paper, because invariably there are some issues raised, and when you’re going round so many doors you need to make sure that you have a good note of them, so you can come back later and chase them up. KF Uxbridge and South Ruislip “Boris territory,” says a man as the underground train pulls into Uxbridge, an imposing, modernist station with Ervin Bossányi stained-glass panels over the exit. Outside, in the high street, the safe-seat-for-incumbent-Tory-PM vibe continues: there are two huge, glass-fronted shopping malls, lots of flat whites and no boarded-up betting shops. But appearances can deceive. At the 2017 election, Boris Johnson’s majority in west London’s Uxbridge and South Ruislip was cleaved in half to just 5,034. No sitting prime minister has ever lost their seat, but the constituency is now rated “vulnerable” by Onward, the conservative thinktank, and it’s on Labour’s want-to-win list. “So it’s, objectively, a marginal seat,” says Ali Milani, the 25-year-old Labour candidate, with an almost giddy grin. Johnson’s headache in this area, Milani argues, is down to the three Hs: “the hospital, housing, Heathrow.” The hospital is Hillingdon, the buildings of which have been described by a senior NHS figure as “the worst of any hospital in London”. But it is the plans for a third runway at Heathrow that offer Johnson’s opponents a ready stick to swing at him. When he was elected in 2015, Johnson swore to constituents that he would “lie down with you in front of those bulldozers”. But in June this year, he dropped his opposition, stating he’d “changed his view”. “The country is finding out what this constituency has known for a really long time: this guy will say or do anything to get elected,” says Milani when we meet at his small flat on the outskirts of Uxbridge. “We knew this guy was a charlatan and now the rest of the country’s discovering it.” Johnson will say or do anything to get elected. He’s a charlatan, and now the country’s discovering it Milani is relishing the fight– he calls it “Boris versus Ali”, making it sound like an epic boxing match in the 1970s, not a clash for votes in suburbia. Every chance he has, he points out how different his world is from Johnson’s. Milani is a Muslim and moved aged five to Wembley, north London, from Iran. He went to Brunel University, which is in Uxbridge, and was student union president as well as vice-president of the National Union of Students. Milani says he is a natural fit for the area, someone “who’s local, who has worked here, studied here, had surgery in the local hospital, grew up on a council estate with a single mum – that connects with people”. There is a problem, though: Uxbridge and South Ruislip voted 57% to leave the EU; Milani, who campaigned for remain, says he would do so again if there were a second vote. “It’s getting it done with Labour as well, it’s just getting it done in a different way,” he insists. “But you’d be surprised at how little Brexit comes up on the doorstep here. Honest to God. OK, since the European elections much more. But before then, I had it come up three times between November and May. You’d think Brexit would come up at about 50% of the doors now, but way less: 15% or 20%.” Milani has taken flack for antisemitic tweets he wrote when he was 16 and 17. He has apologised, and does so again this morning, a day when Jacob Rees-Mogg is being criticised for his comments about the Grenfell victims. Rees-Mogg has also backtracked – does Milani think he should be forgiven, too? “I wasn’t a cabinet minister when I made the comments, I was a teenager,” says Milani. Does he think Labour has done enough to root out antisemitism? “So as long as there’s Jewish voices saying we haven’t done enough, we haven’t,” he replies. In his flat, surrounded by ephemera from DC Comics, Milani clearly believes he can create “a political earthquake”. He glances over at his books, films and figurines of the Flash, Wonder Woman and Superman. “My friends take the piss,” he says, laughing. “They’re like: ‘When you’re talking to the press, can you please take this stuff down!’ But there is just something about pure optimism, pure hope, and the good guy beating the bad guy that I think is worth holding on to.” Who’s your political hero?I had a philosophy teacher at high school and college who nudged me in the direction of politics. He was amazing and pulled us back from engaging in conspiracy theories and things like that. What’s one thing you always take with you when you go doorstep campaigning?A spatula so you can put a leaflet through a letterbox without getting your finger bitten by a dog. It happened to two of my activists and it’s scared all of us into buying them! What do you do to get away from politics?Football. Watching Manchester United is the only thing where for 90 minutes my brain doesn’t think about politics and the campaign. It’s often just as miserable with United these days, so I’m not saying it lifts me up with joy, but it’s about being able to disconnect from politics. Tim Lewis Chelsea and Fulham “This is, in my view, the most important general election of my lifetime,” says Nicola Horlick in the conference room of a co-working space in Hammersmith, west London. “And I’m really old now.” Horlick, who is 58 and best-known as a high-profile fund manager, aka “superwoman”, aka “the woman who had it all”, has had a whirlwind political career. She applied to stand for the Liberal Democrats in early September and was approved as a candidate two weeks later. A couple of days after that, Horlick was told that she had been selected to contest the Chelsea and Fulham constituency, a safe Conservative seat since it was created in 2010 and just across the Thames from where she lives in Barnes. Last time out, Greg Hands, formerly chief secretary to the Treasury under David Cameron and a minister in the Department for International Trade under Theresa May, won 52% of the vote. The Liberal Democrat candidate in 2017 polled just 11%. Some people would be daunted by such statistics, but Horlick has made a career of defying outsized odds. Aged 28, she became the youngest director of Warburg investment bank. At Morgan Grenfell, part of Deutsche Bank, she grew assets from £4bn to £18bn in five years. I have very, very strong views about what needs to be done to fix the NHS Horlick juggled her career with having six children, one of whom, Georgie, died from leukaemia in 1998 at the age of 12. “I’m a hugely competitive person as you may have gathered,” she says. “I’m not going to be defeated easily. Can you imagine? It would be a historic victory.” Horlick’s optimism comes from a single issue: Brexit. In the 2016 referendum, her constituents voted 70% for remain. “It’s difficult for people who have been lifelong Conservatives to contemplate voting Liberal Democrat, I understand that,” she says. “But I’m not asking them to become members of the Lib Dems and vote the rest of their lives with us. I’m asking them to lend me their vote on this one occasion, because this is a quasi-referendum. And these people are remainers, strong remainers. They were the people on the march on 19 October and still have their placard sitting in their front entrance halls.” The Liberal Democrats’ forthright position against Brexit is playing well on the doorsteps of west London, says Horlick. She is also emboldened by private polling that indicates the party has overtaken Labour and is now “within touching distance” of Hands. Although Hands campaigned for remain in the referendum – he has a German wife, bilingual children and speaks five languages – he has voted in support of proposals from both May and Boris Johnson to push Brexit through. Horlick clearly considers the Tory candidate to be vulnerable. Brexit dominates the conversation with Horlick, but she insists she is equally passionate about education, the environment and especially the NHS. Her daughter Georgie was treated for almost a decade by the NHS, mostly at Great Ormond Street, and Horlick has since become a non-executive director at Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. She would quite fancy being health secretary one day. “I’ve experienced the NHS as the mother of a patient,” she says. “I’ve experienced it as a board member. And I have very, very strong views about what needs to be done to fix it.” But before that, there’s the small matter of unseating Hands and overturning his 8,188 majority. “We’re already close,” she says, with a smile of pure mischief. Who is your political hero?In the Liberal party, Jo Grimond [leader from 1956-1967]. I met him a few times because my father was involved with the party and he was a great leader and a great guy. What’s one thing you always take with you when you go doorstep campaigning?My rosette and my mobile phone because the electoral register is on our phones. It’s got very hi-tech these days. What do you do to get away from politics?I’ve only just come into it! I’m not sure I want to get away from it just at this moment. I’m trying to immerse myself more, not less. TL Bromsgrove The tipping point, for David Nicholl, came in the form of an unanswered question. On 2 September, the consultant neurologist from Hagley in the West Midlands went on Nick Ferrari’s radio show on LBC and asked Jacob Rees-Mogg, a guest on the programme: “What level of mortality rate are you willing to accept in the light of a no-deal Brexit?” Nicholl had helped draw up contingency plans for the supply of epilepsy and neuropathic drugs in the event of no deal, but he was so concerned about what he saw as the government’s lack of engagement on the issue, which he believed could lead to the deaths of patients, that he went on Newsnight in April to sound the alarm. When he posed his question on LBC, however, Rees-Mogg dismissed it as “the worst excess of Project Fear”. Three days later Rees-Mogg told the House of Commons that Nicholl was as irresponsible as the disgraced anti-vaxxer Andrew Wakefield. “Genuinely, I was speechless,” says the 54-year-old, when we meet on the day of his Lib Dem campaign launch in Bromsgrove, in Worcestershire, where he is seeking to unseat the chancellor Sajid Javid. Nicholl, who was born in Northern Ireland but has lived most of his adult life in the West Midlands, has a cheerfully pugnacious manner, and on 5 September his speechlessness didn’t last long. That afternoon, he stood outside Westminster with a megaphone and challenged Jacob Rees-Mogg “to come out of the House of Commons and repeat what he said in public. If he does,” he warned, “I will sue.” A few hours later, after widespread criticism, Rees-Mogg apologised. Nicholl accepted the apology, but the experience galvanised him. He had recently joined the Lib Dems, having quit Labour in 2018 after Owen Smith was sacked from the frontbench for calling for a people’s vote, and in October he announced his decision to stand. The choice here is between a politician who will flip-flop and someone with a record of standing up and being counted The odds are not with him – the Lib Dems took just 4.6% of the vote in Bromsgrove in the last election, compared to Javid’s 62% – but Nicholl is not one to dodge a fight. After the Iraq war, he spent more than a decade campaigning on behalf of British prisoners in Guantánamo Bay, concluding with the release of Shaker Aamer in 2015. He has also campaigned for the NHS and, closer to home, against the closure of a gym at his local school. Nicholl’s bete noire is Brexit, which he calls “completely toxic”, but he insists it’s not his only focus. “Obviously the NHS is a big issue,” he says, “and I think the Lib Dems have got fairly sensible policies on the NHS – and on the climate emergency too.” He also cites local issues such as the need for a bypass on the congested A38 and related concerns about air pollution. If he wins, Nicholl believes his experience as a neurologist will help amid the morass of Brexit – “because you’re used to dealing with complex situations and family dynamics. It’s pretty stressful, and you’ve got to try and come to a balanced view.” But his focus is on defeating Javid. “The choice here is between a politician who will flip-flop according to whatever the direction the wind is blowing” – he cites Javid’s shifting stance on the proroguing of parliament, as well as Britain’s EU membership – “and someone who has a track record of standing up and being counted, even at risk to himself, and doing the right thing.” How do you get away from politics?My wife would probably say I don’t. But I do enjoy going to the cinema. The last film I saw was Joker, which was great, a very disturbing film – Joaquin Phoenix must get an Oscar for it. I always thought Heath Ledger was brilliant, but Phoenix was even better. Where do you get your news?I subscribe to the Times and watch Channel 4 News. I am way too addicted to Twitter – apologies to my wife on that. Do you have a favourite pundit?Jon Snow, because he’s polite, but gets the questions through. I think Newsnight is getting better and better – I’ve been very impressed with Emma Barnett and Emily Maitlis. KF Plymouth Moor View Charlotte Holloway is the 34-year-old Labour candidate for Plymouth Moor View, one of two constituencies in this Devonshire city, known for its naval docks and maritime history. The seat, created in 2010, was won by the former army officer Johnny Mercer for the Tories in 2015. He held it in 2017. The daughter of a former NHS nurse, Holloway is a grammar school girl who went to Cambridge and then worked on economic policy with a variety of businesses. She is the mother of a one-year-old girl and decided to seek the Labour nomination after the 2017 election. “What I was hearing on the doorstep,” she says, “was that the Tory government wasn’t working for people in their day-to-day lives and yet the Tories increased their majority. I knew we had to do better to reconnect with people here.” She takes me for a cup of tea in a cafe adjoining a chip shop, in the heart of her constituency, and tells me what she has that will make the difference - roots. “People connect with the fact that I was born and raised in Plymouth and I live here.” Johnny Mercer has never voted against the government, He's voted for every cut that's affected Plymouth She and Keith Moore, a local volunteer and Momentum member who drives her around, explain that Plymouth is a city that feels cut off from the rest of the country. The motorway only goes as far as Exeter, which Plymothians see as rather leafy and genteel. On the way to the cafe, we pass through areas of social deprivation that have been revamped, they tell me, by the Labour council. What does she think of Mercer, the former army officer who was appointed by Boris Johnson as a junior minister in the Ministry of Defence?“He’s called me ‘not decent’, ‘a clown’ and just last week ‘the second biggest joke in Plymouth politics’. When he does this, his supporters pile in. and often use misogynist language. “People round here don’t like that he self-styled as an independent when he was first elected. His record shows that he’s never voted against the government. He’s voted for every cut that’s affected Plymouth. We’re losing £2m a week in Plymouth city council as a result of cuts in the government grant.” She notes that Mercer is not from Plymouth. “And for a lot of people to be rooted in the communities that you represent is really important. Many people feel that Plymouth is a bit of a pit-stop for him on route from his home somewhere in Cornwall. Also people are not particularly pleased that he thought it OK to take a second job. He relied a lot on his personal brand, but in just a few years he’s shown that he’s a careerist.” That’s all very well but the election is a national one and it’s been called because of the impasse over an international issue – namely our relationship to the EU. Plymouth Moor View voted 67% to leave in the referendum. Is she having trouble getting across Labour’s complex Brexit policy on the doorstep? Holloway’s message to them is that within six months of being elected, a Labour government will negotiate a better Brexit deal than Boris Johnson’s. What would it involve? A customs union? “We would have a new deal that would be a better deal, which we’d then put to the country to see if they like it.” Would she like it? “I’d have to see what it looked like. It would have to be a very high bar to be a better deal than remaining in the European Union.” The other big issue she has to contend with is the Labour leader, whose leadership qualities have received some historically low polling results. “I’m going to be honest, Jeremy is not people’s favourite cup of tea,” she says. She says she counters disapproval on the doorstep by telling constituents that Corbyn, the former chair of the Stop the War Coalition, supported the campaign to protect HMS Bulwark and HMS Albion – two Royal Navy assault-class ships based at Devonport – from proposed cuts. Anyway, she says, Plymothians are more concerned about cuts to the police, problems seeing a GP and under-investment in education. Holloway says she really enjoys campaigning, but in the post-Jo Cox era of politics, as opinions continue to polarise, the threat of physical attack is hard to ignore. “And that’s something that’s hard to come to terms with,” she says. Who is your political hero?Keir Hardie. Who is your favourite political pundit?I’m not saying I always agree with either of them, but I’m a big fan of Ash Sarkar and Ayesha Hazarika. They’re both entertaining and insightful. What do you do to get away from politics?My baby daughter turned one on the day the election was called – we took her to the Plymouth aquarium: it’s fantastic. Andrew Anthony