The Russian airline Aeroflot has stripped a passenger of his air miles after he boasted online of sneaking his overweight cat onboard by switching him for a slimmer cat during check-in. Mikhail Galin wrote in a Facebook post last week that his cat Viktor was judged too fat to be taken into the passenger cabin during a layover in Moscow on a trip from Latvia to his home in Vladivostok, in the far east of Russia. “The weigh-in showed that the animal had fattened up to 10kg, a level not allowed for the cabin,” Galin wrote. The cabin limit is 8kg. Galin could not abandon his feline friend to the cold luggage hold, so he refused to fly and said he took a “strategic decision to find a similar cat of a lower weight” in Moscow. The next day, Galin returned to the airport with Viktor, the cat double and its owners, and successfully checked into business class after “the operation to switch Viktor the fat cat for Phoebe the miniature kitty was successful”. He posted a photo of Viktor sitting on the plane with a glass of bubbly, becoming an instant hit with Russia’s cat lovers. Aeroflot, however, was in no mood for jokes and told AFP the incident had triggered an investigation. По многочисленным просьбам. Путешествие кота Виктора по маршруту Рига - Москва - Владивосток выявило 2 лишних кг у животного, 1 ответственную сотрудницу авиакомпании и кучу прекрасных людей у меня в друзьях. Но обо всем по порядку. Пройдя все досмотры в рижском аэропорту, мы с котом сели в самолёт по направлению Рига - Москва. На взлёте и посадке Виктору было хреновато от перепада давления и я весь полёт (а он, по сути, и состоит из взлёта и посадки) закрывал ему уши и вытирал слюни, которые текли ручьями по всему коту, моим рукам и переноске. Кот не понимал что происходит и жалобно заглядывал мне в глаза в поисках ответа. На ветконтроле в паспорт Виктора был поставлен штамп, что Родина официально его приняла и мы отправились регистрироваться на рейс Москва - Владивосток. Рулетка очереди направила нас к самой ответственной сотруднице аэропорта, которая с сантиметровой лентой перемерила все измерения багажа (первый раз за мои 300+ перелётов), несколько раз поместила каждую сумку на весы и сообщила что кот тоже будет взвешен. Контрольное взвешивание показало, что животное отъелось до непозволительных для перевозки в салоне 10 кг. После чего, дама торжественно объявила что кот отравляется в багаж. На все попытки объяснить что кот живым не долетит 8 часов в багаже и будет каждую ночь являться ей в кошмарах до конца жизни, она отвечала что у неё правила и брать на себя ответственность за 2 лишних кг Виктора в салоне самолёта она не собирается. Количество сотрудников авиакомпании, привлечённых по моему требованию к решению вопроса, увеличивалось, но вердикт оставался прежним - Кота в багаж. Но как сказал Леня Романов «Бро должен быть рядом, бро не багаж». Послав по заранее определённому направлению всю делегацию авиаперевозчика, вручил им свой посадочный и снялся с рейса со всем багажом и котом. Далее было принято стратегическое решение о поиске похожего кота меньшей физической массы. Благодаря моим друзьям из Риги и Москвы, кто активно принимал участие в поисках (за что я безгранично благодарен), мини-Виктор был найден у подруги @nikabuka Возникла новая проблема - Билеты во Владивосток на рейсы следующего дня стоили 1000-1500 евро 🙄 Продолжение ⬇️⬇️⬇️ A post shared by  Mikhail Galin (@mikhail_galin) on Nov 5, 2019 at 10:20pm PST The investigation into the cat-swap revealed that Galin broke airline rules by switching Viktor for a similar animal weighing 7kg, which was confirmed on video surveillance footage, the airline said. “Aeroflot has taken the decision to take this passenger out of its frequent flyer programme. All of the miles collected during his time in the programme will be annulled.” Galin had nearly 400,000 miles on his account, according to reports. The decison angered many Russians, with some saying it amounted to fat-shaming and others attempting to start a flashmob in protest. “Offending a kitty! Nobody will forgive this,” wrote Bozhena Rynska. Other owners of large pets feared that Galin’s disclosures could prompt the airline to tighten restrictions, making the trick impossible to repeat. “Many of us often quietly flew around with our fat kitties, and now we won’t be able to,” Svetlana Pogorelskaya said on Facebook.