Jürgen Klinsmann’s debut as Hertha Berlin coach ended in defeat as 10-man Borussia Dortmund held on for a 2-1 win. Early goals from Jadon Sancho and Thorgan Hazard were enough to ease the pressure on Lucien Favre with his team’s first win in four games in all competitions. Klinsmann, the former Germany, US and Bayern Munich coach, was hired by Hertha on Wednesday to replace Ante Covic but he could not prevent a fifth straight league defeat. Leipzig moved to the top of the table with a 3-2 win at Paderborn. The result appeared to be decided early with Patrik Schick and Marcel Sabitzer scoring in the third and fourth minutes. Timo Werner added another in the 26th but Streli Mamba and Klaus Gjasula scored in the second half for Paderborn to set up an unexpectedly exciting finale. Real Madrid earned a spirited 2-1 win at Alavés with a scrappy late goal from the defender Dani Carvajal. Real’s captain, Sergio Ramos, put the visitors in front by heading home a Toni Kroos free-kick after 52 minutes but gave away a penalty from which Lucas Pérez levelled in the 65th. Real demonstrated their new-found grit to retake the lead four minutes later. Isco pounced to head a Luka Modric cross against the post and the ball trickled across to Carvajal, who bundled it in from close range. Alavés threw bodies forward in search of an equaliser but Real stood firm, with Marcelo blocking a goal-bound shot and the goalkeeper Alphonse Areola stopping an effort from the hosts’ captain, Manu García, in the eight minutes of added time. That put Real on top of La Liga, for a few hours at least, with 31 points from 14 games ahead of Barcelona, who visit their title rivals Atlético Madrid on Sunday. Alavés, who had lost one of their previous seven home games this season and conceded two goals on their own turf before facing Real, are 13th on 18 points. Two goals from Mario Pasalic helped Atalanta to a convincing 3-0 win in Serie A at Brescia. The Croatian midfielder headed in from close range midway through the first half before adding his second after the break with a neat backheel flick.