It was not long ago that Stormzy delivered a grime remix of the Tories’ “Back Boris” slogan. The second black British artist to ever headline the famous Pyramid stage at Glastonbury, he had the 100,000-strong crowd – more than the number of Conservative party members who would end up voting Boris Johnson in as party leader – chanting: “Fuck Boris!” The name inspired a collective that I’m proud to support: FckBoris. The group is primarily made up of young women of colour and was behind a colourful protest on the first day of Johnson’s government. I’ve been inspired watching the group organise Register’n’ Rave parties – it has put on two so far, in Glasgow and London – to get young, working-class and ethnic-minority voters registered and ready to vote in the upcoming election. The organisers particularly have their sights set on Johnson’s Uxbridge and South Ruislip constituency where his majority is now just 5,000; the majority of any modern prime minister. Today, Saturday 16 November, I’ll be joining FckBoris as it marches through Uxbridge in a “festival” of voter registration. But what’s the point of all this mobilising? The black, Asian and minority ethnic vote (BAME) is becoming an increasingly critical force in our general elections. The performance of Labour in the 2017 election shocked even the most seasoned commentators, and much has been made of how the party won previously “unwinnable” seats. However, a lesser told story of that election is how the spectacular loss of BAME voters from Theresa May’s “nasty party” helped cost her the majority she so comfortably held. Put up against the mobilisation of BAME voters by Corbyn’s reputation as a staunch internationalist and supporter of free movement (despite the party and key unions’ wavering on these issues), May’s Little Englandism did not have the predicted reach. As the neoliberal centre begins to fold, its replacement must be driven by a multiracial working-class movement A report by non-partisan thinktank British Future breaks down the 2017 election data to show that in 17 of the 28 seats gained by Labour from the Conservatives, Labour’s lead among ethnic minority voters was bigger than its overall majority. Without the significant BAME voting gap between the two main parties, the election result may have looked very different. However, voters of colour, particularly working-class voters of colour, have been sidelined by post-Brexit political discourse. Despite the fact that the majority of leave voters were middle-class southerners, Brexit has been used to cast a mythical vision of the “white working class” as the main bloc worth winning over in British politics. Figures from across the political spectrum have scrambled to pander to the Powell-ite vision of the “ordinary Englishman”, besieged by “wage-undercutting” ethnic minorities whose interests are for some reason insurmountably different from theirs. It is, therefore, unsurprising that, despite shared conditions across working-class people of all backgrounds, it is older white men that are more confident in asserting their identity as “working class”, with minority working-class communities more likely to see the term as belonging to white British people. This is not linguistic nitpicking: feeling part of a working-class politics, particularly as the term is regaining strength in the UK and US, will determine who does and does not have a voice in whatever replaces the neoliberal settlement. The insistence of young people of colour on having their voices heard in this election takes on particular significance in light of the last government’s attempts to introduce US-style voter suppression laws. The plans, according to which people would have to show ID to vote, could have effectively disenfranchised the 11 million people who do not have a passport or driver’s licence – disproportionately BAME, students and the working class. Many of the organisers in FckBoris have never been involved in parliamentary politics before. “I’ve followed as a spectator, but have only been involved this year,” Roya, 27, tells me. “All Conservative leaders in my lifetime have been bad – but Johnson’s strategy of appealing to the extreme right has me frightened.” The future of progressive politics cannot rely on concessions to a racist view of the world. It cannot countenance the dehumanisation of working-class people of colour. As the neoliberal centre begins to fold, its replacement must be driven by a multiracial working-class movement. And what better way to start that movement than with a bunch of black and brown women trying to become the first generation of voters since 1906 to unseat a sitting prime minister. • Dalia Gebrial is a PhD candidate at the London School of Economics, and an editor at Novara Media