Not so long ago, it felt as though British TV comedies were struggling to keep up with their moneyed American cousins, as if there were a dearth of originality or an unwillingness to experiment. How different things seem today. There is a wealth of sharp, unique and often breathtakingly inventive British and Irish comedy coming out seemingly by the week. The latest is Ladhood (BBC Three), which has arrived in its box set entirety and may well be gobbled up in one sitting. Liam Williams is a familiar face in the comedy world. You may recognise him from the excruciating mockumentary Pls Like, which satirised the glossy aspirations of YouTubers, or from Back to Life, another excellent breakout series that felt entirely original. Ladhood is an adaptation of Williams’s Radio 4 series and shares its conceit of the grownup Liam narrating stories from his adolescence in the Garforth suburb of Leeds. The setup is simple. As an adult man in the present day, Liam gets into regular scrapes that have their origins in his teenage years. The audience is then flashed back to the early 00s for a dose of nostalgia that is not so much soul-searching as soul-scraping. It is very confident, and very good, and at 20 minutes or so an episode, never outstays its welcome. (What with this and The End of the F***ing World, I am starting to believe the future of television is brevity.) Each of the six episodes takes a particular strand of the kind of man Liam has become and dismantles it, with brutal honesty, but also a deft kind of affection, for both his childhood gang of mates and the place that forged his identity. In Ladhood, this Liam, an avatar for Williams, is an angry adult whose relationships are strained by his relentlessly glum attitude to almost everything, especially bins. “I haven’t got anxiety or depression or anything like that,” he tells his girlfriend, Jess. “I’m just from the north.” She is from the Midlands, he reasons, so wouldn’t understand. Teenage Liam is a depressive boy with intellectual tendencies, who is desperate to “better” himself and escape from Garforth, but not mature enough to recognise that his friends do not share his restlessness and, in fact, quite like their lives. It made me think of the brilliant old Onion headline: Unambitious Loser With Happy, Fulfilling Life Still Lives In Hometown. This may not sound like comedic dynamite, but it is full of moments that had me snorting with laughter. Williams captures the excruciating awkwardness of teenage life to a terrifying degree of accuracy, whether that is his friends’ inability to talk to girls, or the monotonous allure of PS2 games. Liam is marked out as a nerd by his enemies, the local hardmen Rupert, Tinhead and Whitey, and is therefore known as a “word poof”. (Tinhead, in particular, is a genius creation, as erudite as he is deadly.) Liam writes poetry about how nobody can understand heroin addiction, despite never having tried heroin himself. The episode in which the friends try to get a rap crew off the ground had me howling; watch it just to see how you can fit a mouse into a boast about women and drugs. This kind of northern teenage reminiscence is catnip for me, and if you also recoil at the sight of tipsy youngsters swigging recklessly from a bottle of neat vodka then throwing it up again, it may have a similar hold on you. It is full of so many lovely literary flushes you could call it Flealad. Just as Jean Brodie’s girls are distinguished by how they wear their hats, here the boys are set apart by how many cigarettes they each smoke per day, listed on the screen as they first appear, like military rankings. Their cider of choice is Green Danger, described as “a losers’ elixir”. A recurring device of three eras shown together as a brief triptych on screen is very funny indeed and captures the rotation of men’s fashion choices, 2007-2015, to perfection. Apparently Williams is writing a novel; on the basis of Ladhood, I am looking forward to it. Occasional moments are a little heavy on the archness. “Ridiculous, isn’t it, just writing about my own life,” says teenage Liam, the equivalent of a Harry Hill sideways glance to camera. But for the most part, this is intelligent, incisive humour that makes acute observations then takes them to the next level. The misanthropic male protagonist may be a familiar guide, particularly in modern sitcoms, but Williams treads old ground with a fresh eye. He examines aspects of being a certain type of man – a pointless ongoing routine of fighting, drinking too much and being so incapable of expressing emotions that he smashes things up instead – and makes them both laughable and sympathetic. Bring on a second season.