All the political parties claim to be anti-racists appalled by their opponents. Meanwhile, some political commentators appear to have discovered racism in our public life as if it were a new phenomenon. Racism is a complex, widespread issue with deep historical roots; I won’t (and I can’t, as the director of a charity during an election) offer a balance sheet of who is more racist and which racisms matter more. But there are several problems that must be raised. The first should be obvious: we’re having a very public discussion about whether Jeremy Corbyn or Boris Johnson (or other candidates for parliament) are personally racist. The problem with this framing is that racism isn’t mainly about individual attitudes and actions. It is an ideology developed – from medieval antisemitism to the hierarchies of 18th-century European colonialism – to justify the economic and political domination of ethnic majorities over minorities. If we pretend that racism is merely a question of “extremism” or a few bad apples, we misidentify what racism is, and its deep resonances in our collective intellectual and cultural inheritance. Getting rid of an individual leader or politician will not make it disappear – both parties will have questions to answer and work to do after Johnson and Corbyn exit the stage. Of course some political ideas – particularly those of the far right – are expressly driven by an explicitly racist worldview, and these pose the greatest threat to ethnic minorities and our democracy. But even in mainstream quarters, a sort of “common sense” biological racism is being actively tapped into, especially in criminal justice, the job market, and counter-terrorism, to justify or explain away racial inequalities, and to clamp down on immigration. A second issue is that this country’s discussion of racism runs the risk of worsening the relationships between ethnic minority communities. There is a real danger that minorities will find themselves more divided after the election, with Jewish groups wondering if ethnic minorities can show them solidarity in the event of a Labour government; while black and Muslim voters in particular will question how racism became a central election issue for the first time, but with little reference to the ways racism affects them, if the Conservatives win a majority. Of course, many in all ethnic minority communities are resisting these tendencies and showing support for one another. Yet the fact remains: around 75-80% of black and minority ethnic voters will choose the Labour party, rising to 90% or more for black Caribbean, Bangladeshi and Pakistani voters, while a similarly high proportion of Jewish voters will reject Labour. Although these differences were already present in the 2015 election (when less than a quarter of Jews, but three-quarters of BME voters chose Labour), and ethnic minorities vote for a range of reasons, the outcome of the general election – and the very public discussion around it – seems likely to worsen or increase divisions between ethnic minority groups. It’s important not to fall into the trap of creating a “hierarchy of racisms”. At the same time, the effects of racism are more extensive and systematic for some groups in the UK today when, say, interacting with the police or applying for a job. Yet those groups – black people in particular, but also Muslims and Gypsy, Roma and Traveller groups – have the least access to public forums, which determine when and how racism is discussed. It’s important to be clear and careful: Jewish groups are fully entitled to and are justified in explaining forthrightly the nature of antisemitism they face, and it’s wrong to suggest they are acting in bad faith when raising the issue in the Labour party or the left more generally. And there are, of course, many Jews and non-Jews who are standing up to all forms of racism, and who are deeply alarmed about division between and within communities, even if their voices aren’t always heard. Instead, I believe the issue is that white British journalists don’t have sufficient interaction or frank discussions with ethnic minorities when it comes to racism. This results in the structural and institutional form of racism faced by people of colour seeming to have less traction in the public imagination (though Jewish people too experience structural forms of racism). There are limited signs this is improving. The third point is perhaps the most important. We need action, including policies from government, to better tackle racism, understood not simply in terms of hate crime or about each different faith or ethnic community, but in terms of the structural and institutional racism that underpins the attitudes of the racist perpetrator, as well as the wider racial inequalities in our society. There has also been an enormous loss in institutional and financial support for broader anti-racist work in the past decade, with individual faith and ethnic groups instead getting public funding and policy attention. Instead of headline-grabbing analysis that assumes and increases division between communities, we need to rebuild an anti-racist platform based on listening and solidarity. Anti-racism is a position that is exacting in its demands for principle. It requires people to stand up to all forms of racism, whether or not they affect them personally, and even where others may not stand with them. It’s difficult enough to discuss this at a time of calm. In the midst of an election storm, and given the failure of recent governments to address racism as a matter of policy, the current debate is perhaps bound to be divisive and counterproductive. But that divisiveness will have consequences, consequences that will make it more difficult to understand and ultimately to address racism in all its forms. • Omar Khan is director of the race equality thinktank the Runnymede Trust