A woman who died after being swept away by floodwater was the former high sheriff of Derbyshire. Annie Hall’s body was found in the early hours of Friday after she was carried away in Darley Dale near Matlock. Hall served as the county’s high sheriff in 2017. “I am shocked and deeply saddened by the untimely and tragic death of my friend,” Derbyshire’s chief constable, Peter Goodman, said. “Annie was a great leader in Derbyshire in both industry and on the civic front. She will be hugely missed.” She was named as flood warnings remain in place across the Midlands and northern England as receding waters reveal a trail of devastation across the region. The Environment Agency has issued seven severe flood warnings for the River Don at Barnby Dun, Bently, Fishlake, Kirk Bramwith, Kirk Sandall, South Bramwith and Willow Bridge caravan site. “The River Don at Doncaster and the Derwent at Derby both peaked at record levels overnight,” said John Curtin, the EA’s executive director of flood and coastal risk management. “Although river levels are falling, dangerous flood waters remain.” There are also 55 warnings telling people to take immediate action in light of expected flooding, along with 88 alerts urging residents to be prepared. Derbyshire police said floodwaters were widespread on roads in Derby and across the county. Bus services have been disrupted and trains also delayed. “If you come across a flooded road turn back and find a different route,” the force said on Twitter. “Even where water levels begin to lower the depth can still be unknown and cause significant danger. “As flood waters begin to recede you should take care not to come into contact with water or any of the silt or items left behind. Yorkshire and the Midlands were among the areas worst affected by heavy downpours on Thursday and Friday. Sheffield received 84mm of rain in 36 hours, close to the monthly average for Yorkshire, said the Met Office weather forecaster Marco Petanga. Gringley on the Hill in Nottinghamshire had 65mm of rain over the same time period. Dry weather and sunshine are now forecast for the areas worst affected by the floods. “It’s a cold start but there will be some sunshine throughout the day and a lot of dry weather,” Petanga said. There are two yellow rain warnings. One is in place from 11am to midnight stretching from Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire, to Eastbourne and Portsmouth, and another from 5am to 8pm covering Northern Ireland from Ballycastle to Newry. Up to 50mm of rain could fall in Northern Ireland on Saturday, Petanga said. The Labour party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is due to visit South Yorkshire on Saturday, after the prime minister, Boris Johnson, angered people in the region on Friday by describing the floods as “not looking like something we need to escalate to the level of a national emergency”.