Labour’s plan to provide free broadband to everyone in Britain is essential to allow Britain to compete in the global economy, John McDonnell said on Friday, defending the proposals against claims that they were the beginning of a general programme of nationalisation. The shadow chancellor told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the plan to take over BT’s Openreach is “very much following the model of what has happened elsewhere”. He continued: “And yes, it is ambitious, but we have to be ambitious if we’re going to compete in the global economy. “And it doesn’t just have economic benefits, it has environmental benefits in terms of basically people locating in their local towns and not commuting, some people moving into rural and coastal areas as well so they’re properly connected, and it has social implications as well.” News of the scheme prompted shares in BT to drop nearly 4% on Friday morning and led TalkTalk to announce that it was putting the sale of one of its businesses on hold. It would be a radical shift in provision of broadband services, which are currently provided by companies at an average cost per household of about £30 a month. It builds on Labour’s existing plans to nationalise the energy utilities, water companies, postal services and railways as part of its plan for a transformation of the public sector. But when asked whether Labour was planning to go on to nationalise other companies, McDonnell said: “No we’re not”. “We’re not taking over all of BT, we’re simply taking over Openreach, the BT technology and some elements from within BT itself,” he said. He added: “And the reason we’re doing it is because actually the private sector have not delivered on the scale that we need fast enough, and I think now it is about building for the future.” Labour said the estimated capital cost of rolling out full-fibre broadband was £15bn, on top of the government’s existing £5bn earmarked for broadband expansion. This would be funded from its green transformation fund – paid for by borrowing. Openreach – the broadband network which is a distinct company within the BT group – is worth about £12bn-£15bn but the party said parliament would decide the rate of compensation. Labour has said it would issue government bonds to shareholders for all nationalisations.