Kevin McCloud – along with architect Damion Burrows and design expert Michelle Ogundehin – is approaching the end of his search for the RIBA house of the year 2019. This penultimate episode focuses on houses claiming to be “down to earth” – a judgment that turns out, predictably, to be relative. Many of these properties are comparatively simple but all are still probably beyond most viewers’ means. All the same, plenty of attractive, distant property dreams to gaze at. Phil Harrison All manner of entertaining mishaps this week, as the teams devise, design and market their own rollercoasters. Given the bungling that ensues, we can only hope that these rides remain forever hypothetical. Cue pitching nightmares as dreams collide with reality and more boardroom carnage. PH After a first half that’s sleepy even by Doc Martin standards, this episode ends with two fine comic set pieces: first, a diagnosis battle with a vet (Caroline Quentin, reunited with her Men Behaving Badly co-star Martin Clunes), and then a layered misunderstanding involving a knife wound. Bloody good fun. Jack Seale Dr Bendor Grosvenor and Emma Dabiri visit Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, where they discover undisplayed and under-celebrated landscapes by Thomas Gainsborough and Pieter Bruegel. Both paintings are a little unloved, but our enthusiastic presenters are always up for a challenge. PH The ninth season of this daft and yet oddly endearing comedy challenge concludes. Tonight, in order to win the favour of Greg Davies and Alex Horne, David Baddiel, Ed Gamble, Jo Brand, Katy Wix and Rose Matafeo are challenged to “do the most preposterous thing with this chickpea”. Their creative solutions are suitably ridiculous. PH The documentary strand about relations ripping each other off returns for a second series of grim betrayals retold via thrifty reconstructions. In the opening episode, two Welsh sisters deal with a wicked stepmother, and a Scottish pensioner is the tragic victim of embezzlement. Graeme Virtue Drive, 10.55pm, Sony Movies One of Ryan Gosling’s star-making roles: in Nicolas Winding Refn’s cool and highly stylised 2011 thriller he plays a nameless, nerveless getaway driver. He’s motoring along smoothly until his (sweetly platonic) involvement with neighbour Carey Mulligan gets him fatally mixed up with LA mobsters. Paul Howlett Europa League Football: Vitoria SC v Arsenal 3.30pm, BT Sport 2. A Group F match. Champions League Football: Red Star Belgrade v Tottenham Hotspur 7pm, BT Sport 2. From Red Star Stadium. NBA: Houston Rockets v Golden State Warriors 12.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. From Toyota Centre.