Two ticket touts who used false identities and bots to harvest event tickets at the expense of fans and sell them for £11m through websites such as Viagogo were “dishonest fraudsters motivated by greed”, a court has heard. Lawyers acting for National Trading Standards told a jury at Leeds crown court that the pair tried to “milk profit” from genuine fans by reselling tickets for Ed Sheeran gigs, the Chelsea flower show, and the Harry Potter and the Cursed Child play at inflated prices. Peter Hunter and David Smith, who traded as Ticket Wiz and BZZ from the home they shared in north London, are charged with four offences, including three of fraudulent trading and one of possessing articles for fraud. They deny the charges. “An inevitable consequence of their behaviour was that they reduced the number of face-value tickets that were available to purchase,” said Jonathan Sandiford, prosecuting. “The two defendants were internet ticket touts and were also dishonest fraudsters motivated by greed. “That greed caused them to exploit the love and passion that many people have for their favourite music acts.” The prosecution said Hunter and Smith used bot software to harvest tickets, as well as a specialist browser called Insomniac, that allowed them to masquerade as multiple consumers. They allegedly paid £4m for tickets, including nearly 30,000 from just one company, and sold them for £10.8m over two and a half years, indicating an average trading profit of £52,000 per week. They are also alleged to have used credit cards in different names and employed staff to maximise the number of tickets they could obtain, bypassing limits on the number that could be sold to one person. A search on the home of Smith and Hunter found 112 credit cards in more than 30 names, according to the prosecution. Sandiford said the use of multiple identities allowed them to take up a number of places in the queue, as well as disguise the fact they were buying tickets only to resell them for profit. He said this broke terms and conditions imposed by primary ticket companies such as Ticketmaster and worked to the detriment of fans. “The defendants were competing with consumers to buy tickets that should have been available at face value,” Sandiford said. “It essentially manipulated the market against consumers.” He accused them of “profiteering” by using the largest secondary ticketing companies – Viagogo, StubHub, Seatwave and GetMeIn – to charge inflated prices. Buyers should have been told the tickets could cause them to be refused entry but they were not, Sandiford said. One of the fraud charges relates to speculative selling, whereby touts offer tickets for sale that they do not have, on the assumption that they will be able to get hold of them later. Sandiford said this amounted to lying to consumers. He referred to specific events allegedly targeted by the pair, such as Sheeran’s stadium tour in 2017. The singer-songwriter’s manager and promoter were due to give evidence later in the trial, he said. The case continues.