Shall we have a debate about whether Joe Root should carry on as England’s Test captain? OK, I’ll start. The answer is, no. Of course not. Time to give up, concentrate on being a brilliant batsman and give someone else a go. The end. Unfortunately, a question this clear-cut does present some formal problems when it comes to writing a column. It is necessary at this point to whistle nonchalantly and glance down at the open white spaces below this line, like a man in a crowded lift staring with furious feigned interest at the spa treatment times. Perhaps we could fill a little space by talking about the rest of England’s top order. For example, Dominic Sibley and his brilliantly puritanical offside leave, a shot that sees him actually turn his back and make his bat disappear into his body, like a spy hiding behind a lamppost. Or how about Rory Burns and that habit of turning his head to looking past the bowler towards mid-on, the way a cat sits at an angle when it’s cross with you. Burns does this to favour his stronger left eye, raising the idea, as suggested in various scientific batting studies, that he is actually a right-hander, just one whose batting has been bent by that initial misconception into a series of awkward compensatory shapes, like a footballer who can’t stop doing the Rabona. We could talk about the country as a whole, the way the notion of the England captain as a semi-honorific role speaks to so many other offices and structures that seem stuck, sclerotic, bound by cobwebs – and indeed occupied by the wrong person. Put like that, the idea of discussing Root and the Test captaincy suddenly becomes a great deal more appealing. Go on then. Why should Root stop being England Test captain? Firstly because he’s not very good at it. This is not a slight on Root. Captaincy is clearly very difficult. Sometimes it can just come down to a look, a way of standing and talking, a sense of chasing and finding your own luck. There was a shiver of hope on the opening morning in Hamilton as Root clung on to that early slip catch off Jeet Raval like it was the last piece of golden moon rock left in the world. A little later there was a lovely grab to get rid of Kane Williamson and it was almost a shock to see Root smiling and leaping about, to remember what a fun, uplifting presence he is. At which point things began to fall away a little. Root’s England began this game with no wicketkeeper and no spinner. Root’s England won the toss and bowled, but slowly and without vim. Root’s England risked wrecking their star all-rounder by having him pound in with a knee injury. And as ever there seemed to be no plan, no cranial buzz, no eye for the tides and currents of the day. This has been the tone of the age of Root: formulaic stasis interspersed with formulaic funkiness. We’re going to smash it. No! We’re going to bat like a jug of cold custard. At times during the first Test this feeling of category-confusion seemed to combine into something else, lethargy, exhaustion, even disinterest. The real clincher is that England lose Root the great batsman to gain Root the poor captain. This is a player who at his best has a kind of unscarred grace, a thrilling lightness of touch in his movements and his contact with the ball. And yet from May to September this year Root was gouging his way through 24 international matches across three formats, with the full insomnia of Ashes captaincy duties thrown in. By the time the second Test came around he was wandering out to bat like a man about to be buried up to his neck and left for the desert ants. This is unsurprising. Even the “debate” around this topic is draining and tiresome. This is the real point here. Why do we still fetishise the Test captaincy, building it up as a six-year legacy role, all shot through with shades of empire, as though doing the toss and going to some meetings is like being appointed crown ambassador to the Commonwealth. There is a feeling of impropriety in even pointing out the obvious fact that Root isn’t the best option. Who else is there, Root’s friends ask? The answer to which is: anyone and everyone else in the team. Give it to Burns for a year, a contracted player and successful captain, but deemed by some, with an absurd deference to the role, to be not quite England material just yet. Give it to Ben Stokes, who already leads in everything he does, who won’t be destroyed by this any more than he already destroys himself anyway, and willingly. Give it to Stuart Broad, who has some matches left in him, not to mention brains and a powerful sense of his own worth. The discussion around why, when and with what level of ceremony the England Test captain should be sacked has always been one of the defining elements of the England Test captaincy. Why not dilute it at the source. Take away the selection elements, and anything else that might affect the doling out of those lucrative central contracts. Make the captain’s own position renewable every year too. Dial it back and we might just be doing everyone a favour. Not least Root the player, who is the real story here, and who just needs to go back to being brilliantly unencumbered, to casting his light on this team not trying to remake it.