Bristol completed a remarkable recovery by scoring a last-minute try through their replacement flanker Dan Thomas to beat Exeter 20-17 at Sandy Park and move top of the Premiership. The visitors had trailed 17-0 at the break but rallied to stun the Chiefs and make it three wins from four since the start of the season. With time up, Bristol won a penalty which Callum Sheedy kicked to the corner and from there the Bears’ forwards built up a head of steam to crash over the line. Replays appeared inconclusive but the try was awarded and, after Sheedy kicked the conversion, Bristol were able to celebrate a stunning comeback win. “This win is a major marker for us,” said Bristol’s director of rugby, Pat Lam. Sam Simmonds and Nic White scored Exeter’s first-half tries with Joe Simmonds converting both and adding a penalty. Piers O’Conor was Bristol’s other try scorer with Sheedy finishing with two penalties and two conversions as the visitors scored 20 unanswered points after the interval. The opening 15 minutes were a poor advertisement for Premiership Rugby as both sides struggled to bring any continuity to their game. Basic handling errors abounded with possession being swapped from side to side, which belied the excellent playing conditions. Eventually the Chiefs managed to string a few passes together and took the lead through a 14th-minute try from Sam Simmonds. Henry Slade, on his first game back from England World Cup duties, skilfully evaded a couple of defenders and Sam Simmonds was on hand to drive over from close range for a try that his brother Joe converted. That breakthrough was the catalyst Exeter needed as they became increasingly dominant and, after some accurate handling, they picked up a second try. A splendid offload from Slade then created space for Stuart Hogg, who sent Tom O’Flaherty racing down the right. When he was hauled down, White saw a gap to dart over. Joe Simmonds converted before adding a simple penalty. At that stage, it looked an uphill task for Bristol to reverse their fortunes as apart from a couple of lively runs from wing Luke Morahan, they hardly struck a blow in a one-sided first half. Four minutes after the restart Bristol received some encouragement when Sheedy kicked a wide-angled penalty but normal service was immediately resumed as the Chiefs pinned their opponents in their own 22. They appeared to have extended their lead when Alex Cuthbert forced his way over only for the TMO replays to show the wing had put a foot in touch just before grounding the ball. Exeter brought on their England players Luke Cowan-Dickie and Jack Nowell to add firepower but it was Bristol who scored next when Sheedy kicked his second penalty after Hogg was penalised for not releasing. Sheedy’s penalties were the only scores of a dull third quarter but, with 17 minutes remaining, White was shown a yellow card for a deliberate knock-on and Bristol took full advantage when Luke Morahan’s speed created a try for O’Conor. Sheedy’s conversion brought Bristol to within four points before the late drama saw Thomas touch down to earn a scarcely believable victory. A thoroughly dominant display by London Irish delivered a 36-11 bonus-point win against Leicester at the Madejski Stadium. The points came from everywhere for the Exiles with Oli Hoskins, said said Bristol;’sThisThias win isBen Loader and Ruan Botha getting over in the first half, and Stephen Myler adding seven points with the boot. Leicester had two first-half penalties to show for their efforts and got a late score for Jonah Holmes, but Irish continued to run riot after the break as Waisake Naholo and Tom Parton secured the five-point victory. PA Media