Sandi Toksvig’s activism began early. At her Catholic primary school in Denmark, the nuns decreed that during bad weather, only the boys were allowed to play outside. Outraged, six-year-old Toksvig led a strike; the girls made posters and refused to go to lessons until they were allowed equal access to the playground. Faced with such militancy, the mother superior burst into tears, but the girls got their way. “I was filled with fury,” Toksvig relates, “a fury about any injustice which has never really left me.” The celebrity memoir is a format that requires constant reinvention these days, often appearing in the guise of a self-help book or A-Z rather than the usual chronological series of anecdotes and Toksvig, who balks at the idea of “celebrity”, has found a fittingly idiosyncratic vehicle for her reflections on her life and career. Quite literally: it’s the number 12 bus, which winds through London from her family home in Dulwich to her professional home of Broadcasting House at Oxford Circus, and she uses the journey and the vignettes of London life it offers as a jumping-off point for stories – her own and those of forgotten characters such as Lucy Wanmer, the “Little Woman of Peckham”, a 0.76-metre (2ft 6in) schoolmistress who was exhibited as a curiosity (as a short woman constantly having to navigate a world designed for tall men, Toksvig feels some affinity) or Una Marson, a Jamaican writer and activist who was the first black female programmer at the BBC. “I love passion perhaps more than anything,” she says, in praise of a man who has set up a website to commemorate Kennedy’s sausages, once a great export of Peckham: “Even if it’s just for sausages it is a fine thing.” Toksvig comes across as a passionate enthusiast for many things: the theatre (early jobs included sweeping the stage and working on the electrics crew just to be in the building), for history, for her beloved father and for equality. She recalls recording a pilot episode as a potential host of Have I Got News for You in 1990. Angus Deayton also recorded one and afterwards she was told: “We preferred yours, Sandi, but everyone has agreed you can’t have a woman in charge of making fun of the news.” If such overt prejudice seems shocking now, it’s nothing compared with what she had to endure when the Mail decided to “out” her in 1994 as living with her partner and raising the three children that they had by donor. Toksvig took control of the narrative by writing a pre-emptive piece for a rival paper, but the campaign of hate mail and death threats that followed meant the family had to go into hiding and the stress contributed to the end of the relationship. It seems extraordinary that a TV personality’s sexuality could have been regarded as such a scandal a mere 25 years ago and Toksvig appears to have mixed feelings about discussing that part of her life, “possibly the least interesting thing about me”. There’s an understandable weariness about being “described as a ‘lesbian broadcaster’ when I’m… making jokes about the European Union”, but she also understands the importance of her visibility. She writes with candour about how “lost and frightened” she felt as a young woman, first when she was almost thrown out of her Cambridge college for having her girlfriend to stay in her room, and later, when she was put on antidepressants after the end of her first relationship, when all she really needed was reassurance and the knowledge that she was not alone. No one who has heard Toksvig speak will be surprised to find a bedrock of compassion and righteous anger underpinning the book. She rails against the airbrushing of women from history and talks about her reasons for co-founding the Women’s Equality party and her optimism for change, despite occasionally despairing at the next generation of feminists. When she hears Lena Dunham say being wolf-whistled by a man sometimes makes her feel “validated”, Toksvig splutters: “Validated? What are we? Car park tickets?” But there are plenty of funny stories too, from behind-the-scenes Bake Off gossip to the time she spoke at a charity do in Downing Street and Samantha Cameron took her aside afterwards to say, kindly: “You speak very well. You should think about doing it for a living.” Between the Stops is like browsing through a well-stocked museum of curiosities with a wise and kind guide; it’s part celebration, part confession, part call to arms and wholly entertaining. Don’t read it on the bus though – it will make you miss your stop. • Between the Stops: The View of My Life from the Top of the Number 12 Bus by Sandi Toksvig is published by Virago (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99