Your article (The billionaire and the 219 tiny flats: a new low for rabbit hutch Britain?, Money, 23 November) highlighted the injustice of permitted development, which has once again reared its head in Haringey, north London. Under the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, a developer can convert offices into residential properties without planning permission. A council can only intervene in limited circumstances – where there are transport impacts, contamination or flooding risks, or noise from nearby commercial premises. Haringey asked the government for an exemption for metropolitan town centres like Wood Green, but we were rebuffed. Haringey was aware that this regulatory change would take power away from democratically elected local decision-makers and hand it to developers and speculators. It allows developers to acquire office blocks full of businesses providing jobs and stability to the local economy, to evict those businesses and turn prime office space in town centres into unacceptably poor-quality housing. Councils cannot even prevent people being cramped into rooms well below national government’s minimum space standards. When business leaseholders are forced out of our borough, the council loses vital income through business rates that we need to spend on essential services for local people. The council tax revenue that it is replaced with is substantially less. Permitted development is a national disgrace and symbolic of partial and biased planning regulations and a broken housing market. We must close this planning loophole, support the local economy and ensure that housing built to address the housing crisis really is housing fit for people to live in.Cllr Joseph EjioforLeader, Haringey council • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition