More than two months of media build-up has, incredibly, failed to put the kybosh on Altior v Cyrname, the top-class clash which we still hope and believe will take place at Ascot on Saturday. Both trainers have, I suspect, got a bit tired of confirming that their charges are still on course for the Christy 1965 Chase but they were good enough to do so once more at Cheltenham on Sunday and both seemed genuinely upbeat about their chances. “He’s as fit as I can get him at home,” said Paul Nicholls of Cyrname. “We took him for a spin round Wincanton a week ago.” Nicholls would normally be at Haydock on this Saturday for the Betfair Chase, which he has won six times and in which he is likely to run Frodon. But he expects to be at Ascot this time. Meanwhile, Nicky Henderson reported of Altior: “He could not be better.” Henderson has given the impression of slightly regretting that he has to take on such a good rival for Altior’s first run of the season, but no other race fits so well for a horse who needs to try a step up in trip on the way to the King George. Altior also holds an entry in the Betfair Chase and Henderson said: “I’m going to leave him in both because you’d look pretty stupid if there was an earthquake at Ascot and you’d taken him out of Haydock.” But he confirmed that Ascot remains the plan. And so we have this extraordinary situation, the two highest-rated steeplechasers in Britain taking each other on in November. With a handful of exceptions for races like the King George, it’s rare to have the very best in jump racing going head to head before the middle of March, especially this early in the season and especially for a race that isn’t a Grade One. Who will win? We’ll return to that question on Saturday but I tend to think it surprising that the market favours Altior, the 11-10 favourite against Cyrname at 5-4. Cyrname is rated 1lb higher and appears ideally suited by Ascot, while Altior provoked concern by jumping out to his left the last time we saw him there. Of course, he’s never been beaten in 14 starts over fences, which must count for quite a bit... Leicester having been abandoned, our only jumps action comes from Plumpton, where Outrath (1.30) appeals most. That said, I was hoping for a bit better than the 3-1 which is what we’re offered about Suzi Best’s runner in the selling handicap hurdle. Now nine, he has been kept to the Flat for most of the time since he was a promising novice and didn’t encounter proper soft ground until staying on well to be a never-nearer third here last month. That was Daryl Jacob’s first ride on him and it’s interesting to see Jacob make the journey for just this one ride. Outrath gets to go off the same mark on an even more testing surface and there is every reason to hope this veteran can now get the second success of his career. At Wolverhampton, Brockey Rise (2.20) gets another go over seven furlongs, having been beaten just a neck when stepped back up to that trip here a fortnight ago. He’s been a bit frustrating since his April win here but this is a good opportunity and 9-2 is fine. At 7-2, Cwynar (2.50) ought to be able to sustain the progress he showed on his first start for Andrew Balding, while Sandret (3.20) is an improver to stick with at 6-1 or thereabouts. Plumpton 12.30 The Grey Scholar 1.00 Champagne Court (nap) 1.30 Outrath 2.00 Juge Et Parti 2.30 Le Coeur Net 3.00 Cheque En Blanc 3.30 Timely Gift Wolverhampton 12.50 Minhaaj 1.20 Lafontaine 1.50 Desert Caravan 2.20 Brockey Rise (nb) 2.50 Cwynar 3.20 Sandret 3.50 Ingleby Mackenzie Southwell 4.15 Clipsham Tiger 4.45 Blake's Vision 5.15 Fantasy Keepeer 5.45 Dark Regard 6.15 Gleeful 6.45 Twpsyn 7.15 Albe Del Sole 7.45 Baile Ghilibert Leicester - abandoned due to waterlogging