These drinks are reflective of the season; flavours reminiscent of the aromas, nostalgia and comforting dishes that pervade the holiday time. They’re also drinks designed to suit the various gatherings that crop up. Some work for impromptu drop-ins. Others are for when you need the right cocktail to accompany the multitude of indulgences that adorn the Christmas table. There’s also a consideration for the fact that the holidays also seem to spur a little extra waste in all our lives, so I’ve tried to balance this by using some ingredients that curb the impact on the planet, or are getting used across the table anyway. As with cooking, a little prep ahead of time makes a world of difference – and, as with your cooking, please use these as a guide and adapt as necessary. Happy gathering! Cater to your wee ones or those who are abstaining with this punch. It lacks loads of sticky additions, so works for all palates. It is also great gently warmed for a hearty welcome from the cold. Serves 8-10 peopleSeedlip Garden 108 200mlSeedlip Grove 42 100mlspiced honey water 100ml (see directions below)cloudy apple juice 500mlelderflower cordial 50mlsoda water 500ml, chilledlemon ice (see directions below)pink grapefruit 1, cut into wedgeslemon thyme several sprigs To make the spiced honey water, boil 300ml of water and add 3g of loose-leaf earl grey tea, 1 crushed green cardamom pod and 1 clove. Allow to cool, then strain and mix 100ml of the liquid into 100g of honey. To make the lemon ice, slice a lemon into wheels. Put into an ice-cream tub and fill with boiling water. Allow to cool then freeze overnight. To serve, add the lemon ice to a punch bowl or soup urn, then add the Seedlips, honey water, apple juice and elderflower. Stir well, then add the soda water. Serve in rocks glasses with ice, and garnish with the wedges of pink grapefruit and sprigs of lemon thyme. An ideal boozeless single serve, this is something to refresh in among the busyness. It has a great depth of spice, and is pleasingly bittersweet. This is ideal for a toast when friends drop by. It’s easy to have a batch sitting waiting, then simply pop open some bubbles (stick with something made methode champenoise – prosecco lacks the requisite bubbles, acidity or nuttiness). Pick a garnish as suits. Rosemary and citrus peels are perfectly festive. Serves 8-10 peopleVS cognac 200mlcreme de mures (blackberry liqueur) 300mlSeedlip Spice 94 50mlwater 150mlAngostura orange bitters 10 hefty dashes (or regular Angostura)sparkling wine 2 bottles, chilled To prepare, mix all the ingredients together in a jug. Decant into a bottle, and chill well. To serve, add 50ml to a coupette or flute, then top with sparkling wine, and garnish to taste. Orange wine (the white grape cousin to rosé) offers a unique texture and florality that suits this drink perfectly. Without the richer tannins of a deep red, this “mulled” drink is both comforting and uplifting. Serves 8-10 peoplelemon 1clementines 2bouquet garni (see below)caster sugar 150gsloe gin 200mlorange wine 2 bottlesnutmeg For the bouquet garnifresh rosemary 1 sprig, cut into thirdsblack cardamom pod 1, crushedfresh ginger a thumb, unpeeled but washed, choppedcloves 3pink grapefruit peel 1 strip, pith removedfennel seeds 1 tspfresh bay leaf 1Sri Lankan cinnamon stick 2cm (if unavailable use a regular cinnamon stick)rooibos tea leaves ½ tsp To make the bouquet garni, wrap all the ingredients in a piece of muslin. Slice the lemon and the clementines. Add to a saucepan with 300ml of boiling water, the bouquet garni, and the caster sugar. Place on a low heat, then add the sloe gin and orange wine. Heat on the lowest heat possible for 30 minutes then remove the bouquet garni. Serve in pre-warmed teacups with a fresh grating of nutmeg. Makes 1cold-brewed green tea 50mlflat-leaf parsley 1 sprigEverleaf non-alcoholic bittersweet aperitif 40mlginger ale 100ml, chilled lime wedges to garnish To make the cold-brewed green tea, add 3g of loose green tea leaves to 500ml cold water, and infuse in the fridge for 12 hours. Strain and keep chilled. To serve, wrap the parsley sprig around the inside of a wine glass and fill with large cubes of ice. Add the Everleaf and tea and stir gently. Add more ice, then top with ginger ale, and garnish with a wedge of lime. I love the spiced cakes of Christmas but there are always too many for any sensible consumption. This makes use of the leftover panettone that has begun to dry, but should definitely not be destined for the bin. The booze works great, but can be omitted. The proportion of milk to panettone is to taste, but around a litre of milk to about 300g of stale panettone is probably the best guide. Makes 1spiced milk 100ml (see below)good dark chocolate 30g, gratedunrefined sugar 1 tspyellow chartreuse 15mlLondon dry gin 15ml For the spiced milkmilk 1 litresalt a pinchstale panettone 300g To make the spiced milk, gently warm a pan of milk, then add a pinch of salt, and leftover cake. Keep on a very low heat for 15 minutes, then strain out the cake crumbs. If you’re feeling very energetic, the crumbs can be spread onto a baking tray, sprinkled in sugar, and baked on a very low heat for a “snap” as a garnish. Gently heat 100ml of the spiced milk with the grated chocolate and sugar, then pour into a cup with the chartreuse and gin. A warming and aromatic drink that’s perfect when you need to serve a group. Pro tip: this also works amazingly as a theatrical hot punch. Omit the lemon ice, but add a sliced fresh lemon to the mix, then clean a poker, warm in the embers of the fire, then as guests arrive, plunge the red hot “loggerhead” into the bowl (avoid touching the sides and wear a glove to avoid burns and a spitting cocktail). It will caramelise and warm in a way heating on the hob just won’t do. Serves 8-10 peopleorange 1cinnamon sugarlemon ice (see apple seed punch recipe on page 61)celery 1 stick, shaved into ribbonsspiced honey water 100ml (see apple seed punch recipetawny port 500mlEmpirical Spirits Fallen Pony 300ml (or use pear brandy, vodka or light rum)ginger ale 500ml, chilled Slice the orange into wheels. Dust in cinnamon sugar then bake in a low oven for 6 hours until dried into crisps. When ready to serve, place the lemon ice in a punch bowl or soup tureen, then add the celery shavings, honey water, port and Fallen Pony. Stir well, then add the chilled ginger ale. Serve in teacups with ice, and garnish with an orange crisp. This might not seem the most Christmassy of drinks, but it is ideal when the night’s indulgences have caught up, or for when family and friends are gathering for the many lunch feasts. With that in mind, the base is easily prepped ahead of time, then poured as guests arrive. Serves 6white miso 1 tbspgood tomato juice 700mlpassata 300mlclementine juice 200mlWorcestershire sauce 100mlport 100mlsingle malt whisky 50ml (a peaty, smokey Islay such as Ardbeg is best)Tabasco to tastevodka 50ml To garnishpickled chilli 1celery 1 stick Dissolve the white miso in boiling water in the base of a pitcher, then add all the ingredients except the vodka. To serve, put the vodka in a highball glass filled with ice. Top with the tomato mixture and stir. Add more ice, then garnish with a pickled chilli and a stick of celery. Avoid the urge to stack it with a fruit basket of garnishes – lunch is on its way. Lyaness, 20 Upper Ground, London SE1 9PD