Winning was everything for Steve Clarke in Nicosia. John McGinn swept home the winner in the Euro 2020 qualifier against Cyprus and Scotland survived a few late scares to move third in their qualifying group. The visitors had an early reprieve when George Efrem’s shot bounced off the underside of the bar and appeared to cross the line. The goal was not given and Ryan Christie soon scored a glorious opener before Efrem did get a goal with a well-struck volley two minutes after the break. Scotland will finish third in Group I if they get a draw at home to Kazakhstan on Tuesday but Clarke is keen to build a winning mentality for the play-offs in March after a four-match losing streak ended their automatic qualification hopes. “It was important to build on the San Marino victory,” Clarke said. “We knew coming here would be a difficult game because it was a difficult game at Hampden in June, a very similar game where we got ourselves in front and I thought when we went in front we were the better team. “Second half we conceded to another set play or second phase from a set play but it was a wonderful strike, you have to give the lad Efrem credit. “The reaction to that was great, getting ourselves back in front with a really good team goal. And then we showed a little bit of resilience to get the three points we wanted. “I’m not going to sit here and say it was a fantastic performance. It was a good performance. And sometimes, when you are coming out of the run of games we are coming out of, it’s more important to win than the performance. The win was crucial for us because it gives us the opportunity to go home for Kazakhstan and [the chance of] another three points that would set us up nicely for the play-off games in March.” Clarke was delighted to see his side brush off the disappointment of conceding after they capitulated in a 4-0 defeat in Russia last month. “The response was really pleasing because we spoke about it at half-time, funnily enough,” he said. “I pointed out to them that at 0-0 in Russia at half-time everyone felt quite good in the dressing room and our reaction to the adversity of losing the first goal over there wasn’t great. “So we spoke about it and the reaction to their goal was really good. We got ourselves back in front with a great team goal.” Clarke was not convinced Efrem’s effort was a goal. “I’ve seen the stills but stills are confusing,” he said. “It’s very difficult to say that ball is overthe line and, if the officials have the same doubt, then they can’t give the goal.” The Cyprus manager, Ran Ben Shimon, claimed the better team lost and felt the incident was the “decisive moment in the game”. He added: “To lead after six minutes would have been crucial. It was half a metre inside. The team that tried to play football lost this game. We prepared for long balls but not that amount of long balls.” McGinn continued his international goalscoring streak, his first-time finish making it five goals from his past five games. “That’s a game we might have drawn or lost in recent times,” he said. “It is important to get that winning mentality. We need to build towards the play-offs in March and that is a step forward. “I’ve been working on trying to arrive in the box late and add more goals and, if I can contribute, then hopefully we can get Scotland to a major tournament because that is what everyone wants.” Christie, who scored his first goal for Scotland, said: “I’m delighted. It’s something I have been desperate to do every time I have played for Scotland and it has taken longer than I wanted it to.” Clarke handed the Motherwell centre-back Declan Gallagher his first Scotland cap and gave a competitive debut to the Rangers midfielder Ryan Jack, while Steven Naismith captained the team on his 50th international.