As Rugby Australia determines who becomes the new Wallabies coach they will also consider the length of the successful candidate’s contract. It seems sensible to sign the new coach to a four-year contract, culminating at the next World Cup in France in 2023, but does the governing body really want to lock themselves into a lengthy contract that would potentially leave them stuck with a coach they did not want at the next World Cup? Former coach Michael Cheika was originally contracted until 2017, which was a pragmatic arrangement following the resignation of Ewen McKenzie towards the end of 2014. If Cheika did not work out, RA had plenty of time to find a new coach to take the Wallabies to the 2019 World Cup in Japan. But Cheika’s contract was extended another two years after he guided the Wallabies to the final of the 2015 World Cup in England. This put RA in a difficult position when they considered sacking him at the end of the 2018 season, the Wallabies’ worst since 1958. Despite the poor results, the cost of paying out Cheika’s seven-figure salary was a contributing factor in RA’s decision to persevere with him. The Wallabies produced their worst result in World Cup history in Japan, losing a crucial pool game to Wales and then being knocked out in the quarter-final by England. It’s understandable that RA would want to tread cautiously in relation to the length of the new coach’s contract, but international rugby coaching is a cutthroat business. The leading candidates for the Wallabies job will no doubt seek the security of a long-term deal – and they cannot be blamed for that. If it means getting their man, RA might be inclined to agree to a longer deal, however reluctantly. In the absence of an Eddie Jones candidacy, the new Wallabies coach will almost certainly be a New Zealander, who may argue he needs time to implement his ideas in a totally new rugby environment. But Springboks coach Rassie Erasmus demonstrated a coach does not need four years to prepare a team for the World Cup, having guided South Africa to victory in Japan after only 18 months in charge. The calibre of the coaches on RA’s apparent short-list – Kiwis Dave Rennie, Jamie Joseph and Scott Robertson – would give some degree of confidence in offering a four-year deal, but no one really knows how a coach will work out with any particular team. The strong front-runner appears to be Rennie. As coach of the Glasgow Warriors Rennie has a pre-existing relationship with RA director of rugby Scott Johnson, who held a similar position with Scottish rugby, and that counts for a lot. Rennie proved he was a winner by guiding the Chiefs to back to back Super Rugby titles in 2012 and 2013, becoming the first first-year coach to win the competition. But success at the provincial level does not guarantee success in the Test arena. Cheika was the only coach to win both the European Cup (Leinster) and Super Rugby (NSW Waratahs), but he could not repeat those achievements with the Wallabies. There is every possibility Rennie would turn Australia around, particularly if he had his former assistant coach Wayne Smith on his staff, but it may take a year or two to know for sure. And then again he might not. Similarly, Robertson has enjoyed great success at the Crusaders, guiding the Christchurch-based team to three consecutive Super Rugby titles from 2017 to 2019. But coaching the Crusaders and coaching the Wallabies are two different things as Robbie Deans found out. Deans guided the Crusaders to five Super Rugby titles, but as Australia coach even he could not regain the Bledisloe Cup from the All Blacks or win the World Cup, although he managed to keep the Wallabies at No 2 in the world for most of his five-and-a-half-year tenure. Joseph also won the Super Rugby title, guiding the Highlanders to victory in 2015. Of the main contenders for the Wallabies, only he has had Test experience, taking Japan to the World Cup quarter-finals for the first time in 2019, upsetting Ireland and Scotland along the way. But is coaching Japan the same as coaching the Wallabies? The expectations are entirely different and as Deans discovered there are cultural differences in Australian rugby that need to be dealt with as well. Would any of these successful Kiwi coaches struggle with Australian rugby culture? Who knows? There is only one way to find out. All of these coaches have great track records, but there is nothing on their resumes that guarantees success. Is a long-term contract a risk RA is prepared to take to secure the coach they believe is right for the job? If Rugby Australia agrees to a four-year deal, perhaps they could consider inserting a performance clause in the contract to ensure the coach was delivering satisfactory results before continuing to the World Cup. Either that, or they could end up with someone they don’t want when it matters most.