Tottenham defender Danny Rose intends to see out the remaining 18 months of his contract at the club and revealed he would not be offered a new deal. The 29-year-old England left-back was again made available for transfer during the summer and left off the club’s pre-season tour to Asia. However, a move away failed to materialise, and Rose has since started 11 games for Mauricio Pochettino’s side this season. Rose now maintains he has no intention of leaving the club before the end of his current contract in June 2021, when the defender will become a free agent. “It’s pretty obvious what happened [in the summer]. People upstairs at Tottenham were trying to do what they were trying to do. I’ve said [to them] I’ve got 18 months left on my contract and I’m not going anywhere until my contract has finished,” Rose told the Evening Standard. “In January, you are probably going to hear something [about my future]. I’m telling you right now that I’m not going anywhere until my contract is finished. Daniel Levy told me in the summer there was no new contract for me at Tottenham, which is fine. I respect that. We move on. My contract is up in 18 months’ time and I’ll leave the football club then. People [in the media] can save their time – trying to get stuff ready for January about me being sold. Because I can tell you now: it ain’t happening. I know what people were trying to do in the summer. There were no bids – that was rubbish.” Rose, who came through the Leeds youth ranks before heading to north London, maintains he still has Pochettino’s support: “When the manager stops calling me into his office, stops giving me advice, that’s when I’ll think it’s time to leave Tottenham but, until then, I’m not going anywhere. I’m lucky to have a manager at Tottenham who, from the first day we met, has always stuck by me, regardless of anything, regardless of the rubbish in the media about me being sold or not part of his plans – all that nonsense.” Spurs have struggled for consistent form this season, and were held to a 1-1 draw at home by promoted Sheffield United before the international break. Rose knows there is “no magic formula” to getting the team moving in the right direction again. “I’ve personally made quite a few mistakes this season and I know that because the manager has called me in quite a few times and we’ve analysed things,” he said. “It can happen throughout your career and it’s happening right now to me. The manager has done everything possible to help me get back to how I was playing last season. Obviously I’m raring to go and I’m up for the challenge.”