Best performance? Comebacks against Spurs and with 10 men against Villa were decent. Otherwise, lacklustre. Maitland-Niles being forced off to remove a gold necklace in-play against Vitória sort of sums things up so far. And the worst? 2-0 up at Vicarage Road. Cue second-half capitulation. Happy with the manager? Inoffensive, but hapless. Mr Good Ebening’s tinkering is in sharp contrast with how Rodgers and Lampard have moulded their respective teams in their image. The atmosphere is toxic, again. Why I love … Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang Feeds on scraps, but Auba invariably comes up trumps. What is “the Arsenal way”? I was weaned on a Gunners side where “resilience” was the watchword. These days we’re about spinelessness. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? The Invisible Wall, Gilberto, to stop our defence from being so exposed. How are you feeling about VAR? Totally infuriating, ruining the passion and flow. If it’s staying, it must be limited to “clear and obvious” errors. Funniest moment so far … Spurs 2 Bayern Munich 7. Their humiliations have been the only solid crumbs of comfort. • Bernard Azulay GoonersDiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 Best performance? The first half against Burnley: we took apart a proper Premier League team. That showed how good our football can be at its best. And the worst? The first half against Wolves. Leggy, off the pace and leaderless. Happy with the manager? He’s popular, and learning quickly. Some say he’s a bit gung-ho: I guess it’s game management that needs to improve Why I love … Jack Grealish Took a few games to get up to speed, but inspirational since. We’ve got the prayer mats out now, hoping his injury heals properly. We’re toothless without him What is “the Aston Villa way”? The appalling 2014-18 period stripped us of most of our identity. But this young manager and team are trying to re-establish the desire to win with a bit of flair. That said, I’d sacrifice a snazzy playing style (and a limb) to stay up. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Dwight Yorke. He’d provide the link-up play and the goals to keep us afloat. How are you feeling about VAR? Soul-destroying. It works in stop-start sports; the beauty of football is its flow and momentum, and the joy of a goal. VAR eradicates all that. Stop it. Now. Funniest moment so far … Karren Brady’s attempts to be a football columnist are consistently hilarious. • Jonathan Pritchard Observer reader Best performance? The away win at Southampton. Accomplished, and our first win at St Mary’s – long overdue! And the worst? Arsenal away: flatter than a can of Coke left out overnight. We took too long to get going – a familiar problem this season. Happy with the manager? Of course. If his team could defend better we might have lost him to a rival by now. Why I love … Jefferson Lerma Not the quickest or the cleanest of players, but he just desperately wants to win. He’s the heartbeat of the side. What is “the Bournemouth way”? Under Eddie, it’s about playing out from the back and sucking teams in. He likes counterattacking, expressive players. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Nigel Spackman had a great career here in the early 80s (119 games) and went on to play for Chelsea, Liverpool and Rangers. We could do with his pinpoint passing. How are you feeling about VAR? Put it in the bin. Technology can’t judge issues that just aren’t black or white. A fiasco. Funniest moment so far … Southampton’s comic defending for our third goal: Angus Gunn and Jan Bednarek running in to each other. Oh, and a certain 9-0 reverse to Leicester. • Peter Bell AFCBchimes.blogspot.co.uk @cherrychimes Best performance? Beating Spurs 3-0 days after they lost 7-2 to Bayern. We were fearless in a win as impressive as it was unexpected, with two goals for teenager Aaron Connolly on his full debut. The crowd sang “we want seven”. And the worst? Losing at Old Trafford. In the past we’ve been unlucky to come away from there with nothing – this time we never got going. Happy with the manager? The transformation has been instant: we’re now creative and exciting. It’s magical. Why I love … Leandro Trossard A brilliant signing. He missed a few games through injury but turned the match against Everton after coming on as sub, then scored the first and made the second against Norwich. The only worry is whether we can hold on to him. What is “the Brighton way”? We’ve added style to never giving up. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Peter Ward, to score 30 goals a season, and get us into the top six. How are you feeling about VAR? I loved it in the Everton game when it noticed Connolly had been trodden on in the area. But mostly it’s frustrating. It doesn’t stop mistakes. Funniest moment so far … Back in April BT’s Jake Humphrey tweeted: “Having watched Brighton today, and I know I’m not impartial, but you really should be pleased about the prospect of an expansive, exciting, ambitious Norwich team full of home-grown talents joining the Premier League.” Which made beating a dull, disorganised Norwich side at the Amex that bit sweeter. • Steph Fincham Observer reader Best performance? The 1-1 draw at Wolves, particularly in the first half when we totally dominated against the team that finished seventh last season. Only the softest of stoppage-time penalties stopped us winning. And the worst? 0-3 at Sheffield United. We were second best from start to finish as the Blades did to us what we’ve done to so many other teams. Happy with the manager? I’m sure there are things he might wish he’d done differently, but being in the top flight for a fourth straight season is some achievement. Why I love … Chris Wood Offside too much, but we’re better with him than without him. He makes the pitch bigger, holds up play and runs the channels, and his goal return is excellent. What is “the Burnley way”? As Sean Dyche puts it: maximum effort, minimum requirement. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Jimmy McIlroy. The most talented player to wear the claret and blue. How are you feeling about VAR? The worst change we’ve ever had. Someone needs to pull the plug. Funniest moment so far … Pep Guardiola reacting to not getting it all his own way at Liverpool. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com @UTCdotcom Trizia Fiorellino, who covered Chelsea for our Fans Verdict feature for over a decade, died in October after a short illness, aged 50. Trizia was a hugely respected figure at the club, chair of Chelsea Supporters Group, and always wrote with passion, humour and insight. In her last piece, in August, she discussed what lay ahead with VAR, writing: I want to howl at a referee error, scream at the injustice of it all, become apoplectic with rage at a missed red card tackle; I want to laugh my ass off when we score an offside goal against Spurs, grin like a lunatic when the wrong Manchester United player gets sent off, and guffaw when the ref overlooks a Liverpool stonewall penalty (as if…). The point is, our game is passionate not despite the flaws, but because of the flaws. Below, her partner of 18 years, Paul Baker, continues Trizia’s work. We send him, and Trizia’s family and friends, our deepest sympathies. • Crisis, the national charity for homeless people, was a cause close to Trizia’s heart. You can donate in her memory here. Best performance? Ajax away. We took it to them, and that late winner was just perfect. And the worst? A toss-up between the 20-minute spell that cost us at Old Trafford and 2-2 with Sheffield United. No home team should surrender a two-goal lead against a newly-promoted side. Or against anyone, for that matter. Happy with the manager? What a start. We’re so exciting going forward – the crowd are absolutely buzzing. Clean sheets are the issue, but with zonal marking disappearing, and players coming back, that should improve. Why I love … Mason Mount His willingness to shoot at every opportunity must be something he’s picked up working with Lampard. A proper star in the making. What is “the Chelsea way”? Never giving up. Season after season we’ve seen lost causes turn into triumphs. The current side is certainly living up to it in a transitional season. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Eden who? Didier Drogba would be the perfect mentor for Tammy Abraham. How are you feeling about VAR? It has killed the joy of celebrating a goal. There’s too much at stake to call it a work in progress. It needs to be scrapped, now. Best moment so far … The outpouring of love and respect for Trizia. It has really given me comfort during this sad time. I miss her hugely and my heart is broken – but for me she’ll always be looking down from her seat in the front row of the East Upper, watching her beautiful Chelsea. • Paul Baker Best performance? With honourable mentions to our first ever win at the Olympic Stadium, where we came from behind to seal three points, and our first league win at Old Trafford in 30 years, I would point to our 1-0 home win over Villa. We absolutely dominated from start to finish, and were relentless. As convincing a victory as a 1-0 can be. And the worst? Spurs away: desperate stuff. To be 4-0 down at half-time was shocking. What made it worse was Newcastle and Brighton beating them so easily … Happy with the manager? He’s done very well with relatively limited resources, and no replacement for Aaron Wan-Bissaka, our player of the year. Gary Cahill and James McCarthy were good signings, but his refusal to use Max Meyer or Victor Camarasa to add creativity has caused some frustration. Why I love … Gary Cahill He could’ve shown up and coasted in the early twilight of his career but has been terrific and led by example. An incredible bargain. What is “the Palace way”? It used to be counterattacking at pace with skilful wingers, giving the big clubs a bloody nose. But it’s all become a bit more pragmatic lately. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Andy Johnson. Pace, and a clinical eye for goal. What a difference he’d make. How are you feeling about VAR? It has massively benefited us. No surprise, really, as the so-called smaller clubs didn’t used to get the big decisions. It has corrected some obvious wrongs, particularly the Zaha penalty at Arsenal. Funniest moment so far … Arsenal’s wild celebrations after their late winner against us – especially Alexandre Lacazette’s full-on frenzied knee slide for the cameras. Cue VAR … • Chris Waters PalaceTrust.org.uk @Clapham_Grand Best performance? West Ham at Goodison. Quick passing combined with good pressing. We should have won by a much greater margin. And the worst? The home defeat to Sheffield United. Not a single player put in an acceptable level of performance. Happy with the manager? Silva is an enigma. He’s often dour and uncommunicative, but is highly rated as a coach and well liked by players. He’s tactically stubborn with a default formation of two defensive midfielders, and still hasn’t solved our weaknesses in dead ball situations – though dropping zonal marking may help. He’s been unlucky with injuries, too. Why I love … Tom Davies A proper fan’s favourite. The local lad is showing flashes of form again, and he’s still only 21. He has the potential to become a proper Everton great. What is “the Everton way”? As per the club motto, “only the best is good enough”. Sadly, as a team we haven’t lived up to that for many a long year. But there’s always hope … Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? William Ralph Dean: the greatest goalscorer the game has seen. How are you feeling about VAR? It’s been poorly implemented. The process – visual and audio – needs to be relayed to the crowd in the ground. Funniest moment so far … Bill Kenwright kissing “tiny” Bernard on the head during a TV interview. • The esk TheEsk.org @theesk Best performance? Our record-breaking away day on the south coast. I never dreamed I’d see Leicester hit a team for nine, let alone away. It’s a night I’ll never ever forget. And the worst? We were at sixes and sevens during the first half at Chelsea early in the season – and the draw with Wolves was rusty. Happy with the manager? Absolutely brilliant. I’d change nothing. Why I love … Caglar Soyuncu When Maguire jumped ship to United plenty of pundits wrote us off. Little did any of us know our replacement would be better. He’s barely put a foot wrong. What is “the Leicester way”? As the chant goes, “we play from the back and counterattack”. But Rodgers has reimagined us as a possession-based side, and no one’s complaining. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha gave us the greatest reward in 2016. This current renaissance would be even sweeter if he were still at the helm. How are you feeling about VAR? It’s needed long term but the current incarnation is absolutely laughable. Why aren’t we using pitch-side monitors? The penalty decisions have been atrocious too. Funniest moment so far … Maguire’s new side trailing us by a distance with barely a third of the season gone. Seems the grass at a “big six” club isn’t that much greener. • Chris Whiting clippings.me/chriswhiting @ChrisRWhiting Best performance? Overpowering Man City. Even when they pressed us hard, we were in control. And the worst? Probably Napoli away when we lost by two late goals. But we still played better than we did when we lost to them at the same stage last season, and that didn’t turn out too badly. Happy with the manager? We’re unbeaten at Anfield since April 2017. Klopp’s a tactical mastermind. Why I love … Roberto Firmino He’s ace, the best centre-forward in the country. Oh, and Fabinho – also ace, the best defensive midfielder, and scorer of spectacular goals, in the country. What is “the Liverpool way”? Playing the game the way it should be played, to entertain. Also a passion for the traditions of the club, and looking after our own. It was wonderful to see Sean Cox at Anfield for the City game. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Terry McDermott. He could dribble, run, pass, create, score from anywhere. How are you feeling about VAR? Ditch it. Funniest moment so far … Firmino’s sheepish sideways glance caught on camera in the Turf Moor tunnel at full time following the “Mané v Salah” spat in October. • Steph Jones Observer reader LOLLLLLL pic.twitter.com/fxdNdwK0Lp • Part two: Manchester City to Wolves