Better sides than Wasps would have found life extremely tough in Devon on a cold winter’s afternoon. A cruel wind chilled the bones of players and spectators alike and the visitors, despite a valiant effort for almost an hour, were also ultimately blown away by the relentless hard work of an Exeter team who have an increasing army of match-winners at their disposal. On this occasion it was their quicksilver winger Tom O’Flaherty who caught the eye even before he rounded off a fine display with a coruscating long-range break to register his side’s bonus-point try with 13 minutes remaining. In concert with the equally energetic Don Armand and the busy Luke Cowan-Dickie, O’Flaherty was everywhere and thoroughly deserved his man of the match award. It was a perfect return for Exeter all round, given Henry Slade and Stuart Hogg had been given the weekend off in light of next week’s significant Champions Cup fixture at Sale. Once or twice this season they have lost games they should have won but here, having led 10-3 at half-time, they were clinical with the wind at their backs, four of their five tries being claimed by their big, motivated pack. Their England forwards Ben Moon, Cowan-Dickie and Alec Hepburn all made the scoresheet but it would be misleading to suggest the Chiefs had things entirely their own way. In the second quarter, in particular, Wasps were a genuine handful and only some excellent scramble defence from the Chiefs kept them out. A visiting first-half try looked odds-on with the Italian Matteo Minozzi sprinting towards the right corner only for the spirited O’Flaherty to make good ground and catch the full-back. Even then Nizaam Carr would have crossed without the last-gasp intervention of Cowan-Dickie, as industrious in a club jersey as he has become in a England shirt. Minozzi and O’Flaherty had already been having an interesting duel, the former sending the latter flying as he went to gather a high bouncing ball close to his own line. It was that kind of contest, with Wasps’ highly rated young forward Jack Willis putting in one particularly thumping tackle on Moon, not the easiest man to blast backwards. It is not hard to see why Eddie Jones wanted to take Willis on tour to South Africa last year before a long-term knee injury put him out of the picture. Wasps have a few other players with a point to prove to Jones, not least their captain, Dan Robson, who will be hoping to force his way back into the England frame in the New Year. They could also have done with the injured Joe Launchbury, for whom this kind of contest would have been tailor made, but it is a long season and there will be other days when the estimable second-row will make his presence felt. There will also be afternoons when Jack Nowell, such a frequent gamebreaker, has more success than he did here. A misjudged kick which flew out on the full was followed in the second half by an overhead pass which arrowed downwards at the feet of Ian Whitten, giving the Ulsterman little chance to hold on with a bit of space ahead of him. The home crowd, though, are generally a patient bunch. Having been briefly entertained with a one-handed catch and line-breaking gallop from Dave Ewers, only for Gareth Steenson’s pass to the big flanker to be ruled forward, they finally had something to celebrate when a slickly worked driven lineout produced an unstoppable score for a burrowing Cowan-Dickie after 53 minutes. Steenson’s conversion made it 17-3 and also underlined the increasing depth at Exeter’s disposal; standing beside him if required was Joe Simmonds, who has not missed a goal kick in the current campaign. How long that sequence lasts will depend, to some extent, on the wintry weather but increasingly the Chiefs are a team for all seasons. Once the Wasps’ tight-head Kieran Brookes had disappeared to the sin-bin just before the hour, having exhausted the patience of the aptly named referee Ian Tempest at scrum-time, there was no doubt about who was going to win.