The material used to make Haydock’s steeplechase fences has been changed for the jumps season, following controversy this time last year when some racing professionals felt they were too stiff and contributed to an unusually high faller rate on Betfair Chase day. Kirkland Tellwright, the clerk of the course at the track, said on Monday he had decided to use leaf birch as the stuffing for the fences, rather than black birch, which he accepts led to them being tightly packed a year ago. “We’ve made them with leaf birch and you just don’t stuff them as tight,” Tellwright said during a media event at the Gloucestershire stable of Nigel Twiston-Davies. He said the attraction of black birch had been that it was more durable but that a spell of dry weather before the fences were made last year allowed for too much black birch to be packed into the fences. “When it then did get wet, they swelled a bit and they wouldn’t need to swell much to make a difference. Leaf birch wouldn’t do that to the same degree.” There were 25 runners over fences on Betfair Chase day last year, seven of which either fell or unseated. Nicky Henderson was sufficiently concerned to make his own inspection of the stiffness of the last fence before the big race, when his Might Bite fared poorly. The trainer later said the horse had lost his confidence after hitting an early fence and Nico de Boinville, the rider of Might Bite, said: “I don’t think they were fair. They were too stiff.” Tellwright said: “We know if we make the fences small and soft, it’s criticised as a gaff track but we plainly overdid it that time. When the fences are soft, the jockeys fire the horses round and the risk is that you haven’t got a rhythmical effect appropriate to a Grade One chase. They rattle round and you’re not penalised for making an error. “No one wants to create a risk of injury but equally there should be a premium attached to jumping well. So you’re looking for that balance and it’s not easy to find.” Twiston-Davies, whose Bristol De Mai is seeking a hat-trick of wins in the Betfair on Saturday, described last year’s talk of stiff fences as “the most ridiculous bloody excuse I ever heard”. He reported the grey horse in fine condition and hopes he can justify odds of 7-4. “He proved in the Cheltenham Gold Cup he’s the third-best horse in England or Ireland. The first two aren’t coming over from Ireland, so he should win.” Of the second-favourite, Lostintranslation, Twiston-Davies said: “Talk is easy but he’s got to prove it. His last win was two and a half miles round Carlisle. We had the horse that was second, beaten two and a half lengths. Hopefully, Bristol would be better than that one.” Lingfield Park12.30 Courtandbould 1.00 Karakoram 1.30 Yaa Salaam 2.00 Troubled Soul 2.30 Barntown 3.00 Clondaw Anchor 3.30 Easter Gold Fakenham1.10 Skeaping 1.40 Black Tulip 2.10 Paricolor 2.40 Imperial Aura 3.10 Master Vintage 3.40 Perfect Moment Kempton Park1.20 Beauvais 1.50 Book Review 2.20 Bear Force One (nb) 2.50 Mendoza (nap) 3.20 Good Tidings 3.50 Point In Time 4.25 Hart Stopper Chelmsford City4.15 Story Of Light 4.45 Summeronsevenhills 5.15 Bavardages 5.45 Magic Dust 6.15 Zefferino 6.45 Sonnet Rose 7.15 Affluence 7.45 Amjaady 