Totes cool They might have life on Mars, but they certainly don’t have penguins. Support our flippered friends with this right-on tote, made from recycled plastic bottles. Protect the Planet bag ZSL, £3, shop.zsl.org Bitter and twisted In a world of conscious uncoupling, have an old-fashioned bitter union – or, at least, a stiff drink. Bitter Union bitters, £7, bitterunion.com Pot luck A cool blue patterned planter that gets on great with spiky types like this guy, the euphorbia fruticosa inermis cactus. Blue geo print planter, £9.99, carandkitchen.co.uk Space oddity One small step for man, one giant leap for manuscription. Astronaut pen, £2, sainsburys.co.uk Tiny Timothée The perfect present for budding linguists and les Scrooges alike, a parallel text of Dickens’ Christmas classic with the original English side-by-side with the French. Joyeux Noël. A Christmas Carol/Un Chant de Noël, €8.50, guardianbookshop.com Cut the mustard Particularly British piccalilli: fun to say, great with cheese, hard to spell. Particularly British piccalilli, £3.80, tracklements.co.uk Erasersaurus Colourful rubbers for prehistoric pencil cases. Dinosaur erasers, £2.95/set of four, rexlondon.com Wine not? Retro seasonal sweeties for a festive pick-me-up. Mr Stanley’s mulled wine drops, £3.99, thehambledone.com Jazzy hands A smart set of goalie gloves for your Pickfords-in-training. Kipster goalkeeper gloves, £4.99, decathlon.co.uk Mr nice guy For the friend who has everything – including a personality problem – say it with rainbows. A straight-talking message-on-a-fridge-magnet by David Shrigley. Be Nice David Shrigley fridge magnet, £8.99, nationaltheatre.org.uk Good hair day A snazzy scrunchie with a sustainability story, made from fabric offcuts in a zero-waste factory. Zebra scrunchie, £4.80, mayamiko.com Take a shine Finally, what your face has been waiting for: guilt-free glitter for eco-friendly festival faces. Biodegradable glitter, £5 each, cyberdog.net Well read Because reading is sexy. Fact. Leather bookmark, £9, anthropologie.com Save face Eco-friendly facial cleansing bars free of plastic and synthetics – good for the planet, good for the pores. Biodegradable eco warrior sensitive facial bar, £4, littlesoapcompany.co.uk Clock the week A week is a long time in politics. Keep up with our curated collection of the best reporting and writing from around the world. From £6 for six issues, subscribe.theguardian.com Little squirt Bathtime is officially eight times the fun with a water-squirting octopus playmate. Octopus bath squirter, £7, uk.sunnylife.com Buen provecho Cute-as-a-button bowl for tapas and other diminutive delicacies. Tiny tapas face bowl, €9.95, anna-nina.nl Puzzle me this More than 150 ingenious brainteasers from Guardian puzzle columnist Alex Bellos. So You Think You’ve Got Problems? By Alex Bellos, £9.99, guardianbookshop.com Small book, big change A selection of stirring speeches from everyone’s favourite activist. No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference, by Greta Thunberg, £1.99, guardianbookshop.com Stay hydrated A stylish sprayer for the house-plant-proud. Sainsbury’s Home Highlands plant mister, £10, sainsburys.co.uk Smart set Literary playing cards to add some pomp to poker night, featuring watercolour portraits of everyone from Samuel Beckett to Zadie Smith. Get you. Genius Writers playing cards, £9.99, laurenceking.com Trainee twitcher Junior binoculars for budding birdwatchers. Binoculars, £10, nationaltrust.org.uk Preschool power Inspiring stories of outstanding people from Maya Angelou and Simon de Beauvoir to Mother Theresa and Emmeline Pankhurst. Little People, Big Dreams, £8.79, guardianbookshop.com Brush up Monogrammed bamboo toothbrushes: proof that even the most mundane of things is made special with a little personalisation. (Also effective if you want to get all pass-ag about someone else using yours.) Monogrammed eco bamboo toothbrush, £4 each, agood.com Little green Bring the Portuguese countryside to them with an iconic cabbage-leaf bowl. Bonita não? Bordallo Pinheiro cabbage bowl, £7, arket.com Lift off! For your future astronauts or economists: a glow-in-the-dark rocket money box to save pocket money in outer-space-style. Rocket money box, £7, argos.co.uk Netflix and chill? Up your movie night game with American Originals’ neat popcorn maker, which goes from kernels to unbridled popcorn-y joy in just three minutes. Popcorn maker, £19.99, argos.co.uk Sweet talk A charming clutch bag that says it for you, by brilliant British artist Magda Archer. Magda Archer clutch bag, £25, balticmill.com Eat your greens A kale teething toy to get them hooked young. No, you’re peak Guardian. Kale teething toy, £14.50, souschef.co.uk New flame Get them set for nesting season with a handmade, vegan and cruelty-free soy wax candle in soothing scents of lavender, eucalyptus and rosemary. Irusu dusk candle, £25, irusu.co.uk Make fetch happen Power up walkies with a dog nerf tennis ball blaster, which sends balls up to 50ft in the air. One for large open spaces. Dog Nerf tennis ball blaster, £14.99, lordsandlabradors.co.uk Sock it Sassy tie-dye socks for a high-fashion ankle flash. Baby steps don’t trip tie dye socks, £28, motherdenim.com No yolk Arty egg cups for all your surrealist egg and soldier needs. Salvador Dalí and Frida Kahlo egg cups, £19.95, balticmill.com Kermit knit This amphibian baby winter-wear is hand-crocheted in bamboo/cotton by a women’s group in Sri Lanka. Also, it’s adorable. Frog hat and mittens set, £16, yourssustainably.com Go green From Brexit vegetable-growing survival kits to pollinator starter packs for the climate emergency, Franchi’s seed packs are prime for green-fingered folk who want to make a difference. Endangered vegetable seeds survival kit, £15, seedsofitaly.com Sleeping beauty Sustainable shut eye with Desmond and Dempsey’s fabric offcuts eye mask. La loteria print eye mask, £15, desmondanddempsey.com We three rings A smart trio of simple, stylish stacking rings for yonder star. Gold flat circle ring set, £23, aweatheredpenny.com The last supper One man, eight courses: embark on an edible odyssey with Observer restaurant critic Jay Rayner. Witty, wise and, obviously, delicious. My Last Supper: One Meal, a Lifetime in the Making, £11.99, guardianbookshop.com Sweet like chocolate Single-farm drinking chocolate made by a family-run Suffolk company. Sweet. Pump Street hot chocolate, £12.45, pumpstreetchocolate.com Balmy beauties Top pick for teen skin, budget beauty favourite Glossier has put their cult skin salve into a customisable threesome – choose a tube for every mood. Glossier Balm Dotcom Trio, £25, glossier.com Pup quiz Match dogs with their human in this canine memory game for furry friend fans. Woof. Do You Look Like Your Dog? memory game, £14.99, laurenceking.com Smart cookie A feast for the eyes as well as the belly, Baked by Steph’s hand-iced cookie creations are dangerously hard to resist. Still, you know what they say, a moment on the lips, a lifetime on the ‘gram. Or something. Hand-iced cookie boxes, from £12, bakedbysteph.co.uk Snake in the glass A serpentine corkscrew evocative of Gauguin, so says the National Gallery. Oh, you didn’t get that? Snake corkscrew, £19.95, nationalgallery.co.uk T-time Fashion + feminist icons = great T-shirt. This features everyone from Michelle Obama to Boudicca, and there’s an adult’s version in case you fancy your own. Strong Girls Club T-shirt, £17, muthahoodgoods.com Power aid We know you love us. And hope. And power. Tell the world; get the T-shirt. Read all about it. Coming soon, guardianbookshop.com Find your marbles Elegant salt and pepper pots for upscale interiors, handcrafted in India from solid marble. Marble salt and pepper pots, £21, grahamandgreen.co.uk Eat east From kimchi pancakes to swede laksa, via sweet potato momos and salted miso brownies, Meera Sodha takes keen cooks on a vegan and veggie journey across Asia. East cookbook by Meera Sodha, £15, guardianbookshop.com Sweet dreams Give the gift of a good night’s sleep with This Works’ award-winning, anxiety-reducing, slumber-inducing pillow spray. They’ll thank you for it. Deep sleep pillow spray, £19.50, marksandspencer.com Make your own menagerie From bird boxes to biodiversity, green roofs to garden lighting, soil health to honey bees, an inspiring guide to helping wildlife thrive in your garden. RHS How Can I Help Hedgehogs?, by Helen Bostock and Sophie Collins, £13.19, guardianbookshop.com Don’t kick the bucket Yes, we tried to ignore it too, but bucket hats came back in a big way this summer and they’re going nowhere. Weekday’s is made from 100% recycled denim, so you may as well get on board. Recover bucket hat, £20, weekday.com In like sardines Is it a fish? Is it a chocolate? We won’t know until you crack open the tin. The suspense. Chocolate sardines, £10.50, royalacademy.org.uk Pop quiz Urban legends, niche genres, outrageous behaviour – it’s all there in NME’s music quiz book, spanning almost seven decades of music history. Buzzers at the reader. NME music quiz book, by Robert Dimery, £12.99, guardianbookshop.com Washed up Don’t let the festive season thwart your unimpeachable eco cred. Guppyfriend’s smart laundry bag captures microplastics from synthetics in your machine wash – stopping them going into rivers, lakes and oceans. Guppyfriend laundry bag, £12, hm.com Happy camper Top socks for outdoorsy types, made with eco-friendly pigments. Camping socks, £12, maiklifestyle.com Smarty pants Stripe and Stare’s starry-eyed undies are made from sustainably-sourced beech tree modal, which uses 95% less water than cotton and is impossibly soft. Astral star vest and knicker set, £40, stripeandstare.com Cheese me A retro cheese feast for two? Don’t mind if I fondue. Two-person fondue set, £35, paxtonandwhitfield.co.uk Skates on Fuel their roller disco dreams with pretty-in-pink quad skates. Pink Oxelo rollerskates, £39.99, decathlon.co.uk Baby got back A bumbag with a backstory, Hip Baq’s fannypacks are made from car airbags. Hip Baq in yellow, €39.90, airpaq.de Save our seas Hydration with a heart: made from upcycled, ocean-bound plastic, each Ocean Bottle funds the collection of 1,000 plastic bottles to stop them entering the oceans. Ocean bottle, £40, theoceanbottle.com Guitar hero Pushy parents assemble. Want to nurture an overachiever? Tech Will Save Us’ build your own electric guitar kit will teach kids the principles of engineering, electricity and, of course, music. You’re welcome. Build-your-own electro guitar kit, £29.99, techwillsaveus.com Just the tonic A botanical beauty in a flower-powered gift box, Theodore’s gin is as pretty as it is potent – designed with a perfumer, it packs in 16 botanicals and tastes from pomelo and pine to oolong. Theodore Scottish gin gift box, £45, theodore-gin.com Plastic fantastic Small bag, big impact – Lefrik’s waterproof mini backpack is made from recycled polyester from PET-bottles. Scout mini backpack, £35, lefrik.com Mat-ural healing Super-grippy, totally toxin-free travel yoga mat that turns a home practise into a tropical island retreat. Who needs Bali? Tropical yoga mat, £42.95, yogi-bare.co.uk Grub’s up A neat apron for messy chefs. Feast apron, grey, £35, guardianbookshop.com Another dimension Hand-draw incredible 3D models and turn photographs into stencils so they can be taken into 3D too. Welcome to the future. Polaroid 3D pen, £29.99, polaroid3d.com Carry on An aesthetically pleasing home accessory for pleasing home aesthetes. It’s also a useful tray. Tray, £30, conranshop.co.uk A little fishy Is it a fish? Is it a lamp? Is it a clever present for a slightly surrealist pal? You decide. (It’s not a fish.) Gold fish table lamp, £49, made.com Dig it Make for a happy horticulturalist with this trowel, designed to the specifications of the great gardener and author Christopher Lloyd. Trowel, £37, greatdixtershop.co.uk Tell me about it, stud Say it with acronyms. LOL/OMG studs, £32, arlettegold.com Love Actually It’s that time of year when Emma Thompson reminds us what Joni Mitchell does to our cold English hearts. With original watercolours and handwritten lyrics from the artist, this beautiful book is sure to get fans going. Morning Glory on the Vine, by Joni Mitchell, £26.40, guardianbookshop.com Pout-perfect Cut down on packaging and give the gift of luscious lips with Guerlain’s refillable lippy set. Guerlain refillable lipstick and case set, £46, guerlain.com In the bag A totally tropical wash bag featuring fabric from iconic artist and architect Josef Frank. Josef Frank notturno toilet bag, small, €46, svenskttenn.se Smarty plants Described as the New Yorker of horticulture, Hortus is the high-brow gardening journal to have. Hortus Gardening Quarterly, £38 for a year, hortus.co.uk Ruby slippers Snow days, puddles, muddy paths … they’re all ours for the taking. No walk is too wet, wintery or slippery for these waterproof, warm and wonderfully bright snowboots. Snowdrift boots, £42, muddypuddles.com Hibernation station A super-soft, shimmery hot-water bottle is just what winter ordered. See you in spring, suckers. Fair Isle hot‐water bottle, £35, boden.co.uk Speak up Great sound, good look, handy handle and pocket size for on-the-go-tunes. Literally nothing not to like. aGo Bluetooth Speaker, £35, amara.com Full-bodied red A fruity plonk in high-impact, properly posh magnum form. What do we like? Wine. What do we really like? More wine. Château Tayet Cuvée Prestige Bordeaux Supérieur 2015, £38.66, privatecellar.co.uk The snuggle is real Birdsong’s seriously cosy, chunky, cheery red scarf is made by an Enfield-based community knitting group from sustainably sourced wool. Great vibes all round. Birdsong red chunky scarf, £75, birdsong.london On board Bright wooden bellyboards, handmade in Newquay: the ultimate buy for beach bums. Surfrider bellyboard, £55, dickpearce.com Club Med Juicy jewellery inspired by Mediterranean summers and handmade with mother of pearl, brass and recycled acrylic. Orange orchard necklace, £74, wolfandmoon.com Top brass A burnished brass beauty that offers coarse to fine pepper grinding for a high-style flourish for home cooks. Brass pepper mill, £65, freightstore.co.uk Specs appeal Peachy, pearly shades for a good look and an even better conscience – for every pair of sunglasses sold, a donation is made to an eye-care programme in Africa. Zola pink marble sunglasses, £85, palaeyewear.com Burning up Warm and woody with notes of cashmere, chestnut and clove, Maison Margiela’s By the Fireplace is the best of winter, bottled. Gender neutral, with a personalisable label. Replica by the Fireplace eau de toilette, £96, by Maison Margiela, selfridges.com Oh là là ears Metal meets Matisse in statement earrings inspired by the French fauvist movement. Fauvism earrings, £95, sibilia-accs.com A winter’s tale Fly through the air with Matthew Macfayden and Benedict Cumberbatch as they narrate Raymond Briggs’ classic Snowman story – just connect to the Toniebox audio system (which you can hook up with all sorts of other audio stories too). Toniebox audio system, £69.95, and Snowman Tonie, £14.99, tonies.com The big flipper Just when you thought it was safe to go back in the water. Viper swim fins, £55, dickpearce.com Back-to-school scents Home fragrance impressionism with Anya Hindmarch’s pencil pot diffuser, infused with scents of pink pepper, cedarwood, cypress and, er, novelty erasers and new notebooks. Anya Hindmarch “pencil” diffuser, £99, anyahindmarch.com Wild cards Idiosyncratic card holders combining art, literature and fine Italian leather. The Ways are Green and Songs of the Soul card holders, £75, artwrd.com Put ’em up Snazzy boxing gloves for fabulous fisticuffs. Navy and silver star boxing gloves, £75, fashercise.com Party potions Inspired by Terpsichore, the muse of dance, Aesop’s Reveller kit leaves late-night skin refreshed, rehydrated and ready for more. Aesop Reveller hand and body care kit, £85, aesop.com Spot on Fluffy, cosy, properly comfy leopard slippers for lazy, snoozy, loafing arvos. Zzzzz. Leopard print Ugg slippers, £100, amara.com Lobe story Modern, minimalist gold-filled ear furniture, handmade in Devon. Gold sunburst earrings, £58, wanderlustlife.co.uk Hand in glove High-glitter mittens made from metallic off-cuts from the cutting-room floor, each perky pair is utterly unique and, evidently, awesome. Shearling patchwork mittens, £80, penelopechilvers.com All tied up A simply dashing silk tie. Handmade in London. Job done. Tricolour broken dash silk tie, £135, oliviajholland.co.uk About time Be your own master watchmaker with a touch of luxe DIY in the form of this swish self-assembly timepiece. Instrmnt T-42 watch, £180, instrmnt.co.uk Leica magic Happy snappers of all levels love a Leica, and its pastel-perfect point and snapper takes all the trademark quality and whacks a load of instant gratification on top. Sofort instant camera, £275, selfridges.com The missing link Missed cuffing season? No matter, these handcrafted silver and resin cufflinks will help you thaw anyone’s heart. Thaw cufflinks, £130, emilygracejewellery.com Goody two shoes Best feet forward with Veja’s bio-based and recycled “post-petroleum” running shoes. Condor mesh trainers, €130, veja-store.com Raise the bar A super-smart solution for the person who seemingly does have it all: a sleek brass bar set in a chic black case. Cheers. Bar tool kit, £120, nappadori.com Beat that Bright Beats for big tunes on the move. Beats headphones, £269.95, beatsbydre.com Prices were correct at time of going to press This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.