A wife and her lover who fantasised about having sex in her husband’s blood have been jailed for 21 years for murdering him. Angela Taylor, 53, and Paul Cannon, 54, killed William Taylor, fuelled by a “venomous hatred” of the multimillionaire farmer and his refusal to grant his wife of 20 years a divorce. For months, the couple had secretly revelled in violently pornographic fantasies of torturing and maiming the landowner, who vanished just days before his 70th birthday in June last year. Passing sentence at St Albans crown court on Friday at the end of a two-month trial, the judge, Michael Kay QC, said: “Only Paul Cannon and Angela Taylor, and perhaps an unknown accomplice, know what happened that night. “The evidence suggests that, having been lured out of his house, William Taylor was attacked in the farmyard and killed there by means of strangulation or suffocation. “[William Taylor] loved Angela Taylor to the end despite whatever she did to him and however much she did not deserve that love.” The judge said the primary reason for the killing “may be simply the extent to which Angela Taylor in particular loathed the very sight of William Taylor and felt she could never be rid of him”. Taylor’s skeletal remains were found waist-deep in mud on a secluded riverbank near one of his farms in Gosmore, Hertfordshire, in February, eight months after he was last seen alive. The jury of eight women and four men convicted Taylor and Cannon, a digger driver, on Monday after just over 11 hours of deliberations. Despite a lack of forensic evidence, jurors found them guilty after hearing evidence of graphic WhatsApp messages, which included fantasies of showering together as Taylor’s blood ran down the drain, and cutting off his ligaments and fingers. The pair had exchanged 28,000 messages between February and June last year, believing the messages were secure and could not be accessed. They were later found by police on the memory of Cannon’s phone despite having been deleted.