The Tories took no risks with their manifesto on a point by point basis but made one large gamble: that nobody reads manifestos, and if they do read them, they don’t believe them. Labour threw different dice, the key difference being that there were about a thousand of them. Have they over-promised? Is it possible to be too ambitious? Does it even process as ambition, in the context of blanket incredulity? Tony Blair made his intervention on Monday morning. Say what you like about the man, he is not without political cunning, and he is not incapable of revising a stance. Since the referendum, he has been castigated as the wrong messenger for almost everything. He could make the most reasoned case imaginable for remain and all he would do would be to besmirch that case, by associating it with the status quo-ism that people were rebelling against in the first place. He is now espousing an outcome that no individual voter, anywhere in the country, could vote for – a hung parliament. Nonsensical on the face of it, there is genius at its core: it says “don’t despair”; it says “there’s everything to play for”; but above all, it says “this is bigger than Johnson and Corbyn”. The salvation of the Labour vote will be if both its wild enthusiasts and its hold-your-nose swing voters have something to chew on beyond the atmospherics conjured by any leader. Put a promise-everything manifesto against one that promises nothing, and all you do is reinforce the notion of the Corbyn-Johnson dichotomy as the defining question. Explicit in its second referendum offer, the party becomes the gateway to remain It remains astonishing that the character of the prime minister should ever be considered a positive for the Conservatives, never mind their only positive, but it’s important for Labour not to spend so much time gaping, open-mouthed, that they forget what their positives are. The party always does best with a concrete offer, not a swashbuckling leader. They have a tendency to misunderstand why, however: in Blair’s middle years, he and his acolytes thought their pledges worked because they promised stuff, and stuff was what people wanted. This led to the shopping-list rhetoric in which you might agree with every item but still take no delight in the whole. In fact, the 1997 pledge cards distributed by the party worked partly as a code, each promise signalling a vision of the country, and partly as a distribution of power – when they distilled their agenda to five easily communicable points, anyone could become its ambassador. That cannot be said of Labour’s 2019 manifesto, but it is not too late to do a pledge card this time too. The original was, for anyone who’s forgotten, mostly awful: “We will introduce a fast-track punishment scheme for persistent young offenders by halving the time from arrest to sentencing” was there mainly to put themselves on the side of law and order, an answer to the habitual critique of the bleeding-heart liberal, not a serious reflection on criminality or the penal system. “We will get 250,000 under-25-year-olds off benefit and into work by using money from a windfall levy on the privatised utilities” was a decent programme with a vindictive frame, “get them off benefits” a crude variation on Thatcher’s scrounger narrative. “We will set tough rules for government spending and borrowing” was the classic “we’re basically Tories, only kinder”, but everyone was prepared to take that for the last two: cut class sizes in primary schools; cut NHS waiting times. Corbyn’s programme has signals of its own, it’s full of them: “create one million Green New Deal jobs” says “we’re taking climate change seriously, and we have a solution that brings prosperity”. “Build 100,000 social houses a year” says “we’re not just aware of the housing crisis, we’ll tackle it at a systems level”. “End student debt” puts them on the side of generational justice. Arguments about which class this brings the greatest advantage to cut precisely no ice, because it’s not really about the money, it’s a statement of solidarity with a generation, and an extremely large one – getting towards anyone under 40. “End privatisation in the NHS”, again, isn’t really about money; nobody is reading those runes for a detailed account of which bits have already been privatised, of the internal markets, of the invisible hand of Richard Branson. They are reading it for its commitment to the greatest, also most efficient, act of socialised medical care ever undertaken, anywhere in the world. They are reading it for a rebuttal of every Conservative policy, a defence against Trump and rapacious markets everywhere. You could even read within it a commitment to the public sector generally, and its workers, steadily impoverished by a decade of pay freezes; it doesn’t even have to say that out loud. And finally, on Brexit: “final say” is enough. With that on a pledge card, it wouldn’t matter which way Corbyn himself would campaign, or whether or not Angela Rayner misspoke when she seemed to suggest that the whole of the front bench would be arguing for a pointless deal of its own. Explicit in its second referendum offer, the party becomes the gateway to remain, the inner workings of its individual actors no longer important. There is an argument that it’s just as important to say what the party won’t do: no tax increases for 95% of people; no more austerity. I’m agnostic; those negative promises are implicit in the positives, but there’s no harm in saying them twice. The manifesto put meat on the bones of the Corbyn – or, to get specific, the John McDonnell – agenda, but now it needs to knit together to come alive. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist