What were you hoping for?Either a nice time or a complete disaster, so I had an anecdote. First impressions?Super pretty. She has very beautiful eyes. I’m cursed with boring eyes. I was glad that she also felt out of place in the posh restaurant. What did you talk about?Being queer and not having role models when we were teenagers, drunken antics and our love of Keira Knightley. Three hours felt like five minutes. Any awkward moments?When I showed how much of a Londoner I am and thought Bristol was in the Midlands. We were “politely asked to move to the bar” because it was an hour after we should have left the table. Good table manners?No idea what makes good or bad table manners. Best thing about Anna?We have similar outlooks. A lot of what she was saying felt super-familiar. Also, her eyes. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yep! They are already begging to meet her. Describe Anna in three wordsPretty, engrossing, gay. What do you think she made of you?I find it hard to make judgments about myself because I tend to be too harsh. She seemed to like me, though. Did you go on somewhere?We stayed in another bar until last orders at just before midnight. And... did you kiss?Yesssss! Outside the station. I am so bad at kissing, though, so I hope I didn’t embarrass myself. Her glasses fogged up, which was super cute. I’d like to see her glasses fog up again. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? More time. Marks out of 10?10. Would you meet again?Yes! What were you hoping for? Someone fun and kind, and no long silences. First impressions? She seemed nervous, but so was I. I liked her colourful hair. What did you talk about? Her sister’s upcoming wedding, shitposting, the queer community, shared houses, worst drinking stories, board games, tattoos, Pride. Any awkward moments? We asked if we could get extra wine free and they said no, but we ordered it anyway. It cost much, much more than we expected. Good table manners? She handled the bewildering array of cutlery with grace. Best thing about Jen? The way she lights up when she talks about her volunteering. Would you introduce her to your friends?She’s lovely, so they’d like her. Describe Jen in three wordsSweet, open, animated. What do you think she made of you? Either she thought I was funny, or she has a great fake laugh. Did you go on somewhere? To a pub down the road. And… did you kiss? A snog outside the station. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? I’d shoot down the dessert wine idea. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again? We’re texting to make plans. • Jen and Anna ate at Margot, London WC2 Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com