The UK betting industry has devised five safer gambling commitments, as the embattled sector attempts to avoid having new regulations imposed on it by central government. The announcement comes in the same week that shares in UK gambling firms lost nearly £1.2bn in value, after the Guardian revealed that MPs had recommended curbs on online casino games worth more than £2bn a year to the industry. It also follows years of criticism that betting companies have failed to take seriously the risk their products pose to some customers. Chief executives of 10 of the UK’s best-known gambling groups – including Bet365, William Hill and the Ladbrokes and Coral owner GVC, said the commitments represented “the most comprehensive set of measures from a wide group of leaders across the sector to support the UK Gambling Commission’s national strategy to reduce gambling harms”. The five pledges, which will be independently monitored and publicly reported on, are to: Prevent underage gambling and protect young people. Increase support for treatment of gambling harm. Strengthen and expand codes of practice for advertising and marketing. Protect and empower our customers. Promote a culture of safer gambling. The commitments have been devised by the betting firms, with their development being facilitated through the Senet Group, an industry-funded body that says it exists to “raise standards in the sector, supporting the Gambling Commission’s work to make services safer and fairer ensuring, in particular, that responsible gambling messages are put to players with frequency and prominence”. However, previous efforts by the group have attracted criticism, with academics at the University of Warwick claiming its responsible gambling slogan, “When the fun stops, stop”, did not show any significant effect on gambling behaviour. The group has said it is rethinking the campaign. Peter Jackson, the chief executive of Flutter Entertainment, which owns Paddy Power and Betfair and has signed up to the pledges, said: “These commitments are an important step forward for the sector in their own right and also signal a genuine desire to ensure that acting responsibly is at the heart of our businesses.” One of the first actions announced is a four-year national programme to educate young people, to be delivered by two charities, GamCare and the Young Gamers and Gamblers Education Trust, and funded by a £10m grant from the industry. The charities will work with young people, their families and support workers to improve awareness and understanding of the risks associated with gambling. New codes of conduct will also be developed for direct and affiliate marketing, and sponsorship activities. The other signatories to the commitments are Aspers, Caesars, Genting, Playtech, Rank Group and Sky Betting & Gaming, in a move that the industry admits represents an attempt to regulate itself before measures are imposed on it by government. On Monday, MPs from the cross-party group on gambling-related harm, who joined the successful campaign to cut stakes on fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) to £2, recommended the same limit be applied to web-based slot machine games, which triggered the drop in share prices. Labour has already backed much tougher regulation of the gambling industry, indicating that its wings could be clipped regardless of the outcome of the general election.