I grew up in a small town in the south east of Ireland called Wexford, which is famous for being invaded. First the Vikings landed on the beach, then the Normans, followed by 700 years of various armies. In a silver screen version of art imitating life, Spielberg filmed the Saving Private Ryan D-day battle on our beach. My own name Colfer is Belgian. And while I’m sure all this invading was a bad thing at the time, it made for very exciting history lessons in school, and a fascinating blend of cultures in our seaside town. My father was a teacher and historian, and he introduced local history to his students with walking tours around town. We learned to spot the signs of ancient culture in architecture, boat design, signposts and even the names written over shops. When I was 11, my dad decided to enter the class in the St Patrick’s Day parade and we built a Viking longship and mounted it on a lorry. At a time when most lessons were taught through the medium of enthusiastic corporal punishment this was revolutionary teaching practice. I remember thinking, as I stood on that lorry clutching my plastic axe and watching the stunned faces on the other kids dressed in their scout uniforms, that this was something I would never forget. And I never have. I imagined the Vikings looking up with increasing horror as we inflicted greater atrocities on ourselves and the planet But the information nugget that intrigued me most about Dad’s local history lessons was that time he brought us to the centre of town and told us that 10ft below the main street there was another, a Viking street and probably an entire village, which had been buried by progress. The idea of a buried village was fascinating, and I often imagined that the people down there were still alive in a subterranean stratum looking up with increasing horror as the surface dwellers inflicted ever greater atrocities on themselves and the planet. The notion of an underground civilisation stuck with me across the decades, and when it came time for me to write my fairy book, as is mandatory for all Irish writers, it occurred to me that I could stick the folk down there near the Vikings, but of course they would be deeper as they’d been down there for millennia. And it was this notion that led to the creation of the Lower Elements in my Artemis Fowl series where the Fowl-verse fairies reside. Of course there were other sources of inspiration: my brothers, students, co‑workers, Douglas Adams, Terry Pratchett, Robert Louis Stevenson, JM Barrie and Philip Ardagh’s beard (don’t ask) to name a few, but the entire series that continues to take up so much of my life sprang from the childlike idea that there was a clan of Viking ghosts still living 10ft below Woolworths on the main street of Wexford town. • The Fowl Twins by Eoin Colfer is published by HarperCollins. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.