Everyone who has met Shane Sutton has a story. Here’s one of mine. During a UK Sport planning meeting for the 2016 Olympics, discussions turned to whether British Cycling could win medals in every event in Rio. “We’ve got more chance of the queen farting than us giving you 18 medals,” Sutton replied. Unsurprisingly Sutton also later told me that “all the performance directors were sitting round the table thinking: ‘Shit, he’s a bit blunt.’” You don’t say. So the Australian’s performance at Dr Richard Freeman’s medical tribunal last week – sample line: “You are telling the press I can’t get a hard-on, my wife wants to testify that you are a bloody liar” – before storming out wasn’t exactly a shock, even if it made for jaw-dropping theatre. Alas we are still no nearer to finding out whether Freeman ordered banned testosterone in 2011 to dope a rider, as the General Medical Council alleges. Or because he was bullied into doing so for Sutton’s alleged erectile dysfunction, as Freeman claims and Sutton denies. As Steve Peters, the former head of medicine at British Cycling and Team Sky, put it: “I feel like I am being asked to solve a crime. All I am saying is I have a man who has lied to me [Freeman] and another who is also untrustworthy [Sutton].” Though in fairness to Sutton, Peters went on to describe him also as an “open book”. One wonders what Jess Varnish makes of it all, given she paid a heavy price for calling out Sutton in 2016? There is a hidden danger in all this, though. It allows Sutton and Freeman to be depicted as the sole bad apples, a common institutional response to a crisis. When instead we should also be asking a more fundamental question: was there a bad barrel in British Cycling as well – and was the barrel-maker, UK Sport, also complicit? After all, as Peters made clear, people knew what Sutton was like. Many riders and staff were intimidated by him. He was even suspended after the Beijing Olympics, only to be brought back because he was key to the organisation’s pursuit of medals – which meant more funding from UK Sport. Yet despite this what happened after London 2012? Sutton was promoted. Even though, as Peters explained: “I would get someone coming in saying, ‘I think he is bullying me’, or being aggressive. It was repeat behaviour.” One wonders what Jess Varnish makes of it all, given she paid a heavy price for calling out Sutton in 2016? I doubt the tribunal assessing Freeman’s fitness to practise will get to the heart of all the issues that have swirled around British Cycling and Team Sky in recent years. However, it has again exposed the chasm between the narrative we were sold and the reality. Both organisations told us that even the tiniest marginal gain was brilliantly exploited by the all-conquering medal factory. The truth was dysfunction at best, and reputation-shredding at worst. Freeman? He has admitted ordering performance-enhancing drugs to be sent to the Manchester velodrome where both teams were based in 2011, trying to cover it up, and lying to UK Anti-Doping. He even found the task of keeping medical records beyond him. Sutton? Freeman’s QC has accused him of being a “serial liar, bully and doper” – allegations he vehemently denies. I’d wager that British Cycling’s success since 2008 has far more to do with its massive budget and aerodynamic suits introduced before the Beijing Games, which give riders a 5-10% advantage over the competition, than anything else. Remember the Speedo LZR Racer? The suits operate on a similar principle. As one insider put it: “These gains are not marginal gains. It is one massive big gain.” As for UK Sport’s role, it wasn’t just that its in-house governance team was told to go easy on British Cycling, as I reported in 2017, “because that is where the medals come from”. Its medals-first philosophy also led to too many unhealthy by-products. Last week another source passed on UK Sport’s “Mission 2012” documents outlining how each sport should be scrutinised. “In theory, the M2012 process should have driven excellence across all themes, with enhanced performance being the result, leading to medals,” the insider put it to me. “In practice, it became a simple case of if sport delivers medals, UK Sport delivers the funding.” In other words, culture took a back seat. British Cycling insists that since Julie Harrington was appointed as chief executive the culture has changed. There are also hopes at UK Sport that its new CEO, Sally Munday, will adopt a more holistic approach. We shall see. The next UK Sport “culture health check” may provide some clues. Last year it found that 31% of Olympic athletes had witnessed unacceptable behaviour, and 18% felt there were no consequences for inappropriate behaviour. UK Sport has hinted at a more balanced approach that is “hard and challenging but respectful and safe”. But there is still work to do. A change of culture is possible. Just look at Gareth Southgate’s recent willingness to drop Raheem Sterling, his best player, in order to preserve the England team culture that he is trying to sustain. One last thing. In a Guardian interview in 2011, Brailsford admitted that British Cycling had “a relatively unique working practice and culture”. Given what we know now, that sounds somewhat of an understatement.