Batsman Joe Burns will be given another run as Australia’s opener in the looming Test series against Pakistan after he, Travis Head and Cameron Bancroft won recalls to a 14-strong Australian squad for the first Test against Pakistan starting on 21 November. Incumbent opener Marcus Harris has been dropped with Mitch Marsh and Peter Siddle also missing from Australia’s last Test team from the Ashes series. Paceman Pat Cummins and Head have been named joint vice-captains. Australia’s chairman of selectors Trevor Hohns said Queenslaner Burns will open the batting with David Warner in the series-opener in Brisbane. “Obviously it’s his home ground and he generally performs pretty well there,” Hohns said in Perth. “Joe in the past years when he has been given the opportunity to play for Australia, his record is not too bad. “He was desperately unlucky not to be included in that Ashes squad. But we consider now is the right time for him to come back, try to form a good partnership at the top with David Warner. “They know each other well, they’re good friends and left and right-handed [opening combination] is pretty useful in our view.” Head is likely to slot back into the middle order after being dropped for the final Ashes Test against England in September. Young Victorian batsman Will Pucovski asked not to be considered for selection, citing mental health reasons. The highly-talented but untried 21-year-old informed team management in Perth on Tuesday evening. Cricket Australia’s national teams boss Ben Oliver applauded Pucovski “for having the courage to discuss his situation”. “Will’s decision not to nominate for Test selection was the right one in the circumstances and one that everyone in the Australian cricket family supports,” he said in a statement. “By Will bravely taking this position, he will undoubtedly inspire others facing similar challenges to speak up and take positive steps towards improving their mental wellbeing.” Pucovski also withdrew from the Test squad against Sri Lanka last February for mental health reasons. The second Test, a day-nighter in Adelaide, starts on 29 November. Australia squad: Tim Paine (captain), David Warner, Joe Burns, Cameron Bancroft, Marnus Labuschagne, Steve Smith, Travis Head, Matthew Wade, Pat Cummins, Mitchell Starc, James Pattinson, Nathan Lyon, Josh Hazlewood, Michael Neser. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org