The death of Clive James breaks as its own kind of “fake news”, a moment so long anticipated and imagined – not least by its irrepressible protagonist, merrily riffing on Mark Twain and the rumours of his death being “exaggerated” – that now Clive is no longer with us, it’s hard to take in, to comprehend or quite believe. For his readers and fans, his audience, this is a moment of infinite sorrow at the passing of a beloved Australian, a supreme entertainer, and a polyvalent literary wizard who, in “the home stretch” (as he called it) managed to be courageous, witty, stoical, inspiring, provocative and sublime, often simultaneously. For the best part of a decade, the example of “the late Clive James”, defying gravity at home in Cambridge, battered by leukaemia, emphysema and junior carcinomas became a media circus in which its star played to the gallery with the limelight instincts of a natural performer. The first time I witnessed this iteration of what had once been “The Clive James show” was in the summer of 2013 when, on the news of his failing health, the world’s press gave James the last rites: valedictory interviews, hushed bulletins, and a posse of shiny blonde Australian TV anchorpersons flying to his doorstep. Such global obsequies turned out to be premature. Clive did not die, and the next time I visited him, he had the grace/savvy to acknowledge the vicissitudes of showbusiness: “The end is nigh,” he wheezed. A beat. “But not that nigh.” This was reminiscent of the 1970s Clive James in his prime: celebrated, parodied, acclaimed, patronised, lionised and disparaged – high and low – but never ignored. In his great Observer days, he was Sunday’s must-read column, a vertiginous mix of literary exuberance, show-off allusion, topical wise-cracks and fuck-you Aussie irreverence. By the mid-1970s, Clive had become that literary phenomenon, as rare as the hippogriff, a critic who might put Rambo and Rimbaud into the same sentence and somehow get away with it. In fact, he’d probably done that already, and you hadn’t noticed, being too dazzled by his comparison of Beowulf to Jaws. The convivial, chimes-at-midnight Clive became notorious for trailing his cultural coat with exquisite references to Pushkin (in the Russian original) and Mallarmé, The Ballad of Reading Gaol, allusions to Freud and Mandarin poetry, with snatches of Ovid and Catullus. In the process, he virtually invented TV criticism at the Observer, infuriated the British poetry establishment, and reminded the local reading public what could be done with the English language if you had been raised in the Sydney suburbs, and had the good luck not to go to Eton or Winchester. In short, he found a voice – a voice that he cherished, I suspect, to his penultimate breath. In its prime, there was nothing quite like it: who can forget his observation that Murray Walker, the motor racing commentator, always broadcast “as if his trousers were on fire”. The best of Clive’s myriad and prodigal cracks – for instance that “Perry Como gave his usual impersonation of a man who has simultaneously been told to say ‘cheese’ and shot in the back by a poisoned arrow” or that Arnold Schwarzenegger in Pumping Iron resembled “a brown condom filled with walnuts” – had an unequalled, surreal hilarity that disguised a ferociously determined Grub Street bruiser who wanted to compete in every literary Olympiad going. This was the essential Clive James. Possibly it transformed his final years into a redemption that might otherwise have been a living hell. His injury time sponsored the indefatigable bibliography of a writer obsessed with Memento Mori (poetry, columns, an audacious new translation of The Divine Comedy, essays on Larkin and Game of Thrones, and ever more poetry). On fire with life itself, he even began to outlive his own material. The Japanese maple that had inspired a globally viral poem in 2014 became first an embarrassment (the poet did not die), then a reproach (it grew into a sturdy sapling), and finally a black joke (it pegged out before him). During his endgame, Clive devoted all his resources to the marriage of life and art, much of it smoke-and-mirrors. The truth of his circumstances in old age evoked a fate that Dante could plausibly have inflicted on a minor member of the damned. But Clive’s masterclass in Anglo-Australian stoicism fooled almost all his visitors and even some of his friends. His farewell appearances became so renowned that his American sparring partner PJ O’Rourke advised him to “soft-pedal this death’s door stuff, because people will get impatient”. That’s not a line that will have much traction today. The last time I saw Clive, he was, momentarily, in a more self-reflective mode, confiding: “I’m a natural inhabiter of the limelight.” A beat. Then he began to quote (in Latin) from Catullus’s Carmen 101, written in memory of his dead brother, before switching to the posterity question. “Posterity ?” he queried. “It’s here and now. I’ve always thought that it was here. If you play to the gallery, that’s posterity. The best you can hope for is another gallery, after you’ve gone.” This, it turned out, was a bit too sombre for Clive in redux mode. As I prepared to say goodbye, he came up with a zinger that, for now, leaves Catullus in his dust: “You can always say that you’re on your last legs,” he croaked in that inimitable drawl, “but the way you say it might equally suggest that you can run a mile in your socks.” 