Children’s news programme Newsround is set to lose its afternoon programme after nearly 50 years of broadcasting, as CBBC viewing figures plunge. In proposals submitted to Ofcom, the BBC announced plans to cut the amount of news shown on CBBC, BBC’s dedicated children’s channel, from 85 to 35 hours per year. Under the plans, Newsround would keep its morning slot, but its afternoon programme would be axed. While the proposals are yet to be confirmed, Ofcom has said it plans to approve the changes on the condition that the BBC agrees to additional safeguards to maintain the quality of children’s television. The move will enable the BBC to channel funds from television to online news, as the number of children watching television news plummets. According to the Ofcom report, viewing figures for CBeebies and CBBC have dropped dramatically, with CBeebies now reaching only a third of its target audience, and CBBC only around one in six. The broadcaster said “budgetary constraints” meant it was unable to expand online without making cuts to televised content. The BBC said: “If our proposals are approved we’ll still have at least one daily TV bulletin of Newsround at the same time as doubling our online offer, which is where more and more children are getting their news.” In a statement posted on Twitter, Ricky Boleto, one of Newsround’s presenters, praised the programme’s continuing relevance. “We don’t patronise our audience and we’ve never shied away from important issues and stories that are difficult to explain,” he said. “Today, more than ever, [Newsround] is loved and trusted by kids, parents, and teachers all over the UK.” He also expressed concern about the shift to digital mediums, saying: “Audiences are changing and the way young kids watch TV is moving so fast … I worry that as we chase the clicks, we lose focus on what really matters.” Former editor of Newsround, Sinead Rocks, criticised the decision: “Newsround needs more prominence – not less. The ability to watch with parents/families is also important. Relying mainly on a child’s ability and interest to seek it out online is short-sighted and sad.” The news was met with disappointment online by those who had grown up watching the programme. Tom Stevenson, an 18-year-old primary school assistant, said he was baffled by the BBC’s decision. “My school used to use it to teach us,” he said. “It’s a cross-generational show which launched careers of many prominent journalists, and I still feel that programmes which teach kids to be culturally aware are positive and should be broadcasted more.”