The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have made their first public appearance with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge since Harry and Meghan opened up about their struggles in an emotional television documentary. The couples both attended the annual Royal British Legion Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall on Saturday night, alongside the Queen, the Prince of Wales and other senior members of the royal family. The Duchess of Cornwall was also present, after she was forced to pull out of engagements earlier in the week due to ill health, while Boris Johnson attended the memorial with his partner, Carrie Symonds. The service marked the first time the Sussexes and Cambridges have appeared in public together following Harry and Meghan’s candid on-screen chat with ITV News at Ten anchor Tom Bradby. In the documentary, filmed during the Sussexes’ recent official visit to southern Africa, Harry said he and brother William are now “on different paths” and have “good days” and “bad days” in their relationship. The service at the Royal Albert Hall was also attended by the Duke of York, the Earl and Countess of Wessex, the Princess Royal, the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester, the Duke of Kent and Vice-Admiral Sir Timothy Laurence. This year’s event marked 75 years since notable battles of 1944, including Monte Cassino, Kohima and Imphal, D-Day, and the collaboration of Commonwealth and Allied forces. It also celebrated the 100th anniversary of the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), and paid tribute to RFA Mounts Bay, which this year delivered supplies and aid to the Bahamas after Hurricane Dorian. The ceremony is hosted by the Royal British Legion and commemorates all those who have lost their lives in conflicts. Remembrance Sunday will also see London taxi drivers offer free journeys to military veterans heading to the march past the Cenotaph, a decade-long tradition. Since it was first formally organised in 2009, the Poppy Cab service has helped veterans attend the commemorations to the war dead on Whitehall in the capital. On Sunday, veterans will be able to catch a black cab from a number of mainline train stations, with the majority dropped off at Admiralty Arch by Trafalgar Square ahead of the service and parade. Taxis volunteering to take part can be identified by a Poppy Cab logo placed in their windscreen. Some are offering special pickups for groups or those with disabilities in need of collecting from home.