TSB has unveiled the locations of 82 branches across the UK that will close next year, with the loss of around 370 jobs. The bank is also shutting four branches this year and will be left with a high street network of 454 branches. The move is designed to cut £100m in costs by 2022 under TSB’s new chief executive, Debbie Crosbie, who is seeking to draw a line under last year’s IT meltdown. TSB said it would seek to keep compulsory redundancies to a minimum, and that it had consulted with the Unite and Accord unions. The bank will continue to have a national branch network across Britain, with 65% of the population living within four miles of a TSB branch. Robin Bulloch, customer banking director at TSB, said: “We have made the difficult decision to close 82 branches, today announcing the locations. We will fully support customers through this transition. “We realise this is difficult news for our branch partners and will do everything to support those affected to offer voluntary redundancies and redeploy as many people as we can to other roles.” The bank argues that when it was spun out from Lloyds Banking Group in 2013, it ended up holding twice as many branches per 10,000 customers as competitors. In the last two years, TSB has seen branch transactions drop by 17% as customers increasingly choose to bank online or by phone. Here is a list of the planned branch closures in 2020. North-east Wigton (June) Newcastle Upon Tyne – Chillingham Road (September) North-west Urmston (June) Chester (June) Chorlton, Manchester (October) Congleton (October) Warrington – Penketh (October) Leyland (November) St Annes-on-Sea (November) Ormskirk (November) Yorkshire/Humberside Headingley, Leeds (February) Thorne (April) Skipton (May) Hull – Willerby (May) Normanton (May) Todmorden (June) Brough (July) Market Weighton (July) Shipley (November) Harrogate (November) East Midlands Leicester – Cavendish Road (May) Eastern England St Albans (September) Ipswich – Felixstowe Road (September) West Midlands Birmingham – Great Hampton (April) Coventry – Walsgrave Road (April) Pershore (May) Cannock (September) Rugby (September) Warwick (September) Birmingham – Stirchley (September) Lichfield (October) Stourbridge (October) Coventry – Jubilee Crescent (November) Leamington Spa (November) Sutton Coldfield (November) Bearwood Road Smethwick (November) South-west Moreton-in-Marsh (May) Okehampton (May) Stroud (June) Poole (October) Salisbury (October) South-east Abingdon (April) Burgess Hill (April) Sidcup (June) Amersham (June) Guildford (July) Ashford (September) Woking (September) Redhill (October) Basingstoke (October) Worthing (October) Fareham (October) Cowley (November) London Elephant and Castle (February) Holborn (May) Finchley (June) Barkingside (September) Wandsworth (September) Bayswater (September) St James’s Park (September) Chingford (November) Gidea Park (November) Old Street (November) Twickenham (November) Potters Bar (November) Scotland Barrhead (April) Glasgow – Govan (May) Bishopbriggs (May) Milngavie (May) Dunbar (May) Portobello (May) Jedburgh (May) Kinross (May) Tain (June) Uddingston (June) Edinburgh – Clerk Street (July) Carluke (July) Brechin (July) Dumbarton (July) Clarkston (July) Edinburgh – Morningside (September) Wishaw (September)