Sophie Goddard Former fashion editor and TV presenter Caryn Franklin has found herself in some unusual situations over the years – from reporting in battle zones to interviewing fashion heavyweights Yves Saint Laurent and Giorgio Armani. Now a fashion commentator and lecturer, her experiences mean she’s learned plenty over the years. Nobody is judging you, trust meI’ve definitely observed a change over the years in myself – I’m less bothered by what others think. I’ve learned that most people are concerned with their own lives and are too busy thinking about their own stories. When we’re younger we don’t realise that, and that realisation is quite liberating. Use clothes to tell a storyI’ve always had a real interest in clothes and the way they can talk on our behalf. I learned very early on that I could earn myself a certain amount of notoriety at school if I got sent home for not wearing the uniform. I’ve always known what I wanted to wear and why, and have always respected the power of clothes. If I’m doing a job, for example, I put on clothing that speaks to others in terms of my creativity and professionalism – it’s a costume. Think about what you want to convey and what it is you want people to know about you. Your definition of success might change (and that’s OK)Now, my definition is very simple: if I can learn, pay my bills and have fun, then I see myself as very successful. Most days, I can do two out of those three things, so as far as I’m concerned I’m extremely successful! I think that’s realistic and allows me to be the person I need to be. Connections are better in personWorking as a fashion editor in the 1980s meant I became very good at networking. We didn’t have social media, so we had to network in real life. I’m big on real-life meetings instead of phone calls or emails, whether it’s work or socialising – you get so much more than you bargained for. Nowadays, I like socialising in small groups over a drink rather than big, noisy rooms, so I can make a connection. The older I get, the more I value making connections, no matter how simple. Ageing is the best thing that will happen to youGetting older is brilliant. I’ve been thrilled with the intellectual growth I’ve experienced, the way my perceptions and motivations have changed and the knowledge I’ve gained about myself and what it is to be human. I’ve really learned to enjoy life and prioritise the things that matter. I had a seminal experience in my 20s – my boyfriend (who became the father of my eldest daughter) was diagnosed with a very serious illness and became very ill. It was a valuable lesson and I felt lucky my body was functional. Maybe that’s why I’ve never given myself a hard time about my appearance. Ignore trends and avoid fast fashionAs the oldest of five children, my mother made my clothes as a child because it was cheaper than buying them. I was into customising early and would change the clothes she made me to suit my style, and help me express myself. My advice to anyone reading this now is the same: buy less and really look after it. Swap clothes, avoid fast fashion and learn to make or customise your own looks. Ignore trends. Wear what makes you happy and feel like you. Make social media work for youSocial media can be useful – I often use it for research and contacting people. I tell students I lecture that it’s like a car: if it’s being driven by someone carefully then it can be a great tool, but if it’s driven by someone who is irresponsible who then creates an accident, it can be very bad. It really depends on the driver, so always consider how you’re using it. Confidence and authenticity come with ageTo me, being authentic means being honest – accepting who I am and not pretending to be someone else, and that really does get easier with age. I was always authentic when I was younger, but I thought I wasn’t good enough and would constantly compare myself with others. But every one of us is authentic. Having the confidence to display your unique voice instead of hiding it or trying to suppress it, that comes with age. When you grow into yourself, you stop seeking other people’s opinions and trust your own. Some gifts are meant to be shared, so give victoriously this Christmas with Grey Goose