Mothercare’s UK business has become the latest high-profile victim of the high street crisis as the baby and maternity retailer said it was entering administration, putting 2,500 jobs at risk. The company said it expected its 79-shop UK chain and online business, which lost £36.3m last year, to be wound down by administrators as it had become clear it could not return to profitability. The administration will not include Mothercare’s profitable overseas operations, which have more than 1,000 stores in over 40 countries. The company, which opened its first store in 1961, said the UK administration filing – which is expected as soon as Tuesday – was a “necessary step in the restructuring and refinancing of the group” after failing to find a buyer. Mothercare’s closure is the latest blow to the UK retail industry after a tough two years which has left more than 7,500 additional shops empty. Well-known names including Karen Millen, Bonmarché and Supercuts have all called in administrators in recent months. Others, including Debenhams, Monsoon and Arcadia Group, have used an insolvency procedure known as a company voluntary arrangement (CVA) to close shops and cut jobs. Mothercare, whose chief executive Mark Newton-Jones left in April last year only to return a month later, has struggled to compete with supermarkets, online retailers and general retailers such as Marks & Spencer, Debenhams and Boots. Shoppers outside the group’s Wood Green store in north London on Monday said they would be sad to see Mothercare go. But several said it was more expensive and less convenient than buying from supermarkets, Primark or Amazon. Thousands of high street jobs have been lost this year as a result of high profile retail administrations and thousands more are at risk as Mothercare, Debenhams and Forever 21 prepare for closures. Here are some of the key industry names that have been affected. Mothercare: Has 79 stores and 2,500 UK retail staff as its British arm prepares to go into administration. Regis/Supercuts: Had 220 salons and 1,200 staff when it went into administration in October. Bonmarché: Had 318 stores and 2,887 employees when it went into administration in October. It is still trading as it seeks a buyer. Watt Brothers: The Scottish department chain had 11 stores and 306 employees when it went into administration in October. All the stores closed and the majority of jobs have gone. Links of London: With 35 stores and 350 staff, the jewellery chain went into administration on 8 October but its sites are still trading. Forever 21: Had three stores and about 290 employees in the UK when it went into administration in September. Stores are staying open in order to clear stock. Albemarle & Bond: Suddenly shut all its 116 stores in September with the loss of about 400 jobs, even though it did not call in administrators. It sold its pledge books to rival H&T in September. Karen Millen and Coast: Had 32 stores and 177 concessions, employing 1,100 people, when it went into administration in August. All sites were closed and the vast majority of staff made redundant after the brands were bought out by online specialist Boohoo.com. Jack Wills: Had about 100 stores and 1,700 staff in the UK when went into administration in August. Bought by Sports Direct and 98 stores are still trading in the UK and Ireland. Spudulike: Closed all 37 stores with the loss of about 300 jobs when it went into administration in August. Bathstore: Had 132 stores and 529 staff when it went into administration in June. Homebase bought 44 stores saving 154 jobs and the brand now trades from 28 stores. Select: Had 180 stores and 2,000 employees when the fashion retailer went into administration in May. In June administrators at advisory firm Quantuma carried out a CVA closing 11 stores with the loss of about 200 jobs. Debenhams: Had 166 department stores and more than 25,000 employees when went into administration in April. No store closed immediately and the chain is now owned by its lenders but two will close before Christmas and another 20 in January when the group completes a rescue restructure expected to result in the loss of 1,200 jobs. Pretty Green: Had 12 stores and about 170 employees when Liam Gallagher’s fashion outlet went into administration in March. All but one store and 33 concessions closed with 100 jobs lost but 67 saved as the brand was bought by JD Sports in April. Office Outlet: All 94 stores have closed with the loss of 1,170 jobs after the stationery retailer went into administration in March. LK Bennett: Had 41 stores and 500 employees when it went into administration in March. The brand was bought by its Chinese franchise partner, Rebecca Feng, saving 21 stores, all the group’s concessions and 325 jobs. But more than 100 jobs lost with the closure of 15 stores. Patisserie Valerie: Had 200 cafes employing nearly 3,000 people when an accounting scandal prompted the chain to call in administrators in January. About 70 of the group’s 200 stores closed immediately with the loss of 900 jobs. About 2,000 jobs were saved when about 100 Patisserie Valerie cafes were rescued by Causeway Capital, more than 20 of which have since closed. 21 Philpotts sandwich shops were bought by AF Blakemore & Son. and four Baker & Spice cafes a were bought by the Department of Coffee & Social Affairs. “When you can get good quality stuff from Asda or Tesco why bother going to Mothercare? It’s the same items and paying £20 [for some babywear] doesn’t make sense when they are only going to wear it for three months,” said one mother of three pushing her pram past the Wood Green store. Victoria Logan, a shopper with a baby in a pram, said: “I was a bit surprised to hear about the administration. There won’t be that many places to go to any more if you want things like car seats.” But she admitted that she bought a lot online as she was signed up to Amazon’s Prime subscription service which includes free deliveries. “It’s so useful as it just comes the next day,” she said. Founded by Selim Zilkha and Sir James Goldsmith, Mothercare has been listed on the London stock exchange since 1972. Ten years later it merged with Habitat and then British Home Stores to form Storehouse, but the group was broken up in 2000 when BHS was sold to Sir Philip Green. After acquiring the Early Learning Centre toy business in 2007, Mothercare had more than 400 stores in the UK. But the chain has gradually been downsizing since then and cut 60 stores last year, through a CVA to take the total to less than 80. Earlier this year it sold off the Early Learning Centre toy brand in an attempt to keep the UK business afloat. Richard Lim, chief executive of the Retail Economics consultancy, said: “This is perhaps one of the most highly anticipated collapses on the high street. The retailer was already on life support, having conducted a CVA last year. The cost-cutting operation and disposal of assets have not gone far enough to revive plummeting profits. “Years of underinvestment in the online business and its inability to differentiate itself as a specialist for young families and expectant parents has been the root of its seemingly inevitable downfall. As competition has become fiercer they have been beaten on price, convenience and the overall customer experience.” Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow business secretary, said: “Mothercare disappearing from our high streets would be a huge loss to the new parents who rely on it and the thousands of workers whose jobs are at risk. “The government must urgently meet with unions and the company to safeguard these jobs. Under the Conservatives, our high streets continue to suffer. They are at the heart of our communities and desperately need saving. Labour’s five-point plan will rejuvenate Britain’s town centres and protect jobs.”