John Brown became the first Buffalo receiver to throw a touchdown pass as the Bills went on to beat the Dallas Cowboys 26-15 on Thursday. Buffalo’s quarter Josh Allen ran for a score and threw for another to Cole Beasley, who had 110 yards receiving and a touchdown in his first game against his former team. The Bills (9-3) got their first Thanksgiving win since 1975 in their first appearance on the holiday in 25 years. 😏#BUFvsDAL | #GoBills pic.twitter.com/10Xlky3ekS The Cowboys (6-6) stumbled after scoring a touchdown on their opening drive, giving Philadelphia a chance to rejoin them atop the NFC East. It was Dallas’s fourth double-digit loss in the past six Thanksgiving games. A lackluster showing for Dallas’ sixth loss in nine games came four days after owner Jerry Jones blasted the coaching staff following a loss to New England from a team that entered the season with lofty expectations. In the late Thanksgiving game, the New Orleans Saints clinched the NFC South with a 26-18 win over the Atlanta Falcons. Taysom Hill caught a touchdown, ran for another and blocked a punt for the Saints as they guaranteed themselves a place in the playoffs. Elsewhere, Mitchell Trubisky started and closed strong to overcome some shaky decisions and plays in between to keep the Chicago Bears in the NFC playoff picture. Trubisky threw a go-ahead, three-yard touchdown pass to David Montgomery with 2:17 left, lifting Chicago to a 24-20 win over the slumping Detroit Lions. The Bears took the lead on the nine-play, 90-yard drive in which Trubisky converted a pair of third downs with 35- and 32-yard passes Anthony Miller. “He made special throws at special times,” coach Matt Nagy said. Chicago sealed the victory on the ensuing possession with Eddie Jackson’s interception. Rookie quarterback David Blough led Detroit’s last drive to the Chicago 26 in the final minute before losing 13 yards on a sack to leave a desperation pass as the only option and Jackson picked off his heave. The Bears (6-6) have won three of four games after losing four in a row, keeping their postseason hopes alive.