Six years after playing for the British and Irish Lions, Christian Wade is trying to make the Buffalo Bills roster in the NFL. A year into his new adventure, the 28-year-old is on the Bills’ practice squad, where he is developing his understanding of the sport. The boy from High Wycombe is settling into a new life in upstate New York, where the Bills are pushing reigning NFL champions New England Patriots for the AFC East title. It’s been more than a year since you quit Wasps to pursue your dream of cracking the NFL. How has it been so far?“I’ve not had much time to think about it, but it’s been a huge eye-opener regarding what goes on behind the scenes. What we see on TV is just the big show on a Sunday. In everyday life, there is so much detail, a lot more preparation than I thought. It’s definitely been a great experience. I’ve enjoyed the whole challenge. I’m getting into the routine, trying to become a better athlete and beginning to love it more each day.” What has surprised you most?“The amount of meetings they have! I knew the challenge would be very difficult, that I had a huge mountain to climb. There are definitely days when I think: ‘Yo! This is really tough!’ I push through but I’ve had to draw on my support network.” Being on the International Player Pathway – a program for athletes from overseas who may have grown up playing other sports – are you treated differently?“Yes. I get extra attention. I’m developing a good relationship with Kelly Skipper, our running backs coach. He knows what sort of player I am now. I’m working on the basics: footwork, hand-offs, pass protection. I’m still the weakest link in the room, the others all have the skills, I’ve got a lot to learn. But I’ve gone from learning the playbook, to now knowing the plays but trying to execute them at the highest level.” In training are you taking part in more than just offensive drills?“I’m involved with everything: punt teams, punt returns, kick offs, playing in all four special team phases and offence. I’m getting a good feel of every position in offence, making myself more versatile and available to ‘coach’.” What do practice squad players do on NFL gamedays?“It’s just like being an academy or reserve player in all sports. In training, you do everything the team does: lift weights, team meetings, walk throughs, practice. The only difference is, at the Bills we don’t travel to away games. We have a day off. For home games, we all stay in the hotel whether we are playing or not, we work out on the field before the squad get there and we finish when they arrive, shower and watch the game. We service the team in the warm-up, just be a good teammate.” Being the IPP member of the practice squad, no other team can sign you, but you can’t play either. Has that been frustrating?“I knew I was coming into a whole new profession and if I didn’t make the team there’d be an element of going back in time. I was once an academy player, a rookie, doing what I do now. Sometimes there would be a friendly or a reserve league game, which we don’t have here. But it’s not a new experience to me, it’s more a humbling one. I can work on my craft.” Valentine Holmes, another rugby player signed on the program, has just left the Jets for a huge contract at North Queensland Cowboys back in the NRL…“It all depends where you’re coming from and what you’ve left behind. With Val, he has a very high profile in the NRL and he’s basically gone home, so I can understand that. It all depends on your motive for being here and the options available to you elsewhere.” Speaking of which, you’ve been linked with a move to rugby league with Toronto Wolfpack…“I’ve not thought about that. It’s all about football for me now. I’m trying to make the team here. I’m giving 100% here and soaking everything up. I consider 2019 a success, even though I didn’t make the squad. I’ve practised, played, scored a first touchdown, had a run and nearly scored in the second game, then played the whole of the last pre-season game. The next six months is huge for me. I’ll give the same energy and see where it gets me.” What advice would you give to other rugby players who are considering the NFL?“They need to be definitely sure it’s what they want to do. There’s no easy path. It requires a lot of mental strength and a large attention span as you have to focus for hours and hours. You’ve to prepare your mind for a huge task, like climbing a mountain. You need some preparation before going into it. The reason I can cope is I had a 10-year career, so I am used to being disciplined with sleep, eating, having a schedule, making things on time, learning plays. I’ve just carried that over into another sport.” What have you seen in the NFL that rugby could emulate?“The players have their own backing from the NFL Players Association which is funded by ex-players. They help with disputes, training conditions – they limit how much we can practice and the 24-hour rule means we always have Tuesdays off – and the length of the season. Rugby has the RPA but that’s funded by the RFU so there’s a clash of interest. Here it’s centred around player wellbeing.” What do you miss about rugby?“I don’t have time to miss anything, I’m so engrossed in football. Maybe in the off-season I’ll think what I might miss. It’s all pretty similar apart from the length of the meetings, although we don’t like to go over 40 minutes before taking a break.” After 10 years at Wasps, you’ve changed club, country and sport. What’s that been like? “The Bills had 30 new signings this year and they all say they’ve never seen anything like this: that this is not normal, the bond in the locker room is unique, that it’s a special place. You saw how crazy the sideline went when I scored, running on the field. It’s something different. It starts with Coach McDermott – he gives us freedom but we respect him and buy into his culture. Regardless of what money we earn, we’re all in the ship together. The offence and defence gel. We look after each other. It’s awesome to be a part of.” Watch 14 live games plus NFL RedZone on NFL Game Pass over Thanksgiving weekend for the special price of 99p.