Catastrophic fire danger has been forecast for the greater Sydney, greater Hunter and Illawarra/Shoalhaven regions on Tuesday 12 November. This includes the central coast and the Blue Mountains. It’s the first time since the new fire ratings were introduced in 2009 that catastrophic conditions have been forecast for Sydney. Here’s what it means. Catastrophic is the highest fire danger rating. High temperatures, strong winds and low humidity are forecast, making conditions dangerous. If a fire starts during catastrophic conditions, lives and homes will be at risk. Fire danger ratings are based on the latest forecasts from the Bureau of Meteorology. The link between rising greenhouse gas emissions and increased bushfire risk is complex but, according to major science agencies, clear. Climate change does not create bushfires, but it can and does make them worse. A number of factors contribute to bushfire risk, including temperature, fuel load, dryness, wind speed and humidity. The Bureau of Meteorology and the CSIRO say Australia has warmed by 1C since 1910 and temperatures will increase in the future. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says it is extremely likely increased atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases since the mid-20th century is the main reason it is getting hotter. The Bushfire and Natural Hazards research centre says the variability of normal events sits on top of that. Warmer weather increases the number of days each year on which there is high or extreme bushfire risk. Dry fuel load - the amount of forest and scrub available to burn - has been linked to rising emissions. Under the right conditions, carbon dioxide acts as a kind of fertiliser that increases plant growth. Dryness is more complicated. Complex computer models have not found a consistent climate change signal linked to rising CO2 in the decline in rain that has produced the current eastern Australian drought. But higher temperatures accelerate evaporation. They also extend the growing season for vegetation in many regions, leading to greater transpiration (the process by which water is drawn from the soil and evaporated from plant leaves and flowers). The result is that soils, vegetation and the air may be drier than they would have been with the same amount of rainfall in the past. The year coming into the 2019-20 summer has been unusually warm and dry for large parts of Australia. Above average temperatures now occur most years and 2019 has been the fifth driest start to the year on record, and the driest since 1970. When calculating fire danger, authorities look at the temperature, wind speeds, humidity and the “drought factor”, that is, measures of how much moisture is in the ground already. Temperatures in the Sydney and Hunter regions on Tuesday are forecast to reach the high 30s. Winds from the north-west are expected to be particularly dry, particularly hot and very gusty. If fire breaks out, it can spread out of control quickly. The NSW Rural Fire Service is also forecasting extreme fire conditions for the north coast, central ranges, northern slopes and north-western regions. Current forecasts are for severe fire danger for the far north coast, New England, the far south coast, the southern ranges, and the lower central west plains. A statewide total fire ban has been declared for all areas of NSW for all of Monday and Tuesday. In catastrophic conditions, the message from the Rural Fire Service is simple: For your survival, leaving early is the only option. They give the following advice: Leave bushfire-prone areas the night before or early in the day – do not just wait and see what happens. Make a decision about when you will leave, where you will go, how you will get there and when you will return. Homes are not designed to withstand fires in catastrophic conditions so you should leave early. Avoid bushfire-prone areas. A safer area may be a large town or city, shopping centres or facilities well away from bushland areas. Schools in identified high-risk areas will be closed. Schools will notify affected students. Start making arrangements now. If you are unable to leave, identify a safe location which may be nearby. This may include a Neighbourhood Safer Place. The RFS provides a clear breakdown of what each of the fire ratings means for you on its website. The web page also includes advice on what people in areas where extreme and severe fire danger is forecast should do.