The Bank of England has told insurance companies to improve their working cultures after revelations about sexual harassment and bullying in the industry. In a letter to chief executives of general insurance companies, the Bank’s regulatory arm said it was deeply concerned about reports of abuse and intimidation. The Prudential Regulation Authority said bad behaviour could result in senior managers being banned from the sector. A survey in September found almost 500 workers at the Lloyd’s of London insurance market had suffered or witnessed sexual harassment in the previous year. The survey, commissioned by Lloyd’s after reports of bullying and harassment, found women’s experiences at work were far worse than men’s. Gareth Truran, the PRA’s acting director of insurance supervision, said in the letter: “Recent public reports relating to sexual harassment and bullying within the London market are of deep concern and it is clear that some firms have more work to do to improve aspects of corporate culture and individual behaviour. “Instances of non‐financial misconduct could speak to personal integrity and may have implications for our view of the fitness and propriety of individuals within our senior managers and certification regime.” The Lloyd’s survey found only 45% of respondents felt comfortable about raising wider concerns over the companies where they worked. Lloyd’s is not an insurance company but it houses more than 200 insurers and brokers that arrange insurance around the world, including against catastrophes and natural disasters. Lloyd’s chief executive, John Neal, said he was “upset and disappointed” at the survey’s findings when they were published. Lloyd’s declined to comment on the PRA’s letter. Truran said harassment concerns raised wider worries over whether staff at insurance companies felt able to speak up about problems, including those related to their firm’s financial security. He singled out the size of an insurer’s reserves as a matter that could affect profits and attract management pressure. He wrote: “Senior management should be careful to ensure that commercial pressure to deliver results does not translate into inappropriate pressure on individuals within control functions to weaken assumptions.” Lloyd’s has a reputation as one of the least reconstructed parts of the City. It is trying to clean up its act by threatening lifetime bans for people found guilty of improper behaviour and fines or bans for their firms. It has imposed temporary bans on people for being drunk or making inappropriate remarks. General insurance is not the only section of the City battling to shrug off a boorish culture. The London Metal Exchange has banned daytime drinking for its trading floor members and introduced a code of conduct after hosting a cocktail party at the Playboy Club in Mayfair. Truran said working culture was just one of several areas he would be watching out for at general insurers. Setting out priorities for the sector over the coming months, he said insurers should check how exposed they were to wildfires, tropical storm flooding and natural catastrophes that may be becoming more frequent or severe. Firefighters in California have been battling wildfires that experts say are made worse by global heating. Truran said firms should “consider whether their historical information and models continue to represent current hazard and exposure trends”. He told bosses to make sure their reserves against claims were strong enough and to charge premiums high enough to cover their risks.