Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 4-5 4 boneless chicken thighs (about 350g), preferably skin on20g ginger, unpeeled2 spring onions, white and green parts separated3 tbsp cooking oil1 ½ tbsp Shaoxing rice wine (now available widely, especially in larger supermarkets)300ml chicken stock or water1 tbsp brown or caster sugar1 ½ tsp dark soy sauce200g cooked, peeled chestnuts (canned or vacuum-packed)Salt Cut the chicken thighs into even, bite-sized chunks. Lightly smack the ginger and spring onion whites with the flat of a cleaver blade or a rolling pin just to loosen them, then cut each spring onion white into a couple of pieces. Cut the spring onion greens into neat 4cm lengths. Heat the oil in a seasoned wok over a high flame. When it is hot, add the ginger and spring onion whites and stir-fry until fragrant. Add the chicken pieces and fry until they are lightly browned: don’t move them around too much, but let them rest against the base of the wok so they take a little colour. Drain off some of the excess oil, if you wish. Splash the Shaoxing wine into the wok and stir well, then tip in the stock or water. Bring to a boil, then add the sugar, soy sauce and chestnuts, along with salt to taste (three quarters of a teaspoon should do). Reduce the heat, cover and simmer for about 15 minutes to allow the chicken to cook through and the chestnuts to absorb some of the flavours of the sauce, stirring from time to time. At the end of the cooking time, increase the heat to reduce the liquid, if you wish, and adjust the seasoning as needed. At the last minute, add the spring onion greens, cover for just a moment to let them feel the heat, then serve. Prep 20 minCook 20 minServes 4-5 3 large eggsAbout 225ml hot stock or water 1 tbsp Shaoxing wineSalt1 tsp sesame oilFor the topping2 tbsp cooking oil75g minced pork½ tbsp Shaoxing rice wine1 tsp sweet flour sauce First make the topping. Heat the oil in a seasoned wok over a high flame. Tip in the pork, stir-fry until it turns pale, then add the Shaoxing wine and sweet flour sauce. Stir briefly until fragrant, add salt to taste, then set aside. Break the eggs into a measuring jug, beat until evenly mixed and note the volume, then add one and a half times as much stock or water, and mix well (the stock or water should be hot, but not boiling: ideally 70–80C, if you have a thermometer). Stir in the Shaoxing wine and half a teaspoon of salt. Use a spoon to skim off any froth from the surface, then pour into two or three rice bowls and cover with foil or small saucers. Put the bowls in a bamboo steamer over boiling water. Cover and steam over a high heat for five minutes, then keep the lid slightly ajar and steam over a gentle heat for another 10 minutes or so, until the eggs have set to a delicate custard. While the custard is cooking, reheat the pork topping in a small saucepan, with a little water if necessary. When the custard is ready, spoon over the topping, drizzle with sesame oil and serve. Prep 15 minRest 30 minCook 30 minServes 4-5 600g auberginesSaltCooking oil, for deep-frying1 ½ tbsp Sichuan chilli bean paste1 ½ tbsp finely chopped garlic1 tbsp finely chopped ginger150ml hot stock or water4 tsp caster sugar1 tsp light soy sauce¾ tsp potato starch, mixed with 1 tbsp cold water1 tbsp Chinkiang black rice vinegar (from specialist Asian food stores)6 tbsp thinly sliced spring onion greens Cut the aubergines into batons about 2cm thick and 7cm long. Sprinkle with salt, mix well and set aside for at least 30 minutes. Rinse the aubergines, drain well and pat dry with kitchen paper. Heat the deep-frying oil to around 200C/390F (hot enough to sizzle vigorously around a test piece of aubergine). Deep-fry the aubergines, in two or three batches, for about three minutes, until tender and a little golden. Drain well on kitchen paper and set aside. Carefully pour off all but three tablespoons of oil from the wok and return it to a medium flame. Add the chilli bean paste, and stir-fry until the oil is red and fragrant: take care not to burn the paste (move the wok away from the burner if you think it might be overheating). Add the garlic and ginger, and stir-fry until they smell delicious. Tip in the stock or water, sugar and soy sauce. Bring to a boil, then add the aubergines, nudging them gently into the sauce so the pieces do not break apart. Simmer for a minute, so to allow the aubergines to absorb the flavours. Give the potato starch mixture a stir and add it gradually, in about three stages, adding just enough to thicken the sauce to a luxurious gravy (you may not need it all). Tip in the vinegar and all but one tablespoon of the spring onion greens, then stir for a few seconds to fuse the flavours. Turn out on to a serving dish, scatter over the remaining spring onion greens and serve. Prep 30 minMarinate 2 hrCook 30 minServes 4-5 250g peeled raw prawns, fresh or frozen and defrosted 300ml cooking oil1 celery stick, cut at an angle into diamond shapes 10 dried chillies, deseeded, cut into 2cm sections ½ tsp whole Sichuan peppercorns2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly slicedAn equivalent amount of ginger, peeled and thinly sliced5 spring onion whites, cut into 1cm slices75g fried or roasted cashew nuts For the marinade¼ tsp salt1 tsp Shaoxing rice wine2 tbsp potato starch1 tbsp egg white For the sauce3 tsp caster sugar¼ tsp potato starch1 tsp Shaoxing wine1 tsp light soy sauce2 ½ tsp Chinkiang black rice vinegar With a sharp knife, make a slit lengthways, through the thickest part. Put in a bowl, add the marinade ingredients and refrigerate, ideally for a few hours. Snip the chillies in half or into 2cm sections and shake out the seeds as far as possible. Cut the spring onion whites into 1cm slices. Cut the celery at an angle into diamond shapes. Mix the sauce ingredients with one and a half tablespoons of cold water in a small bowl. Heat the oil in a seasoned wok to 150C/300F (hot enough to produce a notable, though not violent,sizzle around a test prawn). Add the prawns, separating them with long cooking chopsticks or tongs, then add the celery. When the prawns are half-cooked, remove them and the celery with a slotted spoon and set aside. Carefully pour off all but about three tablespoons of the oil from the wok and return to a high flame. Add the chillies and Sichuan pepper and stir-fry briefly until the chillies are fragrant. Add the garlic, ginger and spring onion whites, and stir-fry until fragrant. Tip in the prawns and celery and stir-fry until just cooked (test a prawn to make sure). Give the sauce a stir, pour into the wok and stir to thickenc and oat the prawns. Finally, stir in the cashew nuts and serve. • Recipes from The Food of Sichuan, by Fuchsia Dunlop (Bloomsbury Publishing, £30)