Honey & Spice biscuits Giant gingerbreads, marunchinos and spiced biscotti from the brilliant Honeys. From £5.50, honeyandco.co.uk Redecker wooden mussel brush For perfect moules mariniere. £7, boroughkitchen.com Coco chocolate bars Edinburgh-based chocolatier, South American cocoa, unique artwork. £5, cocochocolatier.com WA Green London extra long matches Fancy matches for the domestic goddess. £8, wagreen.co.uk Tom Kerridge ketchup and brown sauce Updated condiments from the much-loved chef. £9.95 for two, tomkerridge.com Howdah? snacks A packet of these spicy Indian snacks = a school lunch for a child in need. £2.75, harveynichols.com Stroodles Semolina pasta drinking straws that biodegrade in just one day. £4.99, stroodles.co.uk Big Whale egg warmer David Attenborough’s favourite breakfast accessory. £7.50, souschef.co.uk Pastifico dei Campi pasta High-quality pasta with top PGI credentials. £5.95, souschef.co.uk Peleg Design yolk pig Cute porker-cum-egg-separator. £9.95, amazon.co.uk Rex London fish tins Fishy-themed tins for odds and bobs. £4.25, rexlondon.com Rocko the dinosaur sweetcorn holder Useful tool for the dinosaur-obsessed child/adult in your life. £9.95, souschef.co.uk Doisy & Dam almond and hazelnut butter cups Posh Reese’s, coveted stocking filler. £1.35, boots.com Fabienne Chapot lobster oven glove Oven safety, crustacean-chic. £9, amara.com Liberty soaps Now you can smell like your favourite fruit and veg too. £6.95, libertylondon.com Norður Salt Arctic sea salt flakes Icelandic sea salt from pure Arctic sea water. £7.95, harveynichols.com Kikkerland foragers playing cards Learn something interesting about funghi or pine cones with every shuffle. £9.95, balticmill.com RBV Birkmann sloth cookie cutter Quirky cutter for the lazy baker. £4.99, lakeland.co.uk Pink Sakura bento box bag Stylish lunch kit for the cool kid. £9.50, souschef.co.uk Noolibird garden herb rubber stamps Add some seasoning to your stationery. £7, notonthehighstreet.com San Cesareo passata Premium Italian tomatoes packed into every jar. From £3.75, thehamandcheeseco.com Sarah Raven seeds Edible flowers to sow in the new year. From £1.95, sarahraven.com Dionaea muscipula venus flytrap Keep flies at bay with mother nature’s kitchen aid. £8.50, waitrosegarden.com Drinks by the Dram whisky crackers Skip the nail file and the teeny notepad and win a single malt. £32.95, masterofmalt.com Muzzi panettone Beautifully packaged panettone, including pear and chocolate chip and marron glacé. From £13.95, souschef.co.uk Ceramic egg cups Slip-cast Staffordshire porcelain egg cups inspired by London life. £12, helenbeard.com Paul A Young Very Orangey chocolate segments Move over Terry’s. £12.95, paulayoung.co.uk Fortnum & Mason potted Welsh rarebit Fortnum’s tried and tested recipe. Slather on hot toast, grill and serve. £12.95, fortnumandmason.com Bespoke Barware cowboy boot shot cups Yeehah! Wet you whistle and have a hooch hoedown. £49 for 6, notonthehighstreet.com The Fergroni Stir with ice, serve with a lemon twist (never orange!). £42, stjohnrestaurant.com Sir/Madam linen napkins Featuring words from Emily Dickinson to Mark Twain. £49, couvertureandthegarbstore.com Parameswaran’s special wynad black peppercorns Single estate and vine ripened with a great taste. £10.99, lakeland.co.uk Asterley Bros cocktails Christmas cocktails that look and taste great. From £14.95, asterleybros.com Studio YF bowls and dishes Ceramic figs and pomegranate dishes made by Yasmin Falahat in east London. £30-£45, etsy.com Tate Otama soup ladle Chic utensil by Japanese designer Mikiya Kobayashi. £21, twentytwentyone.com Teatulia tea selection Black, oolong and green. For the tea enthusiast. £14.95, teatuliabar.com Suck UK doughnut sticky tape Sweet and sticky tape with extra sprinkles. £14, selfridges.com Bonne Maison artichoke socks Decorated with globe artichokes and honey bees. £16, bonnemaison.fr Zaytoun tree for life Help a Palestinian farmer buy olive and almond tree saplings. £20, zaytoun.org Wine buff glass polishing cloth For the drinks connoisseur. £12.50, harveynichols.com Glass lobster ornament Under the sea Christmas decor. £16.95, libertylondon.com S’well The Resort Florals bottles Reusable bottles in fetching florals. £35, amara.com Dominique Ansel Christmas morning cereal A decadent start to Christmas Day. £12, dominiqueansellondon.com Fortnum & Mason merrilossus Dangerously addictive biscuits for Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and beyond… £17.50, fortnumandmason.com David Shrigley hip flask Does what it says on the tin. £24.95, balticmill.com David Earp cosy and Brown Betty teapot A cosy made from vintage saris, and Britain’s favourite teapot. Cosy, £45, postcardteas.com; teapot, £38, twentytwentyone.com Rick Stein kitchen measuring spoons All your measuring needs, in fish-form. £10, rickstein.com Yakumi Japanese spice pots Japanese spices at the ready with these grow-your-own pots. £13, twentytwentyone.com Apiary beeswax wraps An attractive alternative to clingfilm. £20, couvertureandthegarbstore.com Wooden mackerel key ring Hand-painted by Bath-based artist Jess Hughes. £15, rickstein.com The Lodden Liberty Christmas hamper Fudge, gin, champagne … Everything for Christmas and more. £250, libertylondon.com Amy Isles Freeman bowls Hand-painted bowls with joyous designs of female sexuality. From £145, amyislesfreeman.co.uk Lina Stores bespoke hamper Delicious things from much-loved Italian deli in London. From £65, 020 7437 6482 Campbell’s soup can skateboard A Skateroom and Andy Warhol Foundation collaboration. £220, shop.tate.org.uk Secret Smokehouse London-cure oak smoked salmon For a luxurious Christmas-morning breakfast. £70, secretsmokehouse.co.uk Alex Ebdon hand-painted artichoke board A useful piece of art. £99, notonthehighstreet.com Caol Ila 18-year-old whisky Gentle smoke, soft peat. £81.78, masterofmalt.com Aluminium yukihira pans Traditional Japanese pans that are as beautiful as they are practical. From £55, nativeandco.com Blenheim Forge oyster knife Forged from high carbon Swedish stainless steel. £180, blenheimforge.com Cuvée Privée Adopt a Vine - Blanc De Blancs Grand Cru Vintage Adopt a vine and drink the benefits. From £300, cuvee-privee.co.uk The Posh Shed Company hedgehog house Help hedgehogs and keep slugs away from the veg patch too. £75, theposhshedcompany.co.uk Asahiyaki tea bowls Stunning wood fired tea bowls made in a 16th generation kiln near Kyoto. £85 each, postcardteas.com Les Ottomans tablecloth Turn a midweek supper into a banquet with these regal tablecloths. £85, matchesfashion.com The Daunt Books cookery subscription A year’s subscription gets you a cookbook a month from Daunt. £360 dauntbooks.co.uk Ottolenghi spice hamper All the hard-to-find spices you could ever need. £65, ottolenghi.co.uk Marcato ravioli tablet Perfect handmade ravioli every time. £58, amazon.co.uk Classical handless jug Simply stylish and simply functional porcelain jug. £67.50, johnjulian.co.uk The Wolseley vintage silver-plated coffee pot Every pot is different but all are engraved. £275, thewolseley.com Market basket For every bag purchased, a woman in Ghana receives a reusable sanitary kit. £69, mmaa.social Seedlings gardeners’ advent calendar £35, notonthe highstreet.com Alain Ducasse chocolate advent calendar £45, lechocolat-alainducasse.com Selfridge’s Selection festive mince pie advent calendar £39.99, selfridges.com The Gin Explorers advent calendar £99.95, masterofmalt.com Percy Pig advent calendar £5, marksandspencer.com The Naked Marshmallow Co gourmet advent calendar £17.50, nakedmarshmallow.co.uk Lakrids by Bülow liquorice advent calendar £38, lakridsbybulow.co.uk Laduree limited edition advent calendar £32, laduree.co.uk This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.