Racing professionals have reacted with shock to the news that the man behind the leading international racing and bloodstock operation, Phoenix Thoroughbreds, Amer Abdulaziz Salman, was recently named by a defendant in a criminal court in the US, who accused him of involvement in a money-laundering operation. The allegation was strenuously denied by Phoenix Thoroughbreds on Monday. “Nothing is proven,” said Martyn Meade, who trained Advertise to win the Commonwealth Cup at Royal Ascot in the now-familiar white and orange colours of Phoenix this summer. Meade said he had yet to hear from Abdulaziz but expected to do so shortly. “No doubt it will become clearer for everybody over the next few weeks. It’s a terrible shock, this sort of thing. The confidence that we get, as trainers, is that anyone who is a registered owner has clearly been through the rigours of the British Horseracing Authority. They are, if you like, authorising us to train for certain people because they’re registered owners. That due diligence is very much up to them. If someone is coming along as a registered owner, then one assumes they have been through the financial tests that are necessary from the BHA.” Robert Cowell, who trained a couple of horses for Phoenix but no longer has any of its horses at his Newmarket stable, said: “I didn’t have any problem with them at all, not in the slightest. I’m shocked that it’s come to this. As a racehorse trainer I look at the horses we’re sent and nothing more. I don’t think the BHA has had any reason not to have him registered.” Abdulaziz was accused from a New York court by Konstantin Ignatov, a prosecution witness during the trial of a lawyer, Mark Scott, who was convicted of conspiracy to commit money laundering and bank fraud last week for his involvement in the OneCoin cryptocurrency scam. Ignatov had himself pleaded guilty to charges. It is estimated by investors that £4bn was raised by what has been described as akin to a Ponzi scheme. In testimony live-tweeted by the investigative journalism website Inner City Press, Ignatov reportedly referred to Abdulaziz as “one of the main money launderers” involved in the scheme. Ignatov went on: “After he stole €100m from OneCoin, he started buying racehorses for, like, €25m.” Phoenix said in a statement that it “categorically denies all allegations made against it and its owner, Mr Amer Abdulaziz, in legal proceedings against OneCoin and its conspirators”. It added that Phoenix and Abdulaziz “have acted according to the law at all times and will vigorously contest all allegations of wrongdoing. [We] will fully co-operate with relevant authorities, should they require any assistance.” Sedgefield 12.50 Emma Lamb 1.20 Maxed Out King 1.50 Another Emotion (nb) 2.20 Induno 2.50 Tonto's Spirit 3.20 Strait RunSouthwell1.00 Battleofthesomme 1.30 Heavenly Promise (nap) 2.00 Nifty At Fifty 2.30 Terrierman 3.00 Willett 3.30 When You're ReadyWolverhampton3.50 Reassure 4.20 Waliyak 4.50 You Don't Own Me 5.20 Prompting 5.50 Thegreatestshowman 6.20 Htilominlo 6.50 Chinese Alphabet 7.20 Oh So Nice The BHA said it was “aware of the allegations which are emanating from a criminal case in the United States. We are in contact with the appropriate authorities and are continuing to make inquiries as a priority. We cannot comment further on the specifics of this case at this time. “More generally British racing takes its reputation – and its responsibility to protect its participants from potentially corrupt activity – very seriously. Wide-ranging criteria are in place for the suitability of those involved in the sport and every application for registration as an owner is assessed in line with these criteria. “If an individual is found to have acted in a manner which makes them unsuitable to be an owner, then their registration can be rescinded. There are also strict rules against engaging in conduct which is prejudicial to the sport’s good reputation.”