Gary Younge, the award-winning Guardian journalist, author and broadcaster, is to join the University of Manchester as a professor of sociology in the school of social sciences. He will leave his position as editor-at-large at the Guardian, which he joined in 1993, but continue to write for the organisation. Younge was appointed US correspondent in 2003 before taking up his current role in 2015. He previously reported from across Europe, Africa, the US and the Caribbean. “The Guardian was my first full-time job and I worked there for 26 years – it’s been a fantastic experience,” Younge said. “Journalism, for me, has always been a process of inquiry and sharing whatever insights I’ve gathered in an accessible and informative way – that’s precisely what I hope to achieve as a professor at the University of Manchester, and why I’m excited to be joining the sociology department. “I won’t be giving up journalism altogether. But teaching and researching at Manchester will provide a welcome shift of emphasis, even as I continue in that tradition.” The Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, paid tribute to Younge and said she looked forward to him continuing to contribute to the Guardian. “Gary Younge is one of the leading thinkers and writers on politics and society working in Britain today,” said Viner. “His powerful and distinctive reporting, commentary and film-making have been central to the Guardian’s coverage of some of the biggest stories in the world for the last 20 years, and like many others at the Guardian, I’ve learned a huge amount from working closely with Gary – about politics, about writing, about life. “I’m very sorry to see him leave, but I’m delighted that he will continue to write for the Guardian – and that he will be continuing to use his talents to shine a light on some of society’s most pressing problems.” Prof Brian Heaphy, the head of the university’s school of social sciences, said he was “truly delighted” with Younge’s appointment. “His work will be of enormous benefit to the school’s students and research activities, and to the university’s engagements beyond academia. As a journalist and author, Gary’s work has long been grounded in principles of research that makes visible the social and political processes that shape people’s everyday lives, often in very tragic circumstances.” Younge, who lived in Hertfordshire before going to Sudan as a 17-year-old to teach English in a UN Eritrean refugee school, studied French and Russian at Heriot-Watt University in Edinburgh and journalism at City University in London. He is an acclaimed author and has written five books: Another Day in the Death of America, A Chronicle of Ten Short Lives; The Speech – The Story Behind Martin Luther King’s Dream; Who Are We – and Should it Matter in the 21st Century?; Stranger in a Strange Land – Travels in the Disunited States; and No Place Like Home – A Black Briton’s Journey Through the Deep South.