Announcements by airlines that they will offset their carbon emissions (Can carbon offsets tackle airlines’ emissions problem?, 19 November) misleads passengers into thinking that they are doing something to stop the atmosphere overheating. They are not. All that is accomplished is no net increase in atmospheric CO2. The message that needs to be conveyed is that far more offsetting is required to help reduce the upward trend in temperature. To double the calculation would be a good start. In the absence of carbon taxes or a frequent flyer levy, airlines (and cruise companies) should be required to inform passengers of this fact. It doesn’t matter too much whether the airline or the passengers pay, or if the cost is shared, as long as it happens.Patrick CosgroveChapel Lawn, Shropshire • EasyJet is now reported as having jumped on the carbon offsetting bandwagon, claiming that all its flights will become “carbon neutral”. It might be wise for this scheme now to be recognised as little more than a comfortable delusion. Projected into the future, all airlines and indeed petrol companies could claim they were carbon neutral by adding typically a few percent to either ticket or pump prices. Indeed, Shell is already offering such a scheme. While the price of “offsetting” will inevitably increase, the Earth could warm irreversibly beyond a dangerous 1.5 or 2C threshold. Yet we could all still be driving and flying whenever we wished, having been told we were having no net impact. Carbon offsetting is basically dishonest in that it purports to offer a way of saving the world that is commensurate with a business-as-usual scenario. It is not a substitute for rapid reductions in fossil fuel energy use.Dr Stephen WozniakSidmouth, Devon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition