Evo Morales, the exiled former president of Bolivia has called for dialogue with his political rivals but repeated his allegation that he was the victim of a coup, as the country’s interim leader pledged to hold new elections as soon as possible. Speaking at a press conference in Mexico City, Morales called on Wednesday for an end to the violence which has wracked Bolivia since elections last month plagued with allegations of vote-rigging. “I have a message for the police and the armed forces: don’t stain yourselves with the blood of the people,” he said. At least eight people have been killed in three weeks of clashes across Bolivia. Morales dismissed an Organisation of American States report which found there had been “clear manipulations” of the vote which would have handed him his fourth term in office, and said that his rightwing opponents had plotted the coup from the night of the vote. “The OAS is not at the service of the people of Latin America. It is at the service of the USA,” he said. “We built a lot with so much sacrifice and now this coup is destroying Bolivia”. As Morales spoke in exile, his successor pledged to hold a new election as soon as possible, calling for a peaceful transition from what she described as a “totalitarian regime”. In a message to Bolivia’s young people, Jeanine Añez tweeted: “God bless you and allow us to be free and to hold transparent elections soon.” Senate vice-president and a conservative Christian, Añez declared herself the country’s interim president late on Tuesday with outsized Bible in her hand – despite a boycott of the legislative session by lawmakers from Morales’s party. Even as she assumed the role, angry Morales supporters clashed with riot police on the streets of La Paz, and decried her as a racist usurper who had seized power illegally. Ruben Chambi, a lawmaker with Morales’s Movement For Socialism – which holds a two-thirds majority in Congress – described her oath of office as a “media show” and told supporters that his party would reject Morales resignation, “so that he comes back directly and resumes his functions as president”. Morales resigned on Sunday after a tumultuous 48 hours in which police officers mutinied, the OAS said it could not verify his first-round victory and the military command urged him him to quit. He flew into exile in Mexico on Tuesday. Bolivia’s constitutional court has said that after the resignations of Morales, his deputy and the presidents of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, Añez was next in line to assume the presidency. With no one to swear her in, she took power noting that the constitution did not need congressional approval. But in the streets of La Paz, hundreds of Morales supporters waved the multi-coloured Wiphala, the flag of native people of the Andes associated with Morales’ government, shouting: “She must quit!” “She’s declared herself president without having a quorum in the parliament,” said one protestor, Julio Chipana. “She doesn’t represent us.” Others swore their enduring loyalty to Morales, the country’s first indigenous leader in modern times. “While our president and maximum leader Evo Morales is alive, the MAS will carry on,” said party youth leader Alejandro Martínez. “He may not come back tomorrow, or the day after, but that won’t stop us from taking the streets.” Añez cuts a starkly contrasting figure with Morales. Entering the parliament building on Tuesday night, she brandished an outsized bible, in an explicit rebuke to Morales, who banned the Christian holy book from the presidential palace when he reformed the constitution in 2009 to recognize Pachamama, the Andean Mother Earth deity instead of the Catholic Church. “My commitment is to return democracy and tranquility to the country,” she said. “They can never again steal our vote.” Afterwards, she greeted supporters from the balcony of the old Casa Quemado presidential palace rather than the 26-storey Casa del Pueblo skyscraper built by Morales, which opponents saw as an example of his excesses. Her sudden move to the political centre stage prompted a closer look at racist remarks towards Bolivia’s indigenous majority on her social media accounts. One tweet from 2013 – later deleted – describes indigenous Aymara new year’s celebrations as “satanic” and concludes: “Nobody can replace God!” In another post, she questioned whether a group of Indigenous people were genuine because they were wearing shoes. Yerko Ihlik, a Bolivian political commentator, downplayed her potential to further polarize the country. “The (interim) president has one mandate and that mandate to call new elections as quickly as possible,” he said. “The constitution allows 90 days by the country’s situation demands that they are sooner.” But in a clear sign that she intends to steer the country away from the socialism of her predecessor, one of Añez’s first acts on Wednesday was to recognise opposition leader Juan Guiadó as president of Venezuela – overturning Bolivia’s support for Nicolás Maduro under Morales. The US and Brazil were quick to offer their congratulations to Añez. “We look forward to working with her and Bolivia’s other civilian authorities as they arrange free and fair elections as soon as possible,” tweeted Michael Kozak, US assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs.