It seems only yesterday that a weary England Test side pitched up in New Zealand after a heavy defeat in the 2017-18 Ashes and succumbed to the charms of Trent Boult, Tim Southee and the pink ball for a series-ruining 58 all out in Auckland. Eighteen months on from that pink stink – one masked to an extent by Australia’s sandpaper scandal erupting 7,000 miles away in Cape Town – there can be no such excuses. All but a handful of England’s Test players have been resting since the end of the home summer and the two-match series in New Zealand that begins on Thursday in Mount Maunganui is being played with the red Kookaburra. And this is the start of a new era under Chris Silverwood, the head coach, whom it is hoped will partner with Joe Root for a golden spell. The captain is talking about this being the first two Tests in a run of 25 as they build towards the 2020‑21 Ashes and though this falls foul of the sportsman’s golden rule – not looking too far ahead – Ashley Giles, England’s director of cricket, has his back. “We have talked about him leading and winning in Australia,” Giles told BBC Test Match Special. “We’ve not said: ‘Maybe if you get there.’ We plan for him to be our captain. “None of us know what is around the corner, things can change quickly. But in our planning when we sat down [in the summer] we were looking to Australia. That’s the holy grail for him: going to Australia and winning is the big prize and we have enough time to plan for that. “This is a really exciting period, this new relationship with Chris Silverwood and a bit more focus on Test cricket. We’ve talked about them finding a DNA for Test cricket. There was definitely more focus on white-ball teams in the past few years.” The early strands of this DNA are a departure from the summer, when it was hoped Jason Roy might thwack the coating off the new ball. The more watchful Dom Sibley joins Rory Burns at opener, Joe Denly drops to No 3, Root is back at four and Ollie Pope, Surrey’s wunderkind, is now properly blooded at No 6 beneath Ben Stokes. Jos Buttler is keeping wicket – rather than some cricketing attempt at the libero – as Jonny Bairstow plots a route back with the bat. The main challenge appears to be the Kookaburra ball. Giles is tipping a “bowler war” on South African green-tops in their second winter tour but here there may be less assistance. England’s hope is that Jofra Archer can scorch through the Kiwis in his first away assignment; everyone else’s hope is that Root does not burn him out in the process. In contrast to all this English talk of re-balancing formats, long-term goals, new eras and DNA sits an impressive New Zealand team who quietly go about their business under Kane Williamson’s ego-free captaincy; the kind that saw the 29-year-old reply “Who me?” when told he was player of the tournament at the end of the World Cup. The Black Caps draw on a talent pool that is roughly a quarter the size of England’s – 110 professional male players – yet were their equals on that heady day at Lord’s (bar the decisive boundary count) and sit second in the Test rankings behind the mighty India, one higher than their guests. England have confirmed that Mark Saxby, the team’s longstanding massage therapist, will now officially head up pastoral care within the squad as they look to take a proactive approach in the field of mental health. Saxby, part of the England setup since 2005, has recently completed a two-year diploma in executive leadership. This additional role now formalises duties he was already performing as one of the dressing room’s most trusted figures. Bay Oval will become the country’s ninth Test venue and it is a homecoming for Williamson. Tauranga’s most famous son, back from a hip issue, is clearly a wonderful batsman with the softest hands since Nanette Newman. But he is no one-man band. Henry Nicholls and Tom Latham sit in the top 10 of the Test batting rankings – either side of Root – while the seasoned Ross Taylor helped himself to a double century in his most recent outing at home. They possess a strong stable of seamers too, such that there is talk of rotation given a southern summer that also features a three-Test series in Australia – perhaps their chief priority, not that they’d be so bold as to say it – and then the visit of Virat Kohli and co for two more. As well as Boult and Southee, the bowling attack boasts brawn in the shape of Neil Wagner, the South African-born left-armer who fell in love with his bouncer from an early age and has been faithful ever since. Matt Henry is a shrewd fast-medium known to Kent supporters and a host of rueful county batsmen. Then there is Lockie Ferguson, the slippery quick with the pencil moustache who starred in the World Cup and, before a possible Test debut, has been talking about inducing anxiety out in the middle. It is as strong a pre-series barb as you will get this side of the Tasman Sea but England’s batsmen would be wise to watch the ball closely, rather than look too far down the line.