After reading her playful, political novels – described by reviewers as “explosive” and “radical” – it’s a surprise to find Meena Kandasamy to be quiet and diffident in person. Today this may be because she is not feeling well; she keeps a scarf wrapped around her throughout our conversation. But also, as she tells me: “I think I’m much better writing down what I feel.” We meet in Belfast’s Grand Central hotel, an opulent symbol of the city’s post-Troubles renaissance and a landmark that celebrates local literary history: walls, exterior paving and even the revolving doors display work by poet Paul Muldoon. Kandasamy is in Belfast to promote her new novel Exquisite Cadavers, but it’s impossible to talk about this without first discussing her last novel When I Hit You: Or, a Portrait of the Artist As a Young Wife, to which the new book is in part a response. It was an “intermingling of [the] political and domestic” that drove Kandasamy to write When I Hit You, which was shortlisted for the Women’s prize for fiction last year. In 2011, she was married briefly – four months – to a man who subjected her to physical and psychological violence. “I went to the police in India. I had this nine-page complaint, literally everything that had happened to me. The officer was really kind and he said to me: ‘You’ve written a novel!’” She laughs. It was a representation of her own story, but she anonymised the narrator of When I Hit You to universalise the experience; she had learned that being “feminist, outspoken, successful, loud” was no protection against violence. Like her other books, it was driven by a desire for social justice. Her social media audience – around 100,000 followers on Twitter – is “more political than literati”. Kandasamy was born in 1984 in Chennai, India, the daughter of a mixed-caste Tamil marriage. She offloaded her anger at India’s “very rigid caste system, which doesn’t give acknowledgement to anyone except the Brahmin [high-caste] population, and even women are excluded from that” by writing poetry, publishing two collections – Touch and Ms Militancy – in her 20s. Following the end of the marriage that inspired When I Hit You, she met her current partner in 2013 and came to the UK in 2016, where she still lives. Her first novel, The Gypsy Goddess, was published in 2014 and is a stunning account of the murder of 44 low-caste labourers and their families in a Tamil village in 1968. The workers, striking for better pay and conditions, were locked in a hut and burned alive. It is deeply faithful: “Researching this book was one of the ways in which I tried repeatedly to escape the task of actually writing it.” Yet it also shows Kandasamy’s originality; the terrible story is framed by a humorous narrator who talks directly to us: “Now the nail-biting reader can join the nervous author in elaborating the rest of the story.” The Gypsy Goddess received good reviews but didn’t reach a wide readership at the time. Comparing it with the breakthrough success of When I Hit You, she sounds frustrated: “When publishers tell me, ‘When I Hit You did well and Gypsy Goddess didn’t do well, it’s because this is about a woman’s story, they can identify with this person.’ Oh, you must be kidding me if people can’t identify with people striking for wages, people fighting for justice.” When I Hit You is a horrifying and gripping portrayal of the narrator’s isolation and abuse at the hands of her husband. Living in a society in which a woman is expected to remain silent and compliant, she comes to realise that she must rescue herself. One of the more troubling aspects of the novel’s success, says Kandasamy, was the way in which some readers treated it as autobiography: a Polish publisher wanted to buy the rights so as to repackage the novel as narrative non-fiction. (She said no.) Although “there was not a line of falsehood in that book”, it was not a memoir. “A memoir for me means a person’s life story; if I was going to write my actual life story, I would condense this entire marriage into a footnote.” By treating it as memoir, people were overlooking the artistry: “The idea was: ‘I’m going to tell you a story about what happened to me.’ For me, the artistic enterprise is: ‘I’m going to tell you a story’, a narrative that has been shaped. It’s not therapy.” One of my sons is British, the other is American, my partner is Belgian, I am Indian. This is the new family She compares it to Magritte’s The Treachery of Images (“Ceci n’est pas une pipe”) – “It’s not what happened to me, it’s a representation of what happened to me.” She asked her publisher not to give it a stereotypical cover design: “I don’t want hands with henna or disembodied parts of a woman. I want you to design a cover like you would design it for a 60-year-old white man.” Praise for When I Hit You did focus on the subject – reviews called it “courageous and brave”, “important and shocking” – rather than the form, in which stories surround the central story, as Kandasamy’s narrator tries to wrest control of her own narrative from her family. (The book’s opening line is: “My mother has not stopped talking about it.”) It was this question of – as she puts it today – “who is the narrator, who is allowed to tell the story” that led to Exquisite Cadavers. To spike the guns of anyone seeking to read her new book as a memoir, it would be “based on a story as removed from my own as possible”. The title comes from the surrealist parlour game, also known as exquisite corpse, where each person adds a body part to a drawing, or a sentence to a story, without seeing the previous parts: “Art as assemblage.” “I wanted to do something where I was going to look for inspirations, things that were happening to me, and project them on to a fictional couple.” The couple are Maya, a young woman working for a liberal newspaper, and her partner Karim, a film-maker originally from north Africa, both living in present-day Britain. One theme is how artists of colour are “taken only at face value”. Karim, completing a course on film, tells his professors that as a north African he wants to prepare a dissertation on the camel in cinema. His proposal is “gleefully embraced with such earnestness that it breaks him to summon the courage to say he was merely being sarcastic”. This reflects the earnest responses to Kandasamy’s first two books. Writing Exquisite Cadavers, she says, presented challenges on a couple of levels. Her previous books were based on past events. Despite their difficult subject matter, “that stuff has finished, you can put a lid on it and write about it”. It was harder to write about what is happening now, where there is no narrative closure. The novel takes in recent events, including the media response to “Isis bride” Shamima Begum and the evergreen politics of the UK’s departure from the EU. It seems an apt subject to raise in Northern Ireland – the Gordian knot of Brexit – on a sunny autumn day when the EU has just granted the UK another delay to its departure. “Only a super-anxious nation,” Kandasamy writes in the book, “could have come up with Brexit.” She tells me she is pro-remain, while her partner, who is a leftist, “would like to leave because the EU is a bankers’ institution”. They have two sons: the first was born in the UK in 2016; their second last year in New York, where she was working at NYU. She has no time for nationalism. “One of my sons is British, the other is American, my partner is Belgian, I am Indian. This is the new family.” She laughs. But she knows who will be hardest hit by Brexit. “When they start discriminating against British people at European borders, they’re not going to go after white British people, they’re going to go after people like me.” Kandasamy’s political passion comes alive as she warms to her theme. “It’s not a polite term to use but I think there’s an element of ‘brown-washing’ going on, like making Priti Patel the face of hard Brexit, following very racist immigration policies, but using a brown person to push it through. Not a proud moment.” There’s an element of 'brown-washing' going on, like making Priti Patel the face of hard Brexit If today’s political landscape was one complicating factor in writing Exquisite Cadavers, another was that when she began, she had a one-year-old child and when she finished it, she was about to give birth to her second. “My partner was away, so once my child was asleep, I would go on the internet and try to find stuff that was interesting to me and help me build a story.” The project to write the book was, she says, “an Oulipo”, referring to the French school of authors who write fiction under formal constraints. “My constraint was motherhood!” She wanted to show how the ideas she took from the internet affected the protagonists’ story, but found that “the inspiration would occupy a big chunk of text, and only two or three lines would be what happens to Maya and Karim. It seemed unfair to them, so I had to collapse my inspirations into the margins.” What this produced is a novel striking in appearance: the story of Maya and Karim occupies the body of each page, while running down the margins is a commentary on what is occupying Kandasamy’s mind as she writes it, including findings from her research, as well as accounts of her family life, her political awakening and reflections on current affairs. The result is a smart, complex book that can be approached in different ways. Has this format been done before? “Yes,” she says immediately. She becomes animated as she discusses Jacques Derrida’s book Glas, showing images on her phone of his split page effect that she adapted for Exquisite Cadavers. She reads from Glas’s Wikipedia page: “‘The two-column format aims to open a space for what the individual texts excluded.’ This was very interesting for me.” Derrida features in all three of Kandasamy’s novels. He must be an important influence? Yes, but “most of the time he’s just intellectually masturbating! You have to look for the parts where his profundities are hidden.” Her other literary influences are “books that are invested in every sentence”, writers such as Toni Morrison and Arundhati Roy, and early Salman Rushdie “until he started becoming absolutely formulaic”. She says she loved Bernardine Evaristo’s Girl, Woman, Other – “her women are full of life and vivacious” – which was controversially announced as joint winner of this year’s Booker prize, along with Margaret Atwood’s The Testaments. She believes that Atwood “deserves the Nobel prize more than [2019 joint literature laureate Peter] Handke … but you can’t right a wrong by giving her the Booker.” And where does she fit into contemporary literature? In The Gypsy Goddess, she writes “disciplined novels are dead, well behaved ones are damned”, which sounds like a modernist credo. “I don’t believe in labels,” she says firmly. But “I don’t want [my work] to be a hand-me-down.” Her mixed-caste upbringing and her experiences as a Tamil woman in both India and the UK inform this. “Who does the novel belong to? I am writing about a different reality, so I need to shape it to fit my reality. You don’t want to do the same. You don’t want to do the done thing. To take a risk, you still need to be absolutely on the margins. I am doing what I want to do.” • Exquisite Cadavers by Meena Kandasamy is published by Atlantic. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.