“Just because we’re in a drought doesn’t mean you have to stop gardening,” the landscape designer and television host Charlie Albone says. “It just means you have to be smarter about how you garden.” With parts of New South Wales moving to level two water restrictions in December, and predictions that droughts nationwide are only going to get worse, getting smart is looking urgent. Here are some simple ways to do it. A lush green lawn may look nice but “it’s one of the things I think should go first in drought”, Albone says. This is because “it’s inexpensive to put back and it’s easy to put back”. Ignoring your lawn allows you to save water for the plants that matter – usually those that are larger or slow-growing. If you’re looking for long-term change, he suggests replacing lawn with gravel, crushed granite or “a drought-tolerant ground cover like a dichondra. Silver falls dichondra has a nice silver leaf and will cover the ground. It uses less water than grass and gives you a nice soft outlook.” Albone makes an exception for those who’ve got rainwater tanks or grey-water recycling systems. If you’ve got large stores of non-potable water “then you can irrigate your lawn to keep it alive”. “I don’t think people put enough value in big trees in gardens,” says Albone. “They get stressed by the drought and ... trying to replace a mature tree in a garden is incredibly expensive, sometimes impossible, especially the effect they give you.” He suggests researching to figure out signs of drought-distress in your trees and larger plants, and watering them as and when they need it. Watering is not just a matter of spraying the leaves of your plants, the approach a lot of gardeners take: “Really you need to be focusing on the root zone of the plant. “With trees, you can teach them to be drought-tolerant by watering less often, but with more water. So you give the ground a good soaking and that really teaches the roots to grow deep into the soil, which prepares them better for drought.” Soaking your plants twice a week uses the same amount of water as a light daily spritz. “If you spread [watering] over seven days your roots will stay in the top area of the soil. If you use the same amount of water, but on two watering days, your roots will grow much deeper.” When you water matters too: “A lot of people will water at the wrong time of day. You need to water before 10am or after 4pm.” Not only does mulch make your garden “look a lot nicer” it offers multiple benefits for your plants. Apply about 75mm of organic mulch around trees and in your garden bed. Mulch insulates the soil, preventing water evaporation and, as it breaks down, the mulch releases organic matter into the soil, which nourishes your plants and makes the soil hold more water. For veggie patches, Albone prefers pea straw or sugar cane mulch, but any course bark can do the trick. For pot plants, a layer of pebbles offers many of the benefits of mulching. Though they don’t break down, they still prevent water loss due to evaporation. The best time to apply mulch to the garden is just after it rains: “That helps lock it in.” Albone recommends against trying to establish plants during drought unless they’re equipped to cope with the conditions. If you’ve got spots in your garden that need filling, choose drought-tolerant options. One of his favourite varieties is coastal rosemary. It’s always good to do your homework, but you can often spot drought-hardy species just by looking at them. “So plants with really small leaves are generally suited to a drought because they’ve evolved to have a small leaf that doesn’t evaporate much water,” he says. “Whereas if you look at a tropical plant with big open leaves that are used to getting a lot of water, they’re not very good for drought.” While many native species are more drought tolerant, natives are not a surefire route to garden success: “You still have to do your research.” If conditions change, you don’t need to worry about whether your new plants will hold up in wetter weather, either. “All plants like water,” Albone says, although drought-tolerant varieties don’t appreciate having water sitting around their roots. “As long as you’ve got a free draining soil, the more water they have, the happier they’ll be.”