The popularity of women’s rugby and Australian rules football has soared in Australia in recent years. But new research suggests the management of breast injuries for athletes in these contact sports needs to catch up, particularly as more women and girls enter the game. When PhD candidate Brooke Brisbine took to the road, visiting over 30 training sessions across Victoria, NSW, the ACT and Queensland, she surprised a lot of the female athletes and staff. “It was quite nearly the first time that any of these players had ever been asked about a breast injury,” Brisbine says. “And certainly the first time a vast majority of them had ever said anything about it at all.” In person and online, working with the University of Wollongong and Australian Institute of Sport, Brisbine surveyed almost 300 athletes and close to 250 coaching and medical staff to investigate the occurrence and perception of breast injuries in women’s AFL, rugby sevens, league and union. Fifty-eight percent of players reported experiencing a contact breast injury during training or a game, and almost half of those, more often sub-elite players, said the injury had affected their performance. However, coaches and medical staff were often unaware of the problem and underestimated the occurrence of breast injuries for their players. In the study, most staff estimated fewer than 5% of players had sustained such an injury. Brisbine says this is not surprising considering so few players are reporting their breast injuries. “No one’s been asking them about it. No one told them that it’s important to report it,” she says, adding that women playing at the community level represented the bulk of her data. They’re athletic, but [their bodies] are not exactly the same [as men] so we need to pay attention to the differences According to Brisbine, a lot of female athletes felt they would not be taken seriously if they reported the injury or were unsure if it could be treated. “Breasts are still a bit of a taboo topic, especially in female sports,” she says. “There is a tendency in elite sport to play through the pain.” “Women are taking the game as seriously as men,” says Deirdre McGhee, research supervisor and co-director of UOW’s Breast Research Australia. “They’re athletic, but [their bodies] are not exactly the same so we need to pay attention to the differences.” With more and more women and girls participating every year, the research comes at a critical time. Identifying the problem is the first step towards developing strategies to prevent and treat breast injuries to enable women to perform at their best. “We’re not saying that this is happening to a lot of women. But we’ve identified a problem that has very poor awareness. Girls are not reporting [their injuries], and therefore we are managing it very poorly,” Dr McGhee says. Already players learn to protect themselves from injury with correct technique but with more research to understand the incidence of breast injuries in each code and how they occur, effective preventative strategies can be developed for each game. Retired rugby league player Joanne Barrett understands the differences in physical contact between the rugby codes, having also played a bit of rugby union in her time. “I’ve been a forward and a back in both codes and it is really different types of contact,” she explains. “In league, there’s a lot more run up, there’s a lot more one-on-ones, as opposed to union.” Barrett played in eight State of Origins for Queensland , the team she now manages, and represented Australia in two World Cups. While she never recalls a breast injury in her playing career, Barrett says we can always do more to improve awareness and proactive strategies to prevent injuries, and thinks the research follows the natural progression of the women’s game. “I’ve often thought until we have some stats and experience and some history in the game, it’s hard to [manage injuries],” Barrett says. “You need the facts before you can progress.” Club rugby union player and University of Newcastle researcher Sarah Kennedy, who was not involved in the study, says the research findings have already started a good conversation: “Especially [in female codes] where there are a lot of male coaches and support staff involved [who] may not know how to begin the conversation around reporting of and avoiding these types of injuries.” Kennedy has played club rugby for over a decade and expects the number of reported breast injuries would increase should female players be educated about what constitutes a breast injury, which may be dismissed as bruising. Bruising is certainly a symptom of soft tissue injuries, along with swelling and pain, but as sports physician Sharon Stay explains, after a traumatic breast injury, the fatty fibrous tissue may change. “We call it fat necrosis. This can be painful, and can distort the shape of the breast,” says Dr Stay who works with Queensland Rugby Union, Netball and Cricket. Head coach of the Brisbane Lions AFLW team Craig Starcevich says he also has not encountered any breast injuries amongst his players, but agrees that technique has a major part to play in injury prevention, particularly at a junior level and for any new player to the sport. “How we teach players to tackle and mark the ball, those things are probably relevant… [and] encouraging the athletes to be open and honest with their reporting,” he says. Kennedy, whose own research aims to equip adolescents with the necessary skills to be physically active throughout life, believes education needs to begin at the club level. “It needs to start from grassroots so that players are coming through with the correct training to avoid injuries in the first place, but also to ensure that those reporting protocols are in place across the board.”