BritBox, the streaming venture from ITV and the BBC that aims to rival Netflix, is to be given a major boost through deals with BT, Channel 4 and the mobile company EE, the Guardian can reveal. The various distribution and programming deals will give the subscription streaming service a major fillip as ITV announced the official launch of the £5.99-a-month service on Thursday. ITV, which owns the majority of the joint venture with the BBC, has struck an exclusive deal to make BritBox available to tens of millions of EE mobile phone customers across the UK. A wider deal with BT, which owns EE, will make BritBox available to the millions of customers who subscribe to its pay-TV service, which broadcasts programming such as Champions League football. BritBox will also begin to show content from Channel 4, a move first reported by the Guardian on Wednesday, which means programmes from all the UK’s main television channels will be available through one catch-up outlet for the first time. “The opportunity to collaborate as public service broadcasters on BritBox extends our track record of partnership and will ensure there is a compelling single destination for the very best high-quality, homegrown content,” said Alex Mahon, the chief executive of Channel 4. Channel 4 will provide thousands of hours of TV and film content to BritBox as part of the three-year deal. Bringing on board Channel 4 as a partner, even if the broadcaster does not take an equity stake in BritBox, marks the most promising strategic step for the future prospects of the UK’s belated response to the rise of Netflix and Amazon. “Today’s launch and announcement of our partnership deals with Channel 4 and BT underline the quality and scale we want the service to embody,” said Reemah Sakaan, the group director of ITV’s subscription video-on-demand services. More than a decade ago the BBC, ITV and Channel 4 came together to launch the ill-fated Project Kangaroo, which would have created a UK video-on-demand champion years before the global rise of Netflix but was blocked by the UK competition regulator. The new deals struck by ITV, whose share price has fallen by 15% in the last year, come a week after Apple made its much-hyped launch into the global streaming wars. Apple launched its service, Apple TV+, with big-budget fare such as flagship The Morning Show starring A-listers Jennifer Aniston, Reese Witherspoon and Steve Carrell, in 100 countries on 1 November. That service is free for a year to consumers who buy a new Apple device – 200m iPhones are purchased a year – otherwise it costs £4.99 a month. Netflix, which has more than 10 million subscribers in the UK, charges £8.99 for its most popular package. Next week ITV will deliver its third-quarter trading update, which will include guidance on how healthy the all-important, big-spending festive TV advertising season is set to shape up. In September, BritBox announced its first distribution deals to make the streaming service available on services including YouView, Freeview and Samsung TVs. ITV also announced the first content partners for BritBox, with Channel 5 and Comedy Central making hundreds of hours of TV shows available on the service.