Well done on your expose of the so-called youth justice system (Children suffer in ‘chaotic’ justice system, 4 November). Your call for a complete overhaul of the system is welcome, but it needs to be based on a rethink about the needs and rights of children. It would be counterproductive to put more resources into the youth offending industry when it is rotten at its heart. The problem is both structural and moral. Youth offending teams, youth courts and child jails have all contributed to a system that fails – and in some cases abuses – children. The dramatic fall in the number of children being arrested, prosecuted and incarcerated is welcome, and the Howard League has been working with the police for a decade to stem the flow of children into the toxic criminal justice system. A two-thirds cut to child arrests has reduced child imprisonment. But still too many children who have complex needs are pushed through a system totally unfit to respond to their behaviour. A new government has an opportunity to do things differently. I call on all political parties to work with the Howard League and base their policies on evidence. Children deserve better than they are getting now, as do victims and taxpayers.Frances CrookChief executive, Howard League for Penal Reform • The youth courts have been falling short of supporting children for many years (A month in court: The young defendants behind bulletproof glass, 4 November) despite repeated government attempts to reform the youth justice system. As the only charity with a legal aid contract to represent children in the criminal courts, we see daily how the justice system continually fails to resolve the behaviours of children with complex health and social problems. Unrecognised mental illness is common; so too are learning difficulties and disabilities, as well as long-term trauma and neglect due to being raised by parents who themselves haven’t been given the support they desperately need. Failure to recognise and meet their needs often leaves children vulnerable to exploitation, all too easily falling into a current of crime from which it is difficult to escape. The shortcomings in the crown court are just as bad, with a regular failure to make child-friendly adjustments such as providing intermediaries. Children are left bewildered and confused, unable to understand what is happening, feeling no sense of justice. What’s more, the lawyers who represent children in both the youth and crown courts often have little specialist knowledge of the youth justice system or the competencies needed to work with vulnerable children. In no other area of the public realm would professionals who have no required training be working with them. It’s one aspect of a broken system that needs urgent attention. More fundamentally we need a radical rethink of how the state responds to children who break the law. The system needs to recognise these children as deeply troubled rather than simply troublesome.Enver SolomonCEO, Just for Kids Law • I read with sadness and angry recognition your article about the crisis in children’s criminal justice (Cost-cutting: Long delays after court closures, 4 November). I have a child who is accused of a serious offence. The allegation was made at the end of 2018. Naturally, I cannot give detail and I support my child – not parental defensiveness; I genuinely believe the offence highly unlikely. The child was interviewed under caution on the day of the allegation and once again six months later. We have authorised – three months ago – access to medical and psychiatric information. That authorisation was given one month after we asked the police to clarify what it was they wanted and why, highlighting the potential negative effects on our child’s treatment. Our lawyer has had no update, save that the case hasn’t been to the Crown Prosecution Service yet. Our child cannot/will not attend school due to anxiety; complaints to the police yield nothing; the MP has no interest; and mental health support (already weak and incurious) has been withdrawn. We are told that the investigating officer is slow to reply because of their own childcare commitments. We are at our wits’ end. We cannot see how children can be exposed to a criminal justice system that appears to make few structural concessions to children; we cannot comprehend how an investigation (not a factually complicated one) can take so long. Meanwhile, our broken child is unrecognisable and close to being lost to us and their own narrowed future.Name and address supplied • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition