Where is it? In a charmingly wonky medieval building in the shadow of York Minster, Draper’s is a stylish, contemporary first-floor apartment above the Minstergate National Trust shop (the original draper’s) and just a few minutes from the cobbled centre of bustling, historic York. What’s new? The whole apartment – it still smells of fresh paint. Once you’ve ducked through your own front door, the flat is enormous, open-plan and airy, with high ceilings, large windows and two double bedrooms. The chic decor takes inspiration from a previous occupant of the flat – George Hudson, Victorian financier and ‘king of the railways’, who lived here with his wife and daughter. Star attractions? The central location: it’s in the heart of one of Europe’s largest pedestrian zones. Close by are the Shambles’ medieval shopping streets, the Castle Museum, York Art Gallery, Theatre Royal, Jorvik Viking Centre and the Treasurer’s House. You can also enjoy the dainty tea shops outside your door. For a surprisingly magical experience, pop into the Yorkshire Soap company, its decor inspired, surely, by the whimsical madness of film director Tim Burton. Room with a view? Yes - the location is so perfect that as you gaze out on the Minster, you’re more than likely to find yourselves gazed at by the tour groups that regularly pass by. Say boo to them if they’re on an evening ghost tour, and watch them jump. Where’s good to eat? If you can beat – or bear – the queues, don’t miss Mannion & Co on Blake Street, Brew & Brownie on Museum Street for breakfast, lunch or supper, and, of course, Betty’s. It’s a city bursting at the seams with tea and scone opportunities. And don’t forget to visit... the North Yorkshire countryside. The towns of Helmsley and Thirsk are nearby; and magical Fountains Abbey is only 45 minutes away. Prince or pauper? Not a cheap treat, but worth it for location and space. It sleeps four and the minimum stay is three nights, from £452 in low season (nationaltrust.org.uk) Amelia and her family travelled from London to York on the high-speed LNER (lner.co.uk). Tickets from Kings Cross cost from £18 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.