The Bad sex award gets more coverage than any other literary prize, bar the Booker and the Nobel. It generates irresistibly clickable headlines, as hundreds of publications hastily type up an introductory paragraph of stern disapproval, then run as much of each nominated sex scene as they can legally get away with. And why wouldn’t they? Past nominees have included Stephen King, Salman Rushdie and Philip Roth, while winners range from Tom Wolfe and Norman Mailer to Morrissey and Melvyn Bragg. I was nominated for the Bad sex award last year, for a scene in my novel Connect that was about three-and-a-half pages long. The extract that most media ran was about 20% of that. The part most people shared was even smaller: “He sucks on the hard nipple. He has never done this before, and yet; no, wait, of course, it is totally familiar. The first thing he ever did.” For millions of people, that fragment of a fragment of a scene is the only piece of my writing they’ve ever read: nothing I’ve written has been published more widely. The Sun ran an article that described me and my fellow shortlistees (an all-male list that included Haruki Murakami and James Frey) as “perpetrators of some pretty shocking descriptive writing”. Jezebel went with the headline: “Ban Men … From Writing About Sex.” And so on, and on, from time zone to time zone, around the world. From the Daily Mail to Entertainment Weekly, Mexico’s El Universal to Slovenia’s Mladina, the world’s press gleefully dumped on us. On social media, meanwhile, people shared a veritable waterfall of vomiting gifs, and tweets along the lines of: “I’m never having sex with a straight man again, these are AWFUL. Also I feel like Julian Gough and Haruki Murakami should be on some sort of register?” In the Pornhub age, there is no demand for sex in novels. My editors often urge me to leave it out entirely So, basically, the Bad sex award is the anti-Booker: you lose rather than gain sales; there isn’t even a real prize; and you now have a colossal new global audience, who had never previously heard of you and now think you are a terrible writer and a worse human being. The traditional advice given to writers who have been misrepresented by the media is: never complain, never explain. That made some sense when a bad review existed for a single day in a geographically isolated newspaper, and, within 24 hours, was being shat on by a cheerful budgie. But I don’t think that works any more, in a world where hundreds of news outlets can, in a single night, overwhelm every thoughtful piece by anyone who has actually read one of your books over the previous two decades. It is possible that the Bad sex award had a point when it was established back in 1993. After the collapse of Britain’s obscenity laws, and before the internet, authors were occasionally encouraged to add some gratuitous sex in order to sell books, giving us the bonkbuster. But that era is long gone. In the Pornhub age, when every toddler poking at Dad’s smartphone is just three seconds away from accidentally watching a donkey mount the pope, there is no demand for sex in novels. My editors often urge me to leave it out entirely. And there are valid reasons for their caution. When we read good immersive fiction, anything that happens to the point-of-view character feels like it’s happening to us. Usually, that’s fine: a reader who dislikes olives will not throw a book across the room because the main character puts an olive in his mouth. But replace that olive with a nipple, clitoris or penis, and the writer risks triggering the reader’s sexual-disgust reflex; a hardwired neurological response that can very easily send a book flying. The places we can talk honestly about sex and sexuality – are shrinking So why do we write sex when we know it is risky? Because leaving sex out of fiction falsifies our picture of humanity. If fiction can’t address life’s most difficult, complex and interesting areas, then why write or read it? This is why I find the Bad sex award, at this point in its history, in bad faith. Its basic premise – that authors are adding unnecessary and lazy sex to increase sales – is not just wrong, it’s the reverse of the truth. The award very deliberately avoids shortlisting actual pornography or erotica and instead targets authors who are trying to be honest about desire and sex, however distasteful the results may be. It deliberately and successfully encourages the worst, and dumbest, misreading of fiction; the conflating of authors with their characters in order to publicly shame them. This is regressive cyber-Victorianism in progressive drag. I’m not saying all the books picked are great literature. I’m saying that, with no context and reframed like this, judgment of them is impossible. Even I wouldn’t like to stumble on that part of my novel out of context. But then no one would, or should, because sex scenes in books aren’t just “sex scenes”, any more than a meal in a Jane Austen novel is an “eating scene”. By the time we get to that part of Connect, we’ve had 500 pages to get to know Colt, a socially awkward teenage boy who doesn’t like to touch or be touched, and Sasha, the young woman he is sharing his first sexual experience with. That a reader wouldn’t think his thoughts in that moment is completely irrelevant to the truth of the scene. I wouldn’t, either. But he would. In many ways, of course, the Bad sex award is a flashy but unimportant cultural sideshow. It may damage the sales of a few peculiar books, but it doesn’t end careers. Some may say that straight white males with publishing deals are the most privileged of the privileged, and deserve their shaming. But you can turn that on its head: if even straight white males, often with major publishers behind them, are going to be humiliated for writing about sex, then is anyone going to be able to at all? Because right now, the internet’s sexual commons – the places we can talk honestly about sex and sexuality – are shrinking. Tumblr has outlawed sexual content, leaving a huge community of sexual outsiders and artists, many of them LGBT and gender non-conforming, homeless. Facebook has banned talking about sex, with the intent to ban soliciting and pornography; the effect is to ban individuality. All this year, coordinated campaigns – both religious and secular – have been using social media’s new reporting tools to force the removal of accounts run by women who work in adult entertainment, or those who fight for the rights of such women. Under such pressure, Instagram recently deleted the accounts of more than 1,300 adult performers, despite their images showing no nudity or sex. Offline, in China, a woman writing under the pseudonym Lady Tianyi is one year into a 10-year sentence, for writing about the wrong kind of sex – gay – in her self-published books. But the problem has spread far beyond sex. A single clumsily expressed political statement, joke or scientific opinion, reframed and misrepresented, can now call into existence a mob who want to destroy you. As an experiment, over the last couple of years, I have taken to following ordinary people on Twitter who have been attacked and shamed for a single tweet. As you get to know them, the tweet almost always makes sense, in the context of their lives. You still might not agree with it, but you will understand it. A woman who said something that seemed aggressively dismissive of men turns out, once you sit quietly with her life for a few months, to have been sexually trafficked as a child. A man’s appallingly insensitive tweet turns out to have been a joke about such tweets, made to friends who understood it as a joke. A woman mocked for the stupidity of a single comment turns out to be dirt poor, uneducated, lost, alone; her friends dying, month by month, of opioid overdoses. None of them deserves mockery, and yet they’ve been dogpiled by thousands of strangers, an experience that usually terrifies them, and can cost them their reputation and livelihood. Do you really want a world where every line you’ve ever uttered, every joke you’ve ever made, can be dug up, stripped of context, flipped in meaning, and used as evidence against you, in an instant trial with no appeal? I wrote a strange, difficult, ugly and beautiful book about love and connection; about technology and humanity; about mothers and sons. Hard to categorise, hard to market, hard to sell. It took me seven years, on and off. It’s more than 500 pages long. Read the first few pages in your local bookshop or library. If you hate it at any point, fine. Stop. But if you like it, keep going. If you keep going to the end, there is a scene between a young man and a young woman in a bedroom. I think you can handle it. • Julian Gough is the author of Connect (Picador).