Years ago, a friend’s over-enthusiastic experimentation with gold eyeshadow made me dismiss this metallic hue. There are, of course, less extrovert ways to wear gold eyeshadow. This AW19 Michael Kors look, created by Dick Page, proves that applying glistening gold to the inner corners of the eye and half of the inner lid works for two reasons. It is a great way to take the yawn out of a smoky eye and – note to friend – it won’t make people stare at you for all the wrong reasons. 1. Conceal and Hydrate Concealer £7, revolutionbeauty.com 2. BBB Ultimate Arch Definer £16, lookfantastic.com 3. Revlon Ultra HD Vinyl Lip Polish £8.99, boots.com 4. MAC Art Library Palette Nude Model £39, maccosmetics.com 5. MAC I Like 2 Watch Dazzleshadow £16.50 maccosmetics.com There is a war going on in the beauty industry. On one side there is the multi-step, multi-ingredient, multi-product approach to skincare; on the other there are those who believe in the power of multitasking products. While I agree that there are far too many products on the market, the super-effective, multi-hyphenated skincare product – It cleans! It exfoliates! It does your tax returns! – literally and metaphorically speaking, I don’t buy. Many of these products, particularly in the cleansing category, are wide of the mark. Every so often, however, there are surprises, like this booster. The purpose of a booster is to boost the performance of your other products, but it can also be used on its own. I love this one because it has 10% azelaic acid, which fades discolouration and post-acne marks, helps with premature ageing and is great on rosacea-prone skin. On appearance it’s white, thick and unyielding, but in reality it dissolves easily into the skin. While it does everything it says on the tin, you will have to use other products, too. That’s simply the reality. So keep that in mind the next time someone tries to convince you about a product that will sing, dance, take your kids to school, feed the dog and give you the best skin ever. It doesn’t exist. Paula’s Choice 10% Azelaic Booster, £37 paulaschoice.co.uk A classic vintage Every cool girl’s wardrobe has a Bella Freud 1970 sweater. Now you can add the candle. This frankincense, musk and myrrh concoction encapsulates ‘the smokiness of a rock star’s den’. Candle, £95, bellafreud.com Down memory lane Chewing Gum, Lollipop and Pencil Shavings are the names (and scents) of the playful but high-quality candles in a line inspired by the designer’s childhood memories. Anya Hindmarch Smells x MatchesFashion, £50 each, matchesfashion.com Waxing lyrical . Louis Vuitton’s candle range – I love En Mai, a blackcurrant, peach and galbanum offering – perfectly exemplifies how a humble block of wax can be elevated to an objet d’art. Louis Vuitton En Mai, £160, louisvuitton.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.