Best performance? By default, probably the 8-0 win over Watford – but we played our best football against Spurs in that (incredibly unjust) 2-2 draw at home. We tore them apart. And the worst? The 2-0 loss at home against Wolves. Shambolic defending, misplaced passes, individual errors – that performance had it all. Happy with the manager? Despite the three losses, Pep hasn’t done too much wrong – other than the team selection against Wolves, and failing to sign a centre-half in the summer. Lots of City fans will point at Txiki and say he’s the one responsible for recruitment, but Pep still has ultimate sign-off. He could have developed the team more, too: David Silva has played too often; Foden hasn’t played nearly enough. Why I love … Ederson Not only is he the best keeper with his feet I think we’ve ever seen, he’s a world‑class shot-stopper too. His saves against West Ham and Everton were incredible. How we could have done with him at Anfield … What is “the City way”? Never being afraid of taking risks. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Vincent Kompany. How are you feeling about VAR? It’s managed to make everything worse. In its current iteration, it’s an absolute shambles. Funniest moment so far … Pep’s antics on the touchline at Anfield. • Lloyd Scragg NinetyThreeTwenty.com @lloyd_scragg Best performance? Brighton at home. Fast, entertaining – we could have hit them for six if our finishing was better. And the worst? Newcastle away. We saw plenty of the ball but still couldn’t break down a really average team. Happy with the manager? We know how Ole wants to set up, but the squad lacks quality and leadership. His next two transfer windows will be pivotal. Why I love … Daniel James Such a positive impact: definitely the bargain of the season. There’s so much more to his game than just pace. What is “the Manchester United way”? Attacking football and developing young players. Both are slowly returning. Hopefully Ole will be given time and resources: some Reds forget how dull the football was here under Mourinho. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Sir Alex would get the best out of this bunch, and deal with the overblown egos. As Roy Keane said in April, there are still too many “bluffers”: Fergie would never have tolerated them. How are you feeling about VAR? We’ve benefited from it this season but it kills the atmosphere. I’m not a fan. Funniest moment so far … Pep Guardiola’s two-finger dance at Anfield. • Shaun O’Donnell Observer reader Best performance? The win over Man United: organised, determined, gritty. Matty Longstaff’s fairytale winner reminded us how magical football can be. And the worst? The 3-1 defeat to Norwich. It was shambolic and aimless, the antithesis of Benítez-style football. Happy with the manager? It was hard to have confidence in Bruce after that Norwich defeat and truly awful showings against Brighton and Wolves, but there have been positives, too. And he’s not to blame for our chronic lack of investment in the final third. Why I love … Allan Saint-Maximin The jury’s out on his end product but he definitely gets fans off their seats. What is “the Newcastle way”? Fast-flowing, scintillating football with a talismanic striker banging in the goals. We’re a long way from that. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Kevin Keegan: player/manager, ideally. A man who could galvanise an entire city, never mind just a football club. How are you feeling about VAR? It’s been positive for us, so fine – but it’s hardly been a seamless introduction. Funniest moment so far … Matt “Radgie” Ritchie congratulating Christian Atsu for a fine interception by booting him up the backside. • David and Richard Holmes Observer readers Best performance? The win against Manchester City: the obvious pick of a fairly rotten bunch. To think we went home from that so full of belief and hope … And the worst? A few to choose from, but it has to be the 2-0 home defeat by Watford. The 5-1 by Villa runs it close but against the Hornets we were so devoid of confidence, ideas and belief. Happy with the manager? Farke has done OK with the hand he’s been dealt. A horrendous injury crisis has limited his options, as did the lowest Premier League transfer kitty known to man. Why I love … Tim Krul A leader, a mentor to our youngsters and a shot-stopper extraordinaire. What is “the Norwich way”? Patient, progressive, passing football. The official “mission” is to serve fans and the community, and it does that well. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Darren Huckerby, in his pomp, roaring down that left wing. If you can arrange that, that’d be awesome. How are you feeling about VAR? I’m fine with the principle but not the way it’s being used. “Clear and obvious” has to be the bottom line and the decisions have to be owned by the ref and not Stockley Park. Funniest moment so far … Guardiola thanking Michael Oliver “sooo much” at Anfield. • Gary Gowers NorwichCity.myfootballwriter.com @gary_gowers Best performance? The demolition of Burnley: our most complete performance. They didn’t have a sniff and we cut through them at will. And the worst? The 0-0 draw at Watford was a grind, although the home defeat to Southampton hasn’t aged well. Happy with the manager? Wilder’s stock just keeps rising. He’s a major part of our great start to this season. Why I love … David McGoldrick Still waiting for that first top-flight goal, but he’s a dream to watch. His ability to drop into midfield areas and allow other players to burst past him have caused havoc for more than a few opponents. What is “the Sheffield United way”? Blending tactical and positional fluidity – yes, there’s our left wing-back playing centre-forward – with never-say-die defending. It’s what got us promoted and it’s why we have 17 points after 12 games. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? One of my only regrets is that we never got to see Harry Maguire powering down the wing in Wilder’s side. How are you feeling about VAR? Even accepting that its decisions are correct, it’s an awful experience. There have been times where I’ve barely celebrated goals because the referee’s immediate signal is something needs to be checked. Funniest moment so far … Making pundits look silly. We were told we “weren’t taking the Premier League seriously”, that our style would be “annihilated,” and that we’d be “worse than Huddersfield”. So far … not so much. And our reply to Liverpool fans boasting about European success raised a few smiles, too: “Champions of League One, you’ll never sing that.” • Ben Meakin UpTheBlades.com @bladespod Best performance? A limited pool to choose from. With the benefit of hindsight I guess the win at Sheffield United looks better than the run-of-the-mill victory against a newly promoted side it felt like at the time. An entertaining game (much better than the 1-0 scoreline suggests), a clean sheet and a Goal of the Month winner. And the worst? Leicester: pathetic from first whistle to last. The sum total of three fouls in the entire 90 minutes is probably the most eye-opening stat. That and the nine goals. Happy with the manager? He’s playing a mediocre hand pretty badly. Chopping and changing the defence, playing players out of position … if we were to have one whole match with square pegs in square holes, I think we’d actually stand a chance. Why I love … Sofiane Boufal Genuinely exciting. He’ll take on players, then beat them again just for good measure. Some say that’s frustrating, but with such slim pickings we’ll take what entertainment we can get. What is “the Southampton way”? Buying bang average players, giving them more money than their talents deserve, and then not being able to sell them on because of that salary. Yeah, this has all gone south pretty quickly… Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? A defender with stature. Van Dijk – if he bothered to put in more than 10% effort this time – or Dean Richards. How are you feeling about VAR? Perhaps our one success story this season. By my reckoning, opponents have had six goals disallowed. But, quite frankly, nobody should be remotely surprised that Mike Riley is making a complete pig’s ear of how it’s implemented in this country. The staggering arrogance of PGMOL to think that they can do it their own way without properly testing rather than do it the same way everyone else across the world has been using it is incredible. Funniest moment so far … At Fratton Park, an upset Pompey fan getting involved in a full Benny Hill chase with stewards round the North Stand. • Steve Grant Total Saints Podcast @SteveGrant1983 Best performance? The 4-0 win in Belgrade. It felt like a new beginning. And the worst? After a hairline VAR decision had ruled out a deserved Sheffield United equaliser in Poch’s final game, our players let them amble the length of the pitch to score another. Shocking. Happy with the manager? The run to the Champions League final glossed over the need for a major reboot – but whether Mourinho is the right man for the job is the subject of heated debate. No trophy for Poch but oh, what a journey. We are bereft. Why I love … Danny Rose Always gives everything. And the fans will never forget that volleyed screamer against Arsenal on full debut back in 2010. What is “the Tottenham way”? Ah, glory, glory; “doing things in style, with a flourish”. And if we can marry that with some hard-nosed pragmatism and a title or two, then hallelujah! Over to you José. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Dave Mackay – described by George Best as his hardest opponent. How are you feeling about VAR? Takes too long, keeps fans in the dark and decisions are still suspect. Whatever happened to “clear and obvious”? Funniest moment so far … Shortly after posting news of Poch’s sacking, the club website crashed. ”An unexpected error seems to have occurred,” it said. Indeed. • Richard Barnes @barnesrichard Best performance? Not a wide range to choose from, but the win at Norwich being, you know, a win and everything has to be the highlight to date. Not least because it hasn’t (yet) been tarnished by anything that followed. Honourable mention for the draw at Spurs, which deserved rather more. And the worst? Being caned 8-0 at Manchester City. A perfect storm of unfavourable circumstance, from the early undefendable opener to the fragile confidence of the side, to the ghosts of the Cup final. A long way back from that. Happy with the manager? Flores was brought in to sort the defence and has certainly done that – if we’re not quite miserly then we’re certainly credible. Three goals shipped in five now, a dodgy one at Spurs and two to free-scoring Chelsea. What we need now is a goal threat. Troy returning will help, with Sarr and Welbeck to come. Why I love … Daryl Janmaat Has kept his chin up when others’ have dropped. A rhinoceros of a right-back. What is “the Watford way”? On the pitch there have been many different Watford ways, and more than one successful. Off the pitch it’s defined by representing and being part of the community, and yes, we’re doing that very well. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Some of Luther Blissett’s bloody mindedness up front would be helpful. How are you feeling about VAR? Tired. “Getting decisions right” has always been secondary to not screwing up the game in the process for me, and the latter always felt likely. Funniest moment so far … The relative failures of the likes of United and Spurs – though I’d almost rather they started stuffing people to separate out the morass of averageness in mid-table. We need some poor teams to chase. • Matt Rowson BHappy.wordpress.com @mattrowson Best performance? The comfortable 2-0 win over Manchester United. It looked like Anderson, Lanzini, Haller and Yarmolenko would trouble a lot of teams and we could have a shot at the top six. Sadly it’s been downhill ever since. And the worst? The home defeat to Newcastle. Roberto was at fault for two goals, poor old Zabaleta got embarrassed for speed by Saint-Maximin and we let Voldemort/Shelvey score. Burnley away was almost as bad. Happy with the manager? He’s been unlucky to lose Fabianski, but is increasingly under pressure. Is he worth his £8m a year? He needs to deliver some rollickings, find a decent reserve goalkeeper, stabilise a dodgy defence, get Haller firing again, restore Anderson’s confidence and find a role for Fornals. Why I love … Lucasz Fabianski With every game Roberto plays, Fabianski looks better and better. What is “the West Ham way”? Playing attacking football, beating good teams, losing to bad teams, and being terrorised by Chris Wood. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? A rampaging Billy Bonds. He’d gee up our side of fancy dan playmakers. How are you feeling about VAR? There’s no common sense. Refs should go to the monitors themselves. If it’s a case of being offside by a big toe or an unintentional handball that the naked eye can’t see, don’t give it. Funniest moment so far … Southampton’s chant at 9-0 down: “Manchester City, we’re coming for you.” • Pete May Author of Goodbye to Boleyn hammersintheheart.blogspot.co.uk Best performance? Man City away, rounding off maybe the best week in my lifetime – beating Watford to get our first win, Besiktas away in Europe and then beating the champions. The game plan was spot on. And the worst? Chelsea at home. I’ve never seen us look so bad at the back under Nuno. Happy with the manager? It’s amazing that he’s taken some flak from some Wolves fans after a couple of defeats. He’s doing an incredible job. Why I love … Raúl Jiménez £30m was an absolute bargain. And he hasn’t even hit top form yet. What is “the Wolves way”? Under Nuno we’re a team who will compete, stay in the game, and then hit you in the second half once we’ve worked our way into the game. Our second-half record speaks for itself. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? With Willy Boly out, Billy Wright could definitely slot right in. How are you feeling about VAR? I was in favour, but now have no faith in it being used properly. Plus we seem to be on the wrong side of it a lot so far… Funniest moment so far … The expression on the Kosovo manager’s face in September when he realised his half-time tunnel rant during the England game had been caught on camera. Like a scene from The Office. • Louie Silvani ThroughTheThirds.blogspot.com @louiesilvani4 • Part one: Arsenal to Liverpool