The final day in Mount Maunganui began with Stuart Broad telling BBC Test Match Special listeners before play he did not just believe England could save the first Test against New Zealand, he expected it. Come 4.42pm the No 11 was strolling out with bat in hand. England were 197 for nine – still 65 runs behind with 21.5 overs left – and the hosts were hunting the final wicket that would ensure a 1-0 lead in a two-Test series. Broad lasted one ball. Neil Wagner crashed a fast full toss into his pads from around the wicket and England’s new era under Chris Silverwood had begun with an all too familiar innings defeat when considering similar such recent reversals in Barbados, Auckland, Sydney, Perth, Chennai and Mumbai. For Wagner the winning moment wrapped up figures of five for 44 – the 33-year-old left-armer’s eighth Test five-wicket haul – and New Zealand could celebrate a winning start to life at Bay Oval, their ninth Test venue. This was the home’s side 11th victory in their past 16 on home soil (during which time they have lost once) and, in keeping with the resourceful character traits that have taken them to No 2 in the world, they did so without their spearhead Trent Boult on the final day because of a side injury. From the moment England collapsed on the second morning from 276 for four to 353 all out they lost control of the Test and a hammering resulted. They made early inroads into New Zealand’s lineup but BJ Watling’s 205 from 11 hours glued to the crease, in a total of 615 for nine from 201 chastening overs, was their latest brutal lesson in batting and batting and batting some more. There was collective excellence in New Zealand’s execution, too. Mitchell Santner’s maiden Test century was one half of the spirit-sapping seventh‑wicket stand of 261 from 83.2 overs with Watling. He also picked up three wickets on the fourth evening before performing a flying catch to remove Ollie Pope on the final day. Then there was Colin de Grandhomme, the all-rounder who combined with Watling for a partnership of 119, making 65, and twice removed Joe Root with the ball. Thirteen runs made it Root’s worst Test as captain when he has batted twice and his average has dropped below 40 in the role for the first time. In all a grim start to England’s new era pointed to a team some way short of producing remorseless batting displays or taking 20 wickets on flat batting tracks. It is already apparent Jofra Archer, whose day was marked by a tweet that he had received racial abuse as he was leaving the field, is still finding his feet at Test level. Root was unrepentant over his use of the fast bowler during England’s 201 overs in the dirt and though there was praise for Archer’s efforts after his 42 overs, one for 107, it came with the slightly troubling suggestion that Root believes the quick’s 90mph-plus speeds can be simply turned on and off. “He’s got all the attributes that can be very successful here and he’s got to learn that sometimes you’ve got to make sure every spell counts,” Root said. “You really have got to run in and use that extra pace to your advantage. I think there are certain spells where he can just unleash a little bit more. That will come with experience and time.” Asked whether his batting has been affected by the captaincy, in a year where he averages 27.4, Root said: “I’m not looking too deeply into marrying them up together. I’ve had a bit of a rough time, but I’m working extremely hard on it and sometimes it doesn’t always come that easy to you. The fact I’m captain at the same time is an easy excuse to use as a player.” Root’s dismissal an hour into day five rather summed up England’s predicament. They had begun on 55 for three and, given a deficit of 207, did not necessarily require just blocking: runs had a value, too. For a team with attacking instincts, but under new orders to bat time, it all seemed too confusing and on a previously dead surface now starting to play tricks, Root prodded meekly to gully. There were echoes of the failed first innings after lunch when the wicket of Ben Stokes kickstarted another four-wicket burst. Once again England’s vice-captain was wiped out by Tim Southee, ending 26 overs of diligent work with Joe Denly by chopping on to his stumps on 28 and then erupting in self-admonishment. Wagner then twisted the knife, replacing Southee and wiping out the next three batsmen with hostile spell from around the wicket. Only Denly could consider himself unlucky, his 214-minute stay ended by one that reared off the surface and lightly glanced the glove on the way through to Watling as he shouldered arms. Pope’s dismissal for six was more galling, reaching to slap a slow full toss to the flying Santner at short cover, but Jos Buttler dutifully made the youngster feel better: he left Wagner’s first delivery with the second new ball and heard it crash into the base of off stump for a duck. Archer (30) and Sam Curran (29 not out) did produce a gutsy ninth-wicket stand of 52 but Wagner charged in once more after tea to snuff out the resistance. More pace could be coming England’s way in Hamilton. Boult’s injury means the locals pining for the fiery Lockie Ferguson to make his debut may get their wish.