On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah examined coverage of the impeachment hearings, in particular the reviews on Fox News. In a series of clips, Fox News commentators stressed that Americans don’t care about Ukraine, don’t know anything about it, couldn’t even find it on a map. “So according to Fox News, Americans are too dumb to follow these impeachment proceedings?” Noah asked, mocking the network anchors: “The word impeachment is very confusing – maybe we should call it a presidential boo-boo, would that help?” Fox News snores over the impeachment hearings, calls them unsexy, and straight up tries to hypnotize their viewers into ignoring the whole thing. pic.twitter.com/X7e0D1sx9u “You know what’s funny? When it was Hillary’s scandal, Fox News was like, ‘Now as we all know, Benghazi isn’t just home to Libya’s signature dish bazin, it’s also a hotbed of support for Ansar al-Sharia, especially around Tahrir Square, this is a big thing in Libya!’ But then, when it’s a Donald Trump scandal, all of a sudden they’re like, ‘What’s a Ukraine?’” The strategy underestimated viewers’ intelligence, Noah argued: “Look, even if people don’t understand every aspect about the Ukraine scandal, that doesn’t mean that they can’t still grasp its importance.” But after the first day of public hearings, “Fox has already written off the entire process. Which really shows you – they have no intention of being objective at all. They sound less like journalists and more like mean girls trying to sabotage someone’s sweet 16.” Noah also criticized the network for its other excuse to write off the hearings: it’s not bingeworthy TV. The Fox News host Jesse Watters, for example, complained impeachment is “not a sexy scandal”. “These hearings are investigating whether the president of the United States committed high crimes or misdemeanors,” Noah corrected. “So they’re supposed to be serious; it’s not about excitement. Impeachment is like a family reunion – if it’s sexy, something has gone horribly wrong.” A day after the first public hearings in the House impeachment inquiry, Stephen Colbert examined the fallout according to various media outlets, and took umbrage with some faulting the process for being too boring. NBC, for instance, tweeted that the hearings “lacked the pizazz necessary to capture public attention”. “Yeah, that’s what I’m looking for in deeply troubling congressional hearings: zazz,” joked Colbert. “Since when is pizazz the benchmark of trustworthiness? I don’t want a pilot who says: ‘Attention passengers, we’ll be touching down in Denver in just a moment but first: barrel roll, barrel roll, shimmy shimmy.’” Still, now that the hearings are televised, Trump is making an effort to woo Republicans; Colbert cited a USA Today story on the president’s outreach to GOP congressmen – hosting movie nights, engaging in small talk about the World Series and making phone calls to drum up support. He even signed a Trump board game for one Republican lawmaker, “and for those of you who aren’t familiar with the Trump board game”, said Colbert, “it’s like Monopoly, except nobody has as much money as they say they do, and everyone should go directly to jail”. The only late-night host to address the latest school shooting in Santa Clarita, California, was James Corden. “This morning we were so saddened to see the news of another school shooting unfolding,” he said, noting that the shooting took place not far from his studio in Los Angeles. Two students, aged 14 and 16, were killed, and several students remain hospitalized. “We’re horrified,” said Corden. “Another place of innocence, learning and education has become instead a site of violence and trauma. Our hearts break for the families.” Corden also had a message for American lawmakers. “Whilst we continue to elect politicians without the moral courage to address gun laws, these tragedies are destined to keep repeating themselves. Tonight we grieve for the families of the victims and for the community that’s been shattered. Tonight, we send our love to Santa Clarita.” And on Late Night, Seth Meyers also responded to the NBC tweet on the impeachment hearings lacking necessary “pizazz”. “What do you mean it lacked pizazz?” Meyers said. “The only politicians who have ever been entertaining were the ones in Hamilton. What do you want them to do, show up with their own backup dancers like they’re in a chorus line?” There were actually important revelations in the hearings, Meyers said. For example, Bill Taylor, the former ambassador to Ukraine, testified that one of his staffers overheard a phone call between the ambassador to the EU, Gordon Sondland, and Trump about the pressure applied to the country to investigate Trump’s rivals. “That’s right, Trump was so loud that people heard him on the other end of the call,” Meyers said. “I’m shocked he didn’t just go all the way and take the call while he was on national TV: ‘Oh hold on, let me take this – oh good, yeah, the extortion? And the bribery? That’s fantastic. Should we throw another crime in there, maybe like fraud? Alright, fantastic. OK gotta go, press conference.’” When asked at a press conference, Trump said he didn’t recall the phone call with Sondland “not at all, not even a little bit”. “You know Trump is lying when he goes overboard like that,” Meyers said. “It’s like if you asked someone, did you rob that bank? Most people would say, of course not. Trump would say: ‘I’ve never even been inside a bank. I keep all my money stuffed inside my coat – that’s why it looks like that.’”