Marie-Elsa Bragg, 54, is an author, Anglican priest, therapist and duty chaplain at Westminster Abbey. She is half-French and half-Cumbrian and grew up in London with her father, the broadcaster Melvyn Bragg. She wrote her debut novel, Towards Mellbreak, in 2017. Her forthcoming book, Sleeping Letters, is a memoir addressed to both her parents about her mother, Marie-Elisabeth Roche, who took her own life when Marie-Elsa was six years old. The book is written – in part – as a series of unsent letters to her mother and father. It is also a description of the ritual of the eucharist. What was the starting point for Sleeping Letters?I was commissioned to write another novel but I went into a silent retreat and this is what came out. I thought, Well, I’ve just got to do this. I didn’t know if I wanted my editor to see it but then they kept asking and I felt there was something universal about what I was writing. I’ve watched so many people go through grief now, and I’ve also done a lot of funerals, and there really is no shame to suffering. It’s actually quite beautiful. If you allow yourself to still love, even when you’ve had incredible grief, then all of you comes through it somehow. You write in the book that you would like to tell your mother that she has always been with you “like a scent”. But you say you have often turned away from her “from fear of what happened”. What made you turn back?Love. It’s got to be love. And defiantly refusing to accept that pain can be the end of the story. It’s more than hope, it’s a refusal to let the difficult things have the last word. There’s something about getting older that means you have a longer view about what forgiveness is and how we really heal. It is often the case that people find it easier to give forgiveness than to receive it. The form of Sleeping Letters is unusual – it’s a memoir made up of prose, poetry, religious reflections and letters. You call it a confession – why?Because it was written in the ritualistic atmosphere of a silent retreat. But there’s also something about facing my own pain, which has to be a confession about the things I irrationally believe I’ve done wrong. We all collude somehow in even the most difficult situations because we don’t know what to do. But I feel very different having written the book – it was a question of confessing that pain to myself. I know it’s there and I feel ready to bite on it now. You have said that writing the book has been very cathartic. In what ways?When you live with grief, you can hide parts of yourself from yourself and often those parts are the ones longing to see that person again. We often just don’t know what to do with them, so they’re just stored. Living with unanswered questions can feel like you’re holding your breath because you don’t have the other person answering them. But even in a relationship with someone who is alive, we don’t fully understand how we are encountering each other. I was able to go through that pain threshold to talk to both my parents. Has your father read Sleeping Letters?Yes, he read it in the summer. I felt a mixture of nervousness and also so much love. Everything I have possibly found from my soul to give to my parents is in the book. It’s something he’s never been able to hear and is continually tortured by. I genuinely wrote it to both of them in the hope I could say: “Hey, I’m your daughter and this is what I’ve found and I have the courage to speak to you now.” It was very emotional when he read it, but what’s nice is that over the last couple of months, he’s reading it again and beginning to find it healing. He’s 80 years old and seeing dear friends die so I really wanted to be able to give it to him. When I was reading your book, I had both Frieda Hughes and Emily Berry in mind, two poets whose mothers took their own lives and have written about that loss. Did their poetry give you a confidence to write about your mother?I do feel that there is a really interesting movement of women poets now, Emily Berry being one of them, where we are feeling a freedom of being able to talk in whatever form is natural to us. We’re neither feeling conformed by a sonnet nor so rebellious that we never write anything like that. So I was able to take the eucharist, which in its history has been deeply patriarchal in its structure and in its manner of use and breathe with authenticity without feeling ashamed of being a woman. I feel very companioned with poets such as Emily Berry and Alice Oswald. Who are the writers who have inspired you most?Personally, I feel very [much] in a line of conversation with Sylvia Plath and Virginia Woolf. When I was younger, I was nervous of those writers because their lives ended in the same way as my mother’s. The question for me has been: how does a woman go deeply into creativity and survive? Part of my letter to my mother is saying that I’m really going to dive into this. I think I’ve found a form which helps me survive. Which book or author do you always return to?Mrs Dalloway, because it has this web of reality in it that I find comforting and such delicately drawn characters. You have layers upon layers of Woolf’s sense that we are all affecting each other whether we know it or not. It’s funny, when you are duty chaplin at Westminster Abbey, you go and live there for one or two weeks a year. Having always been obsessed with Mrs Dalloway, I thought what a lark to be sleeping near Big Ben! But by 11pm when it chimed, I thought: “Oh my God, I’m never going to sleep!” You’re an Anglican priest. How do you balance your clerical duties with being creative?I find the craft of priesthood deeply creative. I’m about to write a sermon for the church I work with in Golders Green and I have to have an intuitive sense of what that congregation needs. You meet people who have made terrible mistakes or are in terrible trouble and may never get out of it but they can be inspiring. Pastoral love is very real to me. • Sleeping Letters by Marie-Elsa Bragg is published by Vintage (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15