Australia may be forced to accept three Islamic State fighters in Turkish custody as Ankara begins repatriating foreign fighters to their homelands. Turkey has so far sent up to 10 fighters back to Britain, the US and Germany, saying it cannot continue to house them, even as the governments have rejected taking their fighters back and have cancelled passports. The Australians are among 959 foreign IS fighters and families in Turkish custody in northern Syria. Turkey’s ambassador to Australia, Korhan Karakoc, told News Corp that Ankara wants Canberra to co-ordinate the return of the men. Efforts were under way to repatriate “a few” suspected Australian Isis prisoners, whom Karakoc was unable to identify. But he said Turkey wants the Australian government to co-ordinate their return. “Turkey, at this stage, is not in a position to take a unilateral step because we have to co-ordinate, at the end of the day,” he said. “It really requires some formalities. The Australian side should be willing to accept them. “We certainly want to send them away so you can handle them here in their country. But it would take some time.” He said the Australian government was reluctant to take the men back. Karakoc’s comments came as the ABC reported the United States was offering to rescue the Australian families of Islamic State fighters trapped in Syria. US counter-terrorism official Nathan Sales said “military assets” could be involved in rescuing the Australian families. “We need to get these kids, their parents and the fighters out of Syria and back to their countries of origin,” he said. “Our offer to other countries is ‘we are prepared to help and we hope you’ll accept that offer’. “Leaving these folks in camps in the desert or in ad-hoc prison facilities is not going to solve the problem, it’s going to kick the can down the road.” The Australian government has consistently opposed any operation to rescue Australians trapped by the worsening conflict, saying it would not jeopardise further Australian lives in any rescue mission. The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, has said some of the Australians in the camp were “hardcore” and “have the potential and capacity to come back here and cause a mass casualty event”. “So I don’t think it should come as a surprise when we say we’re not going to send our soldiers to rescue people of this nature.” Sales said the US had repatriated six adults who had since been charged, and 14 children who had begun rehabilitation. There are around 60 Australian women and children being held in camps in northern Syria. Save the Children’s director of policy and international programs, Mat Tinkler, welcomed the US offer. “The Australian government should take responsibility, immediately accept this offer and bring the Australian women and children home,” Tinkler said. “The Australian government has run out of excuses not to repatriate its citizens.”