When George the Poet turned down an MBE, he joined a long tradition of cultural figures who refused the honour because of the British empire’s legacy. Howard Gayle, Liverpool’s first black footballer, declined becoming a Member of the British Empire in 2016, saying: “My ancestors would be turning in their graves after how empire and colonialism had enslaved them”. In 1977, Ken Loach said he couldn’t accept because the British empire was a “monument of exploitation and conquest”. Benjamin Zephaniah went for the pithy “No way Mr Blair, no way Mrs Queen. I am profoundly anti-empire” when he was offered an OBE in 2003. But George the Poet (real name George Mpanga) – who rose to prominence first as a spoken-word poet, then a rapper and, more recently, a podcaster – went further. He wouldn’t be able to accept the honour, which he refused in May 2019, because, he said, Britain raped his ancestral country of Uganda. “Your forefathers grabbed my motherland, pinned her down and took turns. They did that every day for a couple hundred years and then left her to treat her own burns,” he said on his award-winning poetry podcast – Have You Heard George’s Podcast?. Less than a week after the story broke, Mpanga is in Los Angeles on a business trip, and has no regrets over his decision or calling the British Empire “pure evil”. “I think we need language that addresses the situation in a way that is truthful,” he says. “To dance around the subject, and to imply that I’m turning down an MBE for reasons that need to be handled with politeness … that would put me in danger of undermining the situation.” Mpanga says he couldn’t pass up an opportunity to make people “really understand how damaging the legacy of British colonialism has been on the African continent”. Mpanga delivered the message via his podcast, which has become a sensation by “pushing podcasting’s limits”. Mixing narrative fiction, with contemporary news and rap, it won in five categories at the British Podcast Awards and came about after Mpanga decided to step back from a music career, which had seen him shortlisted in the BBC Sound of 2015 poll and sign a deal with Universal. Despite his success – the 28-year-old, who grew up on an estate in Harlesden, north-west London before going to Kings College, Cambridge – decided to have a two-year hiatus. He had become disillusioned by the way the industry required him to curtail his “socially progressive” agenda in order to fit in with the rigid world of album release cycles, promo and an increasing expectation for him to embrace “pure, unbridled celebrity”. “You’re supposed to present your work in the most market-friendly way,” he says. “My priority wasn’t necessarily being market-friendly. I would say it was about being socially progressive.” Calling the British Empire “pure evil” might not have gone down well in a brainstorming meeting at a major label, and for Mpanga stepping away from music and its limitations meant he could throw himself into the podcast. Episodes include one where he imagines what it is like to be strip-searched by the police, and another is a gripping two-part radio play about Grenfell. It’s engrossing, utterly unique and rooted in the black British experience, something Mpanga says is still woefully misunderstood in contemporary Britain. “Black people are in a very emotionally abusive dynamic with this country in which there are elements of British life that refuse to acknowledge what it has done to us,” he says. “This is a matter of record, a matter of history.” For Mpanga our shared colonial history and the way it is interpreted needs to change, dramatically. He welcomes Labour’s election promise to teach colonialism and the legacy of the British Empire in schools, but also thinks the honours system need to be reconfigured. “If you can get me – a child of Africa, whose grandfather died in exile as a result of British meddling in Uganda, whose great great grandfather resisted the British invasion of his country – to accept an MBE, what would my descendants make of that? What would my ancestors make of that? “It’s not fair that in order to accept this accolade, in order to accept this recognition, I have to submit to that interpretation of Empire.” On Have You Heard George’s Podcast? Mpanga regularly talks about his love of the UK and the idea his decision is based on hatred for his country is something he rejects. “It’s interesting; despite all of the negative backlash around the MBE, you’d be hard-pressed to find a young entertainer who is so vocal about their love for this country,” he says. “I. Love. This. Country.” Scholarly, considered and erudite when Mpanga expresses himself it comes out as a series of perfectly formed thoughts. That kind of clarity would be helpful in a political career. He once had ambitions to move into politics but admits the idea of party politics is anathema to him now. He has not decided who he is going to vote for, but plans to affect politics from the outside long after the results are in. “There’s a lot of work that needs to be done outside of parliament,” he says. “You can still have an impact on politics.”