With the general election only five weeks away we want readers to help inform our reporting as we follow the politics, the parties and the voters during the election campaign. If you want to flag something you are unsure of you can contact the Guardian’s fact-check team here: factcheck@theguardian.com or fill in our form here. Leave your contact details if you can as one of our journalists may be in touch to discuss further. If you have seen any political content on social media that does not clearly state who has paid for it we want you to let us know. Political adverts on Facebook should state clearly who has paid for them in their posts. However, commercial adverts do not say who who is paying for them, but show only that they are sponsored. Which platform did you see it on? Which political party was it for? If it did not have a disclosure on it what was the reason the platform gave for showing you the advert? Though adverts will be banned from Twitter on 22 November, we would be interested to know if you see any posted after this date. Send your screenshots to us on WhatsApp by clicking here or via our form here. Is your primary school having to forgo its nativity play? Has the church had to reschedule its festivities? Or are there other issues you are experiencing? Tell us here what is happening where you are. We would like to know where key conversations are happening, both within and away from traditional media. Where on the internet do you find your main sources of news? Do you listen to podcasts? Do you use social media such as Facebook, Instagram or Snapchat? If so, are you part of any private groups in which important discussions are happening and what sort of things are being shared? Do such conversations have an impact on your overall attitudes? Do you notice changing habits in your parents or among your children in the last few years? Tell us more about your experiences in our form here. As the main parties ramp up their election campaigns, letterboxes across the country will begin to clog with leaflets vying to attract voters’ attention. We want to hear the most outlandish claims your local candidates from the main political parties or independents have made to try to win your vote. If you’ve received an eyebrow-raising leaflet, letter or other printed material from a political party or candidate let us know here. With a month to go before the general election, the main political parties continue to attack their opponents but we are still yet to see manifestos. During the run-up to December 12, we want to hear what’s happening where you are. Has your area been targeted by a political party, have you been visited on the campaign trail, has anything happened that hasn’t surfaced on the news agenda that you think is important? Send us your news tips by filling in our form here. After years of political turmoil in which Brexit has dominated the agenda, some voters will get the first chance to have their say on the future of the country on 12 December. We are interested in hearing from people aged 18-24 about their feelings towards this election.Have you registered to vote? Have you decided who to vote for? Will you be voting tactically? Are you campaigning, and if so, how? Or maybe you’ve decided not to vote at all. Share your thoughts with us here. With so much information (and misinformation) about the general election populating our apps, newspapers, television channels and doorsteps during the campaign, we want to know what you think generally about it all. We are also looking for contributors for a video project where we’ll invite people to get out of their political bubble and spend time with others who have a different point of view. You can be based anywhere around the UK and must be comfortable talking about what’s shaped you politically and spending time with people of a different political persuasion. Tell us what you think here. As part of a series of pieces from across the country focused on finding out what matters to the people who live there, we want to hear about the big issues facing you. Belfast East Traditionally a unionist seat, Belfast East is facing deep political uncertainty. It’s held by the DUP which supports Brexit but is not happy with Boris Johnson’s Brexit deal in case it weakens Northern Ireland’s position in the UK. Several pro-remain parties such as Sinn Fein, the SDLP and the Greens have stepped aside in the constituency to give Naomi Long, leader of the centrist Alliance party, a chance at winning the seat. So this election will also be a test of whether the Alliance can rally enough voters who have previously voted along unionist or nationalist lines. Let us know what issues will decide your vote here. Canterbury Are you a young voter in Canterbury? The Guardian is reporting on the battle in one of the most interesting constituencies in the country, which showed the unexpected strength of Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party in the 2017 election. Two years later, we’re keen to hear from voters in the city about their views on the election. We’re particularly interested in hearing from young people and students who were crucial in helping Labour win the historically Tory seat in 2017. Are the young people in Canterbury who swung the election last time still motivated or are they split? With the decline of Facebook, how are volunteers and organisers from the main parties getting their message across online? Let us know what you think here. Chingford and Woodford Green The constituency has been represented by Iain Duncan Smith for 27 years, but his majority has fallen sharply and Labour candidate Faiza Shaheen hopes to oust him by focusing on the cuts he helped implement as a Tory minister. Will the contest be driven by the legacy of austerity? Or will Brexit, which divided this area almost 50:50, dominate this election too? We’d like to understand the big issues facing you and your family and which policies matter to you. If you live in the constituency tell us about your views here. Cities of London and Westminster In the constituency of Cities of London and Westminster, which ranges from wealthy neighbourhoods such as Mayfair and Belgravia to more socially mixed areas such as Soho, Paddington and Pimlico, issues range from homelessness, air quality and local development to the role of the Square Mile. If you live in the area, share your thoughts with us here. Darlington If you live in Darlington, how happy are you with the state of housing, work, community relations, policing and health services? Who has an impact on your community that we should meet? Are there issues in your family that create division? Are you thinking of switching your vote? Or perhaps you feel disengaged from national politics altogether. Get in touch with us here. Morecambe and Lunesdale The seat is considered a bellweather and has been Conservative throughout its history, except for during the Tony Blair years, with the Tory incumbent winning by a 1,399 majority in 2017. There is great wealth but also significant poverty. Helen is particularly interested in hearing from people who live or work in Heysham, a large coastal village which has huge strategic importance for the north-west. It is home to two nuclear power stations and a port, a major distribution hub between the UK and Ireland, which will be affected significantly by Brexit. Yet an estimated 58.2% of the constituency voted to leave the EU. Share your thoughts with us here. Peterborough The Guardian will be reporting from Peterborough, where people have seen public spending fall by £262 a year per person since the start of austerity in 2010 – typical of the UK as a whole. If you live in Peterborough, let us know about the issues affecting you here. Southampton Itchen In Southampton Itchen, Conservative MP Royston Smith is defending one of the smallest majorities in the UK, just 31 votes ahead of Labour. It is one of the constituencies where the student vote could make a big difference. If you are a student in Southampton, we’d like to understand the big issues which concern you and which policies matter to you. How do you feel about tuition fees, student debt and the high cost of living in student accommodation? Are you concerned about mental health provision, jobs, getting on the housing ladder and the climate crisis? Get in touch with us here. Stirling The Scottish Tory MP Stephen Kerr is defending one of the smallest majorities in the UK, of only 148 votes, against the high-profile SNP candidate Alyn Smith. Will the contest be dominated by Brexit and independence or more local issues? Share your thoughts with us here. You can also share your views, pictures and videos via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Leave contact details if you can as one of our journalists may be in touch to discuss further.