Filming my first sex scene prompted an onslaught of questions from friends (their eyes gleaming with mischief): were you naked? How naked? Did he get an erection? You didn’t actually have sex, though, did you? Considering how much on-screen sex we consume, it’s remarkable how little we know about how it’s created. The idea of doing a sex scene was daunting. Alongside concerns about body image or what you’ll look like “doing it”, sex scenes don’t have the best track record: Maria Schneider was infamously “humiliated” by Marlon Brando and Bernardo Bertolucci while filming Last Tango in Paris; Salma Hayek claimed that she was pressured to perform a nude scene in Frida; and, recently, Emilia Clarke has spoken about feeling uncomfortable on Game of Thrones. But I was lucky: my first sex scene came well after #MeToo. And all the scrutiny of the industry’s sexual politics have ushered in a new type of job, the “intimacy coordinator”. Thrust from obscurity, intimacy coordinators are now in high demand so production companies can cover their own (and their actors’) arses. What do they do? Broadly, these intimacy coordinators – who at the moment are more common in the US than the UK – are third parties who safeguard actors in scenes containing nudity or simulated sex. This means ensuring protocols are respected, such as adhering to nudity riders, which outline exactly what’s shown; having closed sets (essential crew only) to respect the actors’ privacy; and making sure there are “modesty garments” to offer some privacy, provide a barrier and soak up (ahem) any bodily fluids. So far, so uncontroversial. However, productions with sex scenes outnumber seasoned intimacy coordinators. Though I benefited from a coordinator and a production that prioritised actors’ safety, I’ve spoken to others in different productions where coordinators with no formal training were hired as quick-fix solutions. And if the coordinator does not have the actors’ trust, their role as the first port of call in case of problems is compromised. Fortunately, companies such as Intimacy Directors International are working to make up that shortfall. Problems can also arise from the rest of the cast and crew’s limited understanding of the job. Those unused to working with intimacy coordinators – which is most, it being so nascent a role – may gripe over the additional meetings and the perceived “red tape”. The choreography and rehearsals central to some coordinators’ mission to avoid unsavoury surprises on the day (rather like a stunt coordinator) can step on creative toes. The reality is that the role is only as effective as the composite parts of a production allow it to be. But the questions raised by nudity in cinema and television cannot be answered by intimacy coordinators alone. There’s also a conversation that needs to be had about how and why we’re presenting nudity. For example, there doesn’t seem to be any consensus on what constitutes “gratuitous” nudity, a term that’s thrown around a lot. Is it better to show nudity outside sex scenes (presenting different body types without sexualising them) or essential within them (giving the audience what they want) – and cheap elsewhere? And what of “sexposition” – the sophisticated device in which those with the least power (extras) to stand around naked while a character explains the plot? Really, this conversation needs to recognise the who behind the how. Women make up only 18% of crew in the US, yet they are three times more likely than men to be naked on screen. This is staggering. And, in practice, it means that a female actor will often be one of the only women on a closed set in a scene written, directed and filmed by men. Add ageism to the mix, and odds are she’s the youngest there. If the “male gaze” is still relevant almost half a century since the film theorist Laura Mulvey coined the term – and my gut tells me it just might be – then this is all conducted with a male audience in mind, skewing how society sees both sex and women. Sex scenes and nudity shouldn’t be done away with – they represent a fundamental human experience. Truthful depictions, such as those in HBO’s Girls, are vital, and titillating ones have a place too. So, the solution? Women on top (grow up): the evidence shows that projects helmed by women hire more women. Supporting training and funding schemes for women, providing on-set childcare and allowing women to direct more than one feature would all be steps in the right direction. The #MeToo movement kickstarted change, and I was fortunate in my first experience. But we can’t rest on our laurels. We urgently need to reappraise who’s doing it, for whom, and how. • Céline Buckens is a London-based actor and filmmaker