To describe the 1974 Australian film Stone requires one to indulge in a certain kind of language. Expressions such as pedal to the metal, for example, or balls to the wall, or hell for leather, or cranked to 11, or crazy in the coconut, or set on fire then shot off a ramp and sent to outer space – anything that says “this movie is wild”. Baiting audiences with a risque narrative about a bunch of bikies called the Gravediggers, writer-director Sandy Harbutt’s film became one of the most profitable Australian features of all time, collecting around $1.5m at time of release (about $10m adjusted for inflation) from a budget of $195,000. To mark its 45th anniversary, Stone will screen at Melbourne’s Astor Theatre on 28 November, on a 35mm print that will be personally delivered by Harbutt himself. The film was one of several productions discussed in the director Mark Hartley’s influential 2008 documentary Not Quite Hollywood, which explored the Ozploitation movement: a typically low-rent canon of hardcore Australian genre films. Harbutt, however, rejects the label as an inaccurate description of his movie. “Exploitation to me means a picture that takes a subject and exploits it,” Harbutt, 78, tells Guardian Australia. “But Stone was trying to send the audience out a better audience than the audience that came in. The idea that I was after their money so they could see some blood and tits – that was never the point. If I had known that was the attitude the [Not Quite Hollywood] film-makers had towards Stone, I probably wouldn’t have cooperated with that documentary. A misunderstanding on my behalf, perhaps.” Stone is unquestionably ambitious and distinctive, balancing a turbocharged aesthetic with gritty realism. Despite being extremely weird (it opens with a man who witnesses a political assassination while tripping on LSD), it was embraced by many bikers as an honest depiction of their lifestyle. They have showed allegiance to it ever since; in the late 90s, around 30,000 motorcyclists gathered to recreate the film’s funeral scene. Mad Max (which arrived five years later) is a much more famous car and bikie-themed production, widely heralded as a watershed action movie. But some credit – or at least a little kudos – should go to Stone, which may have been an inspiration for George Miller’s dystopian classic. One of the film’s characters is even called Bad Max. This, Harbutt reflects, is not the only point of similarity between the two classics: “No other motorbike gang in the world had ever ridden Kawasaki 900s before,” he says. “And Max Rockatansky? ROCKatansky! Stone! Not to mention the four actors in his film that were in mine.” (These are Hugh Keays-Byrne, Roger Ward, Vincent Gil and David Bracks). I was just disappointed that Miller’s aims for the audience were so low ... a total cliche of the motorcycle movie Continues Harbutt: “Because George Miller became such a force in the Australian film industry, nobody had the guts to come out and say, hey, wait a minute! But I’m not criticising anybody for that. There is plenty of room to make movies about people who ride motorcycles. A lot of films made in Europe were probably a lot more like Stone than Mad Max. I was just disappointed that his [Miller’s] aims for the audience were so low. A story about revenge and, in the end, murder and death, with laughing as somebody rides off into the sunset. That’s a total cliche of the motorcycle movie.” When Harbutt made Stone, there was barely any film industry in Australia let alone a subgenre involving daredevil drivers. Did any car or motorbike chase sequences even exist in a modern Australian movie before Stone arrived? “You would have had to have watched Homicide Division 4,” Harbutt says, referring to the then-popular Australian TV police drama which ran from 1969 to 1975. “They always had a car chase in there, in probably almost every episode. These chases were staged by Peter Armstrong, who was their salaried stuntman and stunt supervisor, and who worked with me on Stone. “As soon as you saw a really bad-looking car – a really beat-up old vehicle – you’d know there was going to be a car chase, and that this car was going to crash. Peter Armstrong honed all his skills on those life-threatening stunts for probably about a $150 for a week. They don’t make them like that any more.” Harbutt says the idea for Stone came about when he “started hanging out with people in this motorcycle cult” and realised that “I could get enormous amounts of cooperation for almost nothing and make a big picture from a small budget.” Despite the film’s success, the director never made another feature. According to Harbutt, this was not from lack of trying: he goes into a lengthy backstory about the politics of Australian film-financing corporations and various disagreements over financial matters relating to Stone. Harbutt says he has put in 10 separate submissions to corporations such as the Australian Film Commission and Screen Australia over the years “and I’ve been knocked back, without a penny, ever since”. This has clearly left some ill feeling. The director describes Screen Australia as a “self-perpetuating, self-rewarding, giant bureaucracy” and believes control over it “needs to be put back into the hands of artists. And by that I mean successful film artists.” Now in his late 70s, it seems unlikely Harbutt will return to the director’s chair. His legacy however will always be tied to Stone, an indelible classic. “I wanted to break all the rules of all the genres that we touched. I wanted to do something completely original. I didn’t want Stone to be an echo of anything else.” • Stone is screening at the Astor Theatre in Melbourne on 28 November in celebration of its 45th year