A Taiwanese family drama, A Sun, has won the top prizes at the Golden Horse film awards – dubbed the “Chinese Oscars” – in a year marked by the conspicuous absence of talent from the mainland amid plummeting ties between Taiwan and Beijing. The ceremony in Taipei on Saturday night was boycotted by China after a Taiwanese director called for the island’s independence in an acceptance speech at last year’s event. The acclaimed Hong Kong director Johnnie To resigned as head of the jury, citing contractual obligations, as several Hong Kong films reportedly also dropped out under pressure from Beijing. In another move likely to annoy Beijing, Taiwanese composer Lu Luming voiced support for Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protests at this year’s ceremony, dedicating his best original film song award to “Hong Kongers who insist on ideals, and may you live safely and freely”. The Golden Horse festival’s chairman, Oscar-winning director Ang Lee, said the absence of Chinese talent was “a loss”. “This is not easy to comment on, everyone knows that,” said Lee, who is Taiwanese. “Of course it is a loss, which can be seen on the red carpet or in the works participating in the film festival. “We of course feel regret due to fewer (movies and participants) this year but our arms are opened forever, as long as you are a Chinese-speaking movie director we are welcoming you.” The night’s biggest winner was A Sun, directed by Taiwan’s Chung Mong-hong. It scooped the best picture, best director, best actor, best supporting actor and best editing awards. “I thought it would take several more years for me to win best picture. I am very happy ... although the movies I made haven’t made any profit,” Chung said after receiving the award from the Lee. Singapore-based Malaysian Yeo Yann-Yann was crowned best actress for playing a married teacher struggling with family and work woes who develops a forbidden relationship with a male pupil in the Singaporean drama Wet Season. “It’s not easy going down the path in the entertainment (industry) in Singapore and Malaysia ... but I will continue walking the path,” she said at the ceremony in Taipei’s Sun Yat-sen memorial hall. China considers democratic Taiwan as part of its territory awaiting reunification, by force if necessary, even though the two sides have been governed separately for the last seven decades. Beijing has been ramping up military, diplomatic and economic pressure on Taiwan ever since president Tsai Ing-wen was elected in 2016, because her party refuses to recognise that the island is part of “one China”. Pressure is building once more as Taiwan heads towards new elections in January, with Tsai seeking to defeat an opponent who favours much warmer ties with China.