The ABC has apologised for failing to blur out the names of three survivors of sexual abuse or harassment in a coming documentary before it was posted on its media-only TV publicity site. The three-part program, presented by journalist Tracey Spicer, explores the #MeToo movement in Australia and is scheduled to air on 25 November. The error was revealed the day before Spicer, along with the US-based founder of the #MeToo movement, Tarana Burke, was to accept the Sydney Peace prize for spearheading award-winning investigations into sexual harassment in media workplaces. An early version of Silent No More, produced by Southern Pictures, was accessed by some journalists who had access to the ABC’s subscriber-only media portal, but it is unknown how many of them watched the film. “Due to human error, an early version of Silent No More was posted under embargo on our subscriber-only portal for accredited media,” an ABC spokesman said. “The ABC sincerely apologises for any harm or upset this has caused them or their families. We removed the program from our media portal as soon as we became aware of the error. The welfare of those who have suffered sexual abuse or harassment is of utmost importance to the ABC and we wish to assure them that Silent No More will treat these issues with respect and care while shining a light on the need for positive change in this area.” Spicer, who is featured in the documentary listening to accounts of harassment and assault from women across Australia, said she was assured survivors’ identities would be fully protected. “I am utterly gutted about what has occurred,” Spicer said. “I apologise deeply and unreservedly to those whose names were visible in that initial version of the program. I’m relieved that the ABC has swiftly moved to take it down and that no one is identified in the broadcast version.” The independent producers said they were “devastated” by the error, which was first reported by Buzzfeed and news.com.au. “We wish to assure everyone that the final version of the program will not identify anyone without their explicit consent, which was always our intention,” Southern Pictures said. “Our first priority is our duty of care to those impacted by sexual harassment and #MeToo, along with supporting the work that is being done to address the issue of sexual harassment.” One of the women inadvertently identified told Buzzfeed she did not blame Spicer, but wanted the consequences of the mistake acknowledged. “I sent a private DM to an individual woman,” she said. “I didn’t expect my comments to end up in a documentary to be broadcast publicly. There has clearly been harm done and I’d like that on the record. There is a duty of care if you’re using people’s stories.” Burke will deliver the 2019 City of Sydney Peace prize lecture on Thursday at Sydney Town Hall, where she will accept the prize alongside Spicer. The Sydney Peace Foundation chair, Archie Law, said the #MeToo movement was chosen from more than 200 community nominations because it had fundamentally changed the way society understands and talks about sexual harassment and violence. Spicer was made a member of the Order of Australia last year for her charitable work for World Vision, Autism Spectrum Australia, Domestic Violence NSW and Dying With Dignity.