It costs £60bn to compensate the “Waspi women” – how do you pay for it? Corbyn: “Had a court case gone the other way the government would now be having to do it. What we’re saying is we will do it. We will do it by paying for it from government reserves and if necessary, because it’s not all going to be paid in one year, we will have to borrow in the long term.” Reality The pledge to work with the women who have been hit by the rising state pension age was made in the Labour manifesto, but no provision for it appeared in the costings “Grey book” that the party published. On Sunday when the party stated that it would pay up to £58bn in compensation, it said that it was treating the cost as a “contingency”. It also said that some of the payments may be recouped through taxation. Pensioners do pay income tax, so it would seem likely that some of the compensation money would be returned to the Treasury. The party also said that it planned to make the payments over five years. But that would still mean allocating more than £11bn a year, assuming they were equal payments. Labour’s use of the work “contingency” suggest they may plan to use the government’s official contingencies fund. This is typically used to pay for urgent services ahead of parliament providing to make those services available – the money is advanced then recovered from the individual departments. The latest accounts show it paid out £4.6bn in 2018/19 and £2.9bn in 2017/18, so the Waspi payment is a lot bigger than the sums it typically handles. The fund does not have its own income or a huge bank balance, and so the money would need to be budgeted for elsewhere. It is worth noting that this could become a problem for any future government. Even though the Waspi women recently lost a court case against the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), they have applied to appeal against the judgment. Should they end up with a ruling in their favour money will need to be found to compensate them. What share of income tax revenues do those earning over £80,000 currently pay? Corbyn: “I couldn’t give you the exact figure, but they contribute quite a lot.” Reality In May last year HMRC’s survey of UK income tax liabilities forecast that in 2018/19 the top 5% of taxpayers – which at that point were those earning £80,900 and above – would contribute 48.4% of the total income tax take. Two major public furores about antisemitism occurred in 2016, with Labour MP Naz Shah apologising for an antisemitic Facebook post, and former London mayor Ken Livingstone making remarks about “the Israel lobby” and Hitler supporting Zionism in broadcast interviews that eventually led to him quitting the party after a lengthy disciplinary process. A report that year by Shami Chakrabarti exonerated the party of widespread antisemitism but reported an 'occasionally toxic atmosphere'. Matters escalated in 2018 when it became evident that the party was receiving more and more complaints, to the extent that there was a backlog of disciplinary cases. Jeremy Corbyn apologised that April for hurt caused to the Jewish community by problems in the process and pointed to only 0.1% of members being under investigation for alleged antisemitic comments. But the party was also mired in a row about whether to adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) definition of antisemitism, which it ended up ultimately approving. Then accusations of political interference in the complaints process by aides close to Corbyn began to emerge earlier this year, which the party strongly denies. The resignations of some MPs and peers over antisemitism in February 2019 alarmed many Labour colleagues. Then Chris Williamson, a Labour MP and ally of Corbyn, caused an outcry for saying that the party had been 'too apologetic' about antisemitism complaints. However, many of his supporters in the party backed a campaign saying he had been vilified and badly treated. Then came the announcement that the Equalities and Human Rights Commission was placing the party under formal investigation over antisemitism. In November 2019 the chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis, said Jews are justifiably anxious about the idea of Jeremy Corbyn becoming prime minister, saying a “poison sanctioned from the top” has taken root in Labour. In a July 2019 programme, eight whistleblowers spoke to a BBC Panorama documentary, with some saying they felt there was political meddling from Corbyn’s office in the process for handling antisemitism complaints. Seumas Milne, one of Corbyn’s closest aides, told officials the party was 'muddling up political disputes with racism' and must review processes. Jennie Formby, the general secretary, was accused of attempting to interfere in who sat on a panel examining the case of Jackie Walker, a high-profile activist who was eventually expelled from the party. Labour strongly denied the allegations of political interference, and came out on the offensive, accusing the BBC of bias and calling for the documentary to be pulled. A Labour spokesman said the party had fully answered “a number of questions” put to it by the programme, and had also sent 50 pages of documents in response. The complaints to the BBC had been made “at various levels, including the director general”. Yes, particularly his record when he was a backbencher. For example, Corbyn has said he regrets calling members of Hamas and Hezbollah “friends” at a meeting in parliament in 2009. He accepted he had made a mistake by supporting a graffiti artist after his work, featuring several known antisemitic tropes, was removed from a wall in east London after complaints. The UK’s three most prominent Jewish newspapers published a joint editorial saying a government led by Corbyn would pose an existential threat to Jewish life in the UK. Labour insists the a figure of 130 outstanding cases of antisemitism is inaccurate, and says it is “taking robust action”, including quick suspensions, a process for rapid expulsions and an education programme. However, it has not yet provided its own up-to-date figure. Some prospective candidates have been accused of antisemitism during the campaign. Gideon Bull stepped down in Clacton after denying he used the term “Shylock” in front of a Jewish councillor, while Kate Ramsden, who had been standing for Gordon, in Aberdeenshire, withdrew after it emerged she was being re-interviewed by Labour over posts comparing Israel to “an abused child who becomes an abusive adult”. However, other candidates criticised for antisemitism have remained in place, including Apsana Begum, who shared a post referring to “Zionist masters”. She later distanced herself from the post saying she did not share those views. Peter Walker and Rowena Mason Andrew Neil asked Corbyn when he toughened up the rules to tackle antisemitism. Corbyn gave a hesitant answer, explaining that he proposed that “egregious cases should be fast-tracked” in the “last few months”, and “in the summer”. In July, the national executive committee (NEC), the governing body of the Labour party that oversees the policy-making process, endorsed a proposal put forward by Corbyn to reform the party’s procedures to allow fast-track expulsions in the most serious cases of antisemitism. These cases would be referred to special panels that include the party general secretary, Jennie Formby, and NEC officers, other than politicians, rather than the usual antisemitism panels.