José Mourinho sounds like he might be getting on the blower to old mucker Jorge Mendes, to see if he would be kind enough to orchestrate deals for Benfica defender Rúben Dias and Sporting midfielder Bruno Fernandes. The Tottenham boss is looking to bolster his squad after arriving mid-season following Mauricio Pochettino’s departure but might not have too much money to play with. Mourinho has also been poo-pooing the claim he will bring in Zlatan Ibrahimovic, saying it would make “no sense”. After watching 45 minutes of Phil Jones on Sunday evening, Manchester United are once again looking for a new centre-back. The latest name to be thrown into the ring is Mohammed Salisu of Real Valladolid, whose agent – it says here – is Juan Mata’s dad. He could cost just £10m. Due to the fact almost every single team is underperforming in the Premier League, according to pundits/fans/chief executives, there are going to be some changes in the coming weeks so clubs can gear up for the January transfer window. Arsenal are considering getting rid of laugh-a-minute Unai Emery, with some of their top, top players growing increasingly unhappy and meaning they might run away at the end of the season if the Spaniard is still at the wheel. Head honchos at the Emirates fear the likes of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette, who both have 18 months to run on their current contracts, could pack their bags in the summer in order to clear space in their diaries on Thursday nights. Pep Guardiola has warned the Gunners and Everton off appointing his right-hand man, Mikel Arteta, saying the Basque will be sticking around at the Etihad until the end of the season. Marco Silva could have two more games to save his job, though, which gives the Toffees’ hierarchy a bit of extra time to find David Moyes’s phone number down the back of the Goodison Park dugout. The next man for a P45 is Manuel Pellegrini, whose West Ham career is set to be defined by the flapping of Roberto in goal. For some reason, the Hammers think Chris Wilder might depart free-wheeling Sheffield United in order to take charge at the London Stadium. Elsewhere, it is reported Pellegrini has been told to improve results, which is a cunning plan. Having returned for a second spell in charge of Watford at the start of September, Quique Sánchez Flores is already having to look over his shoulder having won once in the Premier League since his arrival, with their last game resulting in a 3-0 home defeat to Burnley. Watford are considering who could potentially replace the replacement if things do not pick up. If they wait a few weeks there will be hundreds of recently-sacked managers to choose from.