Hello and welcome to your election-heavy daily news roundup. It is feeling a little bit like groundhog day as Boris Johnson delivers the first big speech for the Conservative election campaign, despite having launched the party’s campaign last week with … another big speech. There’s much to mock in Johnson’s new election advert, and things are falling apart as alliances and detentes between parties fray. You can follow our live coverage of the day’s political news here, and read on for a round-up of non-election news as well. Labour has claimed the PM is “in cahoots” with Nigel Farage, after the announcement that Brexit party candidates will stand aside in Conservative-held seats to help deliver Boris Johnson a majority. Labour’s shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner, has told the Guardian that Farage and Johnson are “trying to hoodwink the public – and they are very friendly with Donald Trump”. She warned voters, particularly in the Midlands and the north, to stick with Labour or risk “a hard-right nasty Tory government that will privatise and deregulate our markets – and they will make Margaret Thatcher look like a pussycat”. Deals between parties not to contest certain seats are causing rows on both sides of politics. After Nigel Farage refused calls from Conservatives for the Brexit party to stand down in Labour marginal seats, on the other side of politics there are ructions in the Liberal Democrats after Tim Walker, the Lib Dem candidate for Canterbury, announced he would be stepping out of the race in order to give the best chance of winning to Rosie Duffield, the Labour candidate who took Canterbury from the Tories for the first time in 2017 by just 187 votes. Almost immediately afterwards a party spokesman said Walker would be replaced “in due course”. But a local Lib Dem source said the party in Canterbury was vehemently opposed to replacing Walker and that all four members approved to stand as MPs had said they would not do so. The former Tory minister David Gauke has announced he will stand as an independent candidate, saying he represents “ a form of liberal conservatism” and that “the Conservative party has got it badly wrong” regarding Brexit. Johnson will again launch the Conservatives’ election campaign today with a speech at an electric vehicle plant in the West Midlands – it is being billed as his first big set-piece speech of the campaign. He will offer the familiar roll-call of core policies including a pledge to “end the groundhoggery of Brexit”, spend more on the NHS and cut crime. Johnson will also attack Jeremy Corbyn’s party, saying a Labour government would condemn the UK to the “intellectual cul-de-sac of far left Corbynism”. The entry of the prime minister to the full electoral fray after a relatively quiet start to the campaign comes after his star turn in an election video that sought to portray him as a man of the people – but which some viewers thought made him look more like David Brent. Labour will unveil a “rescue plan” for the NHS in England with an extra £26bn of funding a year paid for by higher taxes on companies and the wealthiest in society. John McDonnell and John Ashworth, the shadow chancellor and the shadow secretary for health respectively, will announce the spending plan today in London. The party’s pledge would give the health service £5.5bn more a year by 2023-24 than the £20.5bn the Conservatives have promised and represent the biggest boost to health spending since Labour was last in power between 1997 and 2010. The Labour party has suffered a second cyber-attack in as many days. The party was the subject on Tuesday of a distributed denial of service attack – a type of hack where “botnets” flood a server with requests to overwhelm it. Angela Rayner set herself up nicely for a potential future leadership position within the Labour party after a rousing turn introducing the party’s showcase programme for lifelong education at a campaign event in Blackpool. Josh Halliday has been in Darlington, in the Tees Valley, which could be won by the Conservatives for the first time since Margaret Thatcher, and where the local library could be the deciding election issue. Marina Hyde’s column this week turns its eyes to Boris Johnson’s mop – and it is a delight to read. It’s a day of big speeches, starting in London, where John McDonnell and John Ashworth will be launching Labour’s NHS policy. Boris Johnson will give his “groundhoggery of Brexit” set-piece speech in the West Midlands. Jo Swinson will be visiting a boxing centre in Hornsey, north London. > Public, televised impeachment proceedings against Donald Trump are due to begin in Washington DC today and he is fuming about it. The first witnesses include state department deputy assistant secretary George Kent, who has said Trump “wanted nothing less than [Ukrainian] President Zelenskiy to go to a microphone and say ‘investigations’, ‘Biden’, and ‘Clinton’” in return for military aid. > The world’s existing climate policies will not be enough to halt rising emissions from energy production without a “grand coalition” of governments and investors to push renewables and energy efficiency, says the International Energy Agency. Separately, half of all the world’s insects may have been wiped out since 1970 because of environmental destruction and pesticides. A leading ecologist says that left unchecked this “unnoticed insect apocalypse” threatens to have profound consequences for humans and all life on Earth. > One in every two FTSE 100 executive appointments – such as chief executive, chief financial officer and chief operating officer, as well senior managers reporting to them – will have to go to a woman if the UK is to meet targets to tackle the gender imbalance across British business by 2020, a government-commissioned report says. Julian Borger in Washington DC on how the US is preparing for wall-to-wall coverage of the impeachment of Donald Trump, which moves to public hearings today. Plus Peter Walker on Jo Swinson and the Liberal Democrats: is their campaign yet to take off? Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/11/12-69722-191113TIFimpeach2.mp3 At an exclusive Swiss school, lessons are being delivered by teachers who honed their skills in cash-strapped English comprehensives. They are just some of the thousands of British teachers heading abroad. Sally Weale asks what’s behind the brain drain. Gareth Southgate has attempted to put the brakes on the Raheem Sterling-Joe Gomez bust-up story, but it will run and run with opinion divided over how the England manager has handled the situation. Leah Williamson’s late goal earned England’s women a 3-2 win over the Czech Republic to ease the pressure on manager Phil Neville. After multiple bombshells during two hours of dramatic testimony Shane Sutton, the former head coach of British Cycling and Team Sky, stormed out of a medical tribunal having denied he was a serial liar, a bully and a doper. Novak Djokovic fell to the brilliance of the Austrian Dominic Thiem while Roger Federer defeated Matteo Berrettini on the third day of the ATP World Tour Finals. Andy Murray has revealed how the recent birth of his third child has led to an altered schedule, temporary weight gain and numerous adjustments in his life as he set his sights on next week’s Davis Cup finals and then the Australian Open in January. Nine men have been given prison sentences arising out of a mass brawl at Goodwood racecourse in May last year. And the NFL has informed all 32 of its teams that a private workout will be staged for free-agent quarterback Colin Kaepernick on Saturday in Atlanta. The increasingly violent protests in Hong Kong show no sign of abating today with students once again preparing for confrontations with the police. The turmoil has been bad news for the city’s stock market, the Hang Seng index, which has lost another 500 points today and is now 1,000 points, or about 5%, worse off for the week. The uncertainty also sent other Asian markets downwards, not helped by the usual US-China trade deal jitters. The FTSE100 looks set to drop 0.6% this morning. The pound is steady at $1.284 and €1.166. The FT gives its front-page picture slot to the bushfires in Australia but its main story is renewed pressure on the tainted auditing sector: “Top 6 auditors tested on resilience as ministers eye industry break-up”. The Guardian has the same picture but goes with election news and Labour’s “£26bn rescue plan for NHS”. The Mirror calls that “Labour’s 10-point plan to save the NHS”. The i’s angle is “Battle for the NHS” as the Tories also flash more cash for the health service. The Times and the Express focus on a 14-point lead for the Tories. YouGov for the Times has put the Tories on 42%, Labour on 28% and the Lib Dems on 15%. The Telegraph’s splash is “Brexit will start green revolution, pledges PM”, as Boris Johnson says that if re-elected his government will spearhead a drive to tackle climate change. The Mail memorialises the late Lord Bramall as “The hero who died without justice” – the D-day veteran and former head of the armed forces was smeared by the false abuse claims of “Nick”, real name Carl Beech. Today’s most difficult to read story is headlined “The incest murders” on the cover of the Metro, about Sarah Barrass and her brother, Brandon Machin, who strangled their two teenage sons and tried to kill their other four with a drug overdose because they didn’t want their relationship discovered. The Sun preoccupies itself with how Harry and Meghan won’t do Christmas at Sandringham this year. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com