Inflation fell to 1.5% in October, its lowest level in three years, pushed down by heavy discounting at furniture stores and a decline in the price of energy. The Office for National Statistics said price cuts across the recreation and culture sectors coupled with the falling cost of household goods more than offset increases to clothing and footwear to pull down inflation from its recent peak of 3.1% in 2017. The figures, which show a drop from 1.7% in September, are likely to intensify pressure on Bank of England policymakers to cut interest rates in the new year. Last week the central bank’s monetary policy committee was divided over whether to reduce rates, with two of the nine-strong team voting for a 0.25% cut from the 0.75% base rate. RPIIn 2013, the retail prices index (RPI) lost its status as a national statistic, as the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said the way it calculated prices was likely to overstate the rate of inflation. The treatment of housing costs is also a problem, as RPI uses a combination of mortgage interest payments and house prices as a proxy for housing depreciation. In a period of rapidly rising house prices, inflation accelerates ahead of a basket of goods and services bought by most consumers. CPIAn internationally recognised calculation of inflation, it monitors the rising cost of goods and services according to an agreed formula that statisticians believe is more reliable and robust than that used with RPI. However, CPI also has its detractors because it excludes all housing costs. CPIHThe ONS has included housing costs in its CPI calculation to make CPIH its preferred method of calculating rising prices. It uses rents as a proxy for housing costs. In recent years rents have fallen, especially in London, dragging down the CPIH rate below CPI. But neither the Bank of England nor the Treasury has recognised CPIH as a the standardised measure, leaving it to be largely ignored outside the ONS. Lower fuel costs reduced prices at petrol pumps and also fed into lower commercial transport costs, easing price pressure on consumer goods. Gas and electricity prices fell month on month by 8.7% and 2.2% respectively, in response to the cut in the regulator Ofgem’s energy price cap. Analysts said they expected the recent slump in wholesale electricity and gas prices to push utility prices down further in the new year. By contrast, core inflation, which excludes food, alcohol, tobacco and energy, held steady at 1.7%. Ruth Gregory, a senior UK economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said prices had further to fall over the coming months. “Overall, the figures do little to change our view that inflation will spend more time below 2% than above it in 2020 and that if Brexit is delayed further, interest rates will be cut in May 2020.