The report on Russian interference in UK politics, which might be damaging to Boris Johnson, has been suppressed. Another, on whether to investigate his alleged favours for Jennifer Arcuri, that not obviously qualified recipient of various public subsidies, is postponed until it, too, can’t change voters’ minds. But there remains one document with enough emetic and cautionary detail to test, if only among women, the despairing view that every form of amorality and criminality, possibly short of cruelty to animals, has already been “priced in”. Supposing Johnson does not kill Dilyn before 12 December, his horrendous – and happily ineradicable – comico-political novel, Seventy-Two Virgins, amounts to a compelling case for character reappraisal, or it would if women could be persuaded to read it. As it is, the author’s difficulties with more traditional women voters have yet, his supporters fear, to be completely dispelled by repeated appearances with his May-December love match from central office. But less squeamish women, willing to tolerate a leader who combines an apparent aversion to precautionary measures with a history of matchless infidelity, could yet recoil from the inescapable message of Seventy-Two Virgins: that Johnson evaluates their entire sex, and not just his unfortunate intimates and colleagues, according to their fuckability on the – sometimes eccentric – Johnson scale. Does this priority promise much interest in addressing, for instance, sex discrimination, harassment, the gender pay gap? There could, however, be a dentistry upside. Teeth emerge as almost as critical for Johnson the novelist, when he dreams up a female paragon, as breast size, hair type and the propensity to weep. A “curly haired” Guardian reporter (“Lucy Goodbody”) has – clue to her ultimate redemption – “loads of pretty white teeth”. His heroine’s teeth are so fine he pictures them being weirdly inspected – “open wide the pearly gates” – by his hero and alter-ego, a married tooth fetishist called Roger. Only afterwards does Roger, a scandal-hit MP, ask this parliamentary researcher: “You’re quite happy for me to check your teeth?” Mislaying her, Roger/Boris asks if anyone has spotted “an exceptionally good-looking researcher of about twenty-three with good teeth and blonde hair”. Which is not to say that this fine object is not supplied with a backstory, the better to account for her sexual appetite. A scant biography explains why Johnson’s fantasy researcher craves, above all, submission to “an alpha male”. She “had a deep and sexist reverence for men who really knew stuff. It amazed her sometimes how little appearances mattered. He could be bald, he could be spindly or sweaty or tubby, but if that man’s disquisition had enough interest, fluency and authority, it would speak directly to her groin.” And thus Johnson’s Churchill impressions can finally be understood: he’s speaking Groinish. Groinwise, we find Johnson the narrator taking the opposite approach to female characters; no disquisition lets them off physical screening. Hello “svelte young female MP”, goodbye to a woman whose sole function is to get a parking ticket: “She had long blonde hair, dark eyebrows, a tight black T-shirt over a willowy figure and a belt made out of copper plates. It was hard to believe she could be the mother of a ten year old.” Here, for those unconvinced by Charlotte Edwardes, who claimed Johnson groped her leg, is the answer to that perennial mystery: how has the idle Johnson, with his five or so children, his political career, his constituents, his journalism, his afternoon technology studies, his serial potboilers, managed to recruit numberless shaggees? The answer, possibly of most interest to the young female nurses, soldiers and police officers currently conscripted as props, is – unless his omniscient narrator only accidentally sounds exactly like Johnson – the lightning assessment of any woman under 35 as not so much an individual as a sexual opportunity. Are they like “a character in a hairspray ad” or, alas, like “the kind of woman who owns fifteen cats”? Johnson’s Churchill impressions can finally be understood: he’s speaking Groinish Even a murderous terrorist is represented to us as, above all, beautiful, “with full red lips and skin that was startlingly pale for a Palestinian Arab”. The reader of Seventy-Two Virgins will gather, supposing they missed his earlier columns, that dark skin and foreign names, if they do not preoccupy Johnson for purely racist reasons, certainly strike him as a very telling departure from the norm. We run into a “darkish kid”, a “dark head”, a “dark young man”, “angry brown faces”, a “young half-caste”, “an Arab”, “a woman [horrid to “Roger”] with an Asian name”. Welsh is “weird creole”. The French, naturally, are “froggies”. Published in 2004, roughly midway between Johnson’s thigh-squeezing and his first encounter with Jennifer Arcuri, the novel was praised, as it now might not be outside the Spectator, for its allegedly Tom Sharpesque/Carry On! appeal. Arguably, Johnson could be forgiven its sexism and ugly language, the way Disney will now apologise, in relation to older films such as The Jungle Book, for “outdated cultural depictions”. But The Jungle Book was made in 1967. Johnson’s girlfriend, Carrie Symonds, would have been around 16 when its novel’s narrator was referring to a “loony bin”, “pikeys” and “something funny in the air, a pre-menstrual irrationality”, and filling his ideal Westminster with incontinent alpha males and panting “sexually emancipated” researchers. And if his conduct, since then, leaves room for doubt, some familiar vocabulary suggests that the author’s strenuously offensive cultural outlook remains intact. “Onanistic”, “crusties”, even “girly swot”: Johnson is unchanged since he likened a sunlit city view to “a beautiful woman surprised in bed without her make-up”. Of course, Johnson’s disturbing affinity with The Fast Show’s Swiss Tony (“making a cup of coffee is like making love to a beautiful woman. It’s got to be hot…”) may be, like his lying, priceable in. It’s still not clear, however, that the same can be said about his categorisation of all women, not just millennial colleagues, as mankind’s onanism avoidance scheme. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist