SoftBank Group, the Japanese tech investor, has slumped to a huge quarterly loss after the valuations of US companies WeWork and Uber plunged. The company, run by billionaire investor Masayoshi Son, made an operating loss of 704bn yen (£5bn) in the three months to the end of September, in results published on Wednesday. SoftBank’s first quarterly loss in 14 years comes after a dreadful quarter for the tech companies backed by Son’s venture capital funds, the $100bn (£77bn) Vision Fund and the smaller Delta Fund. SoftBank’s operating loss was because of the “decrease in the fair values of investments including Uber and WeWork and its three affiliates” held by SoftBank’s Vision Fund and Delta Fund, it said. The two funds together made a quarterly loss of 970bn yen. Son acknowledged his judgement around the $10.3bn investment in WeWork was not right, and admitted his faith in WeWork founder Adam Neumann was misplaced, in a presentation to investors on Wednesday. Son said he turned a blind eye to Neumann’s bad side over issues such as corporate governance and that he had learned a harsh lesson, according to Reuters. He added that WeWork was not a sinking boat, despite a need to cut spending. WeWork’s parent, the We Company, was forced to abandon an initial public offering of its shares on US stock markets at the end of September after investors queried the huge valuation given to the office space rental company. SoftBank then led a $9.5bn bailout of WeWork, and founder Adam Neumann was forced out. The debacle wiped $7.8bn from WeWork’s valuation, SoftBank said. Shares in Uber, which listed in May, fell to a new record low on Tuesday as it posted yet another loss, despite beating revenues estimates. Some investors in its stock market float will on Wednesday be able to sell their shares for the first time, when a lock-up period expires. Son’s net worth has plunged by about $6bn since July, when it peaked at about $20bn, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index, which tracks billionaires’ wealth. That left Son with $13.8bn on Tuesday. The difficult quarter could complicate Son’s efforts to raise a second Vision fund if investors question his high-risk strategy of making significant bets on high-spending, young companies. Preparations for a “full-scale launch” are still underway, SoftBank said.