The Daily Telegraph’s appeal against a judge’s decision ordering it to pay Geoffrey Rush $2.9m over a series of defamatory articles is a “distinctively over-egged pudding”, lawyers for the Oscar-winning actor have said. On Tuesday Rush’s barrister in the appeal, Bret Walker SC, told the federal court in Sydney that the “awkward reality” was that the evidence of the newspaper’s star witness, Eryn Jean Norvill, had been contradicted by a number of her colleagues. The Daily Telegraph through its parent company, Rupert Murdoch-owned Nationwide News, on Monday began its appeal against the federal court justice Michael Wigney’s ruling that the newspaper had defamed Rush by alleging he “engaged in inappropriate behaviour”. During the trial Norvill, who made the initial complaint about the actor to the Sydney Theatre Company following the 2015 production of King Lear, told the court that Rush – one of Australia’s best-known actors – engaged “daily” in a pattern of “sexual harassment” including “sexual innuendo” and groping gestures that made her feel “belittled”, “frightened” and “trapped”. The newspaper is seeking a retrial because, it says, the judge erred in finding that Norvill gave unreliable evidence. But on Tuesday Walker said the evidence of a number of witnesses during the trial had been “squarely against” Norvill’s version of events, including the pre-eminent theatre director Neil Armfield and Norvill’s co-star Helen Buday. During the trial Armfield denied Norvill’s claim that he had told Rush he was being “creepy” during a scene with her. “To put it mildly, his evidence did nothing to corroborate Ms Norvill’s evidence,” Walker said. In his judgment Wigney found Norvill’s evidence was “not only uncorroborated but contradicted” by other witnesses. He said in his judgment he “was not ultimately persuaded that Ms Norvill was an entirely credible witness”. On Monday the Daily Telegraph’s barrister, Tom Blackburn SC, argued the court should overturn Wigney’s judgment because his findings about Norvill’s credibility were “glaringly improbable”. He raised five examples of Wigney’s judgment about Norvill, including his finding that the actor did not need to make “highly complimentary” comments about Rush during an interview with the Sydney Morning Herald to promote the play in 2015. “These were press conferences in support of the Sydney Theatre Company’s production of King Lear, this is not mainstream entertainment, this is not a Harry Potter movie,” Blackburn said. “What is Ms Norvill supposed to do? Is she supposed to be guarded, or heroically pure at a press conference? Mr Rush was obviously, apart from being a distinguished actor, obviously a great drawcard for this production, I mean she had to talk him up.” Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Walker said on Tuesday the interview was “scarcely a promising start” for the judge in weighing up her credibility that she had said “things she believed to be wrong … in order to enhance her position in work”. “She’s saying, ‘believe me, I was lying, and here are the reasons I was lying, it’s what one does on these occasions’,” he said. “[But there is] nothing creditable about people carrying on in that fashion, advertising is not creditable, PR is not creditable, when it knowingly says that which is false. “We should not be coarsened, in effect, when it comes to truth telling because everyone does it. It’s not in your favour or credit that you fall into that crutch.” Justice Jacqueline Gleeson interrupted and asked whether it was “not to her credit, but not materially to her discredit”, which Walker agreed with. Rush is due to receive $2.9m, including $1.97m in special damages based on past and future lost earnings – the largest defamation payout to a single person in Australia. On Monday lawyers for the Daily Telegraph dramatically dropped the newspaper’s claim that Wigney’s conduct in the case “gave rise to an apprehension of bias”. Blackburn also says the judge was wrong to award special damages to Rush based on an “inference” of future lost earnings because over three days in the witness box the actor made a “startling omission” in not expressly telling the court he could no longer work as a result of the articles. But Walker said Blackburn’s argument was a “distinctively over-egged pudding”, saying that during his evidence Rush had described his mental state following the articles as being “incompatible with the capacity to do what he did”.