What were you hoping for?A fun evening, to meet someone interesting and see what happens. First impressions?Tall, dark, handsome. What did you talk about?Travel stories, career paths, Heathrow airspace, Welsh rugby. Any awkward moments?Coming across rude when we suggested to the manager at the end that we were “too waited on”. However, loved having the napkins folded if you went to the loo, and the sommelier was a fantastic highlight. Good table manners?Perfect – sharing is caring. Best thing about Sam?Great drive for life and understanding of how people work. Would you introduce him to your friends?I think they’d get on well. Describe Sam in three wordsIntelligent, good hair and down-to-earth. What do you think he made of you?An overly smiley posh blond. Did you go on somewhere?Nope. Made the most of the fancy restaurant. And... did you kiss?On the cheek. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Nothing, I had a great time. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Yes, I had fun. First dates are nerve-racking so I think a second date should always be on the cards. He’s got my number. What were you hoping for?Anything but a boring evening. First impressions?Tall, blond – and she had already ordered a drink when I arrived, which is class. What did you talk about?Travel, work, physiotherapy. Any awkward moments?Trying to pretend we weren’t on a blind date. Good table manners?At least as good as mine. Expert napkin folder. Best thing about Georgie?Her smile. And her positivity. Would you introduce her to your friends?I wouldn’t put her through that. Describe Georgie in three wordsSmiley, sensible, healthy. What do you think she made of you?Mostly (hopefully) positive? Did you go on somewhere?We did not, but we did stay later than anyone else. And... did you kiss?On the cheek. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I felt rude dashing off but I was about to miss the last train. Apologies, Georgie. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?I think I owe her a cocktail. Georgie and Sam ate at Roast, London SE1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com