In the decade that I’ve been running, I’ve clocked 43 marathons in cities, mountains and even deserts all around the world. But when it comes to exciting locations to run some happy miles, there are few cities that squeeze in so much scenery, greenery and variety as Bristol. And if you enjoy splitting your time between tarmac and trails, this hilly beast of a city offers the perfect mix – with enough ups, downs and testing terrain to challenge the bravest and the fittest. With access to expansive parks and estate grounds, trails for off-road adventuring, fantastic river paths and even quad-burning towers to climb, this gateway to the West Country has become my personal running mecca. If you fancy checking it out for yourself, here are my highlights. Blaise Castle quad burnerWith free parking, a handy cafe and 260 hectares (650 acres) of parkland to explore, the Blaise Castle Estate is a wonderful – but challenging – place to lose yourself on a longer run. The grounds mix steep, groomed woodland paths with rockier trail-style climbs and descents, providing plenty to test your footwork and work your quads. The single-track woodland trails along Hazel brook make you feel like you’ve been magically whisked far from the city. For the best views – and a harder hill run – make a beeline for the 18th-century folly castle that looks down over the estate. I personally love letting loose on the way back down, putting the grip of shoes like the New Balance Fresh Foam X Hierro V5 to work. Alger’s New Balance Fresh Foam X Hierro v5 trail shoes, the folly at Blaise Castle Estate and Clifton Suspension Bridge seen from the Avon Trail Ladies Mile intervalsA wonderful road that cuts through the green open space of Clifton Down, Ladies Mile is a flat stretch of Bristol that’s hugely popular with runners who want to escape the busier city streets. Join at Westbury Road and run through Durdham Down, for a 2-mile (3km) almost-unbroken stretch that’s perfectly punctuated with trees every 20m and shouldered on both sides by big expanses of green. You can choose to run the pavements but if you’re in a versatile road-to-trail shoe with decent grip, I recommend stepping on to the softer paths naturally worn out of the park to add a little extra difficulty – and fun. Those trees are perfect for speedy intervals and once you’re done it’s easy to swing back on to the down for some stunning easy recovery – or run on to the Clifton Observatory. Over and under the Clifton Suspension BridgeA short hop from Ladies Mile is a stunning loop that takes in Bristol’s most famous landmark – Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s Clifton Suspension Bridge. Run the Promenade and slip past the Clifton Observatory en route to the 150-year-old marvel of engineering. To get the maximum experience, run across the bridge and soak up the dizzying views of the gorge and the River Avon below. Then loop down riverside via the steep, muddy trails through Leigh Woods on either side, and run along the flat, groomed compact mud of the Avon Trail for another perspective on this incredible setting. River Avon Trail – the long runWith a combination of manicured cycle paths and sections that cut through fields, this river trail [pdf] is made for road-to-trail shoes like the New Balance Trail Hierro V5. Its Vibram MegaGrip outsole offers maximum traction when things get slippy, steep or muddy while there’s plenty of Fresh Foam X cushioning for a plush ride on the firmer ground. It runs 23 miles (37km) from Pill in Bristol to Pulteney Bridge in Bath. Unlike many of Bristol’s best run spots, it’s flat and perfect for longer marathon training runs but you can also do shorter out-and-backs. My favourite place to join it is under the Suspension Bridge for incredible views of the gorge. Run east past the colourful houses at Hotwells, the SS Great Britain and escape the city on the more rural stretches between Hanham and Kelston locks – and beyond. Alger running at the foot of Leigh Woods, Cabot Tower and the colourful houses at Hotwells on the Avon Trail Ashton Court Estate loopIt’s not hard to see why this Grade II* landscape, with 345 hectares (850 acres) of woodland, is one of the UK’s most popular. Set around a grand mansion house, its rolling terrain offers a winning combination of tarmac roads, hilly running trails across huge clearings and through enclosed woodland. The tree-lined driveway into the estate on a bright autumn or winter day is a real treat. I relish the challenge of burning my quads climbing the softer, grassier hills. When the work is done, you’re treated to stunning views over Bristol and surrounding countryside. There’s parking and a lovely cafe for essential post-run refuelling, too. Cabot Tower climbCabot Tower is set in the heart of Brandon Hill Park, itself a great city centre location for short looping runs with a healthy serving of hills. But if you’re looking for an alternative quick HIIT (high-intensity interval training) session, then you could try sprinting up the 108 steps of the tower. The stairs are steep and narrow so you need shoes you can trust to be sure-footed but the 360-degree views over Bristol are worth the effort. It’s open from 8.15am to 6.15pm all year round but this is a tourist hotspot so very early mornings are the best time to come. Troopers Hill marchIf you want somewhere to tackle short-but-sharp, off-road hill repeats, Troopers Hill ticks that box. Enter the nature reserve from the entrance on Troopers Hill Road and you can “enjoy” a 60m trail climb up to the tower. The mainly mud path up is stepped in parts to make it more of a challenge and each time you conquer the hill, the pay-off is a great view back down across Bristol. While you’re here, you can also explore the trails through Troopers Hill Woods. Vale Street sufferfestIn April 2019, the Ordinance Survey officially declared Vale Street a hill. Which might sound blindingly obvious when you first set eyes on the steepest street in England. With a 22-degree gradient in a 60m asphalt climb, it’s like a very short section of a mountain in disguise and, in running terms, it’s the ultimate hill reps challenge. Unlike a mountain, however, there’s nothing picturesque about this residential street to distract from the pain – so running up it isn’t for the faint-hearted. Or the unfit. Banksy Street art strollBristol’s green spaces and woodland trails are great but when you’re done tackling trails, as the spiritual home of UK street art and of course Banksy, the city’s urban roads also offer plenty of visual treats to keep you running and exploring too. The perfect way to test out the Hierro’s soft, cushioned ride, it’s easy to stitch together your very own running street-art tour. For a cultural 5K, start in Bedminster and pick your way past Banksy’s Well Hung Lover on Frogmore Street and the Girl with the Pierced Eardrum on Hanover Place before heading to the Bear Pit skatepark and exploring the streets of Stokes Croft and St Pauls. The Fresh Foam X Hierro v5 is designed to go the distance. Engineered with a plush Fresh Foam X midsole, a Vibram® MegaGrip outsole for traction and an upper that’s refined for improved breathability and protection, this men’s trail shoe will push you to reimagine your boundaries. Available now on newbalance.co.uk