1) Dele Alli produced a moment of magic in Spurs’ win at West Ham, toppling over on the touchline but still flicking the ball down the line to set up Spurs’ second goal. Here are some more unusual assists from Gonzalo Higuaín, Lionel Messi, Mario Balotelli and er, Danny Welbeck, plus a lesson in never giving up from the J-League. Messi is a master of supine skills but even he can’t keep up with James Milner – or Phil Jones. As for goals scored from the floor, Harry Kane has form this season. Montreal Impact’s Hassoun Camara offers a sitting bicycle kick, Fernando Parra won’t be denied, and here’s a touch of finesse from Mainz’s Jairo Samperio. In Turkey, Milan Baros shows off a ruthless streak that was lacking at Liverpool. Finally, Rennes’ Paul-Georges Ntep serves up a playground classic back in 2014. 2) If you’re going to take this long on the run-up, you’d better score the penalty. 3) College prospect Lynn Bowden is making waves at Kentucky. The wide receiver has been a revelation since making an emergency switch to quarterback, but gave us a glimpse of his skills when back in high school, turning a muffed punt into something very special. 4) In college hoops, meanwhile, Stephen F Austin pulled off an all-time upset at Duke, grabbing the win in overtime thanks to Nathan Bain’s coast-to-coast, lay-up buzzer beater. Here’s another wild finish from the NBA, as the Bulls overturn a seven-point deficit with 30 seconds to play. In Denver, former Broncos QB Peyton Manning took in a Nuggets game, and showed he’s still got it. Shame about the receiver, though. 5) Playing out from a bunker, with two shots in hand to land a $5m payday, Jon Rahm chips nervelessly to set up a winning birdie putt in Dubai. Bunker escape of the year, mind, goes to Tiger Woods with this physics-defying effort from the WGC event in Mexico. Woods’ old rival, Phil Mickelson, is a master of the art, as this highlight reel shows. And if you can’t be that good, be lucky. 6) Michael van Gerwen warms up for Ally Pally with the first televised nine-darter of the year; a perfect excuse to revisit his 17 perfect darts at the Palace in 2013. So close, but yet so far. 1) It’s been a tough year to watch the NFL in Miami and Washington, so here’s a flashback to happier times – Super Bowl VII in 1973, when the Dolphins completed the first (and still only) perfect season. 2) A tribute to the players who may not be last to leave training, but are still world-class. Exhibit A: Antonio Cassano’s first touch. Next: this assist from Carlos Valderrama, and an unstoppable run from Adriano. Finally, Radja Nainggolan with a goal-of-the-season contender. 3) Harlequins and England prop Joe Marler with a late contender for weirdest pre-game interview of the decade. 4) From the boxing archives: Kostya Tszyu floors Zab Judah in round two back in 2001, and his opponent takes the stoppage pretty badly. 5) In 1987, Armenian long-jumper Robert Emmiyan jumped 8.86m at high altitude – it’s still the fourth best jump ever recorded. Here’s a closer look at Emmiyan’s remarkable “hang” technique. Spotters’ badges: denothemeno, germit, BlackCaeser, meagher10, M_T_Wallet. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.