Valie ExportThe incendiary feminist art of an Austrian revolutionary who named herself in defiance of patriarchy and nationalism.• Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac, London, from 28 November. Forgotten MastersGorgeous and enlightening images of nature by outstanding Indian artists commissioned by the East India Company.• Wallace Collection, London, 4 December to 19 April. Sir Stamford RafflesThe British Museum looks at the thorny question of empire and ethnographic collecting through the Javanese art enthusiasms of Raffles, who founded Singapore.• British Museum, London, until 12 January. Science Photographer of the YearThis new award recognises excellence in one of this century’s most sublime fields of visual discovery from astrophotography to the super-microscopic.• Science Museum, London, until 5 January. Turner prizePop along to Margate’s seafront in the bracing late-autumn weather to place a bet on this year’s winner – do you fancy Lawrence Abu Hamdan, Helen Cammock, Oscar Murillo or Tai Shani?• Turner Contemporary, Margate, until 12 January. The Spider-Man of BoltonGrowing up Asian in Bolton, Hetain Patel “wanted to be white”. Now the superhero fantasies into which he escaped racism have won him the Jarman prize for video art. Read our full story. Our architecture critic tested the foundations of UK parties’ election housing promises Anselm Kiefer cracked string theory Was Tutankhamun the original tomb raider? The Great Animal Orchestra is an audiovisual spectacle Judy Chicago is mounting her own extinction rebellion US artist Rashid Johnson will not be hijacked by President Trump Yves St Laurent’s Van Gogh jacket is a snip at €382,000 Letizia Battaglia shot the Mafia and lived We gave the V&A’s Cars a spin Turkish architecture has gone kaleidoscopic Margaret Mitchell’s poignant family photographs are on show Shooting Without Bullets supports young black US artists Queen Elizabeth I has been restored to youth French New Wave posters broke the rules A Roman statue sparked a row about the illicit antiques trade St Paul’s will make a show of William Blake The Historic photographer of the year award was announced Surf’s up in Sydney Fearless Girl sparked a copyright dispute Troy brings many gifts David Lynch lit up Chris Saunders’ world Van Eyck is moving from London to Ghent The art of ceilings is looking up The Virgin and Child Enthrobed With Angels and Saints, circa 1475, by Michael PacherThe spiky white peaks and knobbly protrusions of the gothic arches that enclose this painting almost look like mountains – not surprising , for this is a masterpiece from Alpine Europe. Michael Pacher worked in the Tyrol, and left paintings in today’s Austria and the far north of Italy. He was one of the first Germanic artists to adopt the grace and harmony of the Italian Renaissance, as you can see in the sweetness of Mary’s face and the almost sculptural dignity of the figures. Yet he merges that “modern” style with a medieval delight in fantastic architectural profusion and gold bling that makes this lovely painting a meeting of cultures on one Europe’s inner borderlines.• National Gallery, London. To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.