Liverpool are monitoring Bournemouth’s 25-year-old mobile assist factory Ryan Fraser, whose contract runs out at the end of the season, and might even be able to snag him in January, reports the Sun. “Liverpool loaned winger Harry Wilson to Bournemouth in the summer and the south coast side may be keen to make the move permanent with a swap,” it trills. The Liverpool Echo, however, insists that Jürgen Klopp is “more than happy with the attacking options at his disposal” and has no plans for a mid-season move for Fraser or anyone else. It continues its joyless rumour-busting by adding that a previously trailed move for Borussia Mönchengladbach’s Denis Zakaria will also not happen, as Klopp “will continue to work with the wealth of options available to him in midfield”. Bah. Manchester United are keeping an eye on the Ajax goalkeeper André Onana, with their interest in a potential summer move for the 23-year-old suggesting that David de Gea’s time at Old Trafford might finally be creeping towards a conclusion. In further goalkeeping news, Crystal Palace and Brighton are both monitoring the Slovan Bratislava gloveman Dominik Greif, insists the Mail, with both clubs sending their goalkeeping coaches to watch the Slovakian in action against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the Europa League last week. Apparently the 22-year-old impressed them both, and they will “continue to monitor” him over the next couple of months before deciding on a potential swoop. Manchester City plan to “flex their financial muscle” in January as they seek to replace the departing David Silva, the gently ageing Sergio Agüero and the long-gone Vincent Kompany. Their budget for this spree is anyone’s guess, but the Mail surmises that the moves “would likely cost City a total of at least £100m”. They are not the only Premier League club pondering a mid-season spree, with Ralph Hasenhüttl having “warned Southampton’s top brass” that they need to go on a wild relegation-dodging January transfer binge, says the Mirror. “Hasenhüttl’s priorities are a new right-back and a top-quality central defender,” it says. Chelsea’s Olivier Giroud is linked to Internazionale yet again in Tuesday’s Tuttosport, who reveals the three names that top Antonio Conte’s January wish list: Chelsea’s 33-year-old Frenchman, the 21-year-old Genoa forward Christian Kouamé, and the 24-year-old SPAL striker Andrea Petagna. Meanwhile Juventus are planning a clearout, with Mario Mandzukic, Mattia Perin and Marko Pjaca all deemed disposable – the latter two likely to leave on loan – and Emre Can, Daniele Rugani and Merih Demiral also potentially available in January. Real Madrid haven’t exactly left Vinicius Junior out in the cold, but his record of four league starts and none in Europe indicates that he is perhaps just a little chilly, his Brazilian compatriot Rodrygo having arrived in the summer and snaffled his starting spot. Eagle-eyed Paris Saint-Germain have spotted this, and according to the Spanish paper Sport are considering a move. The Brazilian is seen as a criticism-deflecting human shield should either Neymar or Kylian Mbappé move away from Paris, with the Parisians’ sporting director, Leonardo, apparently wanting “to shield himself with a crack” should either of the team’s two top superstars get lured away. Managerless Cardiff will target either Chris Hughton or Lee Bowyer after Neil Warnock left the club by mutual consent on Monday, writes the Times, though other names are apparently under consideration, including Newport County’s Michael Flynn and the former Middlesbrough bosses Aitor Karanka and the dreaded Tony Pulis.