Israel’s opposition leader, Benny Gantz, has failed to form a government, increasing the likelihood of the country holding an unprecedented third round of elections. Gantz had close to a month to forge a coalition after the prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, failed to do so. Neither leader won a clear majority during a September election and both have sought to stall each other’s play for power. Under Israeli law, midnight on Wednesday was the deadline, after which Gantz was obliged to return the mandate to the president, Reuven Rivlin. The former Israeli army chief told Rivlin four hours before the deadline that he had not succeeded, his Blue and White party said in a statement. Politicians loyal to Netanyahu had blocked his attempts, Gantz said in a speech on Wednesday evening, “insisting only on the best interest of one person”. Gantz added he had sought to reach out to the prime minister, but his efforts had been met with “insults, slander and childish videos”, referring to Netanyahu’s frequent social media rants. Gantz’s failure does not automatically trigger elections. It kicks off a final 21-day period in which the Knesset, Israel’s parliament, can nominate any candidate to be prime minister, including Netanyahu or Gantz. However, the divided makeup of the Knesset would lead to a tough battle as no political alliance has a majority of 61 seats. After that period, Israelis will be on course to go to the polls again, the third time in a year. In May, Netanyahu failed to cobble together a coalition following April’s muddied election result. A second election was held in September, but the ballot only delivered a similar result. The political stalemate has played out during a fraught time for Israel as an increasingly open conflict heats up with Iran, its arch-enemy and a regional powerhouse. Israel’s military said on Wednesday its jets had bombed dozens of Syrian and Iranian targets overnight in neighbouring Syria. The British-based monitoring group the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 23 people had been killed in the strikes, 21 fighters and two civilians. Rivlin had been pressing the two main parties to put aside their differences and form a unity government as they would have more than enough seats for a majority. But there have been vast differences between the rivals during negotiations on key aspects such as how the next administration will look, including who leads it. Gantz ran his election campaign on the promise to topple Netanyahu, making it difficult for the opposition leader to accept a power-sharing deal without losing credibility. Meanwhile, the prime minister has insisted his traditional allies from hardline nationalists to religious parties be included in any unity government, a precondition Gantz has rejected. Netanyahu also faces the possibility of court cases that could lead to jail time. Israel’s attorney general is deciding whether to indict him in three potential corruption cases. If he retains the role of prime minister, he will not be required to step down, even if indicted, and could use his position to push for immunity. Netanyahu has denied all allegations. Gantz had several ways of forging a coalition, including the possibility of courting politicians from Israel’s Arab minority, which makes up close to a fifth of the country’s population. To block this route, Netanyahu has claimed that a government propped up by Arab parties would be a “historic danger to Israel’s security” and accused Arab politicians of allegiance to Palestinian militant groups. Rivlin, who is tasked with overseeing the government formation, strongly rebuked Netanyahu for the campaign. “The characterisation of all Arab elected officials as a ‘threat’ to the existence of the state of Israel and as a ‘fifth column’ must be emphatically denounced,” he said this week.