Q: What big European classics can I read? I want long, thick books to get me through autumn and winter.Enid Lacob, 70, Cape Town, South Africa Sandro Ferri and Sandra Ozzola, founders of Europa Editions, write:The first titles we would suggest are the great masterpieces of the 19th century. The Russian novels by Tolstoy and Dostoevsky and the French novels by Balzac, Dumas, Hugo and Zola, as well as the English ones by Austen, Dickens and Conrad. The foundations of literary realism – not only are they able to tell of social and personal universes, but they remain compelling narratives that allow the reader to identify with characters and situation despite the temporal distance. It’s also very enjoyable, if more demanding, to read the masters of modernism, those who questioned the basis of the traditional novel. We’re talking about Franz Kafka, Marcel Proust, Virginia Woolf and James Joyce. Then we have the great European classics of the 1900s. Among those who wrote in German: Thomas Mann, Joseph Roth, Leo Perutz and Ernst Lothar, who told of the demise of the mighty Austro-Hungarian empire and the ascent of Nazism; Christa Wolf, Heinrich Böll and Günter Grass, with their novels about postwar Germany and the political and personal angst people felt until the fall of the Berlin Wall and beyond. Among Italian authors, Guiseppi Tomasi di Lampedusa, with his canvas depicting Sicily and Italy’s unification, The Leopard; Pier Paolo Pasolini, visionary reporter of the changes taking place in contemporary Italy (in The Street Kids, about the young men growing up in the bombed-out suburbs of postwar Rome); Elsa Morante and, more recently, Elena Ferrante, on Italian women’s arduous route to emancipation. And among the French: Albert Camus with his existential novels, The Plague and The Stranger; Simone de Beauvoir; André Malraux with Man’s Fate; Louis-Ferdinand Céline’s Journey to the End of the Night. Last but not least, the great writers of eastern Europe, from the Czechs Milan Kundera and Bohumil Hrabal, to the Polish Kazimierz Brandys. And the Russians: Bulgakov’s The Master and Margarita, Pasternak’s Doctor Zhivago, Svetlana Alexievich with Chernobyl Prayer and Vasily Grossman with Life and Fate. Submit your question below or email bookclinic@observer.co.uk