Alexis Dudden’s opinion piece presents an argument on the rising sun flag based on the misunderstanding of Japan’s sincere dealings with the past (Japan’s rising sun flag has a history of horror. It must be banned at the Tokyo Olympics, 1 November). Looking at Prime Minister Abe’s statement on the 70th anniversary of the end of the second world war – issued by cabinet consensus – it is clear that Japan has squarely faced the facts of history and repeatedly expressed feelings of deep remorse and heartfelt apology for its actions during the war, which this opinion piece fails to recognise. It is completely wrong to state that embracing the rising sun flag means taking pride in Japan’s military history. The design of the flag has been widely used in numerous scenes in the daily life of Japan for a long time, including celebrating childbirth and seasonal festivities. It is not an expression of political statement, nor a symbol of militarism. We must point out the fact that vessels of the Maritime Self-Defense Force of Japan (MSDF) have been entering ports of Asian countries, recently in China (2019), Singapore (2019), the Philippines (2019), and Myanmar (2013), hoisting the flag without any objections from these countries. There was even no objection from the Republic of Korea (ROK) when MSDF vessels entered Busan port in 1998 and 2008. Indeed, over more than 70 years since the end of the war, there had been no objections to the rising sun flag from the international community. Many of these objections against the rising sun flag are driven by political motives, and only in recent years has the ROK come to make them. The Olympic Games should not be used for such political manoeuvring.Ohtaka MasatoPress secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, Tokyo • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition