Ofcom has chosen Melanie Dawes, one of the UK’s most senior civil servants, to be its new chief executive, the Guardian can reveal. The 53-year-old, the most senior woman in the civil service, is currently permanent secretary at the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, which she took over from Bob Kerslake in 2015. The UK media and telecoms regulator’s selection panel, led by the Ofcom chairman, Terry Burns, is ready to appoint Dawes, who is understood to be keen to take up one of the biggest regulatory jobs in Britain. However, the announcement of a successor to Sharon White is not likely to be confirmed until after the general election and that could have an impact on her appointment, which needs to be agreed by the culture secretary. Ofcom has said Jonathan Oxley, its group director of competition, will become interim chief executive as White is leaving at the end of November. Ofcom said Oxley did not apply to be permanent chief executive. Dawes, who is married to Benedict Brogan, the former deputy editor and chief political commentator at the Daily Telegraph, boasts an impressive three-decade career in government, including 15 years at the Treasury, five years at HMRC and four years at the Cabinet Office. “She is a very safe pair of hands and nobody’s fool,” a former colleague said. “She has a lifetime of experience with senior ministers, secretaries of state and being in and out of No 10. I’d call her formidable.” Dawes is the government’s diversity and inclusion champion, a role she took up this year, replacing Dame Sue Owen, the former permanent secretary at the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, who has retired. Dawes was previously the government’s gender champion. The Ofcom role, which has a starting salary of £315,000, spans everything from regulating the BBC to monitoring mobile, landline and broadband pricing. The next phase of Ofcom’s regulatory agenda involves work on the UK’s 5G mobile phone networks, the race to roll out next-generation full-fibre and gigabit-speed broadband and content standards in the digital age. Consumer protection, protecting people from online harm and balancing the regulation of on-demand video with tighter rules governing traditional TV broadcasters will also be priorities. White is leaving to become chair of John Lewis. She joined Ofcom in 2015 from the Treasury, where she was a senior civil servant in charge of public finances. Ofcom declined to comment.