I am sitting, with old friends, around a table. We start talking about the election. No one is enthused. My friends are mostly going to vote Labour. It’s what they do. They are unhappy about it – a couple may go Lib Dem. They are all ardent remainers. I feel as if I should be somewhere else, that somehow, while these are decent people trying to do the right thing, they are no longer my people. They are being forced to vote for politicians they do not trust, and to reduce their complex, well-thought-out beliefs. Well, that’s democracy, you might say. Them’s the breaks. I say, break it more. Break it down. Voting can no longer be a tribal, class-based enterprise. I once bribed my working-class mother not to vote Tory. That’s class war for you. But before you start the lecture about people having died for my right to vote ... you should know that that has the same effect on me as arguing I should eat food I hate because children are starving in Africa. Stop. I live in a safe Labour seat. How I vote doesn’t matter in this first-past-the-post system. And it’s actually my right to vote for none of the above. To register my disgust. How you vote only matters if you live in a marginal seat. As with the referendum, the electorate is being underestimated. More than three years after that vote, they understand that the system they are being asked to participate in is borked. The shutdown caused by Brexit cannot be fixed by more of the same. Apathy might be read as radical alienation, an emotional understanding that neither party can deliver what it is promising Labour has a radical transformative programme. There are good individuals in the party of course, and I am hoping Iain Duncan Smith gets the Michael Portillo moment of this election. But I stand in solidarity with my Jewish friends and refuse the fake binary of austerity v antisemitism. I can be against both, actually. A leadership that cannot manage antisemitism or rampant misogyny and is in thrall to charmers such as Len McCluskey is not for me. Boris Johnson is even more abhorrent and unable to relate to ordinary people at all. This deeply unimpressive ego-driven mobster stands for nothing. We are to believe he is clever, just as we are to believe Dominic Cummings is an evil genius. The evidence? A couple of slogans. By these standards, whoever wrote “Because I’m worth it” for L’Oréal should be prime minister. Jo Swinson in her possessed head-girl persona doesn’t float my boat, either. Surely the way people feel - leave, remain, left or right - doesn’t fit into these claustrophobic party-political boxes. The media has to cheerlead as though all of this were exciting. Well, maybe if you are at a rally and given a placard, the earth moves for you. I need a little more seduction. If the past three years have taught us anything it is that more of the same is not viable: the main parties are divided, Westminster cannot control Scotland and alliances have to be made. Both main parties think themselves better than this. Both main parties are crumbling. Apathy might be read as radical alienation, an emotional understanding that neither party can deliver what it is promising. Of course, I think of the Oz editor Richard Neville saying, long ago: “There is an inch of difference between the Conservative and Labour parties. But this is the inch in which we live.” Now it is more than an inch, sure. A metre? Before you start on about the mainstream media being against the blessed Jeremy Corbyn, I would like to say the mainstream media fails to reflect what is really going on, replaying all this as a simple choice and zombie party politics. Vote, everyone says. Get a large nose peg. Do the right thing. But what if the right thing is refusing the fake binaries on offer? Voting now feels like clinging to the wreckage of a system we should dismantle. All the issues that really matter require cooperation, not silly, point-scoring conflict. That’s what this election feels like: a proxy war in which we are unwilling conscripts with little actual choice.