Logan Roy is today’s King Lear in the HBO series Succession, turning his offspring against each other to pull up the drawbridge against threats to his reign. The Loudest Voice, Russell Crowe’s gargantuan embodiment of alleged sexual harasser and Fox News head, Roger Ailes, confronted us with the perpetrator’s point of view. Add Joker to the list, and the protagonists of 2019 are reprehensible and compelling to watch. The trend has made it to the stage too, with the recent global success of The Lehman Trilogy depicting the historic trading of moral values for towering stock worth. The bravest provocation about this wave of storytelling is that the moral heart of the drama is so ambiguous, if not entirely absent. The first time a lead character airs a moral qualm in Succession is episode two of the second season. Cousin Greg hesitates at working for the fictional equivalent of Fox News. He is laughed at for having principles. Even when the show elicits empathy for Kendall Roy as he takes on his father, his objective is no storybook compulsion for the greater good. His core goal is greed and self-advancement. The moral centre is no longer centre stage. It’s still doing its warm up in the green room having missed its entrance. Packer & Sons, my upcoming play for Belvoir theatre, dramatises the patriarchal cycles within Australia’s famous media dynasty. Part comedy, part tragedy, its portrait of male entitlement is stark; the scenes take place in rooms where women are excluded. This might appear a counterintuitive undertaking, incautious in a world that is becoming more conscious and critical of its gender blindspots. The real Packer women have a central role in the narrative of this family, but these individuals would bring a moral counterpoint that Packer & Sons resists. Deserving of the theatre as they are, this is not their play, nor is that a play for me to write. Kerry Packer perfected the role of Australia’s alpha male in chief I write from a queer outrage at the excesses of Australian masculinity. As a gay man I have been both an insider and an outsider in all-male domains. I know how men perform their masculinity for each other. I attempt to provide that insight in this story of men inculcating other men to be less sensitive – to stomp out the feminine. Kerry Packer perfected the role of Australia’s alpha male in chief. A Packer executive described to me how he was once made to watch for hours as Kerry verbally mauled a top lieutenant. Within the marathon, Kerry sent a secret wink to his audience of one. It was a performance, and Kerry was enjoying it. In his comedic 1991 appearance before a parliamentary committee, Kerry’s bulky presence, quick wit and sizeable disdain for his government interrogators is still a great watch on YouTube bannered in green and gold typeface. His main gripe is, “Every time you pass a law you take away someone’s privileges.” Well, yes. The fumbling politicians merely grinned with admiration at his quips, his reprimands and his unbridled entitlement. The one-time richest man in Australia argued for minimising his tax on the basis that the government were “not spending it that well that we should be donating extra!” The public, who would have benefited from Packer paying his fair share, applauded him. I’m told they even stopped him on the street for years afterwards to say so. This is the thing about the Australian ultra-rich: though he was the third generation of a family who had known enormous wealth since the 1920s, Kerry had a common touch. He created Australia’s “golden age” of popular television and World Series Cricket: that hallmark of 1980s masculinity, even in pastel. Notably, he bragged that he knew the price of chops in Parramatta. It was his business to tune in to what made the populace tick. Our tycoons and their scions enjoy sport and may sound enough like a bloke from out west, but let’s not confuse that for egalitarianism. The class system is elusive in Australia and too easily escapes scrutiny. Prime ministers bowed to the “big man”. Kerry even once derided Bob Hawke’s public deference because it made him uncomfortable, according to biographer Paul Barry. Kerry’s father had set the standard on how to make pollies grovel. Prime minister Robert Menzies wrote in his foreword to Sir Frank Packer’s hagiography: “I have heard him charged with being too tough, or too rough in his treatment of people. My answer has always been, and still is, that all his faults are masculine.” Dubbed “Dumb Dumb” by his father, dyslexic young Kerry lived in the shadow of an ambitious and intellectual older brother. Then, at 37, Clyde Packer could take no more of their father’s haranguing. In the opinion of Clyde’s son, Francis, with whom I spoke, Clyde sought to demonstrate to Sir Frank that he was essential by resigning his post at Channel Nine. It didn’t work, and his position as heir was usurped by Kerry, who had by then developed the impenetrable body armour that he would don in all future contests … including in his own role as father. Packer & Sons dramatises their dominance at the upper echelons of Australian society and how the Packer men wielded their power over each other. It is a carnival of the same grotesque masculinity that we see in the age of Morrison, Trump, Johnson, Duterte, Erdoğan… As if political press conferences are not enough, our current writing for screen and stage baldly displays how masculinity is performed. To depict is not to endorse. It is to unpack the unchecked egos of these men and the destruction they cause. It is to locate our own dubious inclinations in these protagonists. • Packer & Sons by Tommy Murphy is showing at Belvoir theatre in Sydney 16 November to 22 December 2019