Zlatan Ibrahimovic has thanked LA Galaxy for making him feel “alive again” before instructing the club’s fans to “go back to watch baseball” now he has played his last MLS game for them. The Swedish striker will end a two-year spell at the club when his contract expires in December. Ibrahimovic scored 52 goals in 56 games for Galaxy after leaving Manchester United in March 2018, but his final match ended in defeat with Galaxy losing to Los Angeles FC in the MLS Cup play-offs conference semi-finals. In a post on Twitter, Ibrahimovic wrote: “I came, I saw, I conquered. Thank you LA Galaxy for making me feel alive again. To the Galaxy fans – you wanted Zlatan, I gave you Zlatan. You are welcome. The story continues … now go back to watch baseball.” I came, I saw, I conquered. Thank you @lagalaxy for making me feel alive again. To the Galaxy fans - you wanted Zlatan, I gave you Zlatan. You are welcome. The story continues...Now go back to watch baseball pic.twitter.com/kkL6B6dJBr “We would like to thank Zlatan for his contributions to the LA Galaxy and Major League Soccer,” said LA Galaxy’s president, Chris Klein. “Since his arrival in 2018, Zlatan has positively influenced the sport of soccer in Los Angeles. We are grateful for his work ethic and passion. We thank Zlatan for his professionalism and immeasurable impact on the Los Angeles community and the soccer community in North America as a whole.” Ibrahimovic, who has played for some of the biggest clubs in world football including Ajax, Juventus, Internazionale, Barcelona, Milan, Manchester United and Paris St Germain gave no indication over his future plans. The 38-year-old has been linked with a return to Serie A, with Milan and Bologna among the clubs said to be interested in signing the free agent. Elsewhere in MLS, David Beckham’s new team Inter Miami will play their first home match against Galaxy. Inter Miami announced on Wednesday that they will play Beckham’s former club on 14 March at their temporary home in Fort Lauderdale.