I lay there in agony and screamed abuse at the top of my lungs while two care staff had their knees in my back. I guess it was my own fault for throwing that coffee cup across the room. I was 14, living in a children’s home in Oldham and I had missed my curfew. I had also missed the last bus home, and the staff were annoyed that they had to drive out to collect me. On the journey home they threatened to ground me, have my portable TV removed and take away my pocket money. They told me I would amount to nothing if I didn’t change my behaviour. When I got back to “the unit” I made a drink and went into the lounge, but the lecturing continued. I’m not making excuses for myself, but I was 14, and mardy at the best of times. I’d had enough. “Fuck off, you pricks,” I shouted – or some variation of that – and launched the cup at the wall, smashing it. I went to leave the room, but was rugby-tackled to the floor by the bigger staff member before I reached the threshold. This transition from misbehaving child to criminal could have been avoided if care staff were truly acting in loco parentis The police came and handcuffed me while I was still trapped under the weight of the staff. A night in the cells and a police caution was the result. Don’t get me wrong, I was very difficult back then. I probably deserved a bollocking and a grounding. Being made to pay for the cup I broke would have been justified too, but I don’t think the rugby tackle and handcuffs were necessary. I was arrested several times after that, either for more petulant outbursts or getting swept up with the other kids causing havoc. Often the police would come just to make sure we went to bed at night. The silliest, perhaps most needless, arrest was for the time I threw a deodorant can, which ricocheted off a wall and cracked a mirror. The care home manager found out and had me prosecuted for criminal damage. That was 18 years ago, but the treatment I received is still common in the care system. Government guidelines insist that police should not be called to manage the behaviour of unruly children or to deal with incidents that a “reasonable parent” can handle themselves. Yet looked-after children are still being locked up and dragged to court over things that would earn most kids a stern word and a dock in pocket money. Young people living in care homes are 10 times more likely to be criminalised than other young people. However, as stark as that figure is, it’s probably an underestimate, as it only counts children who have been in continuous care for at least 12 months. The Guardian discovered that out of the 128 children who passed through Greater Manchester youth court in August, 17% of them were in care. A number of those were charged with low-level offences committed in the care setting. Considering that almost every person I lived with in care has a criminal record, it is not particularly surprising to me that 27% of the prison population are care leavers. I remember one boy I lived with in a children’s home was arrested because he decided to throw chairs down the stairs. I saw him get arrested several times after this, and each time for something more serious. Eventually he was sent to a young offender institution for beating up two members of staff with another boy after threatening them with a fake handgun. So what started out as teenage aggression escalated to serious assault. But this transition from misbehaving child to criminal could have been avoided if care staff were truly acting in loco parentis. Once you’re told you’re a criminal, you start to believe it. And to compound this, being locked up for such trivial offences gave kids the, often correct, impression that staff didn’t care about them. A consequence of this is the kids didn’t care either. Not about the staff, property, other kids they lived with, themselves and certainly not the law. Of course, the reasons for staff negligence are in some cases understandable, as care workers are often underpaid and poorly trained. How much bad behaviour would you tolerate while working for minimum wage on a zero-hours contract? Any solution to this problem needs to take the working conditions of care workers into account. As for the children’s situation, when they go into care it’s invariably because their family situation has broken down. After this happens the state becomes the parent and is responsible for their welfare. But no parent who truly cares for their children would be willing to criminalise them over something as minor as a broken cup. They wouldn’t do this because to do so could mean their kid might spend a night in a cell, and because a criminal record could have serious consequences for their future. Locking up kids doesn’t help care staff either. If you’re working in a children’s home and you’re fond of dialling 999, understand that this isn’t helping you in the long term – as well as alienating the kids you’re supposed to be looking after, you’re also alienating yourself. Every time the members of staff who got me arrested were on shift, I’d either completely ignore them or go out of my way to torment them. This wasn’t good for either of us. But the saddest thing about the criminalisation of children in care is the overwhelming human cost. A lot of the kids I lived with were troubled – but they were also bright, funny and capable. Who knows what they could have become if they weren’t involuntarily embroiled with the police at such a young age. It’s not implausible that we could still be asking that question decades from now, and that should shame us all. • Daniel Lavelle writes on mental health, homelessness and social care. He received the Guardian’s Hugo Young award in 2017