It is a season of farewells for the Richard Alston Dance Company – though not for Alston the choreographer. The company is closing next spring after 25 years due to funding cuts. The dancers, who are on a final nationwide tour, are making a poignant pit stop at the Place, the London dance house where Alston has been a fixture one way or another since it opened in 1969. Back then he was part of the first intake of contemporary dance students in the UK, and tonight’s highlights are two of his very first works, Nowhere Slowly (1970) and Blue Schubert Fragments (1972). It is special to see the simplicity of his figures, moving through a slow flow of poses, meditative in their elevated concentration. We are transported back in time yet also fully in the moment. Merce Cunningham was a huge early influence on Alston, and Alston’s classmate Siobhan Davies and Elly Braun perform enigmatic Cunningham solos tonight. That influence is apparent on multiple levels, but Alston’s love of ballet also shines through. In Nowhere Slowly, Jennifer Hayes turns in arabesque, hopping on one foot like Giselle, and leaps in a gust of airy flight before a measured yoga-like pose. In 2012’s Isthmus you think of Frederick Ashton, packing in an abundance of steps with such a lightness of touch. Complexity with clarity is what Alston was always aiming for. A revival of 1998’s Red Run shows off the dancers’ effortless speed (Jason Tucker especially) without ever seeming rushed, the revving guitars of Heiner Goebbels’s music turning Alston’s often genteel style into simmering drama. It’s fantastic to see these impressive dancers up close, wholly immersed in Alston’s world of grace. Never content with nostalgia, Alston includes a new, sunny piece, Bari, for current students at the Place, and it is testament to his personal grace that the show closes not with a work of his own but the urgently paced Detour by associate choreographer Martin Lawrance. It is a fine company – and a fine tribute to this modest but towering figure in British contemporary dance. • At the Place, London, until 30 November.