Alisson Took a few unnecessary risks with his distribution but commanded his area impressively. Made an important save from Aguero although not over-worked. 7 Trent Alexander-Arnold Fortunate to escape a handball that, if given, could have changed the complexion of the game. The second appeal never was. Brilliant ball to Robertson to instigate the second goal. Struggled against Sterling at times. 7 Dejan Lovren A few loose clearances could not detract from a strong defensive performance overall. Celebrated one of his own blocks on Sterling like a match-winning goal. 8 Virgil van Dijk Looked unusually nervous in the very early stages but it did not last. Became increasingly assured and let Agüero know he was in a battle, although City created several chances against him late on. 7 Andy Robertson His delivery for Salah’s header was absolute perfection. Defensively he also kept Silva at arm’s length for long periods and made several well-timed interceptions in his area. 8 Jordan Henderson Helped the hosts regain composure after a shaky start with his measured passing. Grew as a threat down the right too and delivered a superb cross for Mane’s goal. 7 Fabinho His first goal of the season was one to savour, as was another commanding and polished midfield display. A major influence on this team. 8 Georginio Wijnaldum The midfielder’s accurate and intelligent distribution under pressure helped launch several counter-attacks. Also switched play superbly to increase City’s discomfort. 8 Mohamed Salah Converted a difficult header with consummate ease and helped set the tempo of Liverpool’s attacks. One of his most destructive displays for a while. 8 Roberto Firmino Knitted together his team’s attacking play intelligently although not as decisive in the final third as his fellow forwards. Would have been substituted just before Silva’s goal. 7 Sadio Mané Marked his 100th Premier League start for Liverpool with his 28th goal of the calendar year. Not afraid to help out with the dirty work either. 7 Subs Milner (for Henderson, 61) 6; Oxlade-Chamberlain (for Firmino, 79) 6; Gomez (for Salah, 87) 5 Claudio Bravo No absolute howlers but doubtful Ederson would have conceded the first or third. 6 Kyle Walker Berated his defensive colleagues for a lack of fight but, positionally, he needed to use his head more. Liverpool frequently prospered behind him, as did Mane for his goal. 5 John Stones Easily beaten in the build-up to the opener but was not only poor in his defensive duties. The polished touches have gone too and so has his confidence. 5 Fernandinho Fought manfully and produced a fine challenge to prevent Salah escaping for a third. Unable to cut out Robertson’s brilliant cross for the Egyptian’s header though. 6 Angeliño Lost track of Salah for Liverpool’s second goal and endured a difficult first half against his marker. Improved after the interval, however, and set up Silva’s consolation. 6 Rodri A quiet return to the side after injury. Lost several individual battles‚ including an aerial duel with Mane at one point ‚ and unable to halt Liverpool on the counter attack. 6 Ilkay Gundogan His sharp passing ensured City kept the pressure on but failed miserably in his defensive duties with a weak clearance and challenge for Liverpool’s first and third respectively. 5 Bernardo Silva Took his consolation crisply and was integral to City’s strong start although creatively he struggled to deliver an end product from several excellent positions. 7 Kevin De Bruyne City’s most threatening player in the first half and must have despaired at the failure of Agüero and Sterling to capitalise on his invitations. Could not have done more. 8 Raheem Sterling Booed as always on his return to Anfield but the crowd didn’t get to him on this occasion. Missed chances and the referee did, though. Never gave up but not his day. 8 Sergio Agüero Another Anfield visit to forget for the usually ruthless Argentina international on his 250th Premier League appearance. Wasted several clear chances to score his first goal on this ground and rightly replaced. 5 Subs Jesus (for Agüero, 71) 6