Brisbane NRL star David Fifita has been arrested in Bali after an alleged brawl at the same nightclub where Nelson Asofa-Solomona landed himself in trouble last month. The Broncos on Saturday confirmed Fifita was in jail. The club has immediately flown an official to meet their key forward. “The Brisbane Broncos have today been made aware that David Fifita has been detained by authorities in Bali after an alleged incident involving a security guard,” a Broncos statement read. “The club is working with representatives in Bali to provide David all the support he needs, and a Broncos official is travelling to Indonesia today.” The Seven Network reported Fifita, holidaying with Broncos teammate Payne Haas, allegedly assaulted a security guard early at La Favela nightclub. It is the same nightspot where Melbourne’s Asofa-Solomona was involved in a wild brawl, which resulted in a three-game ban and a suspended $15,000 fine. A police report obtained by Seven alleged the security guard was hit in the face by a foreigner who was riding a motorbike taxi. “The perpetrator jumped from the motorbike and tried to approach the victim, but was prevented by ojek driver,” the police report reads. “The victim felt pain in his face and made a report at Kuta police station. Based on report, police went to the crime scene, asking witnesses and the victim. A bule (foreigner) that was allegedly the perpetrator was arrested. “The perpetrator was taken to Kuta police station for further investigation. The alleged perpetrator could not be interrogated yet as he is still under the influence of alcohol.” It is understood Fifita can be detained for 24 hours before being named as a suspect or freed by police. “So the alleged perpetrator was nabbed straight away and taken to the police station,” Kuta police chief Teuku Ricki Fadlianshah told the Seven Network. “Witnesses said that he hit La Favela’s security. An ojek driver tried to separate them and he tried to hit the security again. It is still being investigated. Based on witnesses, the perpetrator spontaneously hit the security without any reason. But we are still facing difficulties to interrogate him.” The incident comes a fortnight after Fifita captained a Junior Kangaroos team to a win over France in Wollongong. The 19-year-old is also set to enter the final year of his current contract, and is widely considered arguably the hottest free agent available for the 2021 season. He has been linked with a number of rival clubs, including South Sydney.