Abby Dow is on a mission. Make that two. By this time next year she hopes to have qualified as a mechanical engineer and earned a playing contract from the Rugby Football Union. She can give a boost to the latter ambition by performing as well against France in Exeter on Saturday as she did against the same opposition during last week’s victory in Clermont-Ferrand. Dow is one of only three players – along with Heather Kerr and Ellena Perry – in the England squad for the autumn internationals not to have a full-time contract with the RFU, who signed up 28 players in January. Instead the wing has forced her way in by excelling for Wasps, for whom she ran in seven tries in the first six matches of this season. She did well from the start in last week’s 20-10 win in France, which ended an 18-match unbeaten home record for the French going back to 2012. Keep this up and she will have a fair chance of gaining a full-time deal next year, by which time she should also have graduated from Imperial College London. “I’ve got my last year to go to get my master’s,” says the 22-year-old. “Then everything is on the table: whether to try to aim for a [full-time] spot on the team or go for a career in engineering. I’ve got a very open field to play with.” That “open field” outlook reflects a woman with the confidence to pursue her goals. Just as she has not been put off by being a part-timer in a squad packed with professionals, she is not discouraged by the statistic that says only about 12% of engineers working in Britain are women. “It’s a similar proportion at my university but I think it’s slowly changing,” she says. “I loved physics and maths at A-level and I’ve always been interested in making things. It’s helped having two academic parents. I just naturally fell into doing engineering.” She is a natural at rugby, too, and has been able to hone her talent this year thanks to training with professional players. “Because I’m in the final year [of studies] I know what I have to do so I’ve been able to shift a bit more focus on to rugby,” she says. “We have a really good setup at Wasps. One of the other girls [Claudia MacDonald] is one of the pro players and I’ve been able to follow the structure that Wasps have put in place. We have an elite group that’s designed so professional players and people doing part-time jobs can play rugby and train throughout the day and that’s helping me to thrive.” Her routine when she is not away with England shows her dedication. “I’ll be training every day apart from Fridays and Sundays. Fortunately my uni lectures are recorded so I watch them online just to make sure I’ve caught up. “Last week we were in France so I’m not going to travel to London for a lecture. My senior tutors and scholarship staff are really good with making sure my lecturers know where I am, what’s going on and moving deadlines if I need it, which is really handy.” It would be handier still if she were among those given a professional deal by the RFU next year. “I’d love to be given that opportunity and to throw my all into it,” she says. Only by sustaining her performance might she get that opportunity. “That is what Scott [Bemand], the backs’ coach, says,” she explains. “He looks for consistency within players. You need to show week in, week out, that it’s not a fluke game or a fluke catch or kick of the ball. Because when it comes to the harder game it needs to be skill not luck that gets you to be able to perform in those. Hopefully I can show him that throughout the next year.” Saturday is the next opportunity to show that. It will not be easy. “Both teams are extremely strong and it will come down to the smaller details, which we as a team will hopefully be better at,” Dow says. “They’ve got some really powerful kickers so they’re able to control the game that way if they plan to. So it’s up to our kickers and back three to work and manage the field to make sure they can’t utilise that threat. “They’ve also got some hard ball-carriers so we’ve got to make sure we meet them with dominant tackles. If we stop every margin they get on the gainline and actually send them back and show the control in both physicality and game management, that should hopefully disrupt their play enough for us to win.” England women v France women, Exeter, Saturday, 1.10pm