It’s holiday season soon, a time for winter feasting, for baking Christmas treats. If you want simple and savoury – Jeremy Lee’s definitive soda bread, a smart twist on cheesy straws, or something eye-catching and adventurous such as Justin Gellatly’s monumental croquembouche – you need look no further. From Dan Lepard to Dominique Ansel, Anna Jones to Claire Ptak, Yotam Ottolenghi to Nigel Slater, our experts have your back. There are also crisp shortbread stars, a Christmas pudding, perfect mince pies, Mont Blanc tarts, a luxurious meringue cake, even Anja Dunk’s gingerbread house. Top recipes for a family tea or a posher party. Merry Christmas everyone. Gloriously festive, these fragrant star biscuits are perfect to have on hand for cups of tea over Christmas, and make a great present. Bright, rich, spicy and most importantly delicious, this seasonal staple is best made ahead, then left to gently warm while you eat Christmas lunch. With its snowy surface giving way to layers of crisp flaky pastry and rich and buttery vanilla creme patissiere, this is a winter wonderland of a cake. Christmas entertaining is a snap with these moreish snacks – easy to make, quick to cook straight from the freezer, and perfect with a drink. An easy recipe for a snowy fairytale scene that’s as fun to decorate as it is to eat. Deep, rich flavours from prune and armagnac add seasonally appropriate indulgent notes to a chocolate brownie recipe that will still please purists. This impressive cake, traditionally smashed by the host before serving, makes a theatrical centrepiece for the Christmas table. This take on an Italian tart is an almost perfect wintry pudding – seasonal fruit, enveloped in a ricotta cream and baked in a hazelnut crust. Buttery puff pastry, oozy cheese and layered potatoes, this pie elevates comfort food to be a vegetarian main worthy of a Christmas feast. One recipe for fruity and deeply spiced mincemeat and one for the perfect crisp pastry that helps transform it into these Christmas essentials. A twist on the French bûche de Noël sees the traditional dark chocolate sponge and icing swapped for pistachios and white chocolate. Nothing beats bread warm from the oven, generously spread with butter. This easy loaf is made with an interesting heritage grain and works particularly well with smoked salmon or Christmas cheese. In this sophisticated tart, the classic pudding of chestnut puree and whipped cream is given a bit more interest with crunchy pecan praline. Membrillo – quince paste – isn’t just for the cheese board. Stirred into a mix with buttermilk, spelt and poppy seeds, when baked it melts deliciously into this surprisingly decadent tray bake. Like a boozy pavlova with a lid, the elements for this merry pudding can be made two days in advance, taking a little stress out of Christmas feasting. This dinner-party favourite takes an update, hiding nuggets of a favourite Christmas sweet in its oozy centre. One for the traditional pudding haters. This traditional Indian Catholic family recipe is full of rich and bittersweet caramel and rum flavours, with plenty of spiced sweet ginger and chopped cashews. Influenced by American home-cooking, this cheesecake is full of seasonal spices – and was a much-coveted favourite of the kitchen staff at Honey & Co. There’s no better use for leftover croissants, and this is an easy and a gorgeously indulgent brunch or supper for the lazy post-Christmas days. A sweet, orange-blossom-flavoured brioche-like bread is traditional in Provence for Christmas Eve – but it works equally well as a Boxing Day breakfast for dipping into mugs of hot chocolate.