England have the chance to gain some revenge for their 2018 World Cup semi-final defeat against Croatia in their opening game of Euro 2020 after Gareth Southgate’s side were handed a favourable draw for next summer’s tournament, although Wales face a tricky task to progress after being paired with Turkey, Italy and Switzerland. Already assured of playing all of their Group D matches at Wembley due to the unique format of the tournament that will see 12 cities across Europe play host, England were also drawn with Czech Republic and the winners of play-off path C – one of Scotland, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia or Norway. None of those should particularly worry Southgate, whose side beat Croatia 2-1 at Wembley during the Nations League last year and also put five past the Czechs during qualifying on the way to topping their qualifying group, although they did suffer their first qualifying defeat for almost a decade against Jaroslav Silhavy’s side in Prague last month. England – fortunate to avoid France at the group stage – will face Croatia in their first game on 14 June, with the play-off winners up next on 19 June and the Czechs in their final group match on 23 June. Should they come top, however, Southgate’s side would face the runners-up from a very tough Group F that contains Germany, the world champions, France, and the holders, Portugal in Dublin. In a complicated draw procedure that saw a whopping 36 countries represented at the Romexpo in Bucharest, Wales were placed into Group A and will face a 3,000-mile trip for their opener against Switzerland in Baku on 13 June before facing Turkey in the Azerbaijani capital four days later. Ryan Giggs’s side then travel to Rome to face Italy in their final group match on 21 June. Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland also have hopes of making it to the finals via the play-offs and will be placed in Group E with Spain, Sweden and Poland if successful. Elsewhere, Finland’s finals debut will see them face Denmark, Belgium and Russia in a group where three of the sides were already predetermined thanks to the hosting system, with Manchester City’s Belgium midfielder Kevin De Bruyne having described the format that sees them face trips to both Copenhagen and St Petersburg as a scandal. But the biggest audible gasps of the evening were reserved for Group F, which will see either the winners of play-off path A – Iceland, Bulgaria, Hungary or Romania – or play-off path D – Kosovo, North Macedonia, Georgia or Belarus – face off against three of the world’s most formidable footballing nations. The France manager, Didier Deschamps, was caught laughing by TV cameras after Portugal, who defeated his side in the Euro 2016 final in Paris, were placed into the same pot as them and the three-times champions Germany, although there is a chance all three could make it through to the last 16 with four of the best third-placed teams also set to advance. Uefa, meanwhile, has said it does not expect any more incidents of racism to mar the tournament despite problems during qualifying. Bulgaria had to play their match against Czech Republic earlier this month behind closed doors and fined €75,000 after England players were racially abused by a section of home supporters during the 6-0 win in Sofia in October, while there were also accusations of racism during Sweden’s recent match against Romania in Bucharest. “In our experience, the Euro has always been a very festive event, at least within the stadiums,” said the vice-president, Giorgio Marchetti. “We are confident this particular atmosphere will take priority over stupid and sometimes criminal things that unfortunately from time to time happen in football, and we never want to see in our sport.”