There is no shame in losing to the Kiwis in New Zealand. It has happened to the last 11 British international teams to go there. And, despite being at a rather low ebb, New Zealand were excellent in their 32-8 victory on Saturday. No, the damage done to the Lions has come off the pitch as much as on it – and it has been self-inflicted. It’s not the three successive defeats, or even the uninspiring attacking performances. It’s the attitude of Great Britain (and England) coach Wayne Bennett that grates. No one seems to have told him that this is not the England team. When asked about the defeat to New Zealand on Saturday, Bennett replied: “We’re back to where we were in 2016 when I first came in as coach. We’ve gone backwards a little bit from what last year and the World Cup year was, compared with how we’ve played this series.” Time and again he talks about the Lions as if they are England in different shirts, which, frankly, thanks to his selection decisions, they are. All 17 of the players in Christchurch represent England. Bennett, who also coaches South Sydney Rabbitohs, has ended up fielding an unbalanced side thanks to a bizarre selection policy that clearly favours England and NRL players. True, injuries have struck down wingers Tommy Makinson and Ryan Hall, as well as centres Oliver Gildart and Mark Percival, leaving the Lions with a second-rower at centre and a half-back debutant on the wing. Asking players to make their debuts out of position at the highest level of the game is hugely unfair. Emergency winger Blake Austin, who did OK all things considered, was one of five half-backs on the pitch, three of them lining up on the left of the Lions’ defensive line. But this farrago is of Bennett’s own making. Setting off for the tour so short in the outside backs and with no obvious contingency plan was asking for trouble. The issue is not that Bennett preferred to call up uncapped Englishman Ash Handley, for he had a fine season with Leeds, but that he admitted to never even considering Wales flier Regan Grace, basically because he is not part of the England pathway. That is an insult to the Lions, who have been the pinnacle of the sport since 1947. Grace or Handley could have stayed on after the World Cup 9s to be part of an expanded training squad. Or Bennett could have asked Scotland centres Kane Linnett and Euan Aitken – who are both based in Australia – to remain on stand-by, but they were not considered. It is strange that the RFL have not guided Bennett into picking a broader squad, one that reflects the four nations, not one. His line manager, Ralph Rimmer, was Ireland manager when they pushed England all the way at the World Cup quarter-final in 2000. Bennett should have proved he understood the Lions concept right from the start: they are a British and Irish XIII, not England with some royal blue on their kit. Another reason given by Bennett, whose contract ends after the match against Papua New Guinea on Saturday, for the Lions’ poor performances was not having a mid-season Test. Well, whose decision was that? Those who claim France are no longer serious opponents – primarily due to being so under-strength, so often – should consider what the game’s leaders in the UK are doing to help them. Likewise Ireland, who have a similar number of full-time pros and would have enough Super League stars to become a tier one nation if England didn’t lure away players such as Joe Philbin, Toby King and Ben Currie. Instead, the RFL are hoping to play Samoa or the Cook Islands next June. On a wider, more positive note, this series has shown that there are now four remarkably competitive teams at the top table. In the last two years, Australia, New Zealand, Tonga and England/Great Britain have all looked capable of beating each other. And the pool is deepening. Since the start of the 2013 World Cup, Tonga have played 19 matches and 11 of them have been decided by 12 points or fewer: against New Zealand, England, Australia, Great Britain, and Fiji, Samoa (twice), the Cook Islands, Scotland, Lebanon and Italy. As James Graham said, this is what Test matches should be about. There were a lot of cold heads last week as caps were doffed and hats lifted off to the Wolfpack. The extraordinary exposure brought to the club, Super League and the sport in general by their signing of Sonny Bill Williams for the two most lucrative years of any rugby player’s career is potentially game-changing. Expect other superstars to follow Williams, especially if Saracens start off-loading their highest earners to meet the salary cap. It was 30 degrees colder in Dublin on Saturday night than the last time Ireland and Italy met (at the Rugby League World Cup in 2017), but the outcome was similar. Despite Ireland’s 25-4 win they will be fourth seeds at RLWC2021 along with Italy, Greece and the winners of Saturday’s USA v Cooks Islands qualifier in Jacksonville on Saturday. Places in a potential group of death beckon. Ireland paired Manly winger Roland Podesta – who paid his own way from Sydney – with young Dubliner James Mulvaney, a huge forward who came on for the last couple of minutes to complete a remarkable year in which he has represented Ireland Under-19s, Students, Domestic XIII and now seniors. The European qualifiers for the World Cup in 2021 did not all go smoothly. Tyrone McCarthy and Oliver Roberts – two of Ireland’s Super League players – said the training pitch in Spain was unsafe, there was no transport to the game and the referee lost control. The Greece v Scotland fixture at London Skolars also had problems. The match kicked off 50 minutes late because the host team, Greece, had not organised an ambulance to be on stand-by at New River, as per tournament regulations. After a few frantic phone calls, a spare one was brought down from the Tottenham v Arsenal Under-23 game at Stevenage. And, elsewhere, one team only had two domestic players with them when RLEF regulations insist that four are required in a 19-man squad. Injury or illness to either of the remaining “domestics” could have seen the nation kicked out of the World Cup! Those of you who live too far away from the winter amateur leagues can get your fix and support an extremely worthwhile cause this Sunday. London Broncos are hosting a North v South charity match in aid of the Royal Marsden Hospital Cancer Charity, who are treating their former player, Harvey Burnett. The 23-year-old centre came through Elmbridge Eagles and the Broncos academy, played at London Skolars and Oxford before moving up to Bradford Bulls, winning four Scotland caps along the way courtesy of his father, a Glaswegian policeman. It was at Dewsbury Rams that Harvey fell ill. His former teammates from Broncos, Skolars and Oxford make up the teams. Even if you can’t make it along to the game – a 3.30pm kick-off at Trailfinders on Sunday – donation are welcome. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook