“There is freedom within, there is freedom without Try to catch the deluge in a paper cup …” According to Neil Finn, you can’t put a “paper cup” in a song without it being a reference to John Lennon. So why not go the whole hog? In the Beatles’ Across the Universe, it’s words that are flowing ‘like endless rain into a paper cup’. Finn’s cup is attempting to contain a veritable flood. The Beatles were such a monumental force in pop music that for a decade after their disbanding, other musical acts seemed consciously to avoid their influence. In Split Enz, however, New Zealand’s Finn brothers, Tim and Neil, embraced it wholeheartedly (this was long before 1990s Britpop, when everyone was at it), and the influence carried over to Neil’s Australian band, Crowded House. In general, perhaps too much has been made of the Beatles–Crowded House connection, but it’s there for all to hear in Don’t Dream It’s Over, where the narrow melody of the verse, all stepwise intervals, might easily have been written by Lennon. There is, however, nothing of Lennon in the famous chorus. It was 1987 and Don’t Dream It’s Over, released in October the previous year, was a worldwide hit. It was the song you danced to at the end of the night, pressed close to the intriguing person you’d just met while wondering what might happen next. The palpable sincerity in Neil Finn’s voice and the expansive melodic line of the song’s chorus encouraged hope. The song was also fast becoming an anthem for Antipodeans overseas, the slightly maudlin counterpart to Men at Work’s novelty song Down Under. The latter was jovial and jokey, all plundering and chundering, fried-out Kombi vans and Vegemite sandwiches: here was the larrikin abroad. But Don’t Dream It’s Over was a serious song for the weary (and possibly homesick) traveller or expat. Before long, bands visiting Australia began to include it in their sets as a tribute. Neil Finn’s song is quite simple and symmetric. Melodic lines come in twos, the second half of the song repeats the first. Even a version of the organ solo that separates the two halves returns at the end. Above a relaxed, up-and-down strumming with a pronounced syncopated backbeat that, Finn says, New Zealanders refer to affectionately as the Māori strum, the four-line verse repeats those two lines of Lennonish melody over the same two chordal progressions: E flat–C minor–A flat–G. There’s an element of Weltschmerz – sentimental pessimism – in the lyrics Stepping back up a semitone to A flat, the melody of the chorus is more expansive – literally so, as it opens out from a falling perfect fourth on the first “Hey now” to a falling major sixth on the second, to a rising octave (B flat to falsetto B flat) on “Don’t dream”, coming down the scale to the tonic on “it’s over”. The harmony is simple stuff (IV–V–I), but it’s effective so, like the first two lines of the verse, Finn repeats it. In fact he repeats the expanding “Hey now, hey now” line twice as the lyrics themselves expand (“They come, they come / To build a wall between us”). What is it about this melancholic but hopeful anthem of a song? The point of view of the lyrics is reassuring, even protective in a traditional sort of way. The other half of the relationship seems to be having doubts. We learn that the world is coming to “build a wall” to separate them, and we’re reassured that it won’t succeed. There’s an element of Weltschmerz – sentimental pessimism – in the lyrics: “My possessions are causing me suspicion but there’s no proof / In the paper today, tales of war and of waste / But you turn right over to the TV page …” There’s an insular, even escapist side to the song, but it’s all vague and it’s precisely this vagueness that helps give the song its universal resonance. The accompanying video has Finn walking through a house in which other members of Crowded House are sitting around, sometimes playing their instruments. It’s a scene of nostalgic Australiana worthy of Men at Work. The house is a weatherboard; we even see a slice of toast spread with Vegemite. No wonder it became an anthem for Australians overseas. When the organ solo comes, the windows of this house are suddenly arched and have stained glass. It’s fitting in this hymn to home. • This is an edited extract from The Song Remains the Same by Andrew Ford and Anni Heino, published by La Trobe University Press ($32.99)