Whether it was his own lassitude or his opponent’s fighting spirit that spoiled Dominic Thiem’s spotless progress to the semi–finals of the ATP Tour Finals, the Austrian had to concede that Matteo Berrettini was too good for him in two sets here on Thursday afternoon. Having become the first player to beat Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer back-to-back at this tournament, Thiem found the world No 8 – a Finals debutant at 23 who lost his two opening matches – too lively over an hour and a quarter. Berrettini first fought tigerishly, then hit cruise control to win 7-6 (3), 6-3. If he can produce this form regularly on Tour, he will be formidable at the back end of any tournament. He was playing in Challengers at the start of the year and was the last to qualify for this event. While he was competitive if outclassed in losing to Djokovic and Federer, the big-hitting Italian lifted his game against Thiem, with only pride and prize money on the line. He said courtside: “I’m really proud of myself – my team, my family and my friends. It’s been an unbelievable season. I didn’t expect to be here but I hope to be here next season. Happy to finish with a win. “Against him, it was always going to be a great fight. I was able to stay mentally focused, as I lost my serve. But I played a great tie-break. I’m not feeling really great physically but I’m happy. There were a lot of tough moments this season, and my mum and my dad were close to me.” He hit 30 winners, 17 on his lethal forehand, and averaged 125 miles an hour in clocking up five aces. Thiem did not do that much wrong but rarely unsettled Berrettini, who does not lack for self-belief. In exchanges of big groundstrokes, it was the Italian who invariably prevailed. Losing was a hiccup Thiem could have done without, but he has a day to recover. The Austrian was favoured to make a clean sweep of the Björn Borg Group against Berrettini, but will not be totally disheartened. The world No 5, who has played consistently well for most of the season, will look across the draw and note that Stefanos Tsitsipas, who lost to him in the Beijing final last month and in three of their other five matches, is also guaranteed a semi-final place from the Andre Agassi Group – and, so far, is unbeaten. That clean sheet means more mentally than on the court, but it is a factor none the less. Nadal will join Tsitsipas in the final four if he beats him on Friday afternoon – as long as Daniil Medvedev, who choked against the Spaniard from 5-1 and match point up in the third set on Wednesday, beats Alexander Zverev in the evening. Zverev defeated Nadal on Monday but a foot injury hindered him in a listless loss to Tsitsipas on Wednesday. Those are the scenarios and the numbers. The unknown is how Thiem or Tsitsipas perform under increased pressure against whoever of the Big Three is still standing when they move closer to the prize. Thiem’s Austrian team captain in January’s ATP Cup in Australia, Thomas Muster, said: “He’s proved this year winning five titles that he can keep his level up. He now has to win a grand slam or a big title like this one. What I’ve seen in the last six months has been very impressive.” Berrettini showed he was made of stern stuff in an otherwise meaningless match when he saved and lost a break on his way to forcing a tie-break in the first set, sealing it comfortably with his third ace. Thiem looked a little listless in the second set as Berrettini grew in confidence and aggression, breaking with a wicked forehand in the sixth game. A quick hold for 5-2 and he sensed the match was all but done – unless Thiem launched the sort of breathtaking fightback Nadal had pulled off against Medvedev the night before. He could not.