The NFL has informed all 32 of its teams that a private workout will be staged for free-agent quarterback Colin Kaepernick on Saturday in Atlanta, according to a league memo obtained by ESPN. The pro day-style event will include an on-field workout and interview session, similar to workouts common for collegiate prospects during the run-up to the NFL draft. Teams will be permitted to send scouts, or the video footage to be made available to any club which requests it. “Earlier this year, we discussed some possible steps with his representatives and they recently emphasized his level of preparation and that he is ready to work out for clubs and be interviewed by them,” the memo reads. “We have therefore arranged this opportunity for him to work out, and for all clubs to have the opportunity to evaluate his current readiness and level of interest in resuming his NFL career.” Kaepernick confirmed the report with a tweet shortly after ESPN’s report on Monday night. “I’m just getting word from my representatives that the NFL league office reached out to them about a workout in Atlanta on Saturday,” he wrote. “I’ve been in shape and ready for this for 3 years, can’t wait to see the head coaches and GMs on Saturday.” I’m just getting word from my representatives that the NFL league office reached out to them about a workout in Atlanta on Saturday. I’ve been in shape and ready for this for 3 years, can’t wait to see the head coaches and GMs on Saturday. The quarterback, who turned 32 this month, has not played in three years, but remains determined on returning to the league. In August, he posted a video on his Twitter feed showing off a football-ready physique with the caption: “5am. 5 days a week. For 3 years. Still Ready.” He completed 59.2% of his passes, averaged 6.8 yards per attempt and threw 16 touchdowns with four interceptions in 12 games for the 49ers during the 2016 campaign, his last in the league. But his refusal to stand for the anthem in the name of his principles became a far bigger story than his on-field performance. Kaepernick reached an undisclosed settlement with the league after filing a lawsuit through the players’ union alleging collusion by NFL teams to blackball him because of his activism. The most recent hint of interest from an NFL team came in April 2018 when he was briefly linked with the Seahawks, but an ESPN report indicated the invitation for a try-out was rescinded when the quarterback would not say whether he planned to consider kneeling.