Labour’s manifesto contains many progressive ideas, especially on climate change and sustainability, but it is let down by its regressive support for nuclear weapons and yet more nuclear power. It states, without justification or explanation, that it will support renewal of Trident nuclear weapons, but adds it would try to negotiate them away “under our obligations to the Non-Proliferation Treaty”. This is double-think. In addition, Trident renewal would cost about £200bn over its lifetime, but that sum is not contained in the manifesto’s so-called “fully costed” proposals. The manifesto states, again with little or no justification, that Labour will build new nuclear power “needed for energy security” but the UK’s uranium has to be imported, often from insecure sources in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. New nuclear power is considerably more expensive than the renewables, and millions of people in fuel poverty will suffer. Who would benefit? The nuclear industry, perhaps, shielded from losses by government contracts. Is this what Labour means by “for the many, not the few”? This will likely be a close election and Labour’s ill-considered support for dangerous, absurdly expensive and unpopular nuclear power and nuclear weapons will cost it votes, especially among young people.Dr Ian Fairlie London • There is no mention in your front-page story (Corbyn unveils Labour’s most radical manifesto for decades, 22 November) or your analysis on inside pages, of Labour’s commitment to renew Britain’s Trident nuclear missile arsenal. Trident is estimated to cost more than £200bn over 30 years, a figure the Ministry of Defence does not dispute. There has been no discussion about what many consider a huge waste of money, with no practical relevance to Britain’s defence and security needs. Even Tony Blair, in his memoir, A Journey, questioned Trident, writing: “The expense is huge, and the utility in a post-cold war world is less in terms of deterrence, and non-existent in terms of military use”. He added: “Imagine standing up in the House of Commons and saying I’ve decided to scrap it. We are not going to say that, are we? In this instance, caution, costly as it was, won the day”. And it has done so under a Labour party led by Jeremy Corbyn, a longstanding opponent of Britain’s nuclear weapons. This is one important issue on which his party’s manifesto is very far from being radical.Richard Norton-TaylorLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition