Dominic Thiem continued his formidable march to the summit of tennis in a season in which he has truly come of age, outperforming his good friend Alexander Zverev 7-5, 6-3 to reach the title match of the ATP Finals. He will face Stefanos Tsitsipas as the next generation settles at the top of the sport. Thiem had arrived in the semi-final after one of the greatest two-match stretches of his life, becoming the first player to beat Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic in the same group at the ATP Finals. Conventional wisdom always said indoor courts were simply not compatible with a player with such elaborate strokes and Thiem’s 3-6 record seemed to be the perfect reflection. Throughout the week he has made a mockery of such ideas. Thiem had been visibly bothered by a cold in recent matches and he struggled in the early exchanges as Zverev rained down bombs consistently over 140mph. He saved two break points early on and his first serve percentage was low but, as he settled into the match, it was the Austrian who began to impose his vicious groundstrokes in the majority of the rallies. Across the net, defending Zverev has distinguished himself as the best server of the tournament. But the German began to lose his composure as he failed to impose his game in neutral rallies. The quickfire holds in the first set finally gave way as Zverev sprayed a flurry of errors and found himself facing two break points. After missing a first serve on his second Zverev double-faulted into the net. As he sat in his seat, he tossed his racket across the court. In the second set Thiem made his move at 3-2 but with plenty of help from Zverev, who melted down under pressure. In a flurry of errors from Zverev Thiem broke with a forehand passing shot and then he never looked back. A defining year for Thiem will have a fitting finish. At the beginning of the season Thiem decided to step away from his long-time coach, Gunter Bresnik, who had directed most of his affairs since he was nine years old. He has learnt to make his own decisions and control his own destiny. He clearly likes it. Alongside his new coach, Nicolas Massu, he has complemented his booming strokes with more variety and he has ensured that he will never be called a clay-court specialist again.