The 39 Vietnamese nationals whose bodies were discovered in a lorry trailer in Essex last month had pinned their hopes for their futures on their journey to the UK. Images taken of the lorry show stickers on its windscreen displaying the words The Ultimate Dream – a deeply ironic reflection on the reality for so many migrants. Newspapers and articles covering the subsequent investigation have adopted the language of tragedy, horror and shock – the Independent referred to the “tragic deaths”, a Global Times editorial talked of a “serious humanitarian disaster” that occurred “under the eyes of” the British, and the BBC has repeatedly used the word “tragedy” in its reports. Meanwhile, the police force has used similar language in its statements. The deputy chief constable of Essex police, Pippa Mills, told reporters in Grays that these lorry deaths were “an absolute tragedy” and a “tragic discovery” to have made. And the prime minister, Boris Johnson, signed a book of condolence to the victims, writing that “the whole nation and indeed the world has been shocked by this tragedy and the cruelty of the fate that has been suffered by innocent people who were hoping for a better life in this country”. Throughout the year, journalists, politicians and investigators have described similar incidents by appealing to emotions in a manner that presents migrant deaths as something apolitical. After the discovery of the bodies of 58 Chinese people in a container in Dover in 2000, Gwyn Prosser, the then Labour MP for Dover and Deal, said he was stunned by the event, which emphasised “the awful desperation some people must be experiencing to take the chances they take to cross the channel on the backs of lorries”. The invocation of a humanitarian – rather than a political – shock and grief is prominent in reports about people who die attempting to cross the border between the US and Mexico, as well as in reports of migrant deaths in the Mediterranean Sea. When more than 100 migrants perished off Lampedusa in 2013, Jean-Claude Mignon, the then president of the Council of Europe’s parliamentary assembly, claimed that “a terrible human tragedy is taking place at the gates of Europe”. For many, these words of grief seem most fitting for the description of such incidents. They allow us to express the emotions we feel as witnesses to unnecessary deaths, and they point to the suffering that people endure in their attempts to secure better lives. Such appeals to emotion, however, carry out other work behind the scenes – work that does not always have migrants’ best interests at heart. While emotive language is understandable, we need to combine this with critical commentary and political analysis. Simply labelling events as “tragedies”, without any analysis of the conditions that created them, frames avoidable deaths as exceptional, isolated, symbolic incidents. We are encouraged to pause, to weep and to regret. We are not, however, encouraged to investigate, criticise or protest. In these moments of mourning, we lose sight of politics and the question of culpability. Migrant deaths can be presented as accidents rather than the logical outcome of border policies that deliberately reduce legal pathways of migration. Framing such events in mainly emotional terms can hide people’s histories. In learning of the fate of the 39 Essex migrants, we focus on the moment of death, somewhere en route from Belgium, rather than on the more complex individual stories. Likewise, we think of migrant deaths in the Mediterranean or in Mexico in isolation from the lives that came before. The last page of a person’s story becomes the only page we are asked to read. What has happened to the longer stories of why these individuals travelled to Europe or America? What factors made them feel that they had no choice but to attempt dangerous, and often illegal, journeys? It is here, in the narratives of violence, conflict, oppression and discrimination, that we can find the true “tragedies”. But since these tragedies are deeply political, and deeply connected to big issues such as labour exploitation, people-smuggling and the lack of legal migration routes for those seeking international protection, we are not encouraged to consider them. If we do not look into the deep-rooted dynamics of migration and its connection to suffering, then we will never truly be able to prevent incidents like this from happening again. Here we are, 19 years on from the Dover lorry deaths, six years on from the Lampedusa disaster, discussing the same issues in the same language. Meanwhile, nothing fundamental has changed in terms of the driving forces which propel people away from the places that they used to call home. What remains outside the order of emotive language is the figure of a migrant with a history and a voice, who we can stand with in the struggle for rights. Migrants should not become silent victims who we cry for – they need to be talked about as subjects seeking political rights and protection. They need politics, not pity. • Imogen Dobie is a PhD student focusing on issues of migration and asylum