You know the November vibe: hearty, comforting, autumnal flavours. Apple, toffee, warming spices… They’re all here in these cinnamon-style buns, which are pretty simple to make, so get the whole family involved. They’re banging served warm from the oven. You will need a 12-hole muffin tin. Prep 1 hrProve 2 hr+Cook 30 minMakes 12 1 egg, beaten Oil, for greasing For the dough110ml whole milk100g unsalted butter1 tsp fine sea salt 250g strong white bread flour250g plain flour, plus extra for dusting4 tbsp golden caster sugar 10g fast-action dried yeast1 tsp ground cinnamon 1 tsp ground cardamom2 large eggs, beaten 100g apple sauce or puree For the filling75g unsalted butter, softened, plus extra for greasing150g soft light brown sugar ¼ tsp freshly grated nutmeg 2 tsp ground cinnamon ½ tsp ground cloves100g raisins For the apples4 granny smith apples, peeled, cored and chopped into chunks20g unsalted butter 2 tbsp golden caster sugar ½ tsp fine sea salt½ tsp ground cinnamon ½ tsp ground cloves For the caramel sauce100g soft toffees4 tbsp double cream1 tsp vanilla extract To finish1 handful granola Icing sugar Warm the milk, butter and salt in a small saucepan, stirring constantly over a low heat, until the butter has melted. Remove from the heat and set aside until lukewarm. Combine the flours, sugar, yeast and spices in a large bowl (preferably the bowl of a stand mixer). Make a well in the centre, then add the eggs and apple sauce/puree. Pour the milk mix into the bowl, and knead using the dough hook attachment for eight minutes. Alternatively, stir everything until it comes together, then knead the dough on a lightly oiled surface until elastic and less sticky. Shape the dough into a ball, transfer to a lightly oiled bowl, cover with a clean tea towel and leave to prove until it has doubled in size – one to two hours. For the filling, mix the butter, sugar and spices to a smooth paste, and set aside. For the apples, pop them in a saucepan with the butter, sugar, salt and spices. Cook on a low-medium heat until the apple pieces are slightly tender. Once the dough has risen, tip it out on to a lightly floured surface, and roll into a 35cm x 25cm rectangle. Spread the spiced butter evenly over the dough with a palette or table knife, and top with the chopped apple and raisins. Starting with the longest edge closest to you, roll the dough into a cylinder, then cut into 12 even slices. Put each roll into the lined muffin tin cut side down, put in a large plastic bag and loosely close. Leave to prove at room temperature for 50 minutes, or until well risen. Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/gas 6. Brush the tops of the buns with beaten egg, bake for 15–20 minutes, until dark golden brown, then transfer to a wire rack to cool slightly. While the buns are cooling, put the toffees, double cream and vanilla in a small saucepan and heat gently, stirring constantly, until it forms a smooth sauce. Give each bun a good dousing of sauce, then sprinkle with the granola and a light dusting of icing sugar.