Late-night hosts discussed Trump’s rambling call to Fox News and what his former press secretary Sarah Sanders has been up to. On Jimmy Kimmel Live!, the host talked about Trump’s 53-minute rant on Fox & Friends, in which “he didn’t even pause for a chicken leg”. He also spoke about the president inviting the hero dog from the Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi raid to the White House. While Trump did not touch the dog, seemingly out of fear, his vice-president, Mike Pence, was busy petting him. “It was nice to see Trump’s dogs playing together,” he joked. With Thanksgiving around the corner, Trump will be pardoning two turkeys, an annual tradition. “The next turkey to get pardoned will probably be Rudy Giuliani,” Kimmel quipped. He moved on to Devin Nunes, who is leading the Republican side of the investigation into Trump’s quid pro quo deal with Ukraine. A story has now revealed that Nunes himself was meeting Ukrainian officials at the end of last year. “I don’t think the word hypocrisy even covers it any more,” he said. “This is the hypocalypse.” Disgraced former press secretary Sarah Sanders has been interviewed about her potential move back into politics and has said that, despite copious reports to the contrary, Trump reads a lot. In fact, she claims he reads more than anyone she knows. “You must know some really dumb people,” Kimmel said. He continued: “Now she’s just lying for free.” He then found time to bring up Michael Bloomberg officially entering the race to become president. “The best person to beat a fake billionaire from New York is a real billionaire from New York,” he said. On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke about what Thanksgiving week means for Trump. “Congress’s impeachment inquiry has taken the week off,” he said. “I assume to spend more time dividing your family.” He also expressed dismay at the Nunes revelation. “The top Republican investigating whether Trump tried to get dirt on Biden tried to get dirt on Biden,” he said. “It reminds me of the children’s classic Nancy Drew and the Case of the Man Murdered by Nancy Drew.” Nunes has responded by claiming that CNN and the Daily Beast, who broke the story, are both guilty of recklessly disregarding the truth, leading Colbert to call him “the Lebron James of recklessly disregarding the truth”. He then played footage of Nunes being interviewed on Fox where he tried to avoid questioning by saying he would talk about it at a later date. “Me thinks he doth not protesteth too much,” Colbert joked. On Late Night, Seth Meyers talked about the latest “ludicrous conspiracy theory” involving Trump’s assertion that it was in fact Ukraine behind the DNC hack, not Russia. One key lesson from the impeachment proceedings is that “Trump hates mornings” which doesn’t surprise Meyers at all. “Look at what he eats,” he said. “He has the diet of a 16-year-old stoner.” Meyers moved on to the president’s unhinged call with Fox & Friends which didn’t allow the hosts any time to respond to his ranting. “How would Trump even know if he was talking to someone?” he said. “At some point they should have just disconnected his phone and let him think he’s on TV.” He said to Trump: “You have the anger and free time of a sports radio caller.” He also compared the stunned hosts to “three out-of-town tourists sitting on the subway who just saw a roach smoking a cigarette”.