For those who grew up in the 90s and early 21st century, Central Perk was the ultimate coffee shop. It’s where we spent hour after hour picking over Ross’s serial divorces, screaming with inner terror at Phoebe’s singing career and psychoanalysing Chandler’s defensive sarcasm. And on Thursday afternoon this hangout of the Friends gang, transported from New York to east London for a festival named FriendsFestive, was packed with fans celebrating 25 years since the show appeared on our screens. Charlotte Hardinge is 24. She was born after Friends began and was 11 when it ended. Her trip was a surprise Christmas present from her boyfriend Michael, who watches it too. As she sits on the cafe’s big sofa, she looks around the coffee shop she has seen so many times in her home. “I watch it every day,” she says. “My parents loved it, and I would come in from school and it would be on. So I kept watching it, series after series. It never gets old.” She is briefly interrupted by an outbreak of Phoebe’s anthem, Smelly Cat, from the stage in the corner of the shop. “Even though it’s very 90s, it’s still relatable: twentysomethings starting life.” The relatability, which comes up time and again when people discuss the show, is why the Friends juggernaut just keeps trucking. It’s the most-streamed show in Britain, and at No 2 on Netflix in the US (behind The Office). Not surprising when 10 million people in Britain – 53 million in the US – tuned in to the final episode in 2004. At FriendsFestive – which runs until 21 December – fans have the chance to re-enact their favourite scenes in Monica and Rachel’s apartment, studying costumes and memorabilia from the show, practising Ross and Monica’s dance routine and getting into a festive Friends-themed singalong outside the Holiday Armadillo’s grotto. There is a sense of electric excitement at being able to act out lives with which the show’s devotees are so familiar. The sitcom is astonishingly inter-generational. Joanne Undrell, 40, is at the event with her daughter, Charlotte, and Charlotte’s best friend, Phoebe. The girls are both 10 and have seen all 236 episodes. “Over and over again,” Undrell adds. “I like them watching it because it reinforces the meaning of friendship and fun.” Charlotte grins and nods. “You can relate to it in modern days, and not only back in those days,” she explains as a big screen behind them shows Chandler’s desperate attempt to cover up his relationship with Monica. Phoebe agrees with her friend: “It’s a good way of thinking about life – they come together as friends in a single year and stay together for 10 years. It’s good to have friends.” Friends is even making its way on to the silver screen this Christmas. From 8 December, cinema chains are screening 12 of the best-loved episodes in four-episode chunks. It’s virtually unknown for TV shows to be shown in cinemas, but the sheer torrent of support for the sitcom makes it commercially viable. Retailers, too, are getting in on the act. Fashion house Ralph Lauren is releasing a special Friends line to mark the fact that in the series Rachel worked there. It’s inspired by her style in the show: polo-neck jumpers and sleek office wear. For younger fans, Lego has released a Central Perk set for the 25th anniversary. Along with miniatures of the usual gang, you get a bleached-haired Gunther thrown in. Or – something of a niche in-joke for fans, perhaps – the US homeware chain Pottery Barn will be re-releasing its faux-antique “apothecary table” that was the centre of a plotline in the sixth series. Even the makers of Friends have been taken aback by the show’s continuing appeal. Co-creator Marta Kauffman said it was a “glorious surprise to me that the show has lasted and has this whole new other life”. The secret, she said, was that its subjects are fundamentally nice people: “It’s not dark, not twisted, not about corrupt people. It’s comfort food.” Above all, viewers see themselves in the characters, says Ian Youngs, arts and entertainment reporter for BBC News. “It was the biggest show of its day for a reason, and quality lasts. But even saying that, its popularity among viewers who weren’t alive first time around is remarkable. One reason it connects is that the characters are dealing with the stuff teenagers and young adults are all navigating: friendship, love, independence. “And while the characters tackle some big life events, there’s a simplicity and innocence. The outside world rarely encroaches, and the show’s an escape from some of the shadowy things people have on their minds today – including social media, which the friends never had to worry about. Above all, it’s warm, it’s cosy, it’s relatable, and it’s still very funny.”