Prince Andrew has agreed to speak publicly for the first time about his friendship with paedophile Jeffrey Epstein in what has been touted as a “no holds barred” interview with Newsnight’s Emily Maitlis. The prince has strongly denied being aware of any inappropriate behaviour by Epstein but speculation has been consistent. Will Maitlis be able to cut through the PR bluster? Ammar Kalia Sweet Home Alabama songwriters Lynyrd Skynyrd have been peddling their guitar-laden Americana for the past 50 years and this doc traces their origins from high-school band to national stars, whose career was derailed by a tragic plane crash in 1977 that killed lead singer Ronnie Van Zant. Archival footage and interviews with the surviving members chart their resurgence and – by choosing to fly the Confederate flag during shows – the band’s controversial affiliation with the US south. AK The nation’s favourite ex-pop group couple Marvin and Rochelle Humes return for a second season of this benign musical quiz where pairs of contestants have to guess hit songs as quickly as possible for the chance to win £10,000. Ears at the ready: who can tell their Pink from their Blue? AK It is that special weekend when the Strictly stars cha-cha-cha all the way to Blackpool Tower Ballroom, the international home of ballroom dancing. With just a month to go till the final, the competition is hotting up and the seven remaining couples take to the floor for a group routine. Ellen E Jones As the seventh season of the Parisian police thriller comes to a close, there are moral quandaries for Joséphine in the courtroom, as she decides whether or not to use Lola’s past as part of her defence. Meanwhile, can Gilou and Laure defy the investigation into their conduct and bust the laundering gang? Hannah J Davies The fascinating series on the history of the English language novel continues, this week focusing on colonialism, from Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin to Toni Morrison’s Beloved. It is an illuminating overview of a complex and often misrepresented issue. AK The cad of a heart surgeon returns for a new series of the Aussie drama. Just as Hugh seems to be settling in to fatherhood, potential new love interests come from every direction in the form of his ex-girlfriend and a new doctor. Will he stay focused on the surgery’s big deal? It is fun to find out. Hannah Verdier House of Flying Daggers 12noon, AMC from BT Or Hero 2: Zhang Yimou’s second martial arts epic is set in ninth-century China where the corrupt Tang dynasty is beset by guerrillas known as the Flying Daggers. Cue breathtakingly beautiful colour-coded violence. The heroine is Zhang Ziyi’s blind rebel, who swings a mean sword. Paul Howlett International Rugby League: Papua New Guinea v Great Britain 7am, BBC Two. The fourth and final Test from Port Moresby. Rugby Union: Barbarians v Fiji 2pm, BBC One. Eddie Jones coaches the Barbars for this friendly at Twickenham. International Football: Azerbaijan v Wales 4.15pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Group E Euro 2020 qualifier.