No matter who you speak to, the general consensus will be that the results of Great Britain’s tour of the southern hemisphere tell only half the story of a trip that most of their supporters will be keen to forget. Was this on par with the dismal tour of 1999, when the Lions were humiliated by Australia and New Zealand and struggled to beat even the local Australian side Burleigh Bears? Maybe not, but even so, there are questions to be asked about what happens now. Wayne Bennett was keen to stress in the aftermath of all four of Great Britain’s defeats that their opponents – Tonga, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea – were simply better than them. That much is true, but the Lions were dull, uninspiring to watch and simply outclassed. That is before you even begin to assess selection policies, off-field perception and much more. The lingering feeling that this was England’s national side in another name was palpable before the players even departed from home following Bennett’s squad announcement. So would the hierarchy have done anything different in that regard? “I’ll stand by our selection policy 100%,” the Rugby Football League’s Kevin Sinfield says. It is hard to argue with his approach – but the make-up of the squad is exactly why Great Britain’s return felt hollow anyway. Sinfield is quick to point out that rugby league’s Lions should not be compared to their rugby union counterparts – and with no domestic leagues of any strength to speak of in Ireland, Scotland and Wales, he is right. You do not just give prestigious Test caps away to players because they are non-English: but the whole sport knew that, save for maybe one or two exceptions, this was going to be an English squad. “Fundamentally, we’re trying everything we can to win a home World Cup in 2021 with England but we threw everything we could at this Great Britain tour from a performance perspective,” Sinfield says. “It’s legitimately unfair to compare this concept to what happens in union.” Which is why, unfortunately, Great Britain as a concept in rugby league has run its course. England are building towards that World Cup and the dynamics of this tour – where the Lions have been without mainstays such as Sean O’Loughlin and Sam Burgess – suggests the national side is in a period of transition. There is also the unavoidable feeling that this tour, irrespective of the results, has failed to live up to the hype that a first GB tour in 12 years provided when it was announced. Sinfield concedes that. “Great Britain was the reason I picked up a rugby ball, but the dynamics have changed. Bringing it back was always going to be about seeing what the interest was like in the southern hemisphere but prior to PNG, there hadn’t been a full stadium. Maybe the appetite isn’t quite what it was made out to be – and that will be part of the post-tour review.” Bennett’s own future will also be part of the review when the touring party returns this week. Public feeling for the 69-year-old – who rarely visits England and barely watches Super League by his own admission – has never been lower in England, with many feeling the time is right for him to move on now his contract has expired. Apportioning all the blame at Bennett’s door is harsh given the injuries he has had to contend with, but after such a miserable tour and his decision to take a lopsided squad with six halves and barely any three-quarters – a move that backfired badly after injuries quickly ruled out one of the two wingers, Ryan Hall, and the only true centre, Oliver Gildart – many feel Bennett has run his course. So what happens now? “My dialogue with Wayne has always been excellent,” Sinfield says. “He’s made a huge impact on how we’re developing but we’ll take a break after the tour and make a call. We’ve got an idea on where we would like to go. I don’t want to use the word transition, but with the players not here, this was always going to be a bumpy road.” There are no shortage of candidates to replace Bennett. English rugby league has some talented young coaches such as London’s Danny Ward and Salford’s Ian Watson, who were on the tour. The former Wigan coach Shaun Wane would also be a hugely popular choice if Bennett’s deal is not renewed. Sinfield insists there have been positives from the tour. “The squad have been exemplary, we’ve not had one off-field issue,” he says. “They’ve fulfilled their PR duties and there’s been stuff going on that people watching at home may not see. However, I have an understanding of the criticism we’ve received.” Rugby league is proud of its rich history and its triumphs over adversity. Great Britain have always been an important part of that. But England are now undoubtedly the priority and a rebuilding job is required following a disastrous tour. However, unless the rest of the home nations can strengthen their standing, then the Lions concept should now be consigned to history.