A confession: I left Whitby Community College with a D in A-level English. And now I am directing a Shakespeare play. When I set out to stage A Midsummer Night’s Dream, I worried that there was an intellectual VIP area I couldn’t access. (“Sorry mate, no trainers.”) Too much time spent in the back of a Vauxhall Corsa eating chips and scraps rather than engaging with lessons on iambic pentameter. To make things worse, 2019 has been a year of Dreams. Theatrical behemoths the Bridge, the Globe and Regent’s Park Open Air theatre have all staged grand productions with grand budgets and starry casting. In contrast, our National Youth Theatre Rep company have 16 emerging artists and the support of a youth arts charity. For me, this isn’t a reason to lament – it’s a gift. A catalyst for distilling ideas. We’re still watching Shakespeare because at the heart of his stories are characters in which we recognise ourselves, experiencing things we can relate to. To illuminate the heart of this play, I needed to answer two questions: why does this story need to be told? And why am I the person to tell it? The key was the piece’s location. We have moved it out of the big city to what we have called “Athens on Sea” a place heavily inspired by Whitby, the North Yorkshire seaside town that made me. Whitby is a town where land meets sea, transient meets permanent, and fish meet chips. My childhood there was characterised by the warmth, strength and humour of its people. Supportive communities with a rich tradition in oral and musical storytelling, linking folklore to the landscape. It’s a town that gave me all my firsts – arguments at crazy golf, kisses on the beach, pints in Rosie O’Gradys. A place full of brilliant, highly skilled people, from the youth cricket coach whose photography is on display in the V&A to the regular in the pub I worked at who once proudly announced he’d only eaten doner meat for the past month. These are people whose voices I wanted to lead a production. Voices that would challenge the usual working-class narrative of “it’s grim up north” and show a society with wit, care and joy at its heart. Voices that would let us congratulate the characters who choose to stay and build a life, not just the Billy Elliots whose ambition pushes them to seek success elsewhere. When you champion a community, you also have a duty to challenge it. Small towns can quickly become social pressure-cookers, which in our production compels a father to sentence his daughter to death should she disobey his will. Theseus and Hippolyta’s union becomes a political rather than romantic one. Two socially conservative councillors come to the stark realisation that future prosperity lies in the hearts of the next generation rather than the values of the previous one. The traditional heterosexual love square becomes a queer one, because in my school of 1,500 no one felt safe enough to be anything but straight. The mechanicals, who own a family-run fish and chip shop, are given the opportunity to show the creativity they’re hiding under those aprons. We’re told places like Whitby are doing better than ever, but I don’t know if full holiday cottages signal healthy towns. It has definitely changed in recent years: there’s now a nightclub that’s open till 4am, you don’t have to drive 25 miles to a Wetherspoon’s and you can get avocado on your toast. But there are major issues around local housing being bought as second homes, employment opportunities for young people, the death of the independent high street, and how a town dependent on tourism maintains its identity while adapting to changing visitor needs. The headlines portray Whitby as more blue than red, more out than in, full of doers not thinkers, but my experience is very different. It is home to the funniest, kindest people I know, who possess the potential to change the world. It’s also home to people I love, who feel they are not represented or understood. By looking beyond the chip paper and portraying these communities on a London stage I hope we can start to re-engage the disenfranchised, promote communication and understanding, and allow people to be heard. A Midsummer Night’s Dream is at the Criterion theatre, London, 6 December-13 January