The BBC has unveiled the first trailer for a special Christmas episode of hit sitcom Gavin and Stacey, which returns to screens on 25 December. The series – created by and starring James Corden and Ruth Jones – last aired in 2010, with a New Year’s Day special which drew 10.2 million viewers. Hidden at the end of the series three finale on BBC iPlayer is a new teaser for the festive episode, showing Uncle Bryn (Rob Brydon) struggling to cook Christmas dinner, as Stacey (Joanna Page) and Nessa (Ruth Jones) look on in horror. Corden announced the Christmas special on Twitter back in May, in a Tweet which garnered over a quarter of a million likes. The show’s co-creator and star, who has enjoyed success as a US talk show host in recent years on The Late Late Show, wrote: ‘Ruth Jones and I have been keeping this secret for a while ... We’re excited to share it with you. See you on Christmas Day.’ In an interview with the Radio Times, Corden and Jones revealed that they had struggled with the writing process after their hiatus, with Jones visiting Corden in LA to work on the script in September 2018. “We’d confused ourselves in thinking there needed to be an absolute narrative arc – there was so much in the story, there was no room for the characters to breathe,” said Corden. “We’d written about 40 pages, and we sat and we read it … and we both went ‘this just isn’t good enough. It doesn’t feel like the show. It doesn’t feel like it’s right’.” Despite their challenges, Jones added that the pair had a breakthrough when they decided to add “a heart to it, a big moment that resonated”. Gavin and Stacey started life on BBC Three, before transferring to BBC One following mainstream acclaim. The series follows the titular couple, played by Mathew Horne and Joanna Page, and their families and friends, as the pair navigate a long-distance relationship between Wales’s Barry Island and Essex. Cast members including Alison Steadman, Larry Lamb and Melanie Walters return for the Christmas special, while Nighty Night creator and comic Julia Davis is also set to appear.