Name: Robert Peter Williams. Age: 45. Appearance: Bare-chested more often than necessary. This is that singer who was famous in the 1990s? It is. Although he is still fairly famous now. What for? Right now, for not having a fistfight with Liam Gallagher. Couldn’t quite a lot of people say the same? They could, but Williams enjoys boxing, and says that the promoter Eddie Hearn was ready to make it happen. “I’ve just seen how much KSI and Logan Paul made from their fight and I think we could trounce that,” Williams told GQ last month. So it’s just about money? Not entirely. “[Liam] represents a school bully to me and I would like to take the bully down,” Williams told the Sun. He also taunted Gallagher on Twitter with a boxing glove emoji and the suggestion to “buy yourself a pair of bollocks”. Ah, the cheeky-macho Williams shtick that we all know and tolerate. Is Gallagher up for it? “He hasn’t responded twice,” Williams told Jonathan Ross. And now the fight is officially off, after Williams’s wife, Ayda Field, banned him from pursuing it. On what grounds? “You’re 45, man,” she said on their new podcast. “You’re going to go in a ring and smack each other? That’s just lame.” Wait … “on their new podcast”? Yup. They have launched one to promote Robbie’s new Christmas album. That is also why he has been doing all these interviews. So this fight business was all a stunt to sell a record? Possibly, yes; but then also, no. Williams and Gallagher have been avoiding violence for 20 years. Really? Oh, yes. Liam’s brother Noel called Williams “that fat dancer from Take That”. While Robbie was engaged in the late 1990s to Nicole Appleton, who later married, then divorced, Liam. OK … And on stage at the 2000 Brit awards, Robbie challenged Liam, saying: “A hundred grand of your money, a hundred grand of my money. We’ll get in the ring and we’ll have a fight.” I see … In 2013, Liam called Robbie a “fat fucking idiot” on stage in Manchester, and later responded to a taunt that his songs didn’t have choruses by saying: “They do, fatty. And they’re good and they’re better than yours … Don’t write choruses, fat boy. Yeah, his verses are shit and all.” I just don’t know what to say about two men being so childish. That’s show business? Do say: “First they ignore you. Then they laugh at you. Then they won’t fight you. Then you start a podcast.” Don’t say: “Who do you reckon Noel would be cheering for?”