There is much to admire in this play by Chinonyerem Odimba. It demolishes the stereotype of the sturdily resilient black woman, celebrates female friendship and leaves the audience to join up the narrative dots. But, while I welcome Odimba’s positive attitude, she provides a too-easy solution to the very real problems she has posed. The focus is on Nene, an 18-year-old black British girl who has hardly ventured out of her mother’s council flat since giving birth while still at school. One day her old friend, Lea, entices her out, introduces her to a sparky young Asian, Lune, and the three of them go on a mild spree taking in a cafe, shops and a swimming pool. The one other character we meet is Nene’s mum, Dee, who reveals her love for her long-immured daughter through a series of monologues. It is a sign of Odimba’s subtlety that she suggests that Dee, because of the world’s censorious attitude to teenage pregnancy, is partly to blame for shielding Nene from life. Even if it is Nene who suffers from deep depression, her friends also have their difficulties: Lea is the victim of a conformist, over-ambitious mum and the self-harming Lune feels unable to freely express her sexuality. The best moment comes when all three declare their refusal to be defined by society and to live within its walls. All that is cheering but there is something a mite facile about Nene’s final transformation, which is accompanied by a mythical tale told by her Nigerian-born mother about a sea goddess: one touch of magic realism doesn’t make the whole world kin. Daniel Bailey’s production, however, makes intelligent use of the Downstairs theatre’s intimacy, Amelia Jane Hankin’s fractured set evokes both the fissures in Nene’s personality and the text’s river imagery, and the performances are all good. Nneka Okoye (Nene), Renee Bailey (Lea) and Aasiya Shah (Lune) suggest a growing interdependence and Doreene Blackstock admirably conveys Dee’s suffocating tenderness. Odimba is a writer to watch even if her concluding optimism is not exactly hard-earned. • At Hampstead Theatre Downstairs, London, until 7 December.