If, as many royal observers have claimed, the Duke of York’s decision to submit himself to an Emily Maitlis grilling represented a colossal gamble by a man desperate to make the relentless flow of negative headlines dry up, then it appears he has bet the house on red only for it to come up black. Prince Andrew’s bizarre defence that he chose to stay at convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein’s home because it was “convenient” and that it was the “honourable” thing to do has gone down badly in the court of public opinion. And now his defence of their relationship and his explanations for where he was on key dates when he is alleged to have had sex with women procured by Epstein are likely to meet similar derision. After the initial excerpts of the duke’s interview for BBC’s Newsnight were released to the media, many questioned why the prince was being interviewed by a journalist rather than the police or lawyers for the late Epstein’s victims, who include Virginia Giuffre, formerly known as Virginia Roberts, who claims she was 17 when she was forced to have sex with the duke. The duke told Maitlis: “I have no recollection of ever meeting this lady, none whatsoever.” He later added: “It just never happened”, saying: “I am not one to, as it were, hug, and public displays of affection are not something that I do.” At one stage in the interview, the prince explained that as patron of the NSPCC’s Full Stop campaign, he “knew what the things were to look for” when it came to sexual abuse. But later in the interview, when asked about his time in Epstein’s properties, he acknowledged “you don’t go to stay with people looking for that”. He said his relationship with the American had had “some seriously beneficial outcomes” for his work as a trade ambassador. And he expressed doubts that he could have avoided encountering Epstein because of his friendship with the financier’s girlfriend, Ghislaine Maxwell. “It was inevitable that we would have come across each other,” he said. The prince’s answers are likely to ensure he remains in the headlines for the conceivable future. This strategy only works if you've got a complete answer to every possible question, and here there are too many loose ends Mark Stephens, a lawyer who represented James Hewitt after his alleged affair with Princess Diana, was one of many to suggest the prince’s decision to go on TV could backfire. “This strategy only works if you’ve got a complete and full answer to every possible question, and here there are too many loose ends,” he said. It is known that some close to the prince had reservations about how the interview – reportedly the result of six months of negotiations with the royal household – would play out. Jason Stein, who previously worked for the former work and pensions secretary Amber Rudd, recently quit as an adviser to the prince after less than a month. It is understood he had disagreed with the decision to go ahead with the interview. It is claimed that the prince sought permission from the Queen before giving it, and that she gave her consent early last week. In the interview, the prince said that with “hindsight” his decision to stay at Epstein’s house was “definitely the wrong thing to do”, and that his judgment was “probably coloured” at the time. Of the infamous photograph which purportedly shows the prince with his arm around Giuffre’s waist, apparently in the London mews house of Maxwell, the prince said: “You can’t prove whether or not that photograph is faked or not because it is a photograph of a photograph of a photograph. So it’s very difficult to be able to prove it but I don’t remember that photograph ever being taken.” He said Giuffre’s claims that he sweated a lot were untrue because of a “peculiar medical condition”, the result of an adrenaline overdose when he was shot at during the Falklands, which means it is “almost impossible for me to sweat”. Giuffre’s lawyers did not respond to requests for comment but her Twitter account retweeted a comment from the former editor of the Northern Echo, Peter Barron, who said: “Astonishing decision by the royal family to go ahead with this Prince Andrew confessional interview in the hope it would draw a line under the scandal. It will have the opposite effect.” She also retweeted several disparaging reactions to the interview, including one which said: “To have to watch this weasel attempt to wiggle free from the claws of justice, is absolutely abhorrent.” It is the first time the prince has answered questions on his relationship with Epstein, who was found dead in his Manhattan jail cell in August. In 2015, Prince Andrew used a public appearance at Davos in Switzerland to deny the claims. In 2010, he was photographed walking with Epstein in New York’s Central Park – two years after Epstein’s first conviction for soliciting a minor for prostitution. Addressing his decision to stay with Epstein following the financier’s conviction in 2008, the prince said: “That’s the bit that … as it were, I kick myself for on a daily basis because it was not something that was becoming of a member of the royal family, and we try and uphold the highest standards and practices and I let the side down, simple as that.” The prince denied his relationship with Epstein had damaged the monarch. “I don’t believe it’s been damaging to the Queen at all – it has to me, and it’s been a constant drip, if you see what I mean.” Giuffre’s lawyer, Jack Scarola, told Mail Online the prince should agree to an interview “under oath” instead of giving statements to the media that carry “little weight”. He said: “I believe there is an ongoing investigation in New York by the FBI under the supervision of the US Attorney’s office into those involved in facilitating Jeffrey Epstein’s abuse. “I would love to see Prince Andrew submit to an interview under oath with the investigating authorities. Talking to the media doesn’t quite cut it. Statements that are not under oath carry little weight.”