With five games postponed due to international call-ups, Coventry seized their chance to make up some ground on the teams above them. The Sky Blues had to come from a goal down after Ian Henderson put Rochdale ahead in the 28th minute. Jordan Shipley equalised in the second half and then Liam Walsh got the winner 18 minutes left to lift City up to third. Blackpool also took advantage of a reduced fixture slate as Armand Gnanduillet scored twice to down AFC Wimbledon. The Tangerines are now fifth. Bolton now have a positive points tally after Daryl Murphy scored in the third minute of added time to beat fellow strugglers MK Dons at the Macron Stadium. The visitors had George Williams sent off for raising his hands to Thibaud Verlinden. Ten-man Rotherham held on to beat Accrington Stanley after Chiedozie Ogbene was sent off for a second bookable offence. Carlton Morris got the game’s only goal, putting the Millers ahead after 30 minutes. And there was only one goal in the division’s other game, Mikael Mandron getting it for Gillingham as they beat Lincoln City. Blackpool 2-0 Wimbledon; Bolton 1-0 MK Dons; Coventry 2-1 Rochdale; Gillingham 1-0 Lincoln City; Rotherham 1-0 Accrington The day after popular former skipper Paul Caddis returned to the club, Swindon went top of the league he helped them win back in 2012, beating Salford City 3-2 on the road. Another former Town player got the game’s first goal as Adam Rooney put the hosts ahead, but that lead did not last long with Eoin Doyle levelling six minutes later. Doyle got his second from the spot to give the Robins a lead early in the second half, with Jerry Yates later adding a third. Rooney got his second, also from the spot, but coming in the 95th minute it was too late. Forest Green started the day at the top of the table, but Antoni Sarcevic got the only goal of the game at the New Lawn as Plymouth Argyle knocked Rovers off their perch and edged the Pilgrims towards the play-off spots. But it’s tight: the top 11 are separated by only seven points. With Forest Green losing and Bradford not playing, Crewe had the opportunity to go second with a win at Northampton, but Keith Curle’s side had other ideas. Scott Wharton scored twice before the 20-minute mark and with Sam Hoskins adding a third from the spot not long after, the game was gone before Chris Porter could get one back for Alex in the 37th minute. Andy Williams sealed a 4-1 win for the Cobblers early in the second half. Mark Cullen scored with seven minutes left at Vale Park to give Port Vale all three points against Carlisle and put his side within striking distance of the play-off spots. Ryan Loft had put the visitors ahead inside the first minute, a lead they held until the hour when David Worrall started the Vale comeback. Morecambe climbed off the bottom with Cole Stockton grabbing an 81st-minute equaliser to earn a point at Crawley. Alex Gilliead and Lee Novak got the goals for Scunthorpe as they beat Leyton Orient 2-0 at Brisbane Road. It was too little too late for Cambridge at Walsall. Harvey Knibbs scored in the 92nd minute but the Saddlers had been leading 2-0 since the 10th minute thanks to goals from Josh Gordon and Mat Sadler. There were no goals in the game between Exeter and Cheltenham or Macclesfield and Mansfield. Crawley 1-1 Morecambe; Exeter 0-0 Cheltenham; Forest Green 0-1 Plymouth; Leyton Orient 0-2 Scunthorpe; Macclesfield 0-0 Mansfield; Northampton 4-1 Crewe; Port Vale 2-1 Carlisle; Salford 2-3 Swindon; Walsall 2-1 Cambridge