Dak Prescott threw for 444 yards and three touchdowns, while Ezekiel Elliott added a pair of TDs as the visiting Dallas Cowboys kept pace in the NFC East with a 35-27 victory Sunday over the short-handed Detroit Lions. Prescott completed 29 of 46 passes, while surpassing 400 yards for the third time this season, and Michael Gallup caught nine passes for 148 yards as the Cowboys (6-4) remained in first place. Lamar Jackson threw four touchdown passes, ran for 86 yards and helped the Baltimore Ravens roll to their sixth straight victory, 41-7 over the Houston Texans. The game was billed as a matchup between first-place AFC teams and two of the best double-threat quarterbacks in the NFL. Jackson and the Baltimore defense made it a one-sided affair, and now the Ravens (8-2) are riding their longest winning streak since a seven-game run in 2000, their first Super Bowl season. After throwing three touchdown passes to put Baltimore up 21-0 in the third quarter, Jackson followed with his most impressive play of the day: a 39-yard run in which he broke six tackles, weaving through the Houston secondary as if playing keep-away with the football. Your weekly jawdropping run by @lj_era8 🔥 #RavensFlock📺: CBS📱: NFL app // Yahoo Sports appWatch free on mobile: https://t.co/414bcK9I5b pic.twitter.com/dvzeP0UgTW Watson, on the other hand, spent the entire afternoon running from a defense that utilized a variety of blitzes and coverages. Baltimore rang up seven sacks six against Watson forced two turnovers and limited the nimble-footed quarterback to 12 yards rushing on three carries. The Minnesota Vikings overcame a 20-0 first-half deficit and their defense hung on in a 27-23 win over the Denver Broncos. The Vikings improved to 8-3 by scoring touchdowns on each of their four second-half possessions and capped by Kirk Cousins’ 32-yard touchdown pass to Kyle Rudolph with 6:01 remaining. Minnesota’s defense then stopped the Brandon Allen-led Broncos from scoring on their final drive.The game marked the fourth time Denver has blown a fourth-quarter lead this season. The Atlanta Falcons intercepted four passes and defeated a second NFC South rival in as many weeks, clobbering the Carolina Panthers. Quarterback Matt Ryan threw for 311 yards and a touchdown, and the Falcons took advantage of some stellar work on special teams. A week after knocking off the New Orleans Saints on the road, the Falcons (3-7) didn’t give Carolina quarterback Kyle Allen many open looks. Allen, who had never lost at home when starting for the Panthers, finished 31 of 50 for 325 yards with four interceptions. The Panthers (5-5) have lost three of their past four games. Drew Brees threw three touchdown passes and the visiting New Orleans Saints recorded four interceptions in a 34-17 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The Saints improved to 8-2 a week after a 26-9 loss to Atlanta. Against the Buccaneers (3-7), Brees completed 28 of 35 for 228 yards, he wasn’t sacked and he didn’t throw an interception. Michael Thomas, the leading receiver in the NFL, caught eight of Brees’ passes for 114 yards and a touchdown. Sam Darnold more than made up for an ill-timed interception by throwing for 293 yards and a career-high four touchdowns, and the New York Jets routed rookie quarterback Dwayne Haskins and Washington 34-17 for their second consecutive victory. Darnold was 19 of 30 passing and tossed touchdowns to Daniel Brown, Robby Anderson, Ryan Griffin and former Washington receiver Jamison Crowder. Despite getting picked off deep in his own territory by Jon Bostic, the 2018 third overall pick bounced back and now has 11 TDs and 10 interceptions this season. The Jets (3-7) sacked Haskins six times, including three by safety Jamal Adams Jacoby Brissett threw one touchdown pass, ran for another score and used an impressive ground game to get the Indianapolis Colts back on track with a 33-13 victory over Jacksonville. The Colts (6-4) ended a two-game losing streak and pulled back into a tie with Houston for the AFC South lead. Jacksonville (4-6) have lost four of six, this one coming despite the return of starting quarterback Nick Foles. He had missed the previous eight games with a broken left collarbone. Josh Allen tied a career high with three touchdown passes and ran for another score to help the Buffalo Bills complete a season sweep of the Miami Dolphins. Allen’s TD tosses covered 40 and nine yards to John Brown, and 23 yards to Dawson Knox. Allen also scored on an eight-yard run, and he had a 36-yard run to set up a field goal. Miami couldn’t keep up against Buffalo’s smothering defense. The Bills totaled a season-high seven sacks and allowed only 23 yards rushing.