In 2015, I was a lifeguard and teacher in charge of swimming pools in Catalonia. Once the high season was over, my boss, who had founded our lifeguard company, said, “Look at what’s happening in Lesbos. We have to do something.” He decided to send a four-person team to Lesbos; it was the height of the migrant crisis, and dozens of boats were arriving every day from the Middle East, Africa and Asia, and from Afghanistan and Syria in particular. Our group became the NGO Open Arms. We went out to see what we could do. Between us, we had a lot of experience in life-saving; but what we found there was completely beyond anything we’d dealt with in Catalonia. We had to learn as we went along. It was our job to scramble to the boats and make sure they landed prow-first so they didn’t come in sideways and flip over. I also found myself needing to swim out to rescue people who’d jumped too soon. I wasn’t nervous when I got there. When you’re a lifeguard, you’re used to living off adrenaline. You’re sitting in your chair and then you have to sprint into the water. But we looked at the situation and thought to ourselves, “This is heavy”: you had 20 to 30 boats arriving every day. There was no time to think. You were up at 6am; you pulled on your neoprene, which was still wet from the previous day, and worked until 9pm. We’d been on duty for about a week when this picture was taken. It’s a bit special because it was shot in a place where there hadn’t been a lot of arrivals. You can see me at the back of the boat and a colleague at the front, wearing yellow T-shirts. There were only two of us as our four-person team had split up, with the other two staying where most boats tended to arrive. When I look at the picture now, I’m glad I could help. There are things I’ll never forget, but they’re not bad memories We got the call and jumped into the car. It was a tricky spot to get to, so there weren’t many journalists. The photographer who took it, the late Yannis Behrakis, had been following us everywhere and realised something was happening; he was part of a team that later won a Pulitzer for their coverage of the migrant crisis. The people in the shot are getting ready to jump out of the boat. A lot of the time, though, people didn’t wait to make it to shore; they jumped out as soon as they saw land – even if they were 200m away. They thought they were safe. I was in Lesbos twice that year, and spent a total of 32 days there. With about 25 boats arriving a day, each carrying around 80 people, that makes about 2,000 people a day. I guess I helped about 64,000 people. I also did rescue operations from the Open Arms ship, helping about 1,500 others. When I look at the picture now, I’m glad I was able to help. There are things I’ll never forget, but they’re not bad memories because I was putting to use everything I’d learned. I’m overseeing sports centres in Catalonia now, but I try to volunteer again – even for a fortnight a year. It was my own little grain of sand. The situation has changed now; back then, the main migrant route was from Turkey towards Lesbos. Then it switched to people using the central Mediterranean route, from Libya to Italy. Four years later, we’re back in the same place and nothing has been solved. It’s still the politicians using these people like chess pieces. But if we can help them arrive safely, at least we’re doing something. • As told to Sam Jones If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).