Spain’s long-running drama of political deadlock and confrontation hit a new register with the catastrophic elections called by acting Socialist prime minister Pedro Sánchez on Sunday. The results are disheartening. For the first time since the death of dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, Spain has a far-right party, in Vox, with muscle to match its malice. Vox increased its vote to 15% and secured 52 seats, harvesting the anger provoked by separatist clashes on the streets of Barcelona and becoming the country’s third party. Tragically, that brings Spain into line with other European nations where the far-right represents up to a quarter of the electorate. The inoculation supposedly provided by 40 years of rightwing dictatorship under General Franco last century has now definitively worn off. Sánchez’s decision to remove the dictator’s body from his outsized tomb at the Valley of The Fallen in mid-campaign now looks like a way of burying the past, rather than learning from it. At the same time, this election did nothing to resolve Spain’s greatest problem – its inability to form a government. In fact, things have worsened for Sánchez, who made a terrible miscalculation by imagining that fresh elections, designed to strengthen the position of his Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE), were better than a government supported by the populist left of Podemos. Strategists told him that he had the charisma to emerge as a strongman, and he believed it. Like Britain’s Theresa May in 2017, he is now a weakened and diminished figure. Between them, the PSOE and Podemos now have 10 fewer seats in parliament than those they won in April, and will find it that much more difficult to govern. Few people doubt that this broad-left alliance must finally come into being. Only the left can govern because, with what Catalan separatists see as poetic justice after the prison sentences handed down to their leaders last month, the key to government now sits firmly in the hands of nationalist parties in Catalonia and the Basque country. The right’s hardline stance rules them out of reaching agreements there. Responsibility for smashing Spain’s brittle politics into even smaller pieces lies firmly with Sánchez. So does the task of gluing it back together. Spain is a cage full of madmen all suffering from the same mania: their inability to put up with one another His attempts at looking tough during campaigning included a suggestion that any government led by him would exercise political control over the public prosecutor’s office. Although he quickly apologised, this tendency towards hard-man posturing lies behind both his decision to call elections and his failure to increase his number of seats – even if 28% of the vote still makes the PSOE the largest party. While Podemos must share blame for failing to strike a deal last time, it was Sánchez who eventually nixed it – even after Podemos leader Pablo Iglesias offered to step aside. This testosterone-driven “winner takes all” view of Spanish politics now seems outdated. Ever since Podemos emerged five years ago with a promise to dislodge the elites who had held sway since 1978 and driven Spain over a cliff edge into brutal recession, Spaniards have been telling politicians that they no longer trust a single party to govern them. Years of corruption showed that absolute majorities – in Spain as a whole, in Catalonia or in most other regions – produced abuse and thievery. Sánchez’s caveman-like behaviour belongs to the past. Spaniards do not want a strongman leader (except, perhaps, Vox voters). They want someone who knows the value of dialogue and can bring people together. That is the message repeated, time and again, at elections. Televised election debates featured five pugnacious men. Of the five, only the disastrous Albert Rivera, who lost 80% of his liberal Citizens party’s seats on Sunday, has stepped aside. On past record, however, none of the others are fitted to a system of dialogue and cooperation. Instead, all seem to embrace the view of 19th-century writer Ángel Ganivet, who claimed Spain was “a cage full of madmen all suffering from the same mania: their inability to put up with one another”. Those times are long gone and new leaders are required. Any of the senior party figures who took part in a separate women-only televised debate, and in a very different tone, could do the job just as well, if not better. The most poignant vote of all came from the underpopulated, rural province of Teruel, where a new party called “Teruel Exists” won a single parliamentary seat. It was a plaintive call for attention in a country obsessed with large cities, political point-scoring in Madrid and separatist tensions in Catalonia. Most Spaniards want something new – a political class which knows how to compromise and resolve their everyday problems without turning these into weapons of confrontation, in Catalonia or elsewhere. Sánchez has one final chance to lead that process. • Giles Tremlett is a journalist and author based in Madrid