What were you hoping for?Someone fun, friendly and easy to talk to. I try not to have high expectations to avoid being disappointed. First impressions?From a 5ft distance: cute, well-groomed and a good sense of style. Then I sat down and noticed his ring and big chunky necklace, which I was less happy about. I also immediately knew he was a smoker. What did you talk about?I was keen to know about his salsa dancing, and he was keen to know about my taste in music. We listened to a few songs – I like to think he was satisfied with my choices. Any awkward moments?He asked if I’d want to go to a swingers’ party, as a joke, but I didn’t know what that was. Later I said table tennis is the only ball game I’m good at: we laughed it off. Good table manners?Perfect, better than mine. Best thing about Luke?He can dance salsa. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes – they’d want him to take them dancing. Describe Luke in three wordsCute, polite, engaging. What do you think he made of you?I’m really not sure. He said he would describe me as hot to his friends. Did you go on somewhere?He wanted to, but I had to work the next day. And… did you kiss?Yes! Although I basically had to ask for it… If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?If I had eaten and drunk less, and hadn’t had to work the next day, I would have loved to go on with the night. Marks out of 10?A solid 7. Would you meet again?I would, probably as a friend. What were you hoping for?Someone who was easy to talk to and had the potential for a few more fun nights in them. First impressions?Pretty nervous and wearing a great outfit. What did you talk about?Salsa and bachata, our families, the British and their lack of passion. I spent 15 minutes explaining what swingers’ parties are. Any awkward moments?When we considered having to run out of the restaurant because we didn’t know if the staff knew our meal was meant to be covered. Good table manners?Didn’t notice at all, so big thumbs up. Best thing about Claire?Her sense of culture and willingness to experience new music and activities. Would you introduce her to your friends?Definitely, they would all be able to bitch about me in languages I don’t understand. Describe Claire in three wordsCultured, intelligent, gorgeous. What do you think she made of you?I think my British sarcasm may occasionally have come across as a little rude. Did you go on somewhere? Just to the tube station – it was a school night after all. And… did you kiss?What’s a date without a kiss? If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Have the date on a non-school night; I would have loved to have gone dancing afterwards. Marks out 10?8. Would you meet again?Here’s hoping! • Claire and Luke ate at Mele e Pere, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com