“In Paris, there’s a restaurant called Joe Allen. Apparently it’s the oldest American restaurant in Paris. This got me wondering, are there any other restaurants that have the same name as footballers?” asked Opta Fred. There are also the original in New York, plus one in London too. Meanwhile, Robert Lewis gives us another example. “There is a hotel (not a restaurant, but close) in the Bansko ski station in Bulgaria, which goes by the name of Hadji Georgi. This always strikes me as being very similar to the name of Gheorghe Hagi, the great Romanian star. Incidentally, hadji is Bulgarian for ‘saint’, so it is actually the Saint George Hotel. No dragons I’m afraid.” Incidentally, Hagi does own a hotel in his native Romania, named Hotel Iaki. The continent clearly seems to be the place to go for footballing restaurants. “The other question about restaurants bearing the name of footballers brings to mind the great Croatian midfielder Zvonimir Boban, who owns Restaurant Boban in the centre of Zagreb,” explains Önder Susam. “Slightly overpriced, I would have to say.” There is a strong Italian influence, harking back to his career in Milan. The tuna carpaccio will set you back around £9. “Many an expat was disappointed when the Al in Shirah restaurant in Muscat, Oman renamed itself the Purple Onion,” points out Richard Place. “However, an Al in Shirah Inn opened in Malaysia recently. So we can all look forward to our social media feeds filling up again, with pictures of Newcastle fans showing us how well-travelled they are.” This is not the first time that Big Al has suffered the pain of a establishment named in his honour slip away; Shearer’s bar at St James’ Park was renamed Nine Sports Bar, coincidentally not long after the former striker criticised the running of the club. “Any Liverpool fans looking to watch a match while in New York will probably know of Carragher’s Pub and Restaurant, named after Jamie Carragher,” notes George Jones. “It’s like a training ground for Liverpool fans who haven’t yet been to Anfield. You can buy a portion of Scouse on the menu, while real-life Scousers behind the bar encourage shy tourists to sing Anfield ditties.” Somewhere Manchester City fans would have wanted to go is Il Berti’s, opened by cult hero Gláuber Berti. Sadly, the establishment seems to be no more, as the former defender has decided to focus on his career as an agent. And not eponymous, but Lundum’s in London was so enjoyed by former Middlesbrough forward Mikkel Beck that he bought the place. • Any eateries we haven’t mentioned? Email knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU. “Having looked at their Wikipedia page, I notice that Luxembourg’s biggest ever win was a 6-0 tonking of Afghanistan in 1948 which, for some reason, took place in Brighton – can anyone elucidate, and are there any other equally bizarre occurrences?” tweets Ross Taylor. Michael Haughey can explain: “Played at the Goldstone Ground, this was the preliminary round of the 18-team football tournament, part of the 1948 Olympics held in London. Only the semis, final and bronze medal play-off were played at the host stadium, Wembley. Compared to the World Cup in England 18 years later, more teams (18) from more confederations (six) participated. Crowds were lower, but would a match between Mexico and South Korea attract 6,000 to Dulwich Hamlet on a Monday tea-time these days?” Maybe. Roger Rawston adds some further colour: “Luxembourg then lost 6-1 to silver-medallists Yugoslavia in the first round. In the other preliminary match, Netherlands beat Ireland 3-1 at Fratton Park, before losing 4-3 to Great Britain.” “Queen’s Park have voted to end their purely amateur status and can now take on players on a professional basis. What is the highest status that an amateur club has reached in the post-war years, taking into account the standard of the national league they play in?” asks Alistair Murdoch. Michael is back and takes us to communist-era Romania. “The highest-placed ‘amateur’ team would be Steaua Bucharest winning the European Cup in 1986,” he writes. “Officially a sports club for the Romanian Army, all the players were nominally soldiers and not paid for playing football. Such was the eastern bloc domination of Olympic football that the only western gold medal in the era was won by France in 1984, when the communist bloc boycotted the Olympics and professional footballers were allowed for the first time.” “After seeing a quite forlorn looking human-sized raven at Bromley v Stockport, I wondered what the lowest-ranked team with a paid mascot is,” writes Tom Taylor. “Any ideas?” Take it away, Jeremy Orbell. “I don’t know if said person was paid or not, but in the 2018 Peterborough Youth League U-15 Cup final between Werrington Athletic Blue and Holbeach United Yellow, beaten finalists Holbeach had a tiger mascot. My son Charlie played for Werrington that night, scoring a crucial penalty as they won 9-8 on penalties after a 1-1 draw. I know you all want to read the match report so I’ve kindly provided it.” “In 1899 the UK baseball champions were Nottingham Forest, while Spurs won it in 1906. Which other football teams have had baseball connections or are these team names coincidental?” asked Paul Smith back in 2005. The names are not coincidental. The National Baseball League of Great Britain and Ireland was founded in 1890. Four teams were involved, all with close links to association football clubs: Derby County, Preston North End, Aston Villa and Stoke City. Baseball flourished particularly in the north-east with clubs in Middlesbrough, Darlington, Stockton and Thornaby. In 1933, a National Baseball Association was founded and professional leagues were formed in Lancashire and Yorkshire. The first professional games got under way in 1936, with the Yorkshire League made up of sides from Leeds, Bradford, Sheffield, Hull, Dewsbury, Wakefield and Scarborough. Games regularly attracted 5,000 spectators – and, on occasion, as many as 10,000. • For more from the font of nerdvana, click this thing here. “I noticed, around the 70th minute of Sheffield United v Manchester United, David de Gea took a throw-in. How many times before has this happened? Have there been any specialists? Who’s taken the most?” asks Frederick Parkinson. @TheKnowledge_GU Simon Moore joined Nahki Wells yesterday in playing matches in both the Island Games and Premier League - any other Prem footballers past or present played in obscure non-FIFA affiliated international tournaments? @TheKnowledge_GU this weekend Hoffenheim and Mainz, Mainz were leading 1-0 away when a Mainz player was sent off. Mainz ended up scoring 4 more goals despite being a man down, eventually winning the game 5-1. Has any team scored more goals despite having a numerical disadvantage? “Last season, Marco van Ginkel was named PSV Eindhoven skipper despite being on loan from Chelsea. Is anybody aware of other instances of a team’s designated captain being owned by another club?” wonders Stuart Jones. Serious question though. What’s the highest position in a goal scoring chart a player from Oceania or Asia has finished in Europe? “METTA/LU beat Super Nova 3-1 on aggregate to retain their place in the Latvian Virsliga for next season,” begins Andrew Smith. “That makes seven consecutive seasons the team have managed to stay up by winning the play-off final; can any team beat that?” **IF** @LFC beat @BHAFC on Sat, they’ll have reached the symbolic 40pt safety barrier before December.In the 3pts-per-win era & in a league with 18+ teams / 2+ relegations, what is the earliest date a team has gained enough points that prevented relegation for that season? “Ipswich had 17 shots against Wycombe without managing one on target,” writes Colm Andrews. “Is this a record for most shots without dirtying the opposition keeper’s gloves?” • Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.