Prince Andrew has said that he failed to uphold the standards of the royal family when he visited Jeffrey Epstein after the paedophile’s release from prison, admitting: “I let the side down, simple as that.” The prince made the statement in an interview with the BBC’s Newsnight programme, the first time he has spoken publicly about his friendship with Epstein, to be broadcast on Saturday night. In a pre-recorded interview with Emily Maitlis, understood to have been the result of six months of negotiations with the royal household, Andrew also said he had “no recollection” of ever meeting Virginia Giuffre, the woman who claims to have been coerced into having sex with the royal by the financier Epstein. Andrew said he regretted remaining friends with Epstein after he was found guilty of sexual offences: “I stayed with him and that’s … that’s … that’s the bit that … that … that, as it were, I kick myself for on a daily basis because it was not something that was becoming of a member of the royal family, and we try and uphold the highest standards and practices and I let the side down, simple as that.” Asking the prince about the alleged sexual encounter with Giuffre, which Giuffre alleges took place when she was flown to London on Epstein’s private jet aged just 17, Maitlis said: “She says she met you in 2001, she says she dined with you, danced with you at Tramp Nightclub in London. She went on to have sex with you in a house in Belgravia belonging to Ghislaine Maxwell, your friend. Your response?” Andrew replied: “I have no recollection of ever meeting this lady, none whatsoever.” Asked again if he had any memory of meeting her, he repeated: “No.” Giuffre has previously said that while the prince denies the claims, “he knows the truth and I know the truth”. Andrew has faced a barrage of criticism for his links to Epstein, who was found dead in a New York jail cell three months ago while facing renewed criminal charges. He has been haunted by a picture of him posing with his hand around Giuffre, apparently taken at the home of Maxwell. Sources close to the prince have previously claimed that the photo was faked, in part because his fingers are “much chubbier” in real life. Newsnight sources said that the royal household agreed that there would be no advance vetting of questions for the interview, which was conducted on Thursday at Buckingham Palace. Maitlis promised that it would be “no holds barred”.