Protesters in Hong Kong have cleared a highway that they have blocked since Monday as a gesture of goodwill, as political unrest paralysed the city for a fifth day in a row. At a 3am press conference demonstrators at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, one of the main battlegrounds of the last week, said they would reopen the Tolo highway, a major traffic artery, outside of the school. Protesters said they were giving the government until 6am on Saturday to promise that local district elections scheduled for 24 November would continue. Some believe the government is angling to postpone or cancel the elections in expectation of major losses to pro-establishment candidates. “We are the powerless and they are the ones in power. We have no bargaining chip besides this one single bridge,” a demonstrator said, referring to a bridge occupied by protesters that overlooks the highway. “The blockade of Tolo highway has brought inconvenience to residents ... so we hope to offer a friendly gesture. Our target is the government, not Hong Kong residents,” one of the protesters said. The Hong Kong government has not yet responded to protesters’ demands but said that parts of the Tolo highway had been reopened. Hundreds of people rallied in lunchtime protests across the city on Friday, the fifth day that office workers and other residents have joined weekday demonstrations and disrupted traffic. Protests have previously been during the weekend or in the evenings. “Every day, every single day there are more instances that keep us coming out. This is us telling the government we want this to stop,” said Margaret, 55, who works in investment management and was attending a demonstration in Central, a major business district, where riot police have tear gassed those who have turned up over the last four days. “They are supposed to be protecting us. Instead they are doing the opposite,” she said. “I don’t know how much worse it can get.” Others said they were frustrated by the escalation in tensions this week, after police stormed several universities, prompting student protesters to barricade themselves into the schools where they were stockpiling weapons and other supplies. “The teenagers are out there risking their lives for Hong Kong,” said Sam Ho, an accountant. “I just feel like this is not the same place as before. This is a police state where the police can do whatever they want.” Hong Kong has had one of the most violent weeks since anti-government protests began in June, initially over a now-scrapped extradition bill that would send suspects to mainland China. Tensions reached a new peak after the death of a demonstrator one week ago. In the days after, police shot a 21-year student on live broadcast and a 57-year-old man was lit on fire during an argument with demonstrators. On Thursday a 70-year-old cleaner died after being hit by brick during a fight between protesters and residents. International concern over Beijing’s response has increased. On Thursday a US congressional advisory body called on lawmakers to enact legislation that would strip Hong Kong of its special economic status granted under US law if the Chinese military were deployed to crush the protests. The US-China Economic and Security Review Commission said in an annual report issued that the US “must plan for worst-case scenarios, while trying to achieve the best ones”. In London, Hong Kong’s justice minister Teresa Cheng said she was injured by protesters when attending an event on Thursday. Video showed protesters surrounding and yelling “Shame on you” at the cabinet official who was seen falling. Hong Kong’s chief executive Carrie Lam condemned the incident, calling the behaviour of the protesters involved “barbaric” and a violation of “the principles of a civilised society”. The Chinese embassy in the UK said Cheng was pushed to the ground and sustained a hand injury. “(Cheng) was besieged and attacked by dozens of anti-China and pro-independence activists,” the Chinese embassy said in a statement. The incident showed that the “violent and lawless perpetrators” were now taking their violence abroad, it said. China has lodged a formal complaint with Britain and urged British authorities to bring the perpetrators to justice. Late on Thursday Chinese state media issued an editorial saying “Hong Kong universities are not outside the law” and accused opposition forces in Hong Kong and abroad of “brainwashing students” and “sowing anti-China chaos”. Earlier the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, in his first public remarks on the crisis, said Hong Kong must “restore order” and punish “violent criminals”.