“Absolutely,” Warren Gatland says when he is asked if he would still love to coach the All Blacks one day. “I went back and gave my reasons why I just couldn’t apply for the job right now. I’ve got it on my phone.” There is a long pause while the New Zealander, who has just completed 12 years as head coach of Wales and took them to their second World Cup semi-final under him last month in Japan, flicks through his emails. The 56-year-old Gatland is a principled man and so, out of respect for Mike Anthony, New Zealand Rugby’s high performance manager, he requests that I don’t use verbatim quotes from his emailed reply in which he explains his reasons for not putting his name forward as the next All Black coach. There has been such a desire in influential circles in New Zealand rugby for Gatland to get the job that Anthony asked if he would be willing to be considered. As Gatland reads the positive email exchange it becomes obvious that, despite wanting to honour his commitment to coach the Chiefs in Super Rugby and then lead the Lions on their 2021 tour of South Africa, he would like to take charge of the All Blacks eventually. It is also clear that the New Zealand hierarchy respect Gatland’s integrity in meeting his existing obligations. The big black door remains ajar for Gatland when the time is right. Until then, with Wales and the All Blacks having contested the third-place play-off game between the losing semi-finalists earlier this month, the amiable Gatland will prepare for his return home to Waikato. But, in his amiable way, Gatland conveys with a wry wince that he has still not got over thinking what might have been if Wales had reached the final – having been locked at 16-16 with South Africa after 76 minutes. But the Springboks scored a late penalty and went on to beat England in the final. “I thought if we beat South Africa, even with injuries, I would’ve gone into the game against England feeling we could win the World Cup. There wasn’t that fear factor against England. It would have been different if the All Blacks had won their semi-final. For some of the Welsh players the All Blacks are still on a pedestal because New Zealand’s the one team we haven’t beaten. But against England, psychologically, we would have been confident because the guys have had success and we had an effective game plan. The results have been 50-50 and, knowing you’re capable of beating them, makes a massive difference.” Towards the end of an abrasive semi-final, Gatland believed Wales would win. “After 65 minutes I thought there was a shift in momentum. We’d stayed in the fight and our boys have shown they never give up. We were 16-9 down and we showed courage in taking the scrum instead of the penalty. It led to the try that made it 16-all.” In his excellent new autobiography, Gatland reveals that it was his decision to take the scrum. “We could have taken the three points,” he says now. “But I thought it was a period where we might get that opportunity for the try. So I got the message down to the team. It’s interesting because you go back to 2015, when we beat England in the World Cup, and they made the wrong call. If I had been in charge of England I would have got the message down there straightaway. Take the three points.” England, captained by Chris Robshaw and coached by Stuart Lancaster, were trailing Wales by three points when they kicked a penalty into touch in pursuit of a try. It was a mistake and they were knocked out of the group stages of their home World Cup. “In our semi-final,” Gatland says, “South Africa kept taking three points to keep the scoreboard ticking over. But there are times when, with momentum, you’re better off going for the scrum or the lineout. We got the try and it was 16-16 with six minutes to go. But then South Africa got a penalty. [Handré] Pollard kicked it and it wasn’t to be. But I can’t question the effort of our players. I likened it to a sponge of water. We squeezed every last drop out of Wales.” England also squeezed out something special against New Zealand. “It was one of the best performances by England that I’ve ever seen. They were outstanding. Controlled the game. Defended exceptionally well. Attacked well. It was pretty much the complete performance.” Gatland then voiced his doubt that such a display could be repeated in the final. Eddie Jones, England’s coach, made a sharp riposte when he said Gatland should enjoy his third-place game. “I wasn’t actually referring to England,” Gatland says now. “And Eddie wasn’t being malicious in his comment. Eddie and I often laugh about this because it’s a game. What I meant is that if you look at previous World Cups the only team that has beaten the All Blacks and gone on to win it is Australia. Emotion plays a massive part in big games. It’s very difficult, at the highest level of sport, to be right on the edge emotionally and repeat that the following week.” Earlier this year Gatland had been direct in suggesting that England tend to lose the games that matter most. “I’ve felt it with England before,” he says now. “They’ve lost grand slam games. They lost to us when I coached Ireland. They lost to Wales in a 2013 grand slam decider. They lost to Wales at home in the World Cup. They lost to us this year in the Six Nations where I felt whoever won that game would win the championship.” Wales won their third grand slam under Gatland this year. That treble sits alongside his two World Cup semi-finals as a sign of how much he achieved with a side which was in chaos when he took over in 2007. “I thought Wales couldn’t get any worse,” Gatland says. “But when I first arrived I went to watch the Ospreys train. One of the things that impressed me about the Welsh boys is that they could all catch and pass. They were very skilful because like a lot of southern hemisphere boys they start playing rugby very young.” Jones, in contrast, told me how the basic skills of England’s players lagged behind the southern hemisphere teams when he arrived four years ago. He felt it was a consequence of many English players taking up the game later. Gatland agrees. “I’ve always thought the Welsh boys are the most skilful in the northern hemisphere. Apart from the backs, the tight forwards can all catch and pass. Wales is probably the closest country to the southern hemisphere because it’s not a private school game. Rugby’s part of the community.” Is the constant bickering between the regions and the Union the most challenging aspect of the job? “Yes. But Roger Lewis, the chief executive who offered me the position, did a brilliant job from a business perspective. He reduced the debt by identifying that support of the national team was paramount. He put resources into the squad because we were the cash cow that ran the whole game. “If the national team was successful, and the stadium was sold out, everything flowed back into the game. But the disappointing thing was the relationship between the Union and the regions. For a number of years it was really toxic. It’s still probably not as good as you’d like. But Wales is so tribal. If they could get harmony between the regions and the Union, perhaps with the top players on central contracts, that would have a massive impact. I knew I couldn’t tackle that toxic relationship so I focused on the team – and the Union helped make sure we trained at the best rugby facilities in the world.” And if we lost a Test out there – while England are world champions – imagine the heat from the media Gatland has also achieved mightily with the Lions. He was Ian McGeechan’s assistant in South Africa in 2009, and then led the Lions to victory in Australia four years later before sharing a drawn series in New Zealand in 2017. He will coach the Lions against the world champions in 2021. “This will be my fourth Lions tour and three have seen us play the world champions. That adds to the importance of this tour. I thought about the Lions after this World Cup final. It would have been great if England had won from a northern hemisphere point of view. But, looking at it selfishly, would it have been good for the Lions? I think it would have added to the pressure. “You would have had these questions of ‘Why don’t you just pick the whole England squad?’ And if we lost a Test out there – while England are world champions – imagine the heat from the media. I’m looking at it now and thinking, actually it’s not the worst outcome, from a Lions’ perspective, that England didn’t win. It helps that we are playing the world champions.” There is no anti-English bias from the outgoing Wales coach. When I ask Gatland about his potential Lions captain he wonders if Alun Wyn Jones, who is 34 now, will still be in the frame before stressing the credentials of England’s brilliant young lock Maro Itjoe. He also suggests Mako Vunipola and Jamie George could do the job. It will be fascinating to see how the next 18 months unfold and Gatland’s enthusiasm is palpable. “I love the concept of the Lions. It’s absolutely brilliant and South Africa will embrace it. There’s lots of positive cooperation between the South African Rugby Union and the Lions. I’m still hopeful that PRL will move the date of the [2021] Premiership final to the same day as the Pro 14 final. “That would give us the best possible preparation. But at the moment I’ve got no indication that will happen. We talk about the Lions being the best of the best. Why not give them a reasonable preparation? Surely the clubs can see that if their players go away on a Lions tour, they can come home as superstars. The massive spinoffs for the clubs are obvious.” Gatland smiles when I say he can take a break from northern hemisphere rugby politics for the next year while he coaches the Chiefs. “I’ve been coming backwards and forwards between New Zealand and the northern hemisphere for a very long time. If you’d told me as a young man that I’d spend around 20-odd years in the UK and Ireland, I would never have believed it.” He might yearn to coach the All Blacks one day but Gatland’s love of rugby on this side of the world is obvious. “It’s been brilliant, I’ve loved the rugby and I’ve loved the whole experience. It’s been fantastic for my family. The people we’ve met and the friends we’ve made are part of our lives now. That’s the bigger picture and I look on that with maybe even greater satisfaction than all I achieved in rugby over here. It’s been special.” Warren Gatland’s Pride and Passion is published by Headline