Last week, just days before the deadline to register for a vote in the general election, it was revealed that one in four black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) citizens had still not signed up. The phone lines here at Operation Black Vote (OBV) haven’t stopped since, with concerned people from black and Asian communities seeking their right to vote and helping end this huge democratic deficit. The deadline is urgent: registration closes on Tuesday night When we set up OBV in 1996, things were even worse: non-registration among minority communities was 30%, and among certain communities – African and Bangladeshi, for instance – the figure was as high as 50%. But over the years we steadily got the figures down, and at the last election the power of minority voters shone through brightly. Labour won an estimated 77% of ethnic minority voters, the Conservatives 20% and the Lib Dems 3%. This had a huge impact in marginal seats such as Kensington, Battersea, Dudley North, Crewe and Nantwich, Bedford, and Warwick and Leamington, which have relatively high black or Asian populations. It was a clear message to all parties that they need a policy programme which has a strong appeal to minorities: to the Tories, Liberal Democrats and others that they have the potential to make great gains; and to Labour that it can’t afford to lose these voters. We’ve now compiled a list of 100 seats in which the number of ethnic minority voters is larger than the majority held in that constituency – so they again have the chance to change the course of this election. And alongside that, they can change the course of Britain’s political future: to put pressure on their parliamentary candidates on issues such as schools, jobs inequality, policing, housing, immigration, global warming and racial discrimination. But first they must register, and my organisation is urging them to do so. With the help of our media partners, Saatchi & Saatchi, and a number of young celebrities – including actors Nathalie Emmanuel (Game of Thrones) and Will Poulter (The Maze Runner), musician Nadia Rose, and activist Ash Sarkar – we’ve launched an advertising campaign. It highlights the bigotry, racism, and climate change denial spewed out by our elected politicians, to which we say in response: “If you don’t speak for yourself, others will speak for you.” But the deadline is urgent: registration closes on Tuesday night. Thousands have already responded. But many more still need to do so. If tens of thousands of black, Asian and minority-ethnic people register to vote in these last few hours (and it takes only a few moments) they will be making a statement of intent: that we must be listened to. And that we’ve got the clout to make the difference over who wins or loses on 12 December. • Simon Woolley is director of Operation Black Vote • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.