By now the John Lewis Christmas advert formula has solidified into scripture. There’s a happy song performed in a comically depressed way. There’s a figure that represents the entire concept of agonising heartache. There’s a smattering of Christmas, the thinnest possible veneer of commerce and the lingering sense that we’d all be much better served if the whole thing was simply replaced with a caption reading ‘We sell some clothes and kettles’. But this year? Hoo boy, this year John Lewis has smashed the blueprint into smithereens. This is partly because the advert is actually for John Lewis and Waitrose, which may well be a concession to the crippling financial situation going on behind the scenes. But you can mainly tell we’re in brave new territory here because this is the first time the John Lewis Christmas advert has explicitly been about a twat. At least the twat has a name. It’s Edgar the Dragon; a superficially adorable little lizardy lump who – at literally every possible opportunity presented to him – commits arson. He sees some children making a snowman, he torches the snowman to a puddle. He sees some children having fun on an ice rink, he torches the rink in a doomed bid to drown the children. The townspeople come together to unveil a beautiful Christmas tree. Guess what? Edgar burns the whole thing down. Short of having a scene where he dances on a staircase to a Gary Glitter song, this is the closest John Lewis has ever come to a straight remake of Joker. John Lewis has dabbled with idiots before. The little boy in 2011 was an impatient moron, but the twist there was that he was impatient to give and not receive. The rabbit in 2013 was a selfish numpty for repeatedly waking a hibernating bear, but at least it was because he wanted to show him the magic of Christmas. But Edgar the Dragon? He just wants to see the world burn. Sure, some will argue that the John Lewis advert is about forgiveness; about coming together to look past someone’s faults in the spirit of good will to all men. But that isn’t what it’s about. Not really. It’s a stinging fable about how you can never really change a person, and how trying to accommodate a person’s failings will only end in terrible pain for everyone involved. Look at the ending. After Edgar the Dragon has repeatedly ruined everything with his intrinsic firestarting tendencies, what does his little friend do? She brings him to the townspeople with a Christmas pudding. He sets fire to the Christmas pudding. Everyone applauds. But that isn’t a resolution, is it? That’s a threat. That’s Edgar showing everyone he is still capable of terrible atrocities. Those townspeople aren’t thankful. They understand the warning and they’re clapping in fear. He is their new overlord now. If they don’t give him what he wants, he’ll murder them and everyone they love in an orgy of unstoppable violence. The dance of freedom. The death bells. The rising of the Edgar. So that’s the message John Lewis wants to push this year. You will never change your broken personality, so the best you can do is to weaponise it. Turn it into your greatest asset, regardless of the damage it causes society. Keep buying single use plastic. Keep taking unnecessary flights. It doesn’t matter. Nothing does. The world is a speck of mud floating in a void of uncaring nothingness. A century from now, nobody will remember you even existed. Merry Christmas.