Boxing gyms are supposed to be places where you can turn your life around. In which case, why did I spend this morning inside one with the Liberal Democrat leader, Jo Swinson, with an invitation to spend this afternoon in a different one with the Brexit party leader, Nigel Farage? Is this rock bottom? Is this where the turning around starts? Either way, Swinson’s visit was one of those election events that seem to have been designed by taking one card from a pile with the names of the parties, and one card from a pile of auto-parodic campaign locations. So while this morning it was “the Liberal Democrats” and “a boxing gym”, it could just as easily have been “the Labour party” and “an overvalued ecotech firm” or “the Conservatives” and “a hedgehog sanctuary”. Anyway: the Lib Dems and a boxing gym. This is not street fighting, so there are rules. Namely: they want you to talk about fight club. And if anyone from the Lib Dems says the words “the sweet science”, I’m leaving. Total Boxer is located on an industrial estate in north London’s Hornsey and Wood Green constituency, which voted so strongly to remain in 2016 it is now regarded by the party as a key marginal. The Labour majority is currently 30,000. Last week this gym produced a national champion who, two years ago, had been homeless. But this morning it was a place for middle-class politicians and journalists to stand disinterestedly among people at the sharpest end of inner city society, and ask obsessive questions about what’s happening with the remain alliance in Canterbury. What can you say? Other than: please could someone here knock me out? I feel it would be significantly less excruciating. No? Then let’s get ready to rumble. In the red corner, fighting out of Westminster by way of East Dunbartonshire, it’s JOOOOOOOOOO! SWINSOOOOOOOON! The Lib Dem leader travels in an electric battle bus which has more personalised branding than the George Foreman Grill – and, indeed, than all of George Foreman’s five sons, all of whom are famously called George Foreman. Ever keen to put on a broadcastable show for the news cameras, Swinson had lined up a bit of coaching from the gym’s founder. For this she donned a pair of yellow gloves, and got into the ring to the strains of Roots Manuva’s Motion 5000, wearing a “girly swot” T-shirt with an additional printed spider-brooch tribute to the president of the supreme court, Lady Hale. All the rage down the boxing gyms, these. The other purpose of the visit was to tie in with the announcement of the party’s funding plans for local services and to tackle youth crime. “I think this is a significant investment,” declared Swinson. Mmmm. You’ve seen Raging Bull. I’m afraid there’s a touch of the raging bullshit to this, given that the Lib Dems would be restoring only some of the money their own government took away – a fact that hadn’t gone unnoticed by some of the anti-austerity protesters outside. Pressed on the matter, Swinson would only say unclearly that the Lib Dems would be very clear about times when “mistakes were made”. Still, looked at on a trajectory reaching back beyond the coalition, it can’t be denied that the party has turned its own life of crime around. One day at a time and all that. But, let’s face it, any day the Liberal leadership doesn’t order a homicide but settle for a canicide is a win. The main thing Swinson would like you to think, as she jabbed for the cameras, is that she has that same lovable underdog energy of Rocky Balboa, being absolutely determined to show people she ain’t some bum from the neighbourhood and has a chance of pulling off a million-to-one prime ministerial upset. “I don’t think either of them would be a good PM,” she judged of Johnson and Corbyn. “I could do a better job.” Yes, to put it in terms Swinson would reflexively understand: if this were a cold war training montage, she would be doing pull-ups in a barn and outpacing KGB agents in the snow, while Johnson and Corbyn would be in a hi-tech gym getting dodgy injections off Brigitte Nielsen. Or, as she preferred it of Johnson and Corbyn, “I look forward to taking them on in the debates – unless they’re scared of taking on a girly swot.” There it is again. You hear a lot about the fight game being the hardest game in the world. But it’s got nothing on trying to get your party on the ITV debate ticket, and don’t let anyone tell you different.