The UK’s biggest fund manager has spent nearly £300m this year increasing its shareholdings in companies it named and shamed for dragging their heels on climate action. Legal & General Investment Management (LGIM), which has been one of the most outspoken fund managers over the climate crisis, announced in June it was cutting five more companies from its environmentally and socially conscious funds for not doing enough to mitigate the climate emergency. But figures compiled by the Guardian show that LGIM as a whole actually spent about $367m (£285m) since January increasing its stake in those companies – the oil corporation ExxonMobil, the insurer Metlife, the maker of Spam, Hormel Foods, the US retailer Kroger and Korean Electric Power Corporation (KEPC) – even when accounting for the divestments made by its Future Worlds Funds. LGIM, which manages more than £1tn in assets, openly admits that it continues to hold stakes in companies excluded from those environmentally and socially focused funds, saying it gives them the opportunity to engage with the board and ultimately influence company behaviour. But the boost to LGIM’s overall shareholdings in those firms raises questions over whether companies should take LGIM’s threats seriously, particularly when it is spending millions of pounds to increase its holdings. The investment firm defended its position, saying the increased investment is because it is managing more money for clients overall, and that those clients were putting the bulk of the cash into passive index tracker funds. Index tracker funds are not actively managed but use algorithms to follow major stock exchange indices such as the FTSE All-Share that include companies such as ExxonMobil. “It is index providers, not asset managers, which select companies that are included in mainstream indices. LGIM continues to engage with the large index providers on this issue,” the spokesman said. But John Hardy, an organiser with the divestment campaign group Fossil Free UK, said: “It’s disappointing that a firm like LGIM, which has been a leader on this issue, continues to invest and give a social license to fossil fuel companies and those driving climate change.” He added: “We need to get to a point where there isn’t a difference between ‘Future Worlds Funds’ and tracker funds, where the moral argument and the financial argument are both showing that investment in those kind of companies not feasible and not welcome.” LGIM’s Future Worlds Funds are governed by its Climate Impact Pledge, which means it can exclude companies over poor governance and weak climate disclosures, as well as lobbying politicians on policies that risk accelerating the climate crisis. It led to LGIM dumping stakes in China Construction Bank, Rosneft Oil, Japan Post Holdings, Subaru, Loblaw and Sysco Corporation last year. But in the months leading up to its 2019 divestments, LGIM actually increased its holdings in all five companies, which it would cut loose later from funds in its its Future Worlds Funds. In March, it spent almost $410m increasing its stake in all of ExxonMobil, Metlife, Hormel, Kroger and KEPC. That figure more than makes up for the $50m worth of shares it dumped as part of the climate divestments in June, and resulted in a net investment across all five worth a combined $367m. LGIM remains a top 30 shareholder in all but one of those five firms, having recently sold another chunk of KEPC shares that relegated the fund manager to the firm’s 78th largest investor. Catherine Howarth, the chief executive of investment campaign group ShareAction, said: “The analysis raises the issue of index funds which automatically channel capital into fossil fuels companies – this is far from a perfect model for socially conscious investors.” “What is crucial is that index fund managers use their voting rights as shareholders in fossil fuels companies to demand ambitious change from company boards and senior management, and to vote against the election of directors that fail to commit to transition. As ShareAction’s recent analysis of voting on climate-related resolutions shows, LGIM has indeed done this.” A recent report by ShareAction lauded LGIM for backing 82% of key shareholder climate votes, many of which were aimed at forcing world’s most polluting companies to cut their emissions. LGIM’s spokesman said: “Climate change is a very important topic for us and we have been working strenuously to bring about change in the companies in which we invest.” In line with its climate pledge, LGIM has used its shareholder powers to vote against corporate chairs of companies it believed failed to take adequate action on the climate crisis. Voting records seen by the Guardian show it voted against re-electing the top board members of companies including Volkswagen, Barrick Gold and Japan’s Tepco, which it believed were not doing enough to mitigate the climate emergency.