In Christmas in Austin, novelist Benjamin Markovits rejoins the four Essinger siblings for a yuletide gathering at their parents’ house in Texas. Set two years after we first met the German-American clan (in A Weekend in New York, 2018), resentment and yearning prove hard to hide despite the festivities. Naturally, the novel is glutted with scenes of eating and drinking, but much recent upheaval needs digesting too. Susie is reconsidering an imminent family move to Oxford to support her husband’s career, Nathan is pondering the moral purpose of becoming a federal judge and Jean is worried about introducing her boyfriend (and former boss) whose cancer remission spurred his decision to abandon his family. Yet retired professional tennis player Paul faces the most piquant dilemma because of a recent split from girlfriend Dana (A Weekend in New York centred upon how Paul’s participation in the US Open exacerbated their rift). In the hopes of a reconciliation, matriarch Leisel has also invited Dana and her and Paul’s four-year-old, Cal, but will such a contentious gamble pay off? Divided simply into sections that cover each day of this week-long get-together, the storytelling is a torrent of complicated behavioural minutiae: “This is how the morning wore on – family as information-producing machine… decision-requiring machine… argument-creating machine…” Yet the family drama is surpassed in ambition by the narration itself as it flits from the mind of one character to the next with a quicksilver ease. Critic David Lodge contends that embodying consciousness “from the inside” is the towering achievement of the novel. Pivoting between the internal reactions of this family throng, Markovits pushes the free indirect style as far as it can go, perhaps further, given how some value judgments tumble into a strange no-man’s land. The reader occasionally grapples with the epistemological uncertainty of whether to attribute a specific verdict to one of the characters or even the author: “Jean, who was sensitive to this kind of awkwardness, and good-hearted…” Plot is also curiously overshadowed: the question of Paul’s marriage cannot gain much traction when Markovits is intent on ploughing up every lurking doubt. In its protean perspective on family dynamics, Christmas in Austin is a bravura feat, but the plethora of incidental detail sometimes makes it come across less like a novel than a live documentary feed: “Dana woke up, a little after five, when Jean used the bathroom.” Momentous events do occur – loved ones die and relationships collapse – but their consequences are subsumed into the open-ended dramatic irresolution. Spending time with the Essingers is at once a pleasure and a chore – and in that sense Markovits’s novel has persuasively recreated the kind of family occasion to which most of us submit at this time of year. • Christmas in Austin by Benjamin Markovits is published by Faber (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99