The charred cars are mostly gone, the ashes and ruins largely scraped away and new greenery has sprouted up in the dirt lots where stores and homes once stood. One year after the deadliest fire in California history tore through Paradise, the town in the foothills of the Sierra Nevadas is slowly coming back to life. And its former and current residents are navigating a life for ever changed. Last November, the fast-moving Camp fire forced tens of thousands of people in the town and the surrounding communities of Concow and Magalia to flee. Eighty-five people lost their lives in the inferno. More than 18,000 buildings, including 14,000 homes, were left destroyed. The disaster has been devastating, particularly for those without means. About 90% of Paradise’s population of 27,000 remains dispersed into nearby valley towns and cities across the United States. The estimated 3,000 who remain, living in homes that survived the fire or in trailers on burnt-out lots, are still trying to figure out how to move on. The town itself has begun to look and feel different now that crews have cleared more than 2.6m tons of debris. Some schools in town have reopened. Along Skyway, one of the main thoroughfares in town, plenty of lots still lie empty, but there also grocery stores, antique shops and gas stations up and running. About a dozen food trucks have popped up around town. “I think we’ve turned the corner in the past couple months,” said Michael Zuccolillo, a Paradise town councilman. “You’re seeing more rebuilding. More businesses reopening. People more hopeful. The air just feels different.” Paradise will never be the same place it was, residents agree, but a new version of the town is emerging, spurred forward by those trying to help it rebuild. Bryan Howard, a former farmer from Chico, came out of retirement to start his Bootleg BBQ food truck in Paradise. “The first month was a lot harder - it was almost like people who ate here were still in shock,” Howard said. “It’s different now. We’re seeing more smiles. I can see progress.” For those whose homes survived the fire such as Marna Carli, the opening of businesses and new construction are a hopeful sight. “It’s getting better,” Carli said as she cut cake for guests at the Paradise Symphony Orchestra. “I’m real hopeful for our community. Paradise is a special place, and I think it’s going to be a new and better place.” The future of Paradise looks promising, town officials such as Zuccolillo say, and will be aided by ongoing support from the state government and a $270m settlement with PG&E, the bankrupt utility whose equipment caused the fire. The utility has also agreed to pay to put the town’s power lines underground. That funding will help pay for expensive projects such as constructing a long-desired sewer system. Zuccolillo, who plans on rebuilding his home in the coming years, expects the town will continue to grow over the next five to 10 years. In the near future, Paradise is focused on clearing out some of the nearly half a million dead trees, and bringing people back. More than 300 building permits have been issued so far. Still, life for those who are staying put in the region can be challenging. Anastasia and Daniel Skinner and their five children found a home for rent in Magalia earlier this year after their home burned down in the Camp fire. But soon after, Daniel lost much of the income from his county-funded job, and repeated power shutoffs have made the family’s life in the house complicated. Three of their children have special needs, and one relies on a nebulizer for breathing treatments, which she wasn’t able to use during the outage. In the blackouts, they lost weeks’ worth of groceries and had to utilize a food bank. Their generator was recently stolen. “It’s harder to live here with the power outages. It’s almost unlivable because you’re still living in the wreckage of what’s left. It makes it hard to survive,” Anastasia said. The family is now preparing to give up their rental home and move into the RV they bought earlier this year that is parked on their old lot. They are committed to staying, primarily because their daughter, who has autism, needs the stable, accommodating environment that her school offers. Driving past the remaining debris and even the empty lots is a reminder of everything they lost. “Nobody wants to live through this, it’s still horrifying having to drive down Skyway. It’s desolate,” Skinner said. Some people can’t – or don’t want to – return, unable to afford the cost of rebuilding or fearful of life in an area at risk for wildfires. In fact, most of those who lived in Paradise and the surrounding communities a year ago, no longer do. Many have stayed in California, particularly Butte and Glenn counties, where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has established housing sites for some of those affected by the fire. The largest is in Gridley, a town of 6,600 about 30 miles south of Paradise, where several hundred former residents of Paradise, Concow and Magalia, live. The site, which was constructed earlier this year, has some 400 uniform, light grey manufactured homes that line neat, newly paved roads. Though just off the highway, it is quiet and monitored by security guards 24 hours a day. On a recent Sunday afternoon, as the sun began to set, Alexis and Matthew Kogut, walked through the site with their five-year-old son, Hunter, and their infant daughter. “Did you know the fire was burning my house?” Hunter said before skipping ahead of the family. These evening walks have become part of their routine since they moved into a two-bedroom unit at the site in August. Before that they had spent seven months in a hotel near Sacramento. The family is grateful for their new, albeit temporary, home in Gridley. They have friends a few units down. And their new place is roomier and quiet – Hunter finally stopped having the excruciating night terrors that plagued him since the family fled their town in flames. They left that day thinking they would return – they had been evacuated before – but lost everything, including their two cats and the nursery they had set up for Kori, who was born shortly after the fire. “We’re grateful. We think it’s amazing all the work they put in,” Alexis said, her eyes scanning the tidy rows of homes. Meanwhile Hunter talked about his new toys, and sprinted across the pavement to show how fast he could run. They seemed to be the only ones outside that afternoon at the 72-acre site. After the family finished their walk and arrived back at their temporary home, Matthew and the kids went inside while Alexis stood in the dark next to the porch, reflecting on how things had changed in a year. The fire had destroyed everything: their home, their community and a way of life they loved. Their unit at the Fema site gave Alexis, 25, and Matthew, a disabled veteran, more security. But they still felt at a loss for what they would do next. “I can’t stand that we’re not stable. We live on a fixed income. I’m pregnant with a third child. It’s hard,” she said. Alexis doesn’t know where they’ll go, but it won’t be Paradise. Instead they’ll look for the qualities they loved most about the town – its affordability and location in the mountains – somewhere else. “It’s not going to be the same. It’s going to be a smaller, wealthier community,” she said. “And I lost my life that day and I don’t really want to relive that.”