Dan Biggar guided Northampton to a comfortable Champions Cup victory over Lyon with an imperious display in his first appearance since the World Cup. The fly-half showed no signs of a hangover from Wales’s run to the semi-finals in Japan, kicking 20 points in a flawless performance from the tee as Northampton outclassed the Top 14 leaders. Rory Hutchinson scored Northampton’s only try of an ill-tempered match but Biggar’s control and the influence of returning England forwards Courtney Lawes and Lewis Ludlam proved too much for Lyon, who failed to show anything like their domestic form. If there was any disappointment from Biggar and his director of rugby, Chris Boyd, it was that Northampton were unable to kick on from their commanding 19-0 lead at the interval. But this was evidently a match they had targeted as key to their hopes of progressing through a pool also containing last season’s beaten finalists Leinster and Benetton and they achieved precisely that with Biggar and Cobus Reinach, part of South Africa’s World Cup winning squad, slotting back in seamlessly. “Dan will always do that for you,” said Boyd, who also handed debuts to the New Zealanders Matt Proctor and Owen Franks from the bench. “We’ve benefited from Cobus Reinach being away with the South Africans and practising his box-kicks throughout. He came back and I thought the accuracy of his kick and Dan’s chase was a key part of the game. “If I include the two Kiwi boys who weren’t released out of New Zealand until after the World Cup we had nine [back this weekend]. They all want to play for the club and they realise that as senior players and leaders their contributions are really important.” Whereas Northampton were dominant in the first half, Lyon were hopeless. They looked bereft of ideas with the ball and horribly ill-disciplined without it. What’s more, their lineout was dreadful, their scrum only marginally better and quite how they failed to score when Hutchinson flung a pass to Charlie Ngatai remains a mystery. The stadium was not as full as it often is – perhaps memories of the 62-14 defeat to Saracens in their last outing in the Champions Cup back in January 2018 kept a few supporters at home – but this Northampton side, currently second in the Premiership, are utterly unrecognisable and have rarely had life so comfortable in Europe’s top competition. In mitigation for the visitors, this was not their strongest pack and they lost both their captain Jonathan Pélissié and the centre Pierre-Louis Barassi to injury inside the opening half an hour, but when Northampton’s forwards can give their backs the ball, Reinach and Biggar will always cause problems. “I needed a couple of days to get a bit of rust out but coming into a winning and positive environment helps,” said Biggar. “At the end of the day this is your job and hopefully we can deliver a few more performances.” It took Northampton 20 minutes to conjure the first try but the writing had been on the wall – Biggar kicking two penalties and plenty more to the corner. He had a major hand in Hutchinson’s try too, showing delightfully quick hands to give the Scotland centre enough time to arc inside then out and wriggling over the line. By that stage, Lyon had been denied a try by the TMO, who ruled that Hutchinson’s knock-on, which allowed Pato Fernández to gather and race clear, had been preceded by one from the visiting fly-half. If it was a marginal call it was the right one and Lyon only had themselves to blame for butchering their next chance. Hutchinson is a fine player to watch but he lives dangerously and his rank pass was picked off by Ngatai. He found his winger Josua Tuisova but when the Fijian popped the ball up it was gratefully gathered by Hutchinson. Reinach then had one chalked off for Saints but two more Biggar penalties –Ludlam playing a key role in winning both of them – gave Northampton a commanding 19-0 lead at the break. Northampton lost Piers Francis at half-time but picked up from where they left off with another Biggar penalty. Lyon, it must be said, were improved after the interval. They were energised by changing their entire front row, introducing Demba Bamba, and spent all of 10 minutes camped on the Northampton line with a series of scrum penalties. Eventually they scored their first try when, with Teimana Harrison in the sin-bin, Jonathan Wisniewski spotted Thibaut Regard all alone on the right and picked him out with a precise cross-field kick. Another Biggar penalty pushed Northampton’s lead to 18 before Regard added a second try but the losing bonus point was not forthcoming and hardly deserved.