Ten days is a lifetime during a general election. On Friday 1 November, at the Brexit party campaign launch, Nigel Farage committed his party to contest more than 600 seats. This was despite worries being aired by MEPs and Arron Banks, ally and erstwhile financial backer of Farage, that it would split the leave vote. As of this morning, Farage appears to have listened: the Brexit party will now not stand in 317 seats won by the Tories in 2017. This U-turn represents, effectively, a “leave alliance”. What more can we expect from the Brexit party in the coming weeks? It is likely the first of many surprises to come from Farage. But beneath the surface, it consolidates his party’s key strategy – focusing resources on 20 or so key seats where the party has the best chance of winning under the first past the post electoral system. It also reminds us that Farage will have an important role to play in this election: leave alliance or not, the Tories must gain seats to win a majority, which won’t be made easier by the Brexit party focusing its efforts on Labour-leave marginals that the Tories had also targeted. Farage and his strategists will have been preparing for months their assault on these target seats, and amassing data on them. They have been campaigning, with sizeable rallies in select places around the country, since April. They will be ruthless about channelling resources into the seats where internal data shows them they have the best chance. The Brexit party has largely avoided immigration as a subject, but not at a recent rally I attended in Maidstone The Brexit party is currently polling about the same or worse than Farage’s old party, Ukip, was ahead of the 2015 election, when it failed to gain any seats despite attracting 4 million votes. However, institutionally, the Brexit party is not Ukip. It’s a modern, digitally run machine, tightly controlled. It is very much Farage’s own show. He has said he owns 60% of the party-company. And, as owner, is impossible to oust. As Banks described it to me in May, the Brexit party’s digital structure allows for “almost a dictatorship at the centre”: it won’t be as easily hobbled by internal strife, as Ukip has continually been. Given the way the voting system stacks the odds against minority parties, Farage may start resorting to shock tactics, as he did in 2015, when he scaremongered about HIV-positive migrants using NHS services, deliberately stoking controversy. And it was in the final stretch of the referendum campaign that Farage unveiled the infamous “breaking point” poster. This will ensure a supply of the oxygen of media coverage. The Brexit party has largely avoided immigration as a subject, preferring to focus entirely on Brexit. But at a recent rally I attended in Maidstone, Farage attacked the UK’s “open door to limitless numbers of people” and Jeremy Corbyn’s “betrayal” over the issue – which drew raucous approval from the 1,000-strong crowd. When Farage is flagging in the polls, he lurches towards anti-migrant sentiment. Might he even make another U-turn and stand in the election himself? After failing seven times to win a seat in Westminster, Farage’s critics say that he is afraid to run and risk losing again. He has also learned plenty of lessons from Italy’s Five Star Movement, having adapted the party’s digital-populist model to the Brexit party. And he has expressed his admiration for how Five Star’s co-founder Beppe Grillo “changed Italian politics” while never actually standing as a candidate. Even outside Westminster, Farage has enormous influence over British politics. But according to Electoral Commission rules, Farage has until 4pm on Thursday 14 November – the deadline for submitting nomination papers – to change his mind about standing as an MP. He may have just snatched an extra fortnight, between announcing he wasn’t standing and the actual deadline, from rival parties who otherwise would use the time to build a ground campaign against him in his chosen constituency. And if Farage leaves it to the very last moment, his opponents will have no time to select strong candidates to fight him. While Farage’s decision not to stand sounded unequivocal, this is the man who twice walked away from frontline politics, and returned. It might be wise to keep eyes peeled come 4pm on Thursday. • Darren Loucaides is a writer based in Barcelona and London • This article was updated to include Nigel Farage’s announcement on Monday 11 November 