The first victim of the London Bridge attack has been named as Jack Merritt, a 25-year-old who worked for a programme aimed at improving prisoner rehabilitation. Merritt’s death was confirmed by his father, David, who described him as a “champion for underdogs everywhere”. Merritt worked as the course coordinator for Learning Together, a programme run by the University of Cambridge’s institute of criminology which had been running a course at Fishmongers’ Hall next to London Bridge on Friday. Two people were killed and three were injured when 28-year-old Usman Khan launched a knife attack. Khan was arrested in December 2010 and released on licence in December 2018, wearing an electronic tag. David Merritt posted on Twitter on Saturday: “My son, Jack, who was killed in this attack, would not wish his death to be used as the pretext for more draconian sentences or for detaining people unnecessarily.” His words came as Boris Johnson, said the system of automatic release from prison was flawed. Merritt said: “Cambridge has lost a proud son and a champion for underdogs everywhere, but especially those dealt a losing hand by life, who ended up in the prison system.” He described his son as a “beautiful spirit” and said the Cambridge community was in shock. Jack Merritt’s Twitter feed reveals that he took a close interest in promoting social justice issues. In response to his father’s comments, people who knew him shared their thoughts on social media with one individual paying tribute to his “magnificent dignity and generosity”. Jamie Bennett, a former prison governor and research associate at the University of Oxford, tweeted: “So sorry for you and your family. Jack promoted progressive reform and his spirit continues to inspire.” Dr Hannah Quirk said: “I taught him at Manchester and wrote his reference for Cambridge. He was an exceptional student and a lovely young man. I am so sorry for your loss.” Serena Wright, a lecturer in criminology at Royal Holloway University, said: “David, I knew your son through Learning Together and I loved him to pieces – he was the sweetest, most caring and selfless individual I’ve ever met. The warmest heart, always with time for anyone. Completely irreplaceable - I will mourn his loss greatly and honour his memory.” Caroline Sanders also paid tribute to Merritt and revealed she had planned to work with him on a prisons initiative. She tweeted: “I am extremely sad today to learn that Jack Merritt died at the Learning Together event in London yesterday. “I didn’t know Jack well but had spoken with him and planned to work with him in one of the prisons on a LT project. My heart goes out to his amazing team.” Three people remain in hospital but the condition of one victim who was critically injured has improved, the NHS England chief executive, Simon Stevens, said. “While three people remain in hospital, this means two are now stable and a third has less serious injuries,” he added.