Bayern Munich secured top spot in Champions League Group B with a match to spare as four second-half goals from Robert Lewandowski inspired them to a 6-0 away mauling of Red Star Belgrade. The German side pinned Red Star back from the start and came close three times through Lewandowski and Kingsley Coman before Leon Goretzka fired them into a 14th-minute lead with a superb header. The Germany midfielder rose above his markers to steer a Philippe Coutinho cross from the left past Milan Borjan. Lewandowski had a goal disallowed shortly before half-time after a quick VAR review ruled that Corentin Tolisso handled the ball when he teed up the Poland striker. However the Pole made it 2-0 with a 53rd-minute penalty after Milos Degenek handled in the box, then made it 3-0 on the hour from a fine assist by Tolisso. He headed in the fourth soon afterwards from a Benjamin Pavard cross and stunned Red Star again in the 68th minute. Tolisso completed the rout in the dying minutes with a simple finish. Bayer Leverkusen stunned Lokomotiv Moscow in Group D with a 2-0 victory to keep their hopes of reaching the knockout stages alive. An own goal from the home side’s Rifat Zhemaletdinov and a Sven Bender volley gave Leverkusen a precious three points which kept alive their prospects of finishing in the top two as second-placed Atlético Madrid lost 1-0 at the leaders Juventus. Paulo Dybala curled in a free-kick from a tight angle to give the Italian side victory and although qualification remains in Atlético’s hands, Leverkusen will have home advantage over Juve in their last match. Juventus, already qualified, won a set-piece just outside the penalty area, close to the goal-line but Dybala sent his shot over the wall and in off the crossbar in the 45th minute. His side qualified with a game to spare. Papu Gomez scored with a superb second-half shot as Atalanta secured a first-ever Champions League victory with a 2-0 home success over Dinamo Zagreb that keeps their knockout round hopes alive. Luis Muriel also found the net at San Siro, where Atalanta are playing their home games while their regular stadium in Bergamo undergoes renovations, and the Italian club proved full value for their success. Two points now separate second-placed Shakthar Donetsk – who drew with the group leaders Manchester City – to Atalanta in fourth. The Italian side meet Shakhtar in their final pool match encounter on 11 December, while Dinamo host City.