And now for something completely different. After an inexperienced England T20 side wrapped up a 3-2 series win over New Zealand – needing Super Over: The Sequel to get the job done – attention switches to Test cricket and Chris Silverwood’s biggest challenge as the new head coach. Now, something that will likely be mentioned a bit over the coming weeks is that the two Tests being played in Mount Maunganui and Hamilton from 21 November are not part of the World Test Championship. The competition’s slightly curious framework was placed on top of a previously agreed fixture list. With some countries down to play more than others, there will be the odd series like this one that does not count towards it. But then this was the case for all but 12 of the 2,365 men’s Tests staged since the dawn of time. Do they suddenly mean less in hindsight? There may not be 120 points up for grabs on this tour but the end result should matter as much as it ever did; this is still two countries going hammer and tongs over five days. For an England side that lost its way in Tests a touch over the past four years, as attention and resources were funnelled into the World Cup project, a new era dawns too. Silverwood, who joins forces with the captain, Joe Root, is preaching a return to the values that many observers felt had fallen by the wayside. “I’m looking forward to getting my teeth stuck in,” said Silverwood, before the touring party swapped Auckland for Whangarei, scene of this week’s warm-ups before the first Test in Mount Maunganui starts on 21 November. “The big thing for me is if we can come away from the Test series having started a journey: the method of batting for a long time, putting runs on the board. “When I say batting for a long time, it doesn’t mean just blocking it. You’re looking to score runs, big runs. If we can come away having started that process, galvanising people and figuring out their roles, then it will be a success.” To this end a new team structure is planned that means Root returning to his preferred No 4 position and Ben Stokes bedding further in at No 5. The uncapped Dom Sibley, a hungry and dogged opener, is paired with Rory Burns up top while Ollie Pope is slated to return at No 6 – the position where bright, young middle-order things tend to start out, rather than the No 4 slot that did not work out against India last year. Joe Denly drops to No 3 after an encouraging end to the Ashes but an ankle injury means he is down to miss the two-day warm-up game against a New Zealand XI that will get under way on Monday at the Cobham Oval. Silverwood, however, was optimistic of his return for the three-day first-class match against New Zealand A that starts on Friday. If he does then the previously dropped Jonny Bairstow, asked to stay on as cover for Denly after the T20s, may be released. Jos Buttler has been handed the Test wicketkeeping gloves here, with the Yorkshireman’s route back in now as a specialist batsman – a situation with which he is said to have made peace. It will be fascinating to see how the Silverwood/Root axis works. In white-ball cricket Eoin Morgan is clearly the boss. For example, when Morgan publicly raised Dawid Malan’s refusal to pinch a risky bye at the end of his unbeaten 103 last Friday – putting self above team was the inference – Silverwood was happy to defer. “Eoin has got very high standards for the team, is very unselfish in the way he plays and that’s what he believes,” said Silverwood. “Morgs is a great leader. We have to allow him to lead at times. It’s fine.” But in Test cricket Root may require the head coach to take on more by way of direction, allowing him to focus more on his batting. This dynamic will take time to formulate. It may need some early remedial work too after Silverwood declined to guarantee Root’s return to the T20 setup given Malan’s rise from the fringes. Silverwood said: “It’s a conversation that myself, Morgs and the selectors have got to have. I can’t tell you whether he will or won’t [return]. He is keen to stay involved and is a very, very good player. It’s a great headache to have. Competition for places is healthy. I would be more worried if it was the other way around.” The debate over Root’s workload and suitability in the shortest form can wait for now. More pressing is the return of his Test team and a series against New Zealand that unquestionably matters.