Wolves reached the Europa League knockout stages with a game to spare, despite blowing a two-goal lead. Nuno Espírito Santo’s side suffered a second-half stumble to draw in Portugal. Raúl Jiménez, Matt Doherty and Adama Traoré had fired Wolves into a 3-1 lead after André Horta’s early opener. But second-half goals from Paulinho and Fransérgio rescued Sporting Braga to also send them into the last 32. They remain top of Group K, a point ahead of Wolves, before the final matches on 12 December. The match also allowed Wolves to briefly forget any speculation linking Nuno to Arsenal but their early qualification only served to enhance his reputation. “We are trying to develop and improve and to achieve other results. We don’t have limits, we always try to keep going,” said Nuno. “It’s not about momentum, if you expect to play when you have good momentum you’ll have problems. We always want to compete, the momentum doesn’t mean anything. It’s about preparing yourself for the competition, that’s why you don’t have limits. “It was our 26th game, we started very early in the season, but the balance has been good and the team is improving.” His side have lost only once in their last 14 games in all competitions and sit fifth in the Premier League. Both sides needed just a point to reach the last 32 but Braga laid the first claim for all three after six minutes. Even then, the opener came from nothing when Horta collected the ball 30 yards out. His drive deflected off Rúben Neves’s boot to fly past the helpless Rui Patrício for the winger’s first goal since August. Wolves responded eight minutes later to equalise when Jonny was afforded too much space on the left to float a perfect cross to the far post and Jiménez netted his 15th goal of the season. Wolves were unchanged from their 2-1 win at Bournemouth and their strength became apparent as they took control once level. Traoré’s drilled cross just evaded Diogo Jota’s outstretched leg before the forward dragged an angled drive across goal. Braga, the 2011 beaten finalists, quickly retreated and Wolves punished them with a quickfire double. First, Doherty ran unchecked into the area to plant a fine header past the exposed Eduardo from Jiménez’s cute cross after 34 minutes. Just 81 seconds later the visitors added a third when Jiménez fed Traoré and he drilled the ball through the former Chelsea goalkeeper Eduardo. The game looked won and Jota was denied a fourth when he headed at Eduardo five minutes after the break. The visitors were in cruise control but Braga shocked them after 64 minutes when Paulinho pulled a goal back, tapping in Galeno’s low centre. Wolves were ruffled and Jiménez was booked for dragging down João Palhinha, meaning he will miss the final game against Besiktas. The visitors continued to falter and Braga levelled with 11 minutes left to keep their European dreams alive. Nuno Sequeira crossed from the right and the captain Fransérgio headed in from six yards. The Braga manager, Ricardo Sé Pinto, said: “There’s no doubt these are the best two teams of the group. The confidence was quite high in the first half but we didn’t press as we should.”