Historians, fixing their eyes on a rear-view mirror, sort the past into a procession of immutable events with inevitable outcomes. That suits the grandiose individuals they write about, who fancy that their activities are somehow predestined. “History will not forgive us,” said Lenin in 1917, “if we do not assume power now.” But did history forgive the would-be assassin whose bullet, fired at Lenin a year later, missed his carotid artery by three millimetres? And did it notice why no peace treaty with the Ottoman empire was concluded in 1922? Diplomacy failed on that occasion because Lord Curzon’s train left the Lausanne station five minutes before American go-betweens rushed along to announce that Ismet Pasha was willing to negotiate. Contingencies such as these lead Charles Emmerson to dismiss any notion of purpose or progress in human affairs. Emmerson writes history as if it were journalism, a daily tally of happenings that depend on chance and have unforeseeable consequences. Narrated entirely in the present tense, his enormous book accompanies the blundering of politicians from Washington to Istanbul as they discover that “it is much harder to end a war than to start one”; it treats the past as a farrago of miscalculations and mishaps, every bit as confusing as the present. The monsters who were to maraud through the next decade make inauspicious debuts here As in a paper, many stories develop simultaneously, introduced by their location (which in one case is “under the Atlantic ocean”) and broken off whenever the participants arrive at a dead end or a cliff edge. “The empire is in crisis,” says Emmerson as Muslims riot in Punjab. “The fate of western civilisation seems to hang by a thread,” he remarks when describing the Red Army’s assault on Warsaw: that is almost his book’s refrain, and it frequently leaves us with the sense of being suspended over a void. The fragmented form of Crucible matches its content. “How,” asks the zany dadaist Tristan Tzara, “can one contemplate ordering the chaos of humankind’s infinite, formless variation?” Though never formless, Emmerson’s book dramatises that variegated chaos, dodging to and fro across the globe and veering between tragedy and farce, high politics and low culture. Churchill’s pushy cousin Clare Sheridan, who romances dictators and flatteringly sculpts their adamantine heads, gets more space than Winston; the shimmying bottom of the jazz dancer Josephine Baker does as much for black liberation as the proselytising of the activist Marcus Garvey, who memorably tells his rival WEB Du Bois: “I will make you look like a piece of cotton.” The monsters who were to maraud through the next decade make inauspicious debuts here. Emmerson wittily chronicles the affectations of Mussolini, who turns up at the airfield for a flying lesson dressed in a bowler hat and spats, and attempts to impress Hemingway by perusing a French-English dictionary that he holds upside down. Later, he cultivates his mystique by driving around Rome with a lion cub in the passenger seat of his car. Nerdy and socially inept, Hitler escapes across the border after his failed Munich putsch by posing, only too plausibly, as his rescuer’s valet. Invited to a fancy dinner, he is intimidated by an artichoke. So few people join the Nazi party in its early days that “numbered membership cards start at 500, to give an impression of greater scale”. Lenin, educated by his errors, eventually abandons the delusion of destiny and admits that history moves in “zigzags and by roundabout ways”. Perhaps, getting nowhere, history actually goes round in circles: although Emmerson never underlines the analogies, many of our current messes are anticipated here. Germans who bemoan the rapacity of British demands for war reparations sound – in a wry reversal – like Brexiters blocking payments to Brussels. Civil war flares up in Ireland, vexing London politicians who can’t see that Britain’s first imperial conquest is exacting revenge for centuries of subjugation. A new kind of thuggish autocrat emerges, a Volksführer “fed on illusions of omnipresence and omnipotence”, harnessing the desires and angers of the masses as our current crop of frothing populists aim to do. When the antisemitic tycoon Henry Ford ponders a campaign for the presidency, Hitler’s keen response looks straight ahead to the Kremlin’s mobilising of KGB hackers in 2016: “I wish I could send my shock troops to Chicago and other big American cities,” he says, “to help in the elections.” Hitler also proposes setting up “camps to concentrate Marxists and Jews”, a prototype for Trump’s herding of Hispanic refugees into cages along the Rio Grande. Despite its anecdotal verve, Crucible alarmingly suggests that history, far from having an upward trajectory, is a ride to the abyss. Many of Emmerson’s characters, blooded by combat, find the rollercoaster exhilarating: attending a bullfight, Hemingway says: “It’s just like having a ringside seat at the war with nothing going to happen to you.” Einstein, accused by detractors of having destabilised the world when he overturned the staid laws of Newton’s physics, belongs with the nihilists. In 1917, he likens the marvels of modern technology to an axe wielded by a maniac, and suggests to a friend that it might be no bad thing “if degenerate Europe were to wreck itself totally”. The Chinese, he adds, would probably do a better job of running the world. What Emmerson calls the west’s suicidal “collapse from the inside” is now nearing its conclusion and we shall know soon enough whether Einstein was right. • Crucible: The Long End of the Great War and the Birth of a New World 1917-24 by Charles Emmerson is published by Bodley Head (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99