The chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis, has said Jews are justifiably anxious about the idea of Jeremy Corbyn becoming prime minister, saying a “poison sanctioned from the top” has taken take root in Labour. No – he was not that explicit. But writing in the Times, he asked people to “vote with their conscience”. He said supporters of Corbyn had “hounded parliamentarians, members and even staff out of the party for challenging anti-Jewish racism”, and that 130 cases of antisemitism were outstanding against Labour members. Labour insists not. The party says this figure is inaccurate, and that it is “taking robust action” to tackle antisemitism, including quick suspensions, a process for rapid expulsions, and an education programme. Lord Dubs, the Labour peer who was among Jewish children saved from Nazi-held Czechoslovakia by the Kindertransport, told Radio 4 he felt Mirvis had “gone too far”, while also saying Labour had been “much too slow in getting to grips with this”. The Labour backbencher Jess Phillips, seeking re-election in Birmingham Yardley, said the response to the chief rabbi should be: “I’m sorry and I’ll do whatever I possibly can to win back your community’s trust.” Yes. The Jewish Labour MPs Louise Ellman and Luciana Berger both left the party, citing antisemitic abuse and bullying. Last month, the Jewish Labour Movement withdrew campaigning support for the party in the general election in protest. The group said it would support only “exceptional candidates”, such as its parliamentary chair, Ruth Smeeth, and other MPs it views as having been supportive. Critics of Corbyn say that criticism of Israel among some of his supporters, for example about the treatment of the Palestinian people, can too readily tip over into a generalised condemnation which becomes antisemitic. They say also that those within Labour who challenge this can face abuse and persecution. Labour says that while such incidents must be dealt with robustly, the context is that complaints connected to antisemitism amount to 0.1% of party membership, while prejudice in the Conservative party is more widespread. Yes. Aside from internal Labour investigations, in May the Equality and Human Rights Commission said it had placed Labour under formal investigation over whether the party had unlawfully discriminated against, harassed or victimised people because they were Jewish. Yes, particularly his record when he was a backbencher. For example, Corbyn has said he regrets calling members of Hamas and Hezbollah “friends” at a meeting in parliament in 2009. Last year, he accepted he had made a mistake by supporting a graffiti artist after his work, featuring several known antisemitic tropes, was removed from a wall in east London after complaints. Last year, the UK’s three most prominent Jewish newspapers published a joint editorial saying a government led by Corbyn would pose an existential threat to Jewish life in the UK. Labour faced criticism from some Jewish groups after it adopted a working definition of antisemitism by the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance, but left out one of the 11 examples given in the definition, which said it would be antisemitic to claim “that Israel’s existence as a state is a racist endeavour”. Labour later adopted all 11 examples.