In the Newsnight interview, the prince spoke for the first time about a stay at Epstein’s Manhattan home five months after the convicted paedophile left prison, a trip that included a party where the prince was “guest of honour”. But while he told Emily Maitlis the party “wasn’t quite as you put it” and described Epstein’s house as “a convenient place to stay”, some observers have asked why the prince could not have stayed elsewhere, why his stay lasted four days, and why he would attend such a dinner under any circumstances if he was bringing the relationship to an end. Others have also asked why, after stopping contact with Epstein in 2006 when he heard the financier was being investigated, the prince chose to re-establish contact in 2010 simply in order to say the relationship was over. As the FBI widens the scope of its investigation in an attempt to identify more of Epstein’s victims, the prince’s comments might attract even more attention to him. Alan Dershowitz, who defended Epstein on charges of sex trafficking, has said the prince would have no choice but to submit to questioning by US authorities should they decide to lodge a request. Scotland Yard has reportedly been briefed on the latest developments in the US, while Dai Davies, a former head of royal protection, has previously said it would be in the public interest for an investigation to take place after the Metropolitan police dropped an inquiry. The prince said at the weekend he was prepared to testify under oath “if push came to shove and the legal advice was to do so”. Gloria Allred, the US lawyer acting for Epstein’s victims, has called for the prince to answer questions under oath. She said: “He could just decide to appear and I think that would be the best action that he could take.” He was attempting to undermine Virginia Roberts’ recollection that he was “dripping with sweat” after dancing with him in 2001 before the then 17-year-old allegedly had sex with him. But no sooner had the prince made the claim than a picture began circulating on social media showing him outside the nightclub Chinawhite in 2000, which some observers claimed appeared to show him sweating. Despite the prince’s insistence that he always wears a suit and tie when going out in London, he is tieless and suitless in the photo. Anhidrosis is the inability to sweat normally. Causes include burns from radiation therapy, certain drugs, diabetes, alcoholism and hereditary issues.  Andrew is reported as having been introduced to Jeffrey Epstein through mutual friend Ghislaine Maxwell, daughter of newspaper tycoon Robert Maxwell. Epstein reportedly visits the Queen’s private Scottish retreat in Aberdeenshire Andrew, Maxwell and Epstein are seen together at Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago Club in Florida. Later in the year, Epstein and Maxwell attend a joint birthday party at Windsor castle hosted by the Queen Virginia Giuffre, then aged 17, claims to have had sex with Andrew in Maxwell’s Belgravia home. Giuffre, whose surname was Roberts at the time of the alleged incidents, says she slept with Andrew on two further occasions, at Epstein’s New York home and at an “orgy” on his private island in the Caribbean Epstein is jailed for 18 months after pleading guilty to prostituting minors Soon after his release from jail, Epstein is visited by Andrew in New York. The pair are photographed together in Central Park. Footage emerges years later, reportedly shot on 6 December, that appears to show Andrew inside Epstein’s Manhattan mansion waving goodbye to a woman from behind a large door Andrew quits his role as UK trade envoy following a furore over the Central Park photos Allegations that Andrew had sex with Giuffre emerge in US court documents related to Epstein. The papers, filed in Florida, state that she was forced to have sex with Andrew when she was 17, which is under the age of consent in the state. Buckingham Palace denies the allegations. The claims against Andrew are later struck from US civil court records following a federal judge’s ruling Andrew is accused of sexual impropriety by a second alleged Epstein victim, Johanna Sjoberg. She claims he touched her breast inside the US billionaire’s Manhattan apartment in 2001. Buckingham Palace said the allegations were “categorically untrue”. On 10 August, Epstein is found dead in his jail cell, having killed himself after being charged with sex trafficking. A pilot on Epstein’s private jet later that month claims Andrew was a passenger on past flights with the financier and Roberts It is not known why the prince believed the interview was a good idea and how it came to happen. Maitlis has said it went ahead after the Queen signed it off. Of potentially more significance is the departure of the prince’s PR adviser, Jason Stein, who is understood to have left his post two weeks ago after telling the duke not to do the interview. With the prince now having invited potentially more scrutiny, as well as arguably having caused himself greater reputational damage, who will steady the ship at Buckingham Palace? The prince has continued to travel the world, and attended a summit of south-east Asian leaders in Thailand this month as part of Pitch@Palace, the startup mentorship scheme he established and which hosts pitches by would-be entrepreneurs at Buckingham Palace. But the pressure on him could affect the way in which the scheme is viewed in the UK and elsewhere, not least by businesspeople, other agencies and businesses associated with it. Partners listed on its website include Air Asia, Aon, Bosch, Standard Chartered, AstraZeneca, the Stelios Philanthropic Foundation, Bank of China, Barclays and KPMG.