Sometimes cooking dinner is just never going to happen: too busy, too hot, too hard, too much. Let precooked prawns and some quick veggie blanching come to the rescue for something with a bit more “wow” than salad. Grand aioli is a lovely French way of eating that we totally embrace in my house. You can whizz up the garlicky mayonnaise following the recipe below, or make prep even quicker by buying some high-quality aioli from the deli. The aioli is the hero that all the bits get dipped in, to create a grazing board that is perfect for a quick yet proper dinner. It also works for snacks with friends, a long festive lunch or feeding a hoard. Prep 15 mins Cook 10 mins Serves 2 greedy people Use as many or as few vegetables and salad leaves as you care to prep. Creamy taramasalata is a great complimentary flavour, acting as an interlude to the bitey aioli, you can also skip it or go lighter with a fresh tzatziki. I use a quirky but efficient method to blanche veggies. Heat water in a deep, wide fry pan with the lid on, until it is boiling rapidly. The water needs to be really salty, then it seasons slightly as you go. Each vegetable type is blanched separately, one after another, as I trim stalks and cut, so they cook uniformly. Beans and asparagus take two minutes, broccoli and flatbeans about three minutes, and small carrots about five minutes. The key is to scoop them out before they are cooked through and then lay them straight on to a clean tea towel, were the residual heat continues to cook them slightly as they cool. I’d much rather all my veggies crunchy than soft. On occasion, if we just can’t wait, we just eat them all raw. 500g whole cooked Australian prawns (about 200g to 250g a person). I’m a fan of the small, sweet school prawns100g aioli100g taramasalataSelection of raw and steamed/blanched vegetables, allow about 350g to 450g a person. If you need inspiration, here are some vegetables and leaves I love to dip in aioli. Raw Crunchy cos and witlof leaves Radishes, cut in half Mini bell peppers, cut in half – they make an excellent aioli spoon Cucumber, cut in long sticks Fennel, cut into wedges Cherry tomatoesBlanched or quickly steamed Green and flat beans, stalk off but whole Asparagus, local only in season Broccolini Dutch carrots, stalks trimmed Kipfler and purple congo potatoes, these need to be cooked through but will boil in 10 mins if you select the smaller ones. Cut them lengthways so dipping is easy. Extras: Boiled egg, quartered Wedges of spicy sausage or sliced hamFresh baguette, rye crackers or grissini Assemble them all on a plate and use your fingers to eat – no cutlery required. Just remember the napkins and a shell bowl. Using a stick blender and a mug to whip this up is the fastest way, or go classical with a whisk and bowl. If you’ve not made mayo with a blender before, the secret is to not move the blender once the oil is in, trust the process or risk the consequence: no emulsion. If in doubt google “blender mayo” for a thousand YouTube videos. 1 free-range egg yolk (stash the white in your freezer for a future pavlova or meringues) 1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed Generous pinch sea salt Juice from 1 lemon80ml light olive oil – pick one with a neutral flavour Roasting the garlic first helps to take the bite out of it. You can roast the clove in the oven for five minutes. I love the virtuous raw garlic bite so usually skip this step – you can use it raw. Place the egg yolk, garlic, salt and lemon juice in a mug and whizz with a stick blender. With the blender firmly in the base of the mug, not moving, add the olive oil and watch with amazement as the vortex of the egg emulsifies into aioli in 20 seconds. Scoop into a small bowl and immediately rinse that blender, so you don’t regret it later. Always blanch more veggies than you need, they will make you a step ahead for dinner or lunch the next day. The same with boiled eggs, I cook six at a time at least. Leftover prawn heads and shells make a great quick broth. Cover with water, extra salt and boil for 30-45 minutes to extract the goodness. Stash in the fridge and use as a broth base with some frozen dumplings and the extra green vegetables.