One of several Premier League managers whose days look numbered, Unai Emery is cutting an increasingly isolated figure at the cauldron of seething dissatisfaction that is the Emirates Stadium. Max Allegri and Mikel Arteta are both being touted as potential replacements. Elsewhere in London, Manuel Pellegrini’s countenance is looking even more haunted and gloomy than usual and the Guardian’s man in the know says Chris Hughton, Rafael Benítez and Chris Wilder have all been identified as possible successors for when he’s shown the door. With Everton boss Marco Silva also on borrowed time following his side’s capitulation to Norwich City over the weekend, the word on the streets of Merseyside is that David Moyes may be brought in on a short-term deal to steady that particular listing ship. Having come up agonisingly short in their commendable efforts to take something from their game against Liverpool over the weekend, Crystal Palace hope to boost their firepower by taking Rhian Brewster to Selhurst Park on loan from the league leaders. Aston Villa, Leeds and Swansea City are also interested in the 19-year-old, who Jürgen Klopp has said will be allowed to seek first-team football elsewhere in January. Tottenham Hotspur’s Irish striker, Troy Parrott, is another teenager turning heads, with Borussia Dortmund and Bayern Munich both rumoured to be monitoring his situation at White Hart Lane. Sitting on a contract that is due to expire come season’s end, Bournemouth winger Ryan Fraser is likely to be the subject of several tempting offers in January. The Scottish international has previously been linked with moves to Arsenal, Liverpool and Everton, while his manager, Eddie Howe, says the 25-year-old is “keeping his options open”. John McGinn is another Scottish international in big demand, but rumours of an imminent departure from Aston Villa have been greatly exaggerated, according to his boss. Despite firm interest in the midfielder from Manchester United, Dean Smith insists his employers want to establish Villa as a Premier League force and have no interest in selling their best players. And with Jan Vertonghen still planning to leave Tottenham Hotspur next summer, the club are eyeing up Bournemouth central defender Nathan Aké as a potential replacement. Whether or not the Dutch international will be interested in working under José Mourinho, a manager who dropped him to the reserves during his time at Chelsea, remains to be seen.