If you believe the headlines, political speeches and social media storms, the upcoming general election is one of the most important in living memory. Much is at stake: decisions will be made on Brexit, the future of the NHS, and how we deal with the existential threat of the climate emergency. Which means it’s more vital than ever that everybody is able to have their say. Young people are often the focus of voter registration drives, but other communities are often excluded and widely disenfranchised: ethnic minorities are less likely to be on the electoral register, for example, as are the long-term unemployed. And for those in mental health units, there are extra barriers to both registering and casting votes. In 2010, voter turnout was 65% in the general population; for inpatients, this figure was as low as 14%. For some, particularly those experiencing severe distress or crisis, voting may not be a priority. But a 2012 study identified other barriers – namely that many patients simply had no idea what their rights were around registering or voting. In that study, 65% of patients eligible to vote told researchers they had an interest in voting, but 71% didn’t know how to register. Moreover 77% were unaware they could register using the hospital’s address, an option for those who have been in hospital for an extended period, and 48% said they hadn’t known they were allowed to vote at all. Having this information would have been significant for many – 50% of those who hadn’t registered said they would have voted if they’d known how. In fact, anyone under a civil section (who hasn’t been involved in criminal proceedings) is able to vote, either by proxy or by post. Voluntary inpatients are able to vote, as are those in hospital who have no fixed address. Nurses, psychiatrists, support workers and administrative staff all have a part to play This lack of information isn’t good enough – which is why I’ve been campaigning for something better. As part of a campaign called Mental Health Vote 2019, I have helped to create clear, non-partisan information sheets for staff and patients, clearly setting out voting rights and how to exercise them. Since launching the campaign, many people I’ve spoken to have been surprised to find out they could vote, or regretted that they hadn’t been aware of the possibility during periods as an inpatient. Many are politically very active: one woman – who actually works in mental health – has had numerous inpatient stays and is part of several activist groups. The fact that even she had no idea what the rules were demonstrates the lack of information available. Mentally ill people often have a unique perspective on the workings of the state – in mental healthcare and the NHS more broadly – but also social care and the benefits system. Accessing these services has become increasingly difficult, and the care people are actually receiving is often poor. Some people are sent hundreds of miles from home to receive substandard care in wards that are often unsuitable or even unsafe. Our experiences invariably intersect with other marginalised groups, too – girls, young women and black people are more likely to be restrained or subdued by staff on wards than other groups, for example. The violent realities of mental health units often go unnoticed, with sexual, emotional and physical abuse rife but rarely discussed. Being able to have a say on these services – which too often brutalise and traumatise users – is vital. So far, our message has been distributed across the UK to hospitals, community centres and supported accommodation, and through activist groups in the hope of reaching as many people as possible. It’s clearly written to ensure that there are no barriers to voter registration. However we also need staff to be proactive – while some trusts and organisations do have clear programmes on voter rights, and strive to ensure all patients are enfranchised, others do not. Nurses, psychiatrists, support workers and administrative staff all have a part to play in making this happen; family, friends and carers could also help by educating themselves and informing their loved ones so they’re ready to vote if they wish. Mentally ill and other disabled people have a disproportionate exposure to the workings of the (often violent) state – that’s why it’s so important our voices are heard. • Emily Reynolds is a journalist and the author of A Beginner’s Guide to Losing Your Mind