I am a serial floating voter. I see every election as a new dawn, an exercise not in bias confirmation but in self-discovery. What will it reveal of my outlook on life? Usually I follow my hero, the American HL Mencken, who advised voters to “always chuck the rapscallions out”, but I still want some excitement in the air. Above all, what would I like to see change? Labour should be a party of change. It is a party of the left, rooted in radicalism, a party of disruption not of reassurance. In London this week I listened to the charismatic Greek star, Yanis Varoufakis, as he stirred an audience of leftwing radicals, militants and rebels to revolutionary fervour. Come on, Yanis, they cried, stand against Boris Johnson in Uxbridge. I have been waiting years for an exciting Labour party. I want one of those rare democratic “moments” when cynicism abates, the sky brightens and reveals Browning’s “glad confident morning”. It happened when the Berlin Wall fell, on Barack Obama’s election night, even during Tony Blair’s brief Cool Britannia. In truth, Britain’s radical moment came with Harold Wilson’s forgotten government of 1964. It abolished hanging, legalised homosexuality, ended school selection, banned race discrimination, outlawed unequal pay, permitted abortion and liberalised divorce – all in six years. The record was stunning. The Augean stables of British social policy were cleansed. I get more outspoken anti-interventionism from Donald Trump than I do from the Labour party This week’s arguments over macroeconomic policy are boringly familiar. Austerity has merely legitimised economic populism. We are back to the 2000s and Tony Blair’s let-rip of borrow-and-spend. Plans from both the chancellor, Sajid Javid, and his opponent, John McDonnell, return us to the cycle of stop-go. The last go slammed up against a brick wall in 2008. McDonnell has tried valiantly to take Labour economic policy in a new direction, but going back to co-operatives, social enterprise and worker-directors is hardly radical. Jeremy Corbyn is positively nostalgic, a reversion to the late-1940s, to tax-the-rich and the nationalisation of public utilities. On the last, he forgets Thatcher’s maxim, that you “more easily control utilities when they are in the private not the public sector”. As for the proposed state funds for new industries in the north, we have been there before and nothing happened. Of serious fiscal redistribution we have nothing as yet. It is not the British economy that needs cleansing, it is the same old Augean stables of social policy. Why is any thought of drug law reform left to backbench MPs, the police and London’s mayor? British prisons are absolute shockers, among the worst in Europe. All Labour says is that it will hire more police. Obesity blights the nation’s young and again rates are among the highest in Europe. Where are the pledges to regulate the food industry? Today’s school budgets buckle under a regime of Whitehall targetry, inspection and box-ticking. They are fragmented into regulated academies, which has corrupted and cut them off from their local communities. Housing policy is now in thrall to the construction lobby, and its rage for rural sprawl. It is the urban poor who need housing, although for them salvation lies not in subsidised “starter” estates but in a radical new deal for private renting. As for the NHS and the courts, they are straitjacketed by professional splits and demarcations. Yet no one has the courage to tackle the vested interests, the doctors and the lawyers. These areas of social policy are ones in which Britain used to lead Europe, if not the world. It does so no more. Rented housing is better regulated in Germany, health in Sweden and Denmark, prisons in Norway, drugs in America and Canada. Corbyn does not even have to be radical, just imitate the best and liberate local government to experiment. The issues are not primarily about money or even left or right ideology, they are about having the guts to reform the law and confront the relentless dominance of London. Before becoming leader, Corbyn espoused the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. He favoured foreign regimes and movements, some of particular odiousness. That was his business. But he had a healthy scepticism towards the interventionist fervour of Blair and David Cameron, which had soldiers serving, and dying, in countries of no conceivable value to Britain’s defence. Here at last, I thought, was a politician who might break ranks. Corbyn has claimed he will never use nuclear weapons. So why does he not promise to dispose of them? He has no plans to mothball or sell off Britain’s useless Trident submarines and aircraft carriers. When he arrived on the scene, I expected a clear statement that Britain should never again try aimlessly to “punch above our weight” in every unfortunate corner of the globe. Instead, I get more outspoken anti-interventionism from Donald Trump than I do from the Labour party. The nation is sated on political cynicism. It needs and deserves a break, a shot of radical optimism. That shot properly comes from an opposition party, with a licence to think the unthinkable and win a mandate for it from the voters. The party manifestos will be works of tedium, cliche and worthiness. We must pray for a few explosions of daring reform, something to make us punch the air and cry, “Bring it on!” • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist