Convention says if you are old enough to remember wearing a trend, you shouldn’t go near it when it comes back round again. Nonsense. It’s about a fresh execution. The 80s-inspired neon eye, as seen at Carolina Herrera, is a case in point. Sidestep nostalgia territory by doing the following: forgo a brush to keep the shape angular but imperfect (try swiping a lipstick bullet across your lids). Go minimal on skin – a light foundation and a dab of highlighter will do – define brows and apply lip balm. There’s your modern, wearable spin on an old-school trend. 1. UOMA Brow Fro Blow Out £22, beautybay.com 2. MAC Love Me Lipstick in Shamelessly Vain £17.50, maccosmetics.co.uk 3. Kevyn Aucoin Foundation Balm £42, selfridges.com 4. Huda Neon Orange Obsession Palette £24, cultbeauty.co.uk 5. Lipstick Queen Lipdulgence Lip Mousse in Candy Cane £22, spacenk.com Bobbi Brown Intensive Skin Serum Foundation SPF 40, £48, bobbibrown.co.uk I am often asked to recommend the perfect foundation. No such thing exists. Yes, I know no one wants to hear that, but it’s the truth. You can love a foundation that suddenly decides it no longer loves you. This doesn’t mean it is not a good foundation. More often than not it is reacting to your changeable skin - affected by hormones, stress levels, weather, skincare regime. So you need more than one. This offering from Bobbi Brown is a brilliant addition to any repertoire. There are 23 shades, so the range is not extensive (to be fair that is relatively speaking), but it is evenly spread across all skin tones and the clever formulation takes undertones into consideration. The coverage is medium to full, but you are still left with skin that looks beautiful and dewy as opposed to caked in makeup. Its skincare properties – peptides, UVB and UVA protection – mean it does good while looking good. The texture, however, is my standout. It feels like a serum and glides on like a dream. The true test is how a foundation behaves if you decide to add on a little more at the end of the working day to freshen up the skin. Most would fail miserably at this hurdle. This one? Passed with flying colours. Fine art of cleansing This cleansing water, made with hyaluronic acid, turns face-washing into an art form. It eliminates impurities from the skin while also smoothing and plumping your skin. Chanel, L’eau Demaquillage, £85, chanel.com The eyes have it I rarely recommend eye creams, but I like this one. Full of brightening peptides and moisture-boosting acids, you can expect a less puffy, brighter and smoother under eye. Glamglow Bright Eyes Cream, £29, debenhams.com Fresh scents Vegan scents are becoming a thing: Ormaie Paris, a genderless seven-strong line of scents, has just launched in Harvey Nichols, and cologne fans should make a beeline for Le Couvent des Minimes. £55, lookfantastic.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.