Leeds went top of the Championship thanks to a late goal from Jack Harrison that secured a 1-0 win at Reading. Marcelo Bielsa’s side chalked up a fourth successive win, and made it seven matches without defeat, to move a point clear of West Brom, who have played a game less. Leeds saw an effort from Stuart Dallas hit the crossbar just after the hour then, with only three minutes left, Leeds went on a swift counter, with Helder Costa’s deflected cross headed in by Harrison at the far post. Fulham are up to third after a 3-0 home win over Derby. Bobby Decordova-Reid put his side in front early on and Aleksandar Mitrovic, the Championship’s leading scorer this season, headed in a second just before the break for a 13th league goal. Tom Cairney made it safe scored Fulham’s third in the 89th minute as Phillip Cocu’s side slumped to a fourth straight away defeat. Cardiff’s new manager Neil Harris saw his side take a 1-0 victory over struggling Stoke City from his first home match with a goal from Leandro Bacuna after 11 minutes. Luton moved out of the bottom three after coming from behind to beat Charlton 2-1. The visitors went in front after seven minutes through Jonathan Leko but Luton’s Pelly Ruddock Mpanzu equalised in the 19th minute – despite protests for an offside in the buildup. Izzy Brown, on loan from Chelsea, turned the match around early in the second half. Huddersfield finished with 10 men as they drew 1-1 with Swansea at the John Smith’s Stadium. Jay Fulton had given the visitors the lead in the 18th minute, but Karlan Grant levelled matters shortly before half-time. Trevoh Chalobah was sent off for violent conduct after pushing his head into George Byers’s face following a challenge between the pair. Millwall fought back to 2-2 at home to Wigan. The visitors went ahead through Anthony Pilkington after just three minutes, but Shaun Hutchinson headed in an equaliser from a corner. Antonee Robinson made it 2-1 after 56 minutes, but Wigan’s lead was shortlived as Matt Smith levelled on the hour.