Evo Morales, who resigned under pressure from police and army after a fiercely disputed election, has flown into exile in Mexico, leaving a confused power vacuum behind in Bolivia. Speaking at a hastily organized press conference on the tarmac Morales thanked Mexico for “saving my life” and repeated his accusation that his rivals had forced him out in a coup. He said that before his resignation on Sunday a member of the army had showed him messages putting a $50,000 price on his head. “I thought we had finished with the discrimination and the humiliation, but new groups have emerged that have no respect for life, let alone for the fatherland,” Morales said shortly after landing to take up Mexico’s offer of political asylum. “It’s another lesson to learn.” Morales was greeted with a handshake, a hug, and a pat on the cheek from Mexico’s foreign minister, Marcelo Ebrard, after the flight in a Mexican army plane from the Bolivian city of Cochabamba. Meanwhile, in the streets of Bolivia’s main city, La Paz, supporters of Morales and members of the opposition once again took to the streets, as the opposition attempted to chart a path to new elections. The senate’s second vice-president, opposition politician Jeanine Áñez, called a legislative session on Tuesday to formally accept Morales’s resignation and choose an interim replacement. But it remained unclear if enough lawmakers would attend the session. Morales was accompanied by his former vice-president, Álvaro García Linares, who has been his closest political collaborator since before he became Bolivia’s first indigenous president in modern times. “García Linares and I have always been committed to the idea that peace can only come with social justice,” Morales said. “This coup is not going to change our ideology.” Though he promised that this was not the end of his political career, the Bolivian leader gave no indication of his immediate plans. The Mexican government has refused to say where the 60-year-old will live, and insisted that its offer of asylum should be understood as part of a tradition of providing safety to persecuted political leaders from Leon Trotsky to activists who fled Argentina and Chile during the military dictatorships of the 70s and 80s.