My first sighting of Jonathan Miller was at the Lyceum theatre in Edinburgh in August 1960. I was present, as a student critic, at the slightly chaotic but utterly brilliant first night of Beyond the Fringe. I knew of Miller’s reputation, as a kind of Cambridge Danny Kaye, but nothing quite prepared me for his loping, gangling presence or for his dazzling way with words. In the show, Miller was both a team player and a striking soloist. I still recall his monologue about searching for a pair of secondhand trousers in a lost property office and how, “after a good deal of moral contortion, I steeled myself to the alien crutch”. But Miller was equally funny as a linguistic philosopher, in a sketch with Alan Bennett, claiming “we want to ask not so much why questions as how questions”. And in a hilarious parody of Shakespeare history plays with their endless proper names, Miller memorably cried “Get thee to Gloucester, Essex,” although Peter Cook had the best line with, “Oh saucy Worcester, dost thou lie so still?” I’ve often argued that Beyond the Fringe, which spawned a satire boom that spread to TV and print as well as launching the careers of its four participants – including Dudley Moore – had a more lasting impact on the culture than anything in postwar theatre. But my experience of Miller did not end there. I went to a midweek press conference by the Fringe quartet and asked some, as I thought, obvious questions about their purpose. Afterwards Miller came leaping over to me and a fellow student, and said: “You’re clearly not professional journalists. Who are you?” It was a mark of Miller’s boundless curiosity, which went even further when he asked if there was anything in the show we thought didn’t work. I ventured to suggest that a sketch in which a refugee goes into a charity shop, is kitted out with new clothes and comes out looking worse than when he went in, was a bit of a one-joke affair. To my astonishment, when I had a second look at the show at a Thursday matinee, the sketch had been removed. I’m sure it had less to do with me than with the fact that the cast themselves realised the sketch hadn’t worked. But that encounter with Miller taught me a lot of things about his genuine interest in other people and his willingness to hoover up ideas. In later years, I interviewed him a number of times and we became quite friendly – a happy state that was abruptly terminated when I gave a critical review of his production of A Midsummer Night’s Dream. But I still cherish memories of my meetings with Miller and, in particular, of his performance in Beyond the Fringe which showed that, like all great comics, he combined verbal inventiveness with a physical image that you can never forget.