Back in 1997, Nigel and Abigail Brooks joined forces with their friends Gareth and Pauline Marshall, who they first met at art college, when their ideas on product development drew similarities. They shared a vision of creating an artisan fragrance and natural skincare brand after their love of packaging design and inspiration from their natural surroundings led them to pool their combined passions into a suite of products. In 2003, after testing out their products through independent UK retailers, they were excited to launch the first Bath House shop in Kirkby Lonsdale. Now with seven stores across the Lake District, Yorkshire and Cheshire, the Bath House employs 70 people locally. “Within our workforce community we have families who work with us,” Abigail says. Perhaps not surprising, considering every aspect of the Bath House is a personal affair, from the founders’ own close relationships (Gareth’s brother Glyn Marshall also joined as finance director in 2003) to the hand-finished packaging and enchanting window displays designed by the founders. Although the business has gone from strength to strength, things haven’t always been easy. The UK high street has proven to be a turbulent place, with recent stats showing a net decline of 1,234 chain stores on Britain’s top 500 high streets. But consumers’ changing shopping habits have provided a challenge that Bath House hasn’t shied away from. “Having restrictions can actually make you more innovative and creative,” says Nigel. As all of the founders are artists in their own right, the creative control they have over the shops is important and unlikely to change any time soon. Abigail says that today’s customers expect ‘quality, exclusivity and a great in-store experience’ Today, in any of the Bath House stores, customers can expect an immersive and personal experience. “People want experiences when they go shopping on the high street. With us, when you enter our shop you’re walking into an artistic experience,” says Nigel. “Well, that’s what I’m aiming for anyway,” he chuckles. All four founders agree that customers don’t come shopping simply to buy something. Abigail explains: “I think customers today are very discerning about what they buy. So quality, exclusivity and a great in-store experience are at the heart of why they make a purchase and why they return to shop with you again.” For this reason, great customer service is essential for Bath House. It has led to a continuation of loyal, returning customers who are driving the business forward. With the festive period approaching, Nigel recalls the exhilaration of the first Christmas in their first shop when the team realised their investment in natural products, quality service and an artistic approach was a formula for success. “Even now, to realise a profit for the year, Christmas is a really important time,” he says. This Christmas, the Bath House team have created an immersive festive theme: “The Theatre of Creative Giving”. Customers can expect to experience this within every aspect of the shops, from the limited-edition packaging to the window displays. They also plan to celebrate with their 12 days of Christmas competition where each day one customer will win a Bath House prize in the run-up to Christmas. For many high street shops, success at Christmas is important to help sustain the business for the year to come. This festive season, as local businesses prepare to make things extra-special for customers, Visa is encouraging shoppers to show their high street some love by shopping local. The #WhereYouShopMatters initiative aims to highlight the range of shops ready to be discovered as customers take on their usual Christmas gifting. Christmas is a very important time for the business The founders of the Bath House are delighted that initiatives like this are championing the high street. Nigel says: “It’s really positive. It highlights the fact that there are great, local places on the high street. It’s about exploring what is local to you and finding gifts that are unique.” They believe that shopping at independent stores helps the high street to flourish, which in turn helps communities to thrive, and it’s their supportive communities that have been key to the shop’s longstanding success. “Christmas is a magical time for the high street,” says Abigail. “At the Bath House, we make sure it’s extra-special for our customers from the interior experience to the gifting support of our staff.” The Bath House team are big fans of spending a day out on their local high streets, grabbing lunch and hitting the shops themselves. Here are a few of the founders’ favourite, local spots: Chesters by the RiverA distinctive shop, in a beautiful location selling an eclectic mix of gifts. It also has a tasty vegetarian restaurant. “It’s a great destination to end in after a walk by the river.”Ambleside, Cumbria, LA22 9NW CovetA beautifully curated shop with unique items for you and the home. “We have found some very special items for our home here, which we treasure. A well-chosen collection of unusual and vintage items from around the world.”37 The Grove, Ilkley, LS29 9EE ArteriaDesign-led gifts and contemporary art. “The owner’s passion for art and beautiful things is clear from the moment you step inside this shop and gallery. There’s a clever mix of affordable, contemporary art, one-off craft pieces made by local artists and modern lifestyle gifts.”23 Brock Street, Lancaster, LA1 1UR Show your high street some loveWhy not seek out the personal touch with your Christmas shopping this year and join Visa in supporting local independent businesses across the country because #WhereYouShopMatters