A cosy Christmas afternoon on the sofa in front of a children’s animation is a reliable feature of seasonal television in Britain: half an hour of fun and sentiment in an otherwise commercialised festival. But this gentle arena, once dominated by Raymond Briggs’s The Snowman, has become a hotbed of creative competition, with three high-quality films destined for the small screen this year. Leading the pack for star names is The Tiger Who Came to Tea, a Channel 4 co-production with America’s NBC. The late Judith Kerr, who wrote the much-loved children’s book, advised on the film in her final months. She approved the lyrics of a catchy song, Hey Tiger, sung by Robbie Williams, agreed to David Walliams as the narrator and helped to choose a voice cast that includes Benedict Cumberbatch, David Oyelowo, Paul Whitehouse and Tamsin Greig. BBC One is to fire back with two new offerings. The first is a musical based on Michael Morpurgo’s story, Mimi and the Mountain Dragon. With a score by Oscar-winning composer Rachel Portman and based on Emily Gravett’s original illustrations, it tells the story of a shy girl who finds a baby dragon in the woodshed. The author of The Gruffalo, Julia Donaldson, meanwhile, has enjoyed success in the Christmas animation slot with versions of her hit books, illustrated by Axel Scheffler. Her regular collaborators Magic Light Pictures have now made The Snail and the Whale for BBC One. It uses the voices of award-winning actress Sally Hawkins and comic stars Rob Brydon and Cariad Lloyd to tell the story of a snail who hitches a ride on the tail of a humpback whale to see the world. Kerr, who died in May aged 95, hoped the new film of The Tiger Who Came to Tea would go on to be re-voiced in other languages and shown all over the world. Her original story, published in 1968, came to her when she was at home on a rainy day with a three-year-old to entertain. Her tale of the surprise visit a big cat pays on the home of a young girl went on to sell five million copies. The film, made over two years by Lupus Films, creators of The Snowman and the Snowdog, begins with the familiar opening sentence from the book, “Once there was a little girl called Sophie”, and has the spare style of Kerr’s illustrations, using plenty of white background space. Oyelowo has said that he jumped at the chance to voice the tiger, adding that he “relished all of the growling, chomping and slurping, which called on me to find my inner cat”. The music is designed to echo the way Sophie, played by seven-year-old newcomer Clara Ross, skips. Lupus’s founders, Ruth Fielding and Camilla Deakin, had to pitch for the rights directly to Kerr, and the author’s guidance was crucial, they said. Walliams, who knew Kerr well, said the book was a “stone-cold classic” and “a thing of beauty”. “There isn’t a word out of place, the illustrations are just gorgeous. I really wanted to be a part of it and I was chuffed that she wanted me to narrate.” Sophie’s tiger, as fans know, eats her family out of house and home, and then leaves as suddenly as it arrived. True to the book, the little girl is left hoping that he may return, and this time she is seen stowing away a large tin of tiger food in the larder, just in case.