Brendan Rodgers insists he is not targeting any particular position in the league but his team are Liverpool’s closest pursuers and show no sign of relenting. This was their fifth win in a row and they fully deserved it. “We’re not shying away from anything but it’s only 13 games in,” replied Rodgers when asked whether his side could bridge the gap to the league leaders. “I’m happy [to be asked the question] so long as you’re still asking it in April.” This win may not be as eye-catching as their last one on the south coast – it would have been some going to surpass that 9-0 at Southampton – but it was deeply impressive in a different way. Here Rodgers’ team had to show a broader range of qualities, with patience and defensive diligence allied to multifarious attacking. Jamie Vardy, almost inevitably, was at the forefront of the attacks, creating the breakthrough goal for Ayoze Pérez before completing the victory by netting from a penalty. Rodgers named the same starting lineup for the fifth match in a row and his team began with the conviction of a side who knew they had the wherewithal to plunder a fifth straight win. Graham Potter has introduced a more enterprising style of play at Brighton but for the first 20 minutes here they were forced to play as if managed by Chris Hughton in particularly pessimistic mood, with nearly every player retreating behind the ball as the visitors hogged possession from the start. It was not sterile possession, Leicester creating so many early chances that they should have been ahead before Brighton got going. Leicester probed from all angles but the inquisition was particularly challenging from the left, where Ben Chilwell and Harvey Barnes wrought havoc. Less than two minutes had elapsed when Barnes sent over a cross that Solly March let bounce, only for Pérez to nip in and head the ball against the upright from five yards. One minute later Barnes fired over after a short corner. Vardy tested the goalkeeper again in the seventh minute, this time with a glancing header from a free-kick by Chilwell. The goalkeeper pushed it over the bar. Barnes’s finishing was not of the same calibre as the rest of his play. In the 28th minute he had an effort deflected wide after good work by Pérez and four minutes later he drilled a shot wide after a pull-back by Vardy. As the half wore on Brighton got more to grips with their opponents and began to worry them at the other end, where Caglar Soyuncu was imperious – except in the 41st minute, when Shane Duffy was somehow allowed to meet an Aaron Mooy corner. From five yards out Duffy, normally so reliable, nodded over. Vardy almost made Brighton pay immediately, haring after a through ball from Maddison and clipping it over the keeper at the edge of the box but his shot was off-target. Brighton began the second half better, Leandro Trossard banging a shot inches over the bar. As the hosts pushed their vulnerability to counterattacks increased. Leicester are lethal from those and Vardy’s menace remains undimmed. Three times he was sent racing through and each time he unselfishly teed up his teammates. Pérez and Maddison missed two of those chances but in the 64th minute Pérez made no mistake, sweeping into the net from close range after Vardy’s fine service. A slight shunt from Adam Webster sent the substitute Demarai Gray to the ground in the box with 10 minutes left. Mat Ryan made a terrific save from Vardy’s penalty but Maddison headed in the rebound, only for the referee to order a retake after VAR found encroachment. This time Ryan dived the other way but Vardy stuck to his preferred side to complete an authoritative win.