New Zealand, ranked second in the world and dominant at home of late, were never going to be a soft entry into a winter of eight Tests on the road for England. Yet one match in, and with another starting on Friday in Hamilton, Joe Root’s side already find themselves in urgent need of a performance if they are to muffle some of the alarm bells set off by those five truly dispiriting days in Mount Maunganui. Top of the English wishlist – beyond the obvious: a win– is a return to runs for Joe Root. The captain said he would happily take a pair if it meant a 1-1 draw from this two-Test series and, given his team-before-self nature, you do not doubt it. But a score would be timely. Once considered part of a “big four” alongside Steve Smith, Virat Kohli and Kane Williamson, Root has not only dropped out of this elite since becoming captain but now the world’s top-10 batsmen, too, after what he openly describes as “two horrendous shots” in the first Test. The 28-year-old retains the full backing of his employers and teammates regarding the job itself. The question is whether the work he has put in since the end of his first home summer without a Test century – tinkering with his trigger movement – will pay off and ease some external pressure that is building. “I’m not far away,” said Root. “I’ve never felt I’m someone who goes through a purple patch and then not scored runs – I’ve generally been quite consistent. If it’s not felt right, I’ve still managed to score runs. I’ve got to trust that runs are going to come. I’m not far away – I’ve just got to keep that mentality in my mind of getting my feet moving and staying busy and just go about my business the way I have for four or five years.” And then there is the lineup overall, under new orders to bat time but needing to show what this means. Given one size rarely fits all, it has been a slightly confusing diktat. But Root put some more meat on this, explaining it as “making good decisions for long periods of time. If my way of doing that is different to Dom Sibley or Rory Burns, that’s fine. “[A big total] is around the corner, it really is. I’m not worried about it whatsoever. The lads have to see it happen once, know that they’ve done it, have it in the bank, then just do it over and over again. It’s as simple as that.” With the bowlers seemingly fit after 201 gruelling overs at Bay Oval, England appear minded to name an unchanged lineup overall. Jofra Archer has been swamped with support from colleagues and opponents after hearing racist abuse at the end of the first Test and Root described him as his “happy, jolly self” and good to go again. Even before that grim end to the match, Archer was the most discussed of the England attack. This owed much to the general excitement that surrounds this alluring fast bowler but, like Sam Curran, he is still box-fresh as an international cricketer: it is time for Stuart Broad to step up after hunkering down for thrifty yet wicketless figures at Bay Oval. Such is the camaraderie between the two sides they would never wish ill on each other but two notable absentees for New Zealand – one expected, one freshly emerged – provide something of an in for Root’s men. Trent Boult was always likely to miss out after suffering a side strain and the expectation, locally, was a chance to hand the slippery Lockie Ferguson his debut before heading to Australia for three Tests. As well as being a wicket-taking threat, Colin de Grandhomme’s economical medium-pace provided an element of security to try out the fiery Ferguson, whose stamina across the five-day format is still something of an unknown. But it has since transpired that De Grandhomme suffered an abdominal injury on the final day at Bay Oval – yes, groan, England had in fact lost to a three-man attack by the end – and so in comes another all-rounder, the uncapped Daryl Mitchell. The flipside of this is that Matt Henry looks the more reliable seamer to step up off the bench. He is no mug himself; the right-arm fast-medium has torn through a fair few lineups in county cricket at Kent, even if after 10 Test caps he is yet to truly shine. New Zealand (possible): Latham, Raval, Williamson (c), Taylor, Nicholls, Watling (wk), Mitchell, Santner, Southee, Henry, Wagner England (possible): Burns, Sibley, Denly, Root (c), Stokes, Pope, Buttler (wk), Curran, Archer, Leach, Broad In Henry’s favour is the need for a new-ball bowler and that New Zealand’s bowling coach, Shane Jurgensen, expects it to swing if humid. This will be music to the ears of England’s attack – though not just to Curran but so, too, Tim Southee, who has 44 wickets at 21 on what is his best home ground. If not, the pitch at Seddon Park can go very flat. New Zealand stuck 715 for six declared on the board against Bangladesh here in March thanks to centuries from their two openers and a Williamson double, with the tourists losing by an innings but still responding with 429 all out. Should these conditions come to pass it will be a good chance for England’s players to show Chris Silverwood (the new head coach, who is set to fly home after the second day because of a family bereavement) and the rest of us that they are indeed learning lessons.