Your editorial (22 November) is right that “Labour’s 2019 general election manifesto ... is its most radical in more than 35 years”. But Labour’s new policy initiatives are not quite so dramatic by international standards. Even if all of Jeremy Corbyn’s promises are implemented, the role of the state in the UK will still be smaller than in European countries like Sweden, Norway and France. Britain’s social fabric has been worn thin to breaking point by almost a decade of savage austerity. For instance, millions now depend on food banks to make ends meet, including many in full-time work. Voters will choose between the practical benefits of Corbyn’s offer to start building a more just society and the undoubted emotional appeal of Boris Johnson’s pledge to “get Brexit done”. The country’s decision on 12 December will determine its future direction for years to come.Joe McCarthyDublin • At a time of political crisis Mr Corbyn indulged himself with a utopian manifesto for unachievable sudden change, which unnecessarily risks enabling an irreversible Brexit and a ghastly plutocracy (Corbyn unveils Labour’s most radical manifesto for decades, 22 November). Realistic timescales and targets would have been widely admired. Polly Toynbee (This visionary manifesto should electrify the campaign, Journal, 22 November) bites her tongue and tries to help Labour, but surely she also wonders where wiser heads were when this was approved. They should speak up now, if they don’t want to pick up the pieces later.Kimon RoussopoulosCambridge • Radical? Really? I’m old enough to remember when rail, energy and telecoms were all in the public sector, along with much else besides. The mixed economy was taken for granted by broad swathes of society and did a pretty good job of meeting people’s needs. I have other reasons for not voting Labour, notably their opposition to a second independence referendum, but certainly not their economic policy. Rodney Smith Chapelton, South Lanarkshire • One of the reasons for the electoral success of Tony Blair’s Labour party was its rejection of the language of resentment that seems to characterise Jeremy Corbyn’s project, with its relentless oppositions of them and us, the many and the few, the struggling workers and the “bankers, the billionaires and the establishment”. I do want to see a more egalitarian society, but I don’t think this persistent divisive language is likely to achieve it, and I don’t see how it is consistent with Corbyn’s stated aim of trying to “bring people together”.Matthew TaylorHove, East Sussex • Paul Mason’s article (The claim that Labour’s tax plans are ‘not credible’ is based on ideology, not fact, 23 November), which draws on work of mine, raises an important issue of journalistic balance. The Institute for Fiscal Studies is one of many organisations providing expert assessment of party policies and not always the most appropriate. The Guardian would serve its readers by drawing on expertise from other sources, such as the Institute for Public Policy Research, Women’s Budget Group and the Progressive Economy Forum (with which I am affiliated).John WeeksEast Meon, Hampshire • I earn nowhere near £80,000 a year but I would be willing to pay up to £100 a month higher tax if it would help alleviate child poverty, eliminate homelessness and help the NHS to deliver much better service.Asaf MirLondon • Surely your editorial (25 November) has missed the underlying message in the Conservative manifesto: five more years of austerity.Alain HeadEmpurany, France • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition