From Thatcher’s mass deregulation of the financial markets in 1986 to 2008’s financial crash and the uncertainty of Brexit, this doc takes the vast complex of the City of London’s Broadgate as a symbol for the workings of our financial institutions. It analyses the lives and careers of the super-rich who work there, as well as the cleaners and security staff who keep the building running. It is an often worrying take on the continuing free-market philosophy that is altering not only the face of London, but the shape of our society. Ammar Kalia Julie Etchingham referees a head-to-head between the two potential PMs, the shape of which might mirror the general election campaign: despite being the incumbent, Johnson is likely to spend as much time as possible bullishly rubbishing Corbyn’s ideas. Other party leaders have their say at 10pm. Jack Seale Nuanced performances are key to the success of this relationship drama. Julia Ormond maintains a fine balance between worldliness and vulnerability while Ben Barnes is a satisfying mix of charm and evasion as her younger suitor. Tonight, more family barbs and a discovery that changes everything. Phil Harrison Fifty years on from Ken Loach’s film version of Barry Hines’s novel A Kestrel for a Knave, comedian Greg Davies travels to Barnsley to talk to Hines’s brother, who was the inspiration for the book’s protagonist, as well as Loach himself on making the genre-defining realist film. A love letter to a classic of British culture. AK It is time for another awkward family reunion for Ray (Liev Schreiber) and the rest of the Irish-American crime clan. And “awkward” is putting it mildly, of course. This lot are downright homicidal. At least Ray now has therapist Dr Amiot (Alan Alda) on his side, but can the professional fixer fix himself? Ellen E Jones Presenters Mobeen Azhar and Vogue Williams put a group of young people looking to have plastic surgery under the harsh studio spotlight in this series. There is plenty of gruesome surgery footage and the realisation from the participants that maybe it isn’t the answer. AK The Way Way Back, 6.55pm, Film4 Another slice of dysfunctional family life from The Descendants writers Nat Faxon and Jim Rash. It is the story of teenage Duncan (Liam James) who, on holiday with his mother (Toni Collette) and her boyfriend (Steve Carell), seeks refuge at the Water Wizz aquapark. Clever and funny. Paul Howlett International Football: Wales v Hungary 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The group E Euro 2020 qualifier. International Football: Germany v Northern Ireland 7.40pm, Sky Sports Premier League. The Group C tie from Frankfurt. International Football: Scotland v Kazakhstan 7.40pm, Sky Sports Football. Hampden Park hosts.