Jordan Pickford Two excellent saves showed great concentration on a night when he barely touched the ball otherwise. 7 Trent Alexander-Arnold Trademark crossfield ball led to opening goal and oozed confidence going forward. Must be close to a regular spot. 8 Harry Maguire So little to do that he was able to venture forward at will and could easily have added to England’s tally. 7 John Stones Slow to react when Montenegro created a rare chance, although his distribution added an extra element to England’s play. 7 Ben Chilwell Incisive pass to set up the first goal and showed his set-piece ability with two sublime crosses to complete hat-trick of assists. 9 Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain Took his goal brilliantly on first start for 18 months and an energetic presence on the right of the midfield three. 8 Harry Winks Superb pass to play in Sancho early on and set the tone throughout with intelligent positioning. 8 Mason Mount Some nice touches yet did not impose himself as much as he would have wanted on second senior start. 7 Jadon Sancho Almost set up Kane for opener and looked to have rediscovered some of his confidence on the ball with late assist for Abraham. 7 Harry Kane The easiest hat-trick he will ever score. How long before he passes Michael Owen next on the top scorers’ list? 9 Marcus Rashford Took his goal well and looked a menace on both flanks. Almost into double figures for his country already. 8 Milan Mijatovic Made a couple of decent saves but was helpless as England bombarded his goal in the first half. 4 Marko Vesovic Lucky to escape a red card after an altercation with his tormentor-in-chief Rashford. 3 Aleksandar Sofranac Denied England an early lead with clearance on the line but will not want to see his shinned own goal again. 3 Marko Simic Unlucky not to score with header but was out of his depth in attempting to contain Kane. 4 Risto Radunovic Caught napping for England’s opening goal and must have been grateful to not have to re-emerge for the second half. 3 Vladimir Jovovic Forced to drop deep and at least helped stem the flow of goals after the break before being replaced. 4 Nikola Vukcevic The Levante midfielder is one of the few class acts in this poor side. Had to feel for him as his teammates struggled. 5 Dusan Lagator Pulled out of header at last minute to allow Kane easy goal and guilty of losing his man again for the third. 2 Deni Hocko Chasing shadows all night in midfield as Montenegro were pushed further and further back. 4 Sead Haksabanovic The West Ham loanee was a rare bright spot for the visitors and tried manfully to give his defence some respite. 5 Fatos Beciraj A golden opportunity to make his mark with a goal was squandered by the captain on a night to forget for his side. 4