There is no Conservative manifesto. There is just a Boris Johnson manifesto. As he rollicked round the stage in Telford on Sunday, the prime minister had only one message to the electorate: whatever your supposed party loyalty, forget it. Vote me. I will promise you anything. We both know I don’t mean it, but you will still love me for it. The past week’s manifestos mark the effective end of traditional party responsibility in British politics. They may not have meant much in the past, but they were a sort of conscience for a future government, subject to at least a cursory budgetary discipline. Their degeneration into fiscal promiscuity marks the arrival of raw populism. Johnson’s manifesto is routine, except that it can barely be called Conservative. His silence on nine years of Tory government was deafening. His manifesto is vaguely Blairite, contrasting with Jeremy Corbyn’s retro-1970s effort. Absent are such Tory concepts as fiscal responsibility, belief in open markets, private enterprise and self-reliance. Today’s targets are old Labour Brexit supporters, indicated by a remarkable YouGov poll indicating that 45% of working-class voters intend to vote Conservative (or Johnson), against just 31% for Labour. This result, if true, represents an upheaval in British politics. Hence the manifesto’s specific items aimed at low earners, with a higher start for national insurance contributions and a higher living wage. The costly pensions triple-lock remains in place, as does the winter fuel allowance and energy price cap. Taxes on struggling small businesses will fall. To pay for this, Johnson recently told the CBI that it could forget its promised cut of £6bn in corporation tax. It barely murmured dissent. The now-ritual splurges tumbled on, for new hospitals, 20,000 more police, millions for “first-time buyers”, day care and austerity-hit schools. Johnson could not resist the headline grabbers: filling in potholes, cutting hospital parking charges, reopening patches of long-closed railway, banning fracking and rescuing small village pubs. In a normal democracy these matters belong to local government, yet there is to be no relief to butchered local budgets. Every extra pound will be ringfenced by Whitehall, so Johnson can take personal credit. Centralism is the essence of populism. Labour at least had the intellectual courtesy to dream up a few new taxes on the rich for its fantasy generosity. The Tories offer no indication of where the money is coming from, except that it will not come from higher taxes and has been “costed”, which means borrowed. Paul Johnson of the Institute for Fiscal Studies now pops up each night like Jiminy Cricket to these Pinocchios, warning of “figures not adding up”, using phrases such as “inconceivable” and “come back to bite us”. He is a voice from a distant past. No one listens. In Northern Ireland Johnson was flexible, the devious pledge-breaker recast as deft pragmatist The new extravagance reflects the fact that, across Europe, austerity is politically bust. Britain is not alone in moving towards more borrowing and spending. But forgotten too is the memory of austerity’s predecessor, the age of inflation and debt. Electorates are careless of debt. For Italy, Spain, Hungary and even America, low interest rates mean that borrow-and-spend has lost its terror. Moody’s may downgrade Britain’s debt from stable to “negative”, but no one cares, not even its prime minister. Johnson’s domestic programme is thus warm, familiar and mildly leftwing. But the populist paradigm demands a chauvinism and xenophobia to outsiders. Hence we hear that defence must get ever more money. Aid is no longer sacred. Immigrants are suspect at home, and are to be deterred from abroad. If business desperately needs them, that is too bad. At this point, all roads lead back to Brexit. Johnson outrageously maintains that everyone but he is responsible for “delay, dither and acrimony”. He knows it was the Brexiters who delayed Brexit by opposing Theresa May’s deal. He himself withdrew his own withdrawal bill last month, after parliament had approved it on second reading. He delayed Brexit to hold an election – his own private “second referendum” – because he thought he would be more likely to win with Brexit delayed than with it achieved. Cynicism is populism’s best friend. The manifesto implies finality to Brexit. If Johnson wins an overall majority, Britain should indeed leave the EU formally in the new year. But battle will recommence over the subsequent EU trade deal. On this the manifesto is depressing. It suggests that Getting Brexit Done will “unleash Britain’s potential”. There is no evidence for this whatever. Britain was doing fine before Brexit. As it is, a hard Brexit will cripple British trade. It is a self-imposed economic sanction that will take years to mitigate. There is no Brexit dividend. Hence hope lies elsewhere, that Johnson’s deal would at least lance the political boil of Brexit. Having asserted its machismo, the country may return to its traditional pragmatism in negotiating a new EU trade relationship. The manifesto explicitly rejects remaining in the customs union and single market. This is very close to no deal. Yet Johnson accepted that this could not apply to Northern Ireland, for the simple reason that it was unworkable. It is near to unworkable for Britain too. In Northern Ireland Johnson was flexible, the devious pledge-breaker recast as deft pragmatist. Deep inside, he must know he will have to act likewise for Britain as a whole. It is on Johnson the pledge-breaking pragmatist that Britain must now rely. It is a desperate hope, but the only one. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist