National Galleries Scotland (NGS) has become the latest arts organisation to end links to BP, citing its “responsibility to do all we can to address the climate emergency”. It said on Monday that the 2019 BP Portrait Award exhibition opening at the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Edinburgh on 7 December would be the last time it would take place there in its present form. The announcement increases pressure on the National Portrait Gallery (NPG) in London to end one of the UK’s longest art prize sponsorships. NGS said in a statement: “At the National Galleries of Scotland we recognise that we have a responsibility to do all we can to address the climate emergency. For many people, the association of this competition with BP is seen as being at odds with that aim. “Therefore, after due consideration, the trustees of the National Galleries of Scotland have decided that this will be the last time that the galleries will host this exhibition in its present form.” The decision comes nearly four years after Tate and the Edinburgh international festival announced they were ending long-running sponsorship partnerships with the petroleum firm. Campaigners had hoped that would quickly lead to the termination of all BP’s arts sponsorship deals. That did not happen and regular protests continued at the big four recipients of BP money: the NPG, the British Museum, the Royal Opera House and the Royal Shakespeare Company. In October the RSC broke ranks and announced it was ending its deal with BP two years early, citing pressure from young people. BP expressed disappointment at that decision and said everyone needed to work together to achieve a low-carbon future. “Ironically, the increasing polarisation of debate, and attempts to exclude companies committed to making real progress, is exactly what is not needed,” it said. The NPG is due to host what would be the 31st BP Portrait Award next year, with the closing date for entries advertised as 11 December. It has been complicated because the NPG’s building will close for nearly three years from July, when it traditionally hosts the prize exhibition. Observers see that as an opportunity to end the sponsorship. The gallery said it was considering options for the prize.