Lauren Bravo Thu 28 Nov 2019 14.32 GMT


Last modified on Thu 28 Nov 2019 16.37 GMT Between mountains of wrapping paper, discarded cracker toys, single-use party wear and leftovers that even the most ambitious turkey sandwich fan can’t tackle, it’s not surprising that research suggests UK households produce about 30% more waste than usual during the Christmas break. So how can we replace the traditional consumer binge with something more sustainable? The good news is, a social and environmental conscience isn’t incompatible with festive cheer. From ethical decorations to gifts that give back, here’s a guide to help you do Christmas a little differently this year. And there’s not a humbug in sight. 1. For the foodie: Robin Harford’s wild food foraging courseWho doesn’t love receiving food as a gift at Christmas? Switch things up this year and give the gourmet in your life a foraging course – whether it’s in the city, along riverbanks, or on the coast, the variety of courses available will allow the giftee to discover food at its source. £60, foragingcourses.com 2. For the person who has everything: Oxfam Unwrapped gift card to support women entrepreneursIn a world saturated with “stuff”, why add to someone’s pile? Oxfam Unwrapped is a different kind of present; one that won’t end up under the bed covered in dust. A £20 gift card can provide funds and support for women entrepreneurs, for instance, to help them get their business flourishing, gain financial independence and beat poverty for good. £20, Oxfam 3. For all those Christmas cocktails: Shlurple collapsible drinking strawIt’s tradition to have a few things on your conscience the day after the office party, but single-use plastic doesn’t have to be one of them. Made from stainless steel and stored in a box made from wheat composite, the portable, collapsible Shlurple straw is designed for repeated use – without adding to the 150m tonnes of plastic currently choking the world’s oceans. As the slogan has it: “Buy a Shlurple, save a turtle”. £12.24, Shlurple 4. For glitz without the moral itch: Oxfam partywearNeed to find some Christmas or new year party gear without contributing to fast fashion and spending a small fortune? That’s where Oxfam’s partywear comes to your rescue. Think jumpsuits, velvet two-pieces or standout sequins, with hundreds of like-new items that are sure to make an impact. At the very least, you’ll score points for sustainable kudos. From £3.99, Oxfam 5. For smooth operators: plastic-free shaving kitWho said eco-warriors have to be hairy? Shoreline Shaving’s gender-neutral shaving kit includes an elegant razor made from bamboo and stainless steel, plus natural, vegan-friendly shaving soap and 10 replacement blades. The packaging is recycled cardboard, stamped with acid-free ink and held in place with plant-based string. You might miss a patch, but they certainly haven’t. £29.99, Shoreline Shaving 6. For the statement-maker: Birdsong’s Exercise Empathy T-shirt“No sweatshops, no Photoshop” is the Birdsong mantra, and feminist activism runs through everything the brand does. This T-shirt more than lives up to its timely slogan; made from soft, eco-friendly cotton, it’s embroidered locally by women paid a fair living wage, with £1.50 from every sale donated to a charity that supports survivors of sexual violence. Give it to a friend who likes to wear their heart on their sleeve. £38, Birdsong 7. For bookworms: secondhand booksWhat feels more personal than receiving a signed copy of your favourite book for Christmas? Or a first edition classic you’ve been pining after that will transform your bookshelf? Oxfam’s high street and online book shop has something for all avid readers – with the added pleasure of knowing someone else has got lost in the story before you … From £2.99, Oxfam 8. For the hobbyist: Craft Courses gift voucherWhen it comes to ethical living, we’ve all got plenty to learn. Craft Courses offers a wide range of sustainability-focused classes across the UK, from vegan soap-making to upcycling furniture and growing organic produce. Buy a voucher and the giftee will have their pick of the list – just in time for New Year’s resolutions. From £10, Craft Courses 9. For the best-dressed tree: Fairtrade decorationsFancy some lobster for Christmas? Well, how about snapping one up for your tree? Oxfam’s beautiful decorations are handmade by skilled artisans in India, as part of Alternative Trading Organisation, working to reduce poverty and keep families out of debt. Meanwhile, this star garland, made from recycled scraps of sari fabric, is a perfect alternative to plastic-based tinsel. From £3.99, Oxfam 10. For a thoughtful tipple: Toast aleDid you know that 44% of bread made in the UK is wasted? Spare a thought for all those unloved loaves when you’re getting the Christmas drinks in. Toast ale is brewed using surplus bread instead of the usual malted barley, which reduces carbon emissions and saves the land usually needed to grow the crops – so far, equivalent to seven football pitches. The results are bottled using recycled glass, and a portion of the profits goes to support food waste charities. Eggnog can’t compete. £28 for 12 bottles, Toast 11. For the green-fingered friend: Fairtrade plant basketPlant baskets are everywhere, but they’re not all created equal. This one is handwoven from hogla, a natural grass, by rural women artisans at Corr the Jute Works in Bangladesh – often at home, as a means to earn a fair wage. And if the plant doesn’t make it, the larger size can also double up as a stylish storage basket. £24.99, Oxfam 12. For the leftovers: beeswax wrapsAh, Christmas – the only time when it’s acceptable to eat a king prawn, a lump of stilton and a piece of cake off the same plate. At 10am. But while avoiding seasonal food waste is to be applauded, covering everything in clingfilm isn’t. Try Oxfam’s beeswax wraps instead. Handmade in the Cotswolds, they mould to the shape of your dishes, bread, cheese and veg using the heat from your hands. Washed gently after use, they can last for a year. So just slightly longer than the turkey then. £14.99, Oxfam For inspiration on gifts that don’t hurt the planet and the people in it, visit the Oxfam Christmas gift guide