Further to Kay Murphy’s letter (27 November), when told that the number of people using food banks in the Malvern Hills area had risen by 50%, Conservative candidate Harriet Baldwin was quoted in the Malvern Gazette of 22 November as saying: “People have always gone through relationship breakdowns and severe illnesses and gone without but the food bank is now there as a response.” So that’s all right then. What a relief!Estelle SmartMalvern, Worcestershire • Clearly the building referred to under the subheading “Westminster” in your article (Cathedrals are back! These are the finest, G2, 27 November) is the wonderful 1,000-year-old Westminster Abbey, not the Victorian (Roman Catholic) cathedral. I once made the mistake the other way round and had to run all the way from the abbey to the cathedral for a nonetheless enjoyable concert. Julia HarmanChiswick, London • Your reporters deserve an award for using the word “attendant” for Liam Fox at a conference (Secret papers prove Tories want to sell NHS – Corbyn, 28 November) instead of that ghastly word “attendee”. The Guardian leads the way yet again. Let’s hope the rest of the world will follow.Michael HoranTurners Hill, Sussex • You report (28 November) that the rebranded Avanti (ex-Virgin) trains on the west coast mainline are to be painted green and white. But to me the accompanying photo of the new livery appears to show the colours as being white and British Rail blue. Is this in readiness for nationalisation?Michael RobinsonBerkhamsted, Hertfordshire • Dr Martin Marshall, the new chair of the Royal College of GPs, says “it’s very tricky to persuade doctors to do less and patients to expect less” (‘The NHS must do less. It’s a tricky message’, Society, 27 November). There is a saying in Buddhism: “Don’t just do something. Sit there.”Brendan KellyTrinity College Dublin, Ireland • Following the contributions to your letters page, I have concluded that we all have a duty to bring our families and the country together, and, as someone said, demonstrate maturity and strength and maturity by being neutral. So as a voter in Islington North, I shall be neutral in the general election and not vote for any of the candidates.Dick MuskettLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition