Centrica, the owner of British Gas, has won a court battle with the energy regulator after the watchdog made an 11th-hour change to price cap calculations, which dealt a £70m blow to the supplier. Britain’s biggest energy supplier pledged to take Ofgem to court last year after the regulator announced a surprise change to the methodology used to set the energy price cap. It said the late change in determining fair energy prices for 11m homes knowingly underestimated the cost of supplying energy last winter, and would lead to an unexpected one-off cost increase of £70m for British Gas. An Ofgem spokesman said the regulator was disappointed by the high court’s judgment but its energy price cap would remain fundamentally unchanged. The judicial review focused on the first phase of the energy price cap regime, which was in effect over the first three months of 2019. Ofgem said it would consider its next steps in light of the judgment. A spokesman for Centrica said the outcome underlines the importance of transparent and rigorous regulatory processes and well-designed regulation. The regulator set out its initial calculations for the price cap in an industry consultation in May, but the sums were scrapped months later without warning in favour of a methodology that would lead to a lower price cap. Ofgem sets the cap by tallying the underlying costs of supplying energy to protect customers from “rip-off” bills. Last spring it said it intended to base the cap on the average cost of buying wholesale winter energy in advance between April to September. But months later it announced planned to use the forward market prices between February and July 2018 instead. Industry insiders said the shift was significant because it allowed Ofgem to assume lower energy supplier costs by diluting the impact of severe market spikes in March 2018, which led to higher prices over the summer too. British Gas said it looked forward to continuing to work closely with the government and the regulator and remained committed to delivering for its customers.