Judy Chicago likes to pull the curtain back on things we’d rather keep hidden. The clatter of curtain hoops and the swoosh of material proceeds childbirth, the arrival of death, the examination of a battered body. For Chicago these subjects are to be painted, photographed, sketched, stitched and hung on gallery walls. It seems likely that she’d fill the lull in dinner-party conversation with a question like: “Will I die screaming in pain?” But Chicago is not interested in making us squirm. Instead she is intrigued by what it means to be alive on this planet in all its gory pain and glory. The survey of her 50-year career at the Baltic is both personal and universal; the voice that narrates Chicago’s fears, anxieties and pleasures finds an echo in my own head. And presumably all of us have wondered how we will greet death. The exhibition is bookended by our arrival on and eventual departure from Earth, opening with a four-metre tapestry that depicts the beginning of the world from a female perspective. Dark folds slowly turn a flushed vaginal pink and all of Earth’s components rush forth in colourful stitches: the sun, the sea, the birds and the beasts. Aptly titled The Creation, the handcrafted hanging is Chicago’s reaction against a creation narrative that credits a male god with creating man. Attempting to remove feminism from Chicago’s artistic practice would be like removing ingredients from a baked cake. Women are present from the formation of her work to its final declaration: the subject on the wall, the hands behind the materials. The Creation is part of the Birth Project, a series of tapestries, paintings and educational panels made in the early 80s that explore the experience of giving birth – a moment that is often shrouded in mystery. Now in her 80s, Chicago is facing the other end of the timeline, a subject she does not shy away from in her most recent series, The End: A Meditation on Death and Extinction. The first part features paintings of the “six stages of dying” structured around Elisabeth Kübler-Ross’s stages of grief. A figure clenches her fists, clutches her head and finally opens her hands to the inevitability of death’s arrival. In the second section, a glowing nude with Chicago’s tousled red hair considers different ways of dying. In a particularly moving frame, a blond man cradles a cold figure under the words: “Will I die in my husband’s arms?” These sketches are immensely personal and unashamedly Chicago – the man is her artistic collaborator and husband Donald Woodman. Chicago moves from her own death to that of the natural world. The final collection of paintings details the decline of penguins, polar bears, wolves and birds. An elephant bleeds to death on the floor with much of its face hacked away for the ivory trade, while a finned shark looks out to an ocean where it will soon suffocate without its ability to swim. Chicago’s fight for equality extends to all life. In placing her own death on a par with that of the environment and animals, she forces us to do the same, transferring the soul-splitting despair of grieving a loved one on to the impending climate disaster. The vulnerability of Chicago’s art is completely disarming. She is not afraid to take us behind the curtains of her own home, flinging open all her photo albums and journals. In My Accident, she describes being hit by a truck while out running. She includes photographs of herself naked and injured, confessing: “I felt humiliated at having my new husband see my battered body.” For Autobiography of a Year, Chicago presents 140 drawings that reveal her innermost thoughts. At times she is “utterly drained” and other times she is maintaining “that free female spirit”. It is testament to the power of Chicago’s work that this exhibition doesn’t feel sparse. It was inevitable that photographs of her smoke performances would seem lacklustre in comparison to the original explosive, multicoloured show. In a series of 85 pieces, we are graced with just seven snippets from the Birth Project. The works in The End are only the preparatory sketches, not the final spectacular glassworks. And the reduction of her most significant work, The Dinner Party, to an informative video was always going to be a disappointment. But these shimmering snapshots still pack a punch. Chicago might be the one who has undressed, but I am the one stripped of pretence and facing up to the reality of my existence. Judy Chicago is at Baltic, Gateshead, 16 November to 19 April.