The Kosovo manager, Bernard Challandes, said England are the best team in Europe and joked that the only way to stop Raheem Sterling would be to break his leg. Sterling is expected to start the Euro 2020 qualifier in Pristina on Sunday having been sidelined for the 7-0 thrashing of Montenegro as punishment for his training-ground spat with the Liverpool defender Joe Gomez. Challandes believes the forward’s return presents problems for Kosovo, who can no longer qualify directly but will be in the play-offs. “For us it is not good news,” he said. “It is double bad news because, if Sterling plays, he is one of the best in his position in the world. Secondly, if I am Sterling, I think in this game I must show good behaviour. I think if Kosovo play against England and we know exactly the offensive potential, we have no individual answer - it is only collective work. Only as a team can we do and can we find a solution. Or we break the leg! But that is not our style; we are too nice. We are a team who are very, very, very nice but it is not a problem if we play together.” England have already confirmed their qualification and have racked up 33 goals, three more than the next most potent side, Belgium, before Saturday’s matches, and Challandes pointed to that statistic as proof of England’s standing. “Since we began this European qualifiers I have always spoken about new experiences and progress, about improving,” he said. “This game is a wonderful game with these objectives. It is for us a wonderful challenge to play against one of the best teams in the world and perhaps now the best team in Europe. “If you see this qualification round from England, no one has scored so much, the incredible offensive potential of this team: winning 7-0, 6-0, 5-0, 5-0, 5-0. Incredible! That means for us it is an incredible challenge and I can enjoy such a challenge but am also a little afraid. We can laugh a little but it is the 1,001st game for England, it is our 29th. They are a little more experienced.”