Garnet Hathaway was given a match penalty and thrown out for spitting on Anaheim’s Erik Gudbranson during the Washington Capitals’ 5-2 victory over the Anaheim Ducks on Monday night. “That’s about as low as you dig a pit, really,” Gudbranson said. “It’s a bad thing to do. It’s something you just don’t do in a game, and he did it.” Chaos erupts behind the Anaheim net after Brendan Leipsic levels Derek Grant and Chandler Stephenson scores. Garnet Hathaway gets a match penalty for spitting on Erik Gudbranson pic.twitter.com/azj6YazNTM Hathaway, meanwhile, offered a novel excuse. “Unfortunately, spit came out of my mouth after I got sucker punched and it went on to him,” Hathaway said. “It has no place. It was an emotional play by me. You don’t plan any of that stuff in your head, and it was a quick reaction and unfortunately the wrong one for me to a sucker punch.” The incident occurred in the aftermath of a heated brawl in the second period, after Gudbranson gave Hathaway another punch and received something he didn’t expect in return. Gudbranson’s Anaheim teammate Nick Ritchie was also ejected for being the third man into a fight. “These games can get physical and they can get nasty,” Ducks coach Dallas Eakins said. “These guys’ll throw down, drop their gloves, that stuff goes on in the game, but what I saw there I haven’t seen I think I’ve been in pro hockey 30 years maybe and I’ve never seen that before. It’s just something you don’t see in the game.” After some off-and-on hostilities in the first 39 minutes, Washington’s Brendan Leipsic incited the brawl by bulldozing Anaheim’s Derek Grant just before Chandler Stephenson scored to make it 3-0 to the Capitals. Almost all of the 10 skaters on the ice became involved, and Hathaway fought Gudbranson, Grant and Ritchie in a matter of minutes. Officials were attempting to separate players when Gudbranson rabbit-punched Hathaway, who then spat in his face with referee Peter MacDougall a few feet away. Officials checked the video before confirming a five-minute match penalty and game misconduct on Hathaway for spitting, which carries an automatic ejection. Ducks defenseman Brendan Guhle had been agitating much of the night, almost dropping the gloves with Tom Wilson and tripping up Leipsic in various incidents. It all paved the way for the brawl. “It just escalated,” Guhle said. “It for sure was in the works. There were scrums all night. Guys were going after each other. That’s how it goes sometimes.” The fighting and Hathaway spitting overshadowed the NHL-leading Capitals winning their second in a row and picking up at least one point for the 14th time in 15 games. Alex Ovechkin scored his 254th career power-play goal, Richard Panik, Stephenson and Jakub Vrana also scored, Wilson sealed it with an empty netter and Braden Holtby made 32 saves for Washington.