Racing rarely hands out second chances, here above all, but Happy Diva and Richard Patrick were delighted to be exceptions to the rule on Saturday as Kerry Lee’s mare made it second time lucky in the BetVictor Gold Cup, one of the most valuable and competitive events of the winter campaign. In the same race 12 months ago, Happy Diva and her jockey were still travelling strongly when they made the most unfortunate of all possible exits at the fourth-last: brought down by a faller after jumping it well. There were no mishaps this time, for the winner at least. Patrick might well have had to settle for second place, however, had Slate House, the heavily backed 4-1 favourite, not suffered a luckless departure of his own at the second-last. Colin Tizzard’s gelding jumped the fence soundly but then seemed to buckle after landing, having made ground relentlessly from the rear to join issue with the leaders on the home turn. Slate House’s fall still left Happy Diva with some work to do, but she responded well for her jockey as Brelan D’As and Barry Geraghty tried to close the gap all the way up the hill. The 14-1 winner held on by a neck, with Warthog and Belami Des Pictons filling the minor placings. “Last year we were going really well and then got to four out and got brought down,” Patrick said. “You’ve got to keep going forward and looking ahead and trying to avoid accidents in these big handicaps but sometimes you just can’t do anything about it. “This year definitely makes up for it. I couldn’t hear anything behind me until coming round the bend when they all came on top of us so I had to go. She really battled bravely for me to the line.” Lee, who was enjoying the most valuable success of her training career, paid tribute to Patrick’s cool head in the closing stages. “He’s a very good, balanced rider and he’s excellent on the big stage,” she said. “Nerves don’t matter to him, unlike me. We got done in the [2018] Grand Annual by a horse owned by Mr [JP] McManus [who owns Brelan D’As]. “I was pleased to reverse the placings in that respect, hopefully he might send me a horse now.” Wholestone recorded his fifth Cheltenham success despite idling badly in the closing stages of the three-mile novice chase and is now around 25-1 for the RSA Chase at next year’s Festival, while Thyme Hill is 14-1 for the Ballymore Novice Hurdle in March after a convincing success in the opener on the card. Saldier is the new favourite for the Champion Hurdle with several bookmakers after showing a sharp turn of foot from the final flight to win the Grade One Morgiana Hurdle on his first start for more than a year. Willie Mullins’s five-year-old had his stable companion, Klassical Dream, last season’s Supreme Novice Hurdle winner, back in third as he beat Petit Mouchoir by a length and a half. Saldier is 4-1 market leader (from 14-1) with Betfair while Paddy Power make him 4-1 joint-favourite with Buveur d’Air, the Champion Hurdle winner in 2017 and 2018. The 2015 champion hurdler, Faugheen, is around 20-1 for the JLT Novice Chase after overcoming some uncertain jumps to make a successful debut over fences at the age of 11.