There were only seconds remaining when Gareth Bale stood over the ball not far outside the area and for a moment quiet fell. This was written, it seemed, redemption ready to be delivered. Somehow, no one really knew how, it was 2-2 between Real Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain and now it was down to the Welshman of all people to win it, handed a free-kick at the end of an extraordinary night. He took a few steps back, another to the side, ran up and curled the ball over the wall, past the goalkeeper and … off a post. Scoring that would have been too much, too scripted, even for an occasion that had already beggared belief. As the ball bounced away the final whistle final went, followed by applause. As they clapped most asked the same question: how? How had that not gone in? How had Madrid been in a position that they needed it to? One answer stood at the south end waving to the fans who were once his. Keylor Navas, the former Madrid goalkeeper, had faced almost 30 shots and let in two, keeping his team alive for what looked to be the final twist – which was almost followed by two more. Having drawn level PSG could have won it in the 90th minute; having lost their lead Madrid could have won it in the 94th. Neither did but it was Madrid wondering why not. For so long they had dominated but their lead had been only one, scored by Karim Benzema early in the first half. When he got the second with 11 minutes left justice was served. Instead it was taken from them, PSG scoring twice in two minutes. First Kylian Mbappé nudged in an easy finish, then Pablo Sarabia smashed an equaliser. It had been that kind of night, starting with Eden Hazard turning away from Marquinhos, past Thomas Meunier and nutmegging Artur Soares Dias – the referee. He spread the ball to Federico Valverde who combined with Dani Carvajal and provided for Isco. His shot came off a post to Benzema, waiting to score the opener. The shock was that the wait for the second was so long. Madrid flew, appreciative applause a permanent soundtrack. By the time this game had begun Madrid had already joined PSG in the knockout phase but they did not play a side with nothing to play for; instead they played like one that could win this trophy back. Kroos, Isco, Benzema, Kroos, Hazard, Kroos, Benzema, Carvajal, Casemiro, Marcelo … the shots racked up – 16 by half-time, almost double that by the end. Yet no more goals arrived until the 79th minute. If PSG were fortunate it was only one, fortunate even that it was only two, it is also true they had been denied the chance to level when Mauro Icardi was brought down by Thibaut Courtois. The referee pointed to the spot and showed a red card, only to go to the VAR and change his mind, ruling it out for a push on Marcelo in the build-up. And so it went on, a fun night getting an unexpected finale. Just when Madrid had seemingly ended it Sergio Ramos, Raphaël Varane and Courtois gifted Mbappé PSG’s first before Sarabia equalised. And there was more, Mbappé hitting the side-netting and Bale almost offering one last, absurd twist.