Parts of Australia faced an unprecedented bushfire threat on Friday evening as more than 100 blazes burned across coastal New South Wales and Queensland. Communities on NSW’s mid-north coast and the far north coast were battling the worst of the conditions, which were described by authorities as “uncharted territory” and that led to a dramatic, orange-red glow descending on the fire-threatened city of Port Macquarie. Across drought-stricken NSW, a record 17 “emergency warnings” were in place for more than 90 blazes that stretched from the Blue Mountains to the border with Queensland, where about 50 fires had also burned throughout Friday. “We have never seen this many fires concurrently at emergency warning level,” the NSW Rural Fire Service (NSW RFS) commissioner, Shane Fitzsimmons, told the ABC. “We are in uncharted territory.” At 4pm, the NSW RFS said: “A number of fires in the north coast and northern NSW areas are becoming more intense – and more dangerous. Some are creating their own weather conditions.” By Friday evening, authorities confirmed the destruction of at least two homes on NSW’s far north coast region but that number was expected to rise as residents returned to inspect their properties. Minor injuries were reported to fire fighters and residents, Fitzsimmons said. The ABC reported that fire crews were responding to calls from residents trapped in their homes. A spokesman told the Guardian it was too late for residents to leave in some locations, and that authorities could no longer guarantee crews could reach all homes. Fitzsimmons said aerial footage showed “widespread property damage and destruction, right across multiple fire grounds”. In Port Macquarie, a city of 45,000 people on the NSW mid north coast, a red haze that engulfed the area was described as “apocalyptic”. As fire fighters battled hot and windy conditions, locals in some pockets of the town were evacuated, while sections of the Pacific Highway and some schools were closed. Residents in Tenterfield, Armidale, Clarence Valley, Port Macquarie, Nambucca, Kempsey and other mid-coast areas were warned that their lives were at risk and urged to take action to protect themselves. “From my personal perspective, it’s horrifying,” said the MidCoast council mayor, David West, of the threat to Taree, about 80km south of Port Macquarie. Describing the conditions as “unprecedented”, West added: “I’ve never felt a sense of anguish that I do now, the fear for my community.” In Queensland, two emergency warnings were declared and fires threatened small communities in Scenic Rim, about 80km west of Brisbane, and at Tewantin and Cooroibah on the Sunshine Coast. Authorities said they would evacuate hundreds of residents in parts of Tewantin, a suburb of the popular holiday spot Noosa, and said they would look to clear the entire town if the threat escalated. Earlier on Friday, Fitzsimmons said bush and grass fires were burning through about 370,000 hectares of land in New South Wales. That was more than the entire land area burned last year. The Bureau of Meteorology said a cool change should blow through fire-affected areas in New South Wales, which they hoped would improve fire-fighting conditions. “This change is likely to be quite vigorous,” said Dean Sgarbossa of the Bureau of Meteorology. “This is particularly dangerous for fires, it can change the direction and elongate them and shift them.” The fire danger should lessen over the weekend, although threat levels were forecast to rise again on Tuesday or Wednesday next week, Fitzsimmons said. Western Australians were also warned that significant bushfires were likely at the weekend as forecasters predicted the mercury would hit 40C on Saturday. On Friday, WA’s Department of Fire and Emergency Services downgraded a bushfire that ravaged through 400 hectares of land north of Perth that morning. But they warned the out-of-control fire still posed a possible threat to lives and homes.