Thousands of demonstrators have converged on Hong Kong’s central business district, blocking roads and facing off with riot police as anti-government protests brought parts of the city to a standstill for a second day in a row. Black-clad demonstrators joined by what appeared to be office workers on their lunch hour marched along main roads, holding up outstretched hands to signal the five demands of the protesters. Some crouched behind umbrellas in Central, advancing toward riot police, who held up signs warning they would fire on the crowd. Tuesday’s protests, at universities and locations across the city, come after violence reached a new peak on Monday in amid citywide strikes that resulted in at least 128 people receiving treatment in hospital. Among those was a 21-year-old demonstrator shot at close range in the torso by police. A 57 year old man seen arguing with protesters was also doused in flammable liquid and lit on fire, in a case police have deemed attempted murder. Demonstrators have called for another day of strikes on Tuesday, as the Chinese territory enters its sixth month of political unrest that observers worry will only escalate. Riot police fired tear gas at protesters at City University in Kowloon Tong while demonstrators threw rocks on train tracks in Shatin, disrupting public transit and forcing commuters to walk. In Central, some protesters vandalised street lights and others threw objects at police vans. On Tuesday, some railway services were suspended, while shops and roads were closed, causing traffic jams. Several universities and some secondary and primary schools cancelled classes. The police come. There is a fight. People get arrested. Then tomorrow it starts all over again … There’s not an end The political crisis has entered a new phase following the death of a demonstrator on Friday, who succumbed to injuries sustained when he fell during a protest in what was the first death linked to police action. More than 3,000 people have been arrested since the protests began in June, initially triggered by a bill that would allow the extradition of suspects in Hong Kong to mainland China. Of those, more than 260 were arrested on Monday. Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam on Tuesday called the protesters “extremely selfish” for paralysing the city. On Monday, in a special address to media she described the protesters as enemies of the people and slammed “any wishful thinking” of protesters that escalating tactics would push the government to concede to their demands. At Hong Kong University, academics pleaded with students, who make up the bulk of the demonstrators, to rethink their methods. “What is happening here is not sustainable,” said Matthew Evans, dean of the university’s faculty of science. “What happens is the police come. There is a fight. People get arrested. Then tomorrow it starts all over again … There’s not an end.” The United States expressed “grave concern” over the situation and called for restraint by both the police and government and the protesters. The protesters are demanding an independent investigation into police behaviour over the course of the protests, as well as the implementation of universal suffrage to allow Hongkongers the right to elect their own leader and representatives. But Beijing, which has authority over Hong Kong as part of the “one country two systems” framework established when the former British colony was handed over to Chinese control, has signalled no willingness to concede. On Tuesday, the state-run Global Times described the protesters in Hong Kong as “no different from terrorists like Islamic State”. Addressing the Hong Kong police, the editorial stressed the readiness of the People’s Liberation Army and police force to reinforce Hong Kong’s security forces when needed. “Behind you are not only the people of Hong Kong and the whole country who love Hong Kong, but also the national armed police force and the troops stationed in Hong Kong.”