The collaborative photo-storytelling project Through Positive Eyes chronicles a very particular moment in the global Aids epidemic, when effective treatment is available to some but not all, and when the enduring stigma associated with HIV and Aids has become entrenched – a major roadblock to both prevention and treatment. Over 10 years, more than 130 HIV-positive people across five continents have taken part, many of whom picked up cameras for the first time in their lives. Here they tell their stories, in words and in photographs. Alejandro, Mexico City, Mexico I have been living with HIV for 15 years. The afternoon I got the news, I was in shock. I left the doctor’s office and wandered aimlessly in the streets, all night long. When I finally came to my senses, it was dawn. I decided to fight to remain in the best physical, emotional and psychological condition I could, during the time I had left. I promised myself that the virus would never defeat me. I decided to be tough. It doesn’t matter if the virus came in to my life, or if I went looking for it. I am an electrician, and I live like anybody else. I love to exercise, not only because it is good for me, but also because I always wanted to have the body of a wrestler. The years I have spent living with HIV have taught me to be more humble, respectful and humane. My greatest satisfaction now is to help other people get medical care. We who live with HIV do not ask for special privileges, only that our rights be respected. Aoy, Bangkok, Thailand I became infected with HIV 10 years ago, when I was 30, from sex with my boyfriend. I was shocked and worried that people would judge me. But then I met a group of new friends living with HIV. I realised people with HIV can live for many years. And I thought, “Why can’t I stay alive, too?” I take my medicine and care for myself, both body and soul. That’s why I’m still here. I wish there were a cure, so that I didn’t have to take my medication. Each medicine has a different side-effect. My body has changed. I do exercises to help get a better shape, to help reduce my lipodystrophy: body bulge is a common side-effect. I feel I look like a monster. I have a hump on my back, and a distended tummy. If we don’t want people to stamp HIV on our foreheads, then we have to take better care of our appearance. Even though I’m HIV positive, it doesn’t mean I don’t care about my personal beauty. I don’t want society to see HIV as something pathetic. I don’t want people to feel sorry for me. James, London, England In the early days of my diagnosis, I was afraid of transmitting the virus to partners. Sex was overshadowed by risk, the body a vessel for fear rather than joy. I am interested in depicting the body within a fledgling relationship, and what that means in the context of HIV; David, my partner in this picture, is not HIV positive. I want to represent my HIV within a broader context of human intimacy, as healthy, erotic and sensual, as playful and loving, as sacred and nurturing, because I am all of those things. I have a lot of tattoos. Some allude, metaphorically, to my journey with HIV. A man struck up a conversation in the changing room of my gym, asking me why so many of my tattoos reference the spiritual. And it dawned on me that the most common theme written across my body is my divine connection to love. Once upon a time, I believed HIV would prevent me from loving and being loved. This photo captures a brief moment when the divine nature of love blossomed between me and David. Sudesh, Mumbai, India In 2005, my wife died – of non-Aids-related causes – and I thought, “What have I got in life other than misfortune?” I distanced myself from everyone and was very worried that my children did not have a mother. I wondered how I would look after them, but realised I had to. In 2008, I was becoming thinner and weighed just 32kg [5st]. I suspected that there was something wrong, so I got my blood tested. The doctor said I had HIV. I don’t know how I got it. I suspect it was via a doctor’s contaminated injection needle. From 2004 to 2007, I spent most of my money on treatment. After selling my house, my money ran out. I had to tell the doctor that paying for medicine was difficult. He gave me a month’s worth: I could not believe his kindness. That is how my life has been – spending all my money on medicine, taking pills and raising my children. I take care of the home and if I get time, do a little business. I buy and sell kerosene. I have not been ill in eight years and my weight is up to 55kg [8st 9lb], but I do not work. People help our family. We have a place to live, which my father built. My children know I have HIV. My daughter told me everyone takes medicine, and it is OK if I do. As for the people around me, I have not said anything to them. They think I have tuberculosis. My children are happy now. I got three of my daughters married, which is one stressful thing achieved. My son is in his last year of school, and in two to three years he will stand on his own feet. Meanwhile, I am alone. I don’t have a partner. I fold my hands and accept this. This is my life, and my life will go on. Lynnea, Los Angeles, US When you’re a person living with HIV, you need your friends – to get past the stigma and to share moments of genuine love. I think I was born with HIV. My mother has it, and one of the ways it can be passed on is from mother to child in the womb. Often people give me more sympathy than they give someone who contracted HIV through drug use or sex. They say it’s not my fault and I didn’t ask for it. But who asks for HIV? The only difference between me and other HIV-positive people is that I don’t know life without it. I grew up thinking it was impossible for me to have a child. I failed to plan for my future because I couldn’t imagine having one. As an adult, I began hearing about a decrease in mother-to-child HIV transmission, using a new treatment regimen. After consulting with my doctor, I made the decision to try [for a baby]. HIV is no longer terminal. It’s a chronic treatable disease, like diabetes. So my doctor gave me the green light. In the past, doctors preferred a caesarean birth, to minimise blood sharing, but, following medical advice, I was able to have a natural birth. I wanted my child to have the best possible outcome, and that’s how it turned out. I had prayed for a girl, and the ultrasound confirmed it. She would be the remixed version of myself, so I scrambled the letters of my own name, Lynnea, and created the most beautiful name I could imagine: Nae’Lyn. Nae’Lyn is my life. She’s a happy, healthy, HIV-negative little girl. She’s sassy, spunky and very opinionated. She sings in church. She remembers everything. She is the sweetest little girl I’ve ever met. And here I am, looking forward to being an old woman, decades from now. Wideline, Port-au-Prince, Haiti I started sex work when I was 16. I felt trapped. It was hard, but I got used to the job. Sometimes clients get mad, but the boss would never let anyone hit you. If they are with you for a minute, they pay $10. From the moment I discovered I was pregnant, I stopped doing it. I found out I had HIV in January 2014. At first, I felt confused, because I had done a test that came out negative, then went back again and the test came back positive. Some people living with HIV feel isolated, but I see the world the same way I saw it before. My friends help me, and my boyfriend is there, too. I go to the hospital every month; they give me [HIV] medication, and other medication because I am pregnant. They say that if I take all the medicine, the baby has a big chance of not having HIV. When she grows up, I hope she will not do the same work I did. Bhekisisa, Johannesburg, South Africa When they told me that I was positive, I was not shocked. I knew my behaviour had been bad. I had many girlfriends. I was a playboy – you can see how handsome I am. But I was destroying my life. So I told myself it was time for me to change. I really wanted to live. I really love life. The same day I found out my HIV status, I went to my mother’s house and told her. She didn’t want to show me that she was sad, so she said, “You are positive? So what?” I realised she was trying to tell me I didn’t have to give up. So I started to think positively, to take medication, and pick up my life. I’ve got two children in my current relationship, and I’m living with three others. Their mothers just said, “You know what? Take care of these children.” I’m so happy that they are part of my life. My father didn’t take care of me because of his many wives. I realise I used to be like him. Then I saw that it was important to change my life, to think positively, to rectify all the mistakes I had made. I always want to be happy, because it motivates me and makes me strong. When I become sad, I can feel it in my body – it’s not good for me. • This is an edited extract from Through Positive Eyes, edited by Gideon Mendel and David Gere, published on 1 December (Aperture, £22), throughpositiveeyes.org. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. An exhibition of photographs and videos from the project is at the Fowler Museum at UCLA until 16 February 2020. Interviewees participated in workshops led by Crispin Hughes. If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).