Bristol made the rugby world sit up and take notice last week when they announced the marquee signing of Semi Radradra. The thrilling Fiji three-quarter will join next season from Bordeaux‑Bègles on a three‑year contract and was in demand from clubs in both hemispheres and both codes. Instead he opted for the Bears after the club’s director of rugby, Pat Lam, convinced him that life there would involve far more than just playing rugby. “It was a huge statement by the club,” says Harry Thacker, Bristol’s hooker. “Credit to everyone involved for signing one of the best players in the world and something special is happening here. We have been attracting some big crowds at Ashton Gate and that is down not just to the way we are playing but to the work we have done in the community. “We put in 600 hours a year going around the area and giving back to the community. Every player buys into it and I have learned a number of life lessons in my time here, not just improved as a player. Bristol may not have been successful recently but this is a huge rugby area with a proud past and we want to recapture those days.” When Thacker joined Bristol from Leicester last year, he left one of the most successful clubs in Europe in the professional era for one that had spent most of that time on the margins, relegated from the Premiership four times. Yet before this weekend’s Premiership games the Bears were looking down on the rest of the table while the Tigers were off the bottom of the table only because Saracens had been docked 35 points for breaching salary cap regulations. “It is a good feeling and we want to stay there,” says Thacker, whose seven league tries last season included three against his former club. “I knew when I joined that Bristol was an ambitious club. Even though we had just been promoted last season, the goal was to finish top-six, not survival. We are focused on getting into the play-offs and winning silverware.” On Sunday Bristol entertain London Irish, the club they exchanged divisions with last season, having gone to the top of the table in the last round with victory at Exeter after they had been 17-0 down at the interval. Their away form cost them a top-six finish last season when they lost their first seven matches on the road, but they have now won four of their past six. “Exeter was a huge result for us,” says Thacker. “It showed what this team is capable of. Last season we struggled away for the first three‑quarters of it and to come back from such a long way down against a club that has become a regular in the play-off final said a lot about us. It was a character-building day when we learned a number of lessons. “There will be expectation on us against London Irish because we are at home against a side that has just come up but there will not be a trace of complacency in our dressing room. You only have to look at their side to appreciate that we will only win if we deserve to. “We want to go into a new month on the top of the table with our sights set on a top-four finish.” That ambition has been assisted by the points taken off Saracens, regulars in the play-offs this decade. The champions’ priority is survival rather than another afternoon at Twickenham and this season is, in effect, about finishing in the top five for the rest of the Premiership clubs. Such is the squad that Lam has developed at Bristol, though, a mixture of homegrown players and experienced internationals such as Charles Piutau and Nathan Hughes, that the European Challenge Cup is being taken seriously with thumping victories over Zebre and Brive in the opening rounds. “It would be easy to switch off in Europe and focus on the Premiership but the ambition is to win silverware and we are going for it in the Challenge Cup while also aiming for a top-four finish,” says Thacker. “The points taken off Saracens do not change anything for us. It was not easy to leave Leicester but I am relishing my time at a club where there is an emphasis on playing what is in front of you. It is a great place to be.”