I found out about Greta’s Instagram post  on 20 August 2018, when a photo was reposted on Facebook. She was wearing her leopard-print leggings, and had that widely quoted flyer (which is in the picture above, under a stone), on why she was skipping school: “Of course, we children don’t do as you tell us to do. We do as you do. And since you adults are shitting on my future, I am doing the same, too.” The text had an angry voice, accusing and moralistic, not at all apologetic. I liked that attitude. I had been saying similar things to my friends that summer, ranting about why nobody was doing anything. There was hypocrisy and a lack of honesty on all levels – from the people around me, to trusted institutions and politics. I felt my friends were awkward, embarrassed. So it was great to see someone speaking in this direct way. I had been experiencing stress and guilt for not doing anything. I wanted to go to the parliament building, to see what was happening with Greta, and support her way of speaking out. Greta’s protest began that day, 20 August 2018. I was there every day from 21 August – when we were joined by a 12-year-old schoolboy, Rolf Sauer – and stayed until the penultimate day, three weeks later. I talked to people on the street about the issues we wanted to address.At the time I was a supply teacher, but I did not get into trouble from work. Neither did I get paid, of course. Greta was not as outspoken as I had assumed from the flyer. We talked mostly about specific issues regarding the climate crisis. I was impressed: she welcomed people and encouraged them to join in. Her rhetoric was great, as we have seen since. During those first days, a middle-aged man in a suit stopped and looked at us. I was preparing to make a snide comment, because usually the people who looked like him had been rude to us. But he said he could not understand why there had not been more protests like this. We had a long conversation. When he gave me his card, it turned out he was a senior government official. But other passersby were aggressive and accused Greta of being stupid, shouting, “Go back to school!” After our protest ended, I tried not to think about the climate crisis. But then I started to see it everywhere It was a new thing for me, being seen by so many people. I had no history of activism. The number of people varied. At times it was just me and Greta, but every day more people joined in for a while. I felt like giving up on several occasions. It was uncomfortable; sometimes it was cold and raining, and I felt my friends would think I was ridiculous. After three weeks of protesting, and following the election on 9 September, Greta reduced the protest to Fridays only. It was a long-term project and not everyone can go on strike every day. I did not follow Greta for a while after our protest ended. Actually, I tried not to think about the climate crisis. But then I started to see it everywhere in the papers. Even my mother started to talk about it. I moved from Stockholm to Gothenburg in October 2018, to study fine art. Most recently, I have been involved in direct action against a new natural gas infrastructure. In September this year we blocked trucks from accessing the entrance to the harbour. The company, Swedegas, had invested a lot of money and got building permission. But last month the government stopped it. It showed again that activism matters. • As told to David Crouch If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).