The co-author of the Oakervee review into HS2 has demanded his name is removed from the report which calls for the high-speed line to be built in full. A leaked draft of the report shows that chairman Douglas Oakervee has endorsed the scheme, despite revising down the expected economic benefits. But his deputy and co-author Lord Berkeley, a prominent critic of HS2, said he would refuse to sign off the conclusions and was considering writing his own report. Oakervee, a former HS2 chairman was commissioned by the government in August to review the line’s costs, suggest savings and produce a “go or no-go” conclusion. His review now suggests running fewer trains an hour but says all sections of the line should be built, according to a draft seen by the Times. The economic benefit that the line is expected to generate is now in a range of £1.30 to £1-50 for every £1 spent, compared with previous claims of £2.30. The review found that building only the first phase, from London to Birmingham, would provide even less value for money, and said the full network should be built. But Oakervee said the pure economic case did not include the potential of HS2 to deliver new homes and jobs. However, Berkeley whose inclusion as deputy review chair was cited by ministers as demonstrating balance, said the draft still overestimated the benefit-cost ratio. He said the report excluded evidence that put the final budget at £103bn rather than the current £88bn. Until this summer, HS2 was expected to cost £56bn. The original budget was £34bn. Berkeley also claimed the sums were calculated on the costs and revenue of running 18 trains an hour in each direction, even though the report now suggested running 14 is more feasible. The draft was shown to Berkeley and members of the advisory panel at the Department for Transport last Thursday after the start of the purdah period before the general election, which prevents publication of the review. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, had initially promised to publish the review immediately, after a recent report admitted to delays of five to seven years. According to the department, Oakervee had yet to finalise the report, and no copy had been given to the DfT. It said any views ahead of its delivery to a new government were speculation. Berkeley said Oakervee was “still fiddling with it” and had agreed to remove his name. The Labour peer said he was considering the option of issuing a separate report. “From what I saw, I said take my name off it. I’ve written to Oakervee saying I won’t sign it. I think it has been written by officials with his supervision,” Berkeley said. The DfT said Oakervee had written the entire report. Berkeley said that the report “could easily change in the next few weeks”, and added: “The shit will hit the fan at some stage and ministers will have to make a decision.” Boris Johnson, told reporters on Friday he had yet to see the report and that HS2’s future would be decided after the election. According to the report of the leaked draft, Oakervee has ruled out some proposals, including making the new Old Oak Common station the London terminus rather than Euston. It also says axing the eastern branch of the second phase, linking Birmingham and Leeds, should be ruled out and suggests making provision for a possible link with a new east-west line between Oxford and Cambridge. The report said HS2’s impact would last for a century rather than decades, adding: “The evidence is clear that the full network is needed to realise the highest value for money economic return on the investment of HS2. Phase one as a standalone scheme does not represent value for money.” HS2 has spent about £9bn to date, about £2bn-3bn of which could be recovered in land and property. The report puts the direct costs of cancellation at £2.5bn-3.6bn, according to DfT estimates.