This isn’t as tricky as it looks. Ideally your chocolate swiss roll won’t crack, but if it does, the ganache will cover up any flaws. Decorate the top however you like, to create your own autumnal scene. Serves: 8 For the cake: 5 medium eggs125g caster sugar1 tsp vanilla bean paste80g plain flour35g cocoa powder10g boiling water For the filling:About 400g ice cream (any flavour you like)Strawberry jam For the ganache: 200g dark chocolate200g double cream To decorate: Crumbled walnuts, fresh fruit (blueberries, blackberries and raspberries work well), biscuits and fondant leaf cutouts (both optional) Spoon softened ice cream into a rough log shape (about 18-20cm long) on greaseproof paper. Lift the sides over, then twist the ends together. Freeze until solid. Meanwhile, prepare decorations for the top of the roll. I made a biscuit squirrel and some painted fondant autumn leaves. Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas mark 7. Grease and line a 10 x 15in swiss roll tin (try to have the greaseproof paper overhanging, so it’s easy to lift out). Make the cake: whisk together the eggs and sugar on high speed for seven minutes. Slow the mixer and add the vanilla just before the end. Sieve in the flour and cocoa. Gently fold to combine. Add the water and fold in again. Spoon into the prepared tin, and smooth. Bake for 8-13 minutes, or until slightly springy on top. When baked, lift from the tin (using the greaseproof paper handles to help) and place on a wire rack. Leave for five minutes, then roll up loosely while still warm and leave to cool in this rolled-up shape. Leave the baking paper on. Then gently unroll and spread with strawberry jam. Remove the ice-cream roll from the freezer, peel off the greaseproof paper, and place the ice cream on the end of the cake roll. Roll up the cake to fully encase the ice cream, peeling off the baking paper as you go along. Place back in the freezer while you make the ganache topping. Finely chop the chocolate and place in a heatproof glass bowl. Pour the cream into a small pan. Heat on low, until just starting to bubble (don’t boil!). Pour to cover the chocolate. Leave for two minutes, then stir until all the chocolate has melted. Leave to cool until spreadable, but not too thick. Take the roll out of the freezer, then spread the ganache all over it. Once set, use a sharp knife to neaten up the ends of the roll. Decorate the top as desired. Serve straight away, or tightly wrap in clingfilm and return to the freezer.