Arijanet Muric The Manchester City goalkeeper repelled effort by clubmate Sterling but had no chance with goals. 7 Mergim Vojvoda Showed some neat touches on the ball and gave Kosovo a presence in both halves. 6 Amir Rrahmani The no-nonsense captain squandered a free header moments after glancing Berisha’s effort wide. 6 Fidan Aliti Went missing for opener and his sliced clearance fell to Kane for England’s second. 5 Benjamin Kololli His rampaging runs provided a threat down the left . Booked for manhandling Sterling. 7 Bersant Celina The Swansea winger operated centrally and provided a touch of class. Spurned inviting chance. 7 Ibrahim Dresevic Went to sleep as Winks waltzed through on goal unchallenged. Late slip allowed Mount to strike. 4 Valon Berisha Seemed to hold the upper hand against a youthful and, at times, green England midfield. 7 Florent Hadergjonaj The high-energy Huddersfield defender made a dent on the right wing but faded. 6 Atdhe Nuhiu Burly Sheffield Wednesday striker relished leading the line in the absence of Vedat Muriqi. 6 Milot Rashica Was lively down the left, testing Pope from distance and got the better of Alexander-Arnold. 7 Subs Besar Halimi (for Berisha 65) 7, Edon Zhegrova (for Hadergjonaj 73) 6, Elba Rashani (for Nuhiu 82) 6 Nick Pope Largely untroubled on full England debut but among those guilty of getting sloppy. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold An off night. Occasionally exposed and failed to torment opposition defence going forward. 5 Harry Maguire Did not do a lot wrong but at the heart of a defence that struggled to convince. 6 Tyrone Mings Not at his imposing best. Had hands full with Nuhiu, who ensured a heavyweight battle. 5 Ben Chilwell Another fine performance. His gallivanting down the left was a catalyst for England throughout. 7 Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain Slipped in Winks for opener. Has been involved in six goals in past seven games. 6 Declan Rice Another who grew into the game. Made a crucial block to deny Rashica late on. 6 Harry Winks Failed to assert himself until bursting into the box and coolly slotting home his first England goal. 6 Raheem Sterling A low-key return. Wonderfully weighted pass supplied Rashford for England’s third. 6 Harry Kane Quiet until rattling a post on the hour mark. Slammed home second to maintain scoring streak. 7 Callum Hudson-Odoi The teenager struggled on his second start. Too often his final pass disappointed. 5 Subs Marcus Rashford (for Hudson-Odoi 59) 7, Mason Mount (for Oxlade-Chamberlain 72) 6, Fikayo Tomori (for Alexander-Arnold 84) 6