When the conservation trust Project Janszoon released a dozen kākā in Abel Tasman national park at the top of New Zealand’s South Island, the large, brassy forest parrots settled in quickly, despite never before having lived in the wild. At 3am the next morning they began their customary ear-splitting calls. Hikers sleeping in a hut in Bark Bay declined an offer of earplugs from release team members who stayed overnight; snorers, they said, bothered them more than the birds. That New Zealanders could once again live alongside these rare native creatures – and that the birds could be multitudinous enough to bother them with their chatty racket – is still something of a novelty. In urban spaces, on the fringes of cities, and even in national parks, the country has been bereft of its native birds for so long that they are beginning to feel like part of history. Half of them have gone extinct since humans arrived on New Zealand’s shores. Predators, chiefly stoats, possums, and rats, kill more than 68,000 native birds every day. Project Janszoon has been working to restore the ecology of the park and – six years, millions of dollars, 30,000 dead predators, 50,000 planted trees, and 284 released birds later – the Abel Tasman’s dawn chorus is returning. Now they are wondering if the same thing could be achieved in the rest of the country. The project is aligned with Predator Free 2050, an ambitious national programme launched in 2016 that aims to clear stoats, rats and possums from 26m hectares (64m acres) of mainland, along with all offshore islands, by 2050. It brings together central and local government, Māori iwi, philanthropists, non-governmental organisations, businesses, science and research organisations, communities, landowners and individuals. At its core, the plan is to track, trap, and kill the most damaging introduced predators – stoats, rats, and possums – and put the birds back in their place. It is an audacious goal. The plan of attack involves not only new ways to kill predators, but also ways to monitor how many are left. But much of the technology required does not yet exist. “We acknowledge that with the tools we have today we’re not going to be able to achieve the goal,” says Michelle Crowell, southern threats manager for the Department of Conservation. “We need new tools.” The department has introduced a tools to market programme to build collaborations and strategy to develop big-scale projects. “Once we’ve got the tools we’re in a position to accelerate and rapidly roll [them] out across the country,” Crowell says. Detecting predators at low densities is crucial. As well as researching and developing improved toxins and baits such as long-life rat lures, the programme is investing in monitoring techniques such as Print Acquisition for Wildlife Surveillance (Paws) for areas where predators have been cleared. These hi-tech sensors, set to replace the old ink pad and card tunnels that predators run through, can scan the shape of a predator’s paw and identify it, saving rangers time and money in monitoring for reinvasion. The plan will also need local buy-in, but conservation success stories are already happening in many communities across the country. Forty-three out of 52 Wellington suburbs are actively involved in predator control. A Radio New Zealand host, Jesse Mulligan, talks regularly about his rat-trapping efforts. A two-day training course in trapping pests, started in May 2018, has a waiting list, and has now spread around the country. The Abel Tasman Birdsong Trust, which once struggled to find trapping volunteers, now has a long waiting list. “That’s come from the groundswell of excitement about seeing what is achievable, and also on the back of the whole Predator Free 2050 movement,” says Project Janszoon’s Robyn Janes. Nic Toki, threatened species ambassador for the Department of Conservation, says the government is “now running to catch up with the public”. That groundswell is because many New Zealanders identify strongly with wildlife and because pest-trapping is something upon which almost all can agree. “I go trapping with my builder and farmer mates and we’re not arguing over freshwater and climate change,” says Toki. “Those wicked problems are really hard for a community to coalesce around, because everyone has their vested interests, and they dig in according to their values. “But it makes you feel good in the face of that to say: ‘I killed a possum today, I took out two rats, I killed some weasels and I can breathe a bit easier knowing my native wildlife has a chance to restore itself.’” A report in May predicted that New Zealand could be pest-free in 30 years, but that will depend partly on people changing their behaviour. Knowledge, and caring about the environment, don’t necessarily translate into behavioural change. The BioHeritage Challenge report, the result of two years of research by a bioethics panel, found that achieving a predator-free New Zealand would be as much about people as technology. It said that conflicts, disagreements and poor planning could hamper efforts, and failure to prepare adequately could result in lost conservation opportunities or preventable disasters. “Biodiversity can mean different things to different people or groups,” says the report’s author James Russell, a University of Auckland associate professor. “Different people or groups can then be at odds about how to maintain biodiversity.” He says not all New Zealanders want to remove an introduced species, even when that species has negative effects on the environment; deer are one example. He also says the goal cannot be achieved without collective, national action. “To obtain the backing of New Zealanders, there needs to be widespread social acceptance of predator control plans, including which methods are used,” says Russell.