Back-to-back defeats to start their tour of the southern hemisphere means there is a certain sense of adversity surrounding Great Britain at present: but this is nothing new for Alex Walmsley. Having targeted four wins from four against Tonga, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea, two consecutive losses so far is certainly not ideal, but for Walmsley, just being on the trip alone is an achievement given what he has been through in his career. Walmsley has taken the unconventional route to the top, going from local playing fields to Great Britain international in just a handful of years, having played amateur rugby until the age of 22. But even after earning his big break with St Helens, Walmsley has had numerous hurdles to overcome to reach this point: including a serious neck injury last year which put his entire career in jeopardy. “Nobody had done that injury in professional sport and played again,” Walmsley says in the run-up to Saturday’s meeting with the Kiwis in Christchurch (7am GMT). “The actual neck injury I’d sustained was three-levelled. I was questioning whether I was right to come back, and it was a question nobody could answer for a long time. There were so many unknowns. I had so many scans and the doctors told me I wasn’t ready to play, and when I went for another last December, I started to think if it wasn’t this time, when was it going to be?” Eventually, after being told repeatedly he would be unable to return to playing, Walmsley got the all-clear. But even then, after an injury that could have easily put his health – as well as his career – at risk, there were serious doubts lingering in the forward’s mind: “Was it worth risking it all … my quality of life, being able to be a normal dad? “Did I want to risk everything to play a game I love? It was something I had to decide, but I felt I wasn’t done. There’s a point when you know you’re done, but I wasn’t.” Being cleared physically was not the end of Walmsley’s battle, either: there were now mental demons to overcome. “I was terrified going into games at first,” he admits. “Before the first game, I just remember thinking that I want to be sat in the changing rooms in two hours’ time. I actually spoke to a psychologist for a couple of months leading up to playing again – and even for a few weeks afterwards. “We’d had a weekly chat for an hour, with 58 minutes chatting about anything and everything; kids, football, life, and only two minutes about my neck, because I didn’t want to embrace it that much. But knowing I got those two minutes each week was comforting. It’s amazing what your mind can do; you can create a mountain out of nothing. That helped. It’s still in the back of my mind and always will be, but ultimately it’s becoming less and less at the forefront.” Walmsley’s story does have a happy ending, though. His form this year for St Helens was outstanding and he was instrumental in their run to the title. But a rollercoaster period in Walmsley’s life isn’t finished yet: now there is the challenge of righting the wrongs from the opening fortnight of the tour. “We’re sat here with two losses and the group are frustrated, but everyone remains positive,” he says. “We’re desperate to even the score with the Kiwis after last week and we know we’ve got the mettle to get it done. Stick with us. It doesn’t get much better than playing for England … apart from Great Britain. It’s amazing to follow so many legends and etch my name alongside some of the greats.”