These days, the distinctive green tower blocks in the centre of Pristina’s Dardania neighbourhood look out over a school, a library and a caged-off concrete football pitch. This used to be among the toughest parts of the Kosovan capital but those times are long gone. The silence bears no menace and is only broken from somewhere up one of the high-rise blocks, where a child is yelling for his mother. At the bottom, out on the playing surface, there is the occasional thud of boot on ball as two boys – one in full goalkeeping gear, the other responsible for giving him a workout – train with an intensity several notches up from usual Saturday kickabout fare. Two decades ago this was a wild, open square of grass and soil. So much has changed but at the top of the tallest building there is a reminder of what once passed. A grey, squat structure used to be a lookout post for British soldiers deployed to Pristina in 1999, when the Nato-led Kosovo Force, arrived to maintain peace and establish a secure environment in what was a deeply traumatised, war-ravaged state. As Atdhe Muharremi absorbs the scene, he is reminded of the days shortly after he and his family returned to Pristina that summer, having spent three months as refugees in Macedonia. They were the first to return to their own area, Taslixhe, on the other side of town and, in his words, it was “a new beginning … time to build a new life and new society again.” The city seemed empty, desolate, at first but as more people came back, the opportunities to enjoy old recreational pursuits grew. Muharremi would travel to Dardania and play football on that bumpy quadrant, sometimes in impromptu tournaments between different districts. Now and again they would be joined, just for a few minutes at a time, by a foreigner in fatigues; the simple act of knocking a ball around bred a kinship he has held close ever since. “The British KFOR guys would be on patrol and sometimes they’d get into the game, we’d pass some balls with them,” he says. “They’d stop, talk to us, join in. It was a way of gesturing, bonding through playing, we didn’t need the same language. “We saw them as our heroes. They were very nice, very loving with us. It was a certain mutual love without words, the energy we felt. We could sense this love.” It goes a long way towards explaining the extraordinary reception England and their supporters have received before Sunday’s Euro 2020 qualifier, which is now a dead rubber but will celebrate a relationship that could hardly be more profound. The UK’s role, among an international coalition, in ending the brutal struggle with Serbian forces has never been forgotten in Kosovo. It is why streets are named after Tony Blair and Robin Cook, who were instrumental in the policymaking that led to Nato forcing Belgrade’s withdrawal of troops from Kosovo, and why a handful of children were famously named Tonibler. And it is why Pristina’s centre is festooned with signs and posters offering thanks and goodwill to the 1,000 or so who have made the trip. Muharremi’s words are not offered lightly; as one figure with extensive experience of the countries’ pasts asked the Observer, how often can it genuinely be said that one nation holds love this deep for another? Nobody walking down Mother Teresa Boulevard, the city’s main pedestrian thoroughfare, can miss the “Welcome and respect” banners – complete with English and Kosovan flags and a poppy – that straddle it every 100 metres or so and there have been plenty of other little touches. A plan to offer English supporters free alcohol did not get off the ground but waiters around Pristina will be wearing specially commissioned shirts and a number of establishments have been rolling out the goodwill. Blodin Gagica is the owner of Gagi, a Mediterranean restaurant 500 metres from the national stadium. When his younger brother, who runs a photo studio, designed a banner reading “Welcome, brothers!” and displaying pictures of Raheem Sterling, Fabian Delph and Danny Rose, he asked for one of his own. It is now strung across the building’s balcony and the resulting footfall appears to have justified the idea. “We didn’t do it for attention though,” he says. “We just did it to say thank you for everything. We never, ever thought we’d have the chance to do it this way, before playing football against England. It gives me goose bumps. When we saw the British troops it was like ‘God is helping us’.” The UK provided 19,000 troops for KFOR, most of them operating in Pristina. Muharremi’s brother-in-law, Shpetim, inadvertently became famous when a photograph of his own footballing encounter with a soldier on the Dardania pitch resurfaced online before the sides played in Southampton two months ago. Hundreds of people have their own such story and the forces’ impact was indelible. But Kosovo would not be the quietly optimistic state it is now without the extraordinary application and resilience of its people; the football team, who played their first official friendly five and a half years ago but could still reach Euro 2020 through the play-offs, is the best advertisement of that and Muharremi is proud they are capable of giving England a run for their money. “I never thought we would be playing them within 20 years, and never thought we’d have such a strong team to show them,” he says. “We love our footballers; they have made us feel more Kosovan.” As he speaks, the children on the concrete pitch – who must be around 11, Muharremi’s age upon coming back in 1999 – continue to play, the outfielder frequently besting his friend with sweet, left-foot strikes. He is dressed head to toe in a Kosovo kit and explains he has spent time training with an academy in Croatia. His confidence speaks to the modern Kosovo, reflects the identity football is helping it to carve. The towers overhead bear witness to a game filled with hope yet again; this one just feels a world away from the times when, with those uniformed Britons for company, it was a relief simply to play. “When I was young I would dream of playing in a Kosovo jersey like that,” Muharremi says. Now, thanks in at least some part to British assistance, boys and girls in Kosovo do not need to imagine.