They call it Stormy Monday – except in the literature for the ATP Tour Finals that labelled day two “momentous” – and, mightily as he tried to live up to the billing, Stefanos Tsitsipas had to settle for merely excellent in beating Daniil Medvedev at the sixth attempt. Medvedev has been on an absolute tear this season – 29-4 since Wimbledon, reaching six straight Masters finals and winning two of them, Cincinnati and Shanghai. He also seemed to have Tsitsipas in his mesmeric grip with five wins on the spin – until Stormy Monday, when the Greek with the long hair and the longer arms outlasted him over an hour and 42 minutes to win 7-6 (5), 6-4. The eloquent Tsitsipas, the game’s aspiring poet, described his breakthrough as “one of the toughest and one of the most important victories of my career. I gave myself a big boost today, kept fighting. That last game [which he served out] was one of the toughest I have played. It wasn’t easy. Such a relief. It is not easy coming here knowing you have lost to him five times before. Much love here. It almost feels like I’m playing in Athens.” “Goose bumps,” he said when asked about the feeling of playing in the O2 Arena. “I used to watch it on TV, dreaming of playing on this court one day. Such an important event. Pure joy playing here. It’s been a long way. It means a lot to me. Things aren’t easy.” Of the 26 players to beat each of Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, the 21-year-old Tsitsipas is the youngest. For 20 minutes they traded measured groundstrokes – slice matching slice, drop shots chosen with care, forehands struck safely clear of the lines and sharp, steady serves. They eyed each other like hawks. This was calculated, precision tennis. Even in the pivotal seventh game, where many matches move into top gear, there was little indication of who might crack first. The spindly Russian took Tsitsipas to deuce at three-all but a lazy lob let his opponent hold with a routine smash and the moment was gone. Behind in the serving cycle, Medvedev was under a little more pressure, but one of the defining qualities evident in his emergence this season has been his temperament. He held to 15. Tsitsipas replied in kind. After eight close games, no serious cracks had appeared, Tsitsipas holding a paper-thin lead of 28 points to 27. There was a lot for two Finals debutants to live up to at the end of a long season and so the errors leaked slowly at both ends, through weariness, occasional forehands drifting long. The tempo went up a notch in the 11th game as both gambled to break the deadlock. Medvedev held, shakily, to force the tie-break. Tsitsipas kissed the line and forced Medvedev to net with a tightened-up forehand and the job was half-done. In the second set, it was Tsitsipas who had to play serving catch-up and he held through two deuce points as they went shot for shot to the seventh game, where Tsitsipas sensed the finishing line approaching and fashioned his second and third break points of the match. Medvedev needed his sixth ace to hold. Tsitsipas, looking stronger, levelled quickly. Medvedev’s hectic schedule looked to be catching up with him, even after an hour and a half, and although his serve remained potent enough to keep him in the fight, he surrendered it with a weary forehand to give Tsitsipas the chance to serve out the match. He had to fight for it as Medvedev sought line-winners with his deft close-quarter skills. A volley bought Tsitsipas match point, and a leaping smash – that still caught the edge of his opponents’s racket – completed the task. Who is the better? On the day, Tsitsipas. His delight in victory showed what it meant to him but they surely have a rivalry to cherish as it grows in moments such as this one: not quite momentous but not bad. When this tournament landed up in London a decade ago, four of the eight finalists were 23 or under: Juan Martín del Potro, Djokovic, Nadal and Andy Murray. For the first time since, there is a similarly youthful quartet contesting the end-of-season title: Tsitsipas (21), Medvedev (23), Alexander Zverev (22) and Matteo Berrettini (23). Their chances of emulating their predecessors may be odds-on but they will give it a good shake in the years to come.