Jofra Archer heads into the second Test against New Zealand on Thursday after the toughest week of his fledgling international career and with an already bright spotlight on him having increased as a result of reporting racial abuse. New Zealand Cricket was still investigating the incident on Tuesday after Archer tweeted that he had been the target of a racial slur from a spectator at the back end of England’s innings-and-65-run defeat in Mount Maunganui. David White, the NZC chief executive, met Archer after the tourists arrived in Hamilton to apologise and has promised the culprit a lifetime ban from attending cricket matches, as well as police involvement. Writing in his latest column for the Daily Mail, Archer insisted he had “moved on” from the incident but reiterated his disappointed that it had occurred in the first place. “I’m over it,” he said. “But I found the incident a real shame. When you come to another country, you half expect fans to have a go at your cricket. If someone wants to shout at me and tell me I’m bowling badly, that’s fine. I may not agree but it’s fine. It’s part of the experience of being a touring cricketer. To hear racism, though — that’s another matter. There is no time or place for it in any walk of life, let alone cricket.” For a young fast bowler also recovering from sending down a gruelling 42 overs for one wicket on a flat pitch, and told off by the England team management earlier in the week for riding on a TV camera operator’s Segway, this could be an overwhelming first overseas tour. But Archer’s head coach at Sussex, Jason Gillespie, though incensed by news of the abuse, expects the 24-year-old to cope with the additional attention when the two-match series resumes at Seddon Park. “You’d like to think in 2019 that sort of nonsense is well and truly in the past – it’s just absolute bullshit,” Gillespie said. “It’s really sad and I feel for Jofra. No player should have to put up with that. It is good to see New Zealand are acting swiftly. “Jofra wouldn’t have put it on Twitter if he wasn’t upset about it. Players don’t have to call a press conference to get their message out there, they can do it instantly. And it deserves to be called out for the crap that it is. “But I am confident he will be able to handle this, put it to one side and still deliver [in the Test this week]. Not that he should have to be doing that in the first place, of course.” Kane Williamson, the New Zealand captain, lives within walking distance of Bay Oval and intends to speak with Archer at training this week to similarly apologise “on behalf of Kiwis”. Williamson did not hear the abuse, which Archer said came while walking off the field when dismissed during England’s second innings, but told stuff.co.nz: “It’s a horrific thing. In a country and a setting where it is very much multicultural, it’s something we need to put to bed quickly and hope nothing like that ever happens again. It certainly won’t if there’s any influence we can have on it.” It has been a whirlwind first year for Archer in international cricket. A British passport holder born in Barbados, he qualified for England duty in March after serving three years of residency and went on to play a starring role during the World Cup win and the Ashes. At the Old Trafford Test two supporters were ejected for reportedly shouting “show us your passport” and Ashley Giles, the director of England cricket, has said the players will “rally round” Archer after this latest incident. When Giles was asked more broadly if, amid this meteoric rise, he was confident the team environment was successfully supporting a player from a different background, he replied: “Absolutely. And that’s an ongoing discussion for us. “Culturally, he is different. We all are, to a degree. The teammates have to respect each other. Teammates have to respect where Jofra is, and Jof has to respect where his teammates are. “The point about that rise, we’re expecting a hell of a lot from a young bloke – to run in and bowl 95mph every day. It’s not going to happen. We’ve got to help him through that.” Despite this tempering of expectations Joe Root, the Test captain, said after the defeat on Monday, before he learned about the off-field abuse, that Archer needed to “unleash a little bit more” and “make sure every spell counts”. Asked if the management was mindful that on-field effort might be a perception issue, given differences in background, Giles replied: “Absolutely. We’re all different. We all need different management styles – the carrot and stick will work differently. Jof is gold for us and we have got to look after him. But we have to be careful how much we think we’re going to get out of him every day. And on a pitch that placid, it was pretty hard work.” On the subject of Archer’s pace at Bay Oval, which only fleetingly went above 90mph amid the heavy workload, Gillespie explained how it was not always simply a case of effort producing desired outcome. “There would be days in my career where I didn’t think the ball was coming out well and the speed-gun said I was over 140kph [87mph], then others when I felt quick and it was 135kph. “And Jofra is more than just pace. He has a lot to offer. England will take time learning how best to utilise him, and there will be times when he has to be flexible too. He’s a great learner, who listens.”