After another early-morning deluge followed by sunshine, Testaccio, Rome, is warm and soupy. On my way to the market, I see a cluster of tiny, white toadstools at the base of a tree: mischievous white hats in a sea of stewed leaves. Much better are the mushrooms at the market, especially those from Il Velletrano. The family that runs fruit and vegetable stall no.32 comes from a town south-east of Rome called Velletri, hence the father, Giancarlo’s, nickname, Il Velletrano. Velletri is the city with the highest precipitation in Lazio, and is one of the rainiest cities in Italy; rain that comes down at a rate that seems impossible, then, like a needle being yanked from a record, stops as suddenly as it started. Velletri’s proximity to the sea and the cupping protection of the Alban hills means it is also a city with a mild climate. All these factors make the surrounding countryside good for mushrooming – if you know where to go on a quiet hunt, which Giancarlo does. This mild November has been good for galletti, also known by their proper name Cantharellus cibarius, or chanterelles. Orange-yellow with soft gills, they look like a wind-inverted umbrella or fluted funnel, the name “chanterelle” comes from the Greek kantharos, meaning “tankard” or “cup.” Galletti are often preserved under olive oil in Italy and then used to top and enhance other dishes, which is where the notion that they are il prezzemolo dei funghi (the parsley of mushrooms) comes from. Galletti are also, like me, a natural partner for pasta. One of my favourites dishes this year was eaten at Taverna Mari in Grottaferrata: a silky, slender fresh egg tagliolini with galletti (which cook into almost velvet softness) with a sauce of sweet datterini tomatoes flecked with chilli. I had a moment of mourning when I ate the last forkful. It has been quite a good year for the queen of local mushrooms, the russet-capped ovolo; and a pretty good one for the king, or “little pig”, the porcino. I have read many descriptions of porcini; the best, though, is that of Alan Davidson, in his Oxford Companion to Food, who compares the bulbous stem to a champagne cork and the colour of the cap to a glazed bun. At €30 a kilo, they are closer to champagne than sticky buns – although, having endured a few bumps and bruises, Giancarlo gives them to me for €28, so that’s €14 for 500g: expensive but not extortionate, and a real treat. Porcini are like a good steak, or any good ingredient, really: they are best cooked and served simply. While smaller, fresh porcini can be served raw (sliced paper-thin and dressed with olive oil and maybe some crystal shards of parmesan), it is heat that brings out the rich flavour and curious, almost custardy texture of the cap. I like them sliced and grilled (in a ridge or hot cast-iron pan) or trifolati, which means cuocere a fuoco vivace con olio, aglio e prezzemolo (cooked over a lively flame with oil, garlic and parsley). A paintbrush, sharp knife and damp cloth are the best way to clean porcini: one per person is enough, two per person a treat. If you can’t get porcini, field mushrooms are a good alternative. You want to keep as much of them as possible, so brush, scrape or pare away any grit or earth from the stalk, then use a damp cloth to wipe the stalk and cap. It was the chef Anna Tobias who paired her porcini with buttery mashed potato, a concept that nagged at me until I made it at home. The contrast of the soft, almost custardy-but firm porcini flesh glistening with butter beside a cloud of potato is untroubled pleasure, and another favourite thing this year. Again, I had a moment of sadness when I ate the last mouthful. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 2 2 or 3 porcini or 250g field mushrooms1 kg potatoes, peeled and halvedButterWhole milkSalt and pepper4 tbsp olive oil1-2 garlic cloves, peeled and gently crushed (split but still whole)1 heaped tsp chopped parsley Clean the mushrooms using a cloth or little knife to brush, scrape or pare away any grit or earth from the stalk, then use a damp cloth to wipe the stalk and cap. Cut the mushrooms into 2mm slices, cutting the cap and stem separately, if you prefer. Put the potatoes on to boil. Once tender, drain and mash with plenty of butter, whole milk, salt and pepper, and keep warm. In a large frying pan, warm the oil, a little butter and the garlic, until the garlic is fragrant. Add the mushroom, raise the flame and cook, stirring, for a few minutes until they absorb the fat, then reduce the flame and cook for eight to 10 minutes, or until they are cooked through: the time needed will depend on the mushrooms. In the last 30 seconds, add salt, pepper and parsley, raise the heat and stir. Serve the porcini immediately beside a spoonful of mash, with any pan juices poured over the top and a swirl of olive oil, if you wish.