An end could be imminent to the barrier that prevents entries being made for Kemboy, according to his trainer, Willie Mullins. The triple Grade One-winner, currently second-favourite for the Cheltenham Gold Cup, became deregistered when the Supreme Horse Racing Club was recently barred from owning racehorses, but efforts are being made to get him re-registered in the name of the Supreme members who paid for shares in him. The importance of getting this done quickly lies in the fact that noon on Wednesday brings the deadline for entries to the Savills Chase, Ireland’s equivalent of the King George and a very valuable contest which Kemboy won last year. If he can be re-registered by then, it will cost his owners just €700 to enter. If that deadline is missed, they might end up paying €17,500 to supplement him on 19 December; clearly those involved would like to avoid that, but even that would be better than missing the race altogether, given the horse’s earning potential. “I know there’s a lot of behind-the-scenes work going on,” Mullins said in a conference call with reporters on Monday, “and, from what I can gather, that could all be sorted in the next day or so. It’s very, very close to being resolved. We’re all trying to make that deadline and at the moment I would say that looks good.” But an official at Horse Racing Ireland said on Tuesday morning that there was no change yet in Kemboy’s situation, so this is evidently an issue that is going to be resolved, or not, at the very last minute. There are approximately 28 other horses which formerly carried the Supreme colours and are in the same situation. One or two of them would potentially have business in the Grade One races at Leopardstown over Christmas, including the classy hurdler Aramon, and so the same urgency applies in their cases. Each of these horses has a slightly different group of people involved, believing they have ownerships rights, and it may be no easy matter to establish who is entitled to what. As a result, it seems possible that they may all be re-registered at different times, depending on how easy it proves to hammer out ownership agreements. Good luck to those who are trying to sort this all out. Ante-post punters are also in my thoughts; who would have thought the great game could come up with a new potential stumbling block for us? Trainer form is the only way to explain some of the betting movements we’re seeing at Sedgefield. Both Warren Greatrex and Sue Smith have made slow starts to the new jumps season but have come good in the last few days and both could get on the scorecard again. Smith didn’t have a winner from April until Sunday but there had been signs of encouragement in the previous days and then both her runners won at Uttoxeter. “Jamais deux sans trois,” as the French say and let’s hope they’re right because Maxed Out King (1.20) is easy to like in the two-mile handicap chase, for which he has shortened to 3-1. You wouldn’t expect that from his form figures but he went well at a big price for a long way before fading three weeks ago. If his progress follows the general trajectory of Smith’s stable form, he’ll get involved in the argument. Two of his three wins came at this track and he’s 9lb below his latest winning mark now. Greatrex, who has had three winners from his last five runners, fields Another Emotion (1.50) in the staying handicap chase. This ex-pointer would have needed the run in a hotter contest at Chepstow last month, his chasing debut, and better can be expected with the cheekpieces refitted. The grey is 11-4. Down at Southwell, Heavenly Promise (1.30) is a warm order at even money as the mare, from the hot, hot Fergal O’Brien yard, seeks a fourth consecutive success. She’s gone up 20lb since her winning run began just 36 days ago but still looked well ahead of her rating at Ffos Las on Friday and can defy the penalty. Willett (3.00) is a more speculative option at 10-1. The Sarah Hollinshead stable hasn’t had a winner for half a year but there is quite a bit of potential for this three-year-old to outrun his rating as he takes on his elders in a handicap hurdle. The visor returns for the first time since he went over obstacles and Connor Brace is an interesting booking for a conditionals race. Sedgefield 12.50 Emma Lamb 1.20 Maxed Out King 1.50 Another Emotion (nb) 2.20 Induno 2.50 Tonto's Spirit 3.20 Strait RunSouthwell1.00 Battleofthesomme 1.30 Heavenly Promise (nap) 2.00 Nifty At Fifty 2.30 Terrierman 3.00 Willett 3.30 When You're ReadyWolverhampton3.50 Reassure 4.20 Waliyak 4.50 You Don't Own Me 5.20 Prompting 5.50 Thegreatestshowman 6.20 Htilominlo 6.50 Chinese Alphabet 7.20 Oh So Nice