The Labour party antisemitism dispute has spiralled out of control. With the departure of many non-Corbynite Jewish MPs, activists and members, and with the Jewish Labour Movement promising only to campaign for selected MPs, there are few restraints left on the total alienation of much of British Jewry and the Labour party from each other. The discourse of much of the Jewish leadership and the Jewish media has hardened to a simple message – a Labour victory would be a catastrophe, vote for whoever can beat Labour. The extraordinary intervention from the chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis, who said in the Times that the “poison” of antisemitism had “taken root” in the party, shows how high the stakes in this election have become. The risks of this approach are enormous. British Jews will still need to be able to work with a future Labour government – as they and other minorities must do with any government – and total opposition is going to make this very difficult. Further, the focus on Labour is also drawing attention away from rightwing antisemitism. Meanwhile, the venom turned on Jews who still vote Labour – even those who recognise there is an antisemitism problem in the party – is causing conflict within an already divided community. It would be a mistake to see this as simply stoking fears – there has to be something to stoke in the first place But whatever the risks, it would be a mistake to see the mainstream Jewish leadership and media as simply stoking fears – there has to be something to stoke in the first place. And by now, opinions have become ingrained among Britain’s Jews: surveys show that the majority see the Labour party as lax about antisemitism at best and institutionally antisemitic at worst. Most polls suggest that the Jewish Labour vote has collapsed to below 10%. There is still a significant minority of Jews who continue to support the party. This includes many who see antisemitism in Labour as a serious issue, but do not see it as outweighing the need for the kind of radical change that a Jeremy Corbyn-led government would offer. While Labour-supporting Jews should not be seen as “bad Jews”, neither does their existence invalidate the concerns of the majority. What remains unclear is how non-Labour supporting British Jews will react if the party comes to power. A recent poll for Jewish News suggested that 47% of British Jews would “seriously consider” leaving the country should Corbyn win. Inevitably, the Conservatives, including the party chairman, James Cleverly, gleefully highlighted this finding. On the Today programme on Tuesday, following the chief rabbi’s intervention, Rabbi Julia Neuberger also intimated that many Jews would consider leaving if Labour formed the next government. So how likely is it that Jews would leave in large numbers? The short answer is that the fear in the community is real – and some will inevitably choose to emigrate if Corbyn becomes prime minister. But the long answer is more complicated. In the past few decades there have been three main reasons for episodes of mass Jewish migration. In some cases, Jews have been actively expelled from a country – or faced the imposition of structural discrimination that gave them little choice but to flee. This occurred in many Middle Eastern countries following the 1948 establishment of the state of Israel, and last occurred in Europe in Poland in 1968. In other instances, Jews have emigrated out of a fear of violence against them, whether government-sponsored or not. In the past two decades more than 10% of the French Jewish community has emigrated after a string of terrorist attacks and other violent incidents. Jews have also emigrated as a response to economic collapse. Many of the one million-plus Jews who left the Soviet Union after 1990 were motivated by a desire for a more prosperous life. It’s worth pointing out that both the second and third of these drivers for leaving could actually emerge as a consequence of a Conservative victory, with a rise in far-right violence and economic collapse a real possibility in the wake of a no-deal or ultra-hard Brexit. But British Jews are far more likely to say they would consider leaving following a Labour victory– and it may be the fear of hostility and spontaneous violence that is foremost in their minds. At the same time, much of the concern doesn’t easily map on to any of those three scenarios. When Jews express fear of a Labour victory, they are most likely to point to issues such as the perceived failure to deal with antisemites in the party, Corbyn’s history of relationships with Islamists as part of his campaigning for Palestinian rights and, more generally, the sense that a Labour-led country’s hostility to Israel would make the UK an uncomfortable place for Jews. Some also worry about the possibility of kosher slaughter being banned, funding for Jewish communal security being cut, and an atmosphere of tolerance for certain kinds of antisemitic abuse. Yet there are no hard policy proposals that would suggest any of this is planned. The fear is ultimately a more generalised sense of “existential threat”. So what we are most likely to see following a Labour government coming to power would be an immediate shock, shared widely across the Jewish community (although a significant minority of Jews would be delighted, or merely ambivalent). This would probably be followed by an extended “wait and see” period. It would not take much, though, to tip stoicism over the edge into panic: an antisemitic attack, even one less severe than what we have seen in France and the US, could do this – even if a Labour government had no responsibility for it. Under a Labour government, there would likely be an uptick in emigration to Israel from its current level (which hovers around two per 1,000 per year), albeit one that falls short of mass emigration. Perhaps a Labour victory would force the hand of those who had planned to go to Israel at some point anyway. There may also be a rise in a phenomenon common in France: keeping business and assets in the UK while living for all or part of the year in Israel (as well as the reverse). Perhaps more elderly Jews may be tempted to retire to the sun in Israel than is currently the case. But none of this would constitute mass emigration. So if there is no mass exodus of Jews from the UK following a Labour victory, it is quite possible that the Jewish leadership will face accusations of crying wolf. Yet it would be a grave mistake to misinterpret what it means when Jews say they will consider leaving if Labour wins. Having one’s bags packed and ready to go – mentally, at least – is an age-old Jewish response to insecurity. Whether Jews end up leaving or not, this is how Jews articulate our collective fear. And whether it is proportionate or not, it needs to be taken seriously. This fear would not necessarily be assuaged if Labour does not win (as recent polls suggest is likely). And while Jews could face a backlash from those blaming the party’s loss on “false” claims of antisemitism, it may be that the public debate over this issue ends up drawing more Jewish attention to the growing problem of antisemitism and racism on the right. These are insecure times, for Jews and other minorities – and exploring the option of leaving is simply one way to manage that insecurity. • Keith Kahn-Harris is a sociologist. His books include Strange Hate: Antisemitism, Racism and the Limits of Diversity