Chris Silverwood, on his first tour as England’s head coach, will fly home after day two of the upcoming second Test in New Zealand following a family bereavement. The news is a further setback in a two-match series that the tourists can now only draw following the innings-defeat in Mount Maunganui and comes after the director of cricket, Ashley Giles, shared his hope that Silverwood can help unlock Joe Root’s runs. The captain’s average has dropped to a five-year low of 47.35 and after two failures during England’s defeat, this figure now sits below 40 as captain and has seen him tumble out of the top 10 in the world Test batting rankings. Giles has all but committed to Root leading England in the 2021-22 Ashes series – his only caveat being “none of us know what is around the corner” – and the hope is that the newly appointed Silverwood can take on most of the pre-match organisation and leave the batsman to focus solely on his own game. “The stats would say it, I guess,” Giles replied when asked whether captaincy has reduced a batsman once ranked No 1 in the world. “You can’t hide from that. But as I have said before, I think Joe is our captain to take us forward. “We’ve got to make sure his game is in the best shape and he has time to work on it away from the pressures of captaincy, so he can get back to averaging 50-plus. If he’s doing that we are going to win games of Test cricket.” Silverwood said he wants to “strip away the things [Root] doesn’t have to worry about” and “make sure that when it comes to practice he’s just one of the lads, he’s in there and he’s worried about his batting and that’s it”. This will be the case in the lead-up to the second Test in Hamilton, with the assistants Graham Thorpe and Paul Collingwood then due take on additional team duties in supporting Root off the field once Silverwood departs. Giles said: “I think Joe is still going to wear it. You do. You’re captain. You wear the pressures and worries and take it personally. But I feel the relationship [with Silverwood] is going very well – that’s the feedback I’m getting.” Among the few plus points for England during five punishing days at Bay Oval was the batting of Joe Denly even if, like Rory Burns and Ben Stokes, the No 3 made it past 50 without being able to turn hard work into anything like the kind of match-defining score that BJ Watling – 205 in 11 hours – was able to muster. Denly soaked up 323 balls across his two innings for scores of 74 and 35, looked solid at the crease and with a half-century in each of his past four Tests there are signs that the 33‑year‑old can crack this late tilt at international cricket. The right-hander says he has bought into the team’s new desire to bat long but has also outlined the challenge this presents: with first-class cricket having moved to the margins of summer in recent years he believes the pitches, allied with the Dukes ball, are not conducive to such an approach. “It becomes a habit, doesn’t it?” said Denly. “It’s all very well saying we need to go on and get these big scores. But if it is not something you’re used to doing then it’s not quite as easy as that. Hopefully we can help our young batters by producing some better wickets for them to go on and get those big scores. “Having played quite a lot of first‑class cricket, certainly the last few years it has been very tough as a top‑order batter. Going back to when I first started, the benchmark for a season would be 1,200-plus runs. Some players were scoring 1,500 or 1,600. You don’t see that any more. I think 1,000 runs is a pretty good season.” After 201 overs in the field England are waiting to see how their bowlers perform in training before deciding on any changes to the XI. But New Zealand are likely to require one switch after Trent Boult sustained a side strain.