The Sydney Sixers face an anxious wait to learn the extent of Ellyse Perry’s shoulder injury, suffered in her WBBL side’s dramatic last-ball loss to the Melbourne Renegades at Drummoyne Oval. Courtney Webb, who belted a six off the final delivery with five runs required for an epic victory, launched Sixer Erin Burns high and straight in the 12th over. Perry in the deep leapt high for an attempted miraculous catch and landed awkwardly on her right shoulder. In immediate pain and clutching her shoulder, Perry did not leave the field, but shifted from the deep to inside the circle where she fielded and threw left-handed for the rest of the match. With the WBBL final three weeks away, any severe AC joint damage might rule Perry out for the remainder of the campaign. But Sixers media manager Dave Lyall said the club would wait until Monday morning before deciding whether scans were necessary. “She’s had it looked at by the doctor and the physio and they’ll have another look in the [Monday] morning,” Lyall said. “It’s iced now. She didn’t come off the field at all and was signing autographs after the match but we won’t know more until the morning.” Teammate Burns is backing Perry – who has smoked 469 runs at an average of 93.80 in the WBBL – to be fit and ready for Wednesday’s clash with the Hobart Hurricanes at North Sydney Oval. “Obviously, it looks like she’s got a bit of an AC injury, but you know if there’s anyone who can come back from that kind of stuff, it’s Ellyse,” Burns said. “She soldiered on pretty well there, even though she was running one arm down. All the medical staff will be around her and I’m sure she’ll be be back on the park in no time.” With Sunday’s last-ball win, their third-straight victory, the surging Renegades move to fourth spot on the WBBL ladder, one place behind the Sixers. They needed 15 off the last over bowled by Marizanne Kapp to reel in the Sixers’ 139-4. With five needed off the final ball, No 6 batter Webb smashed the ball over long on for a maximum. “There wasn’t too much going through my mind – just swing for the fences,” said Webb.