It is the pinnacle of coaching in New Zealand, and arguably behind only the All Black captain and Prime Minister, in terms of public profile in the country. So why do so many of New Zealand’s top rugby people not want to coach the All Blacks? In a word, trust. The two most recent coaches, Graham Henry and Steve Hansen, presided over the last four World Cup cycles. It is an indicator as to how much damage that cabal’s almost total domination of the All Black coaching set-up has done, that the country’s diaspora of expatriate coaches do not seem to trust New Zealand Rugby enough now to risk alienating their current employers by having a crack at the job. Given most were effectively forced into exile offshore, having been offered few clear indicators around their own future advancement because positions on the All Black staff were sealed off, can they be blamed? By revealing it was contacting 26 potential applicants to make them aware the job was being advertised, New Zealand Rugby appeared to want to create a perception of being thorough, and completely open, in its process. Quite why, only the powerbrokers really know. It is not information they normally communicate to the public before a recruitment, and it’s not like the contacted 26 wouldn’t have already known that the job was up for grabs. If anything, the disclosure was probably a tacit admission that its most recent processes had been more an exercise in box ticking, than in being genuinely contestable. The All Blacks are still going to end up with a good coach, albeit one who is already on their payroll – most likely the three-time Super Rugby-winning Crusaders boss, Scott Robertson. Yet, it does seem the “closed shop” of the past 16 years has proved a big turnoff for many who have coached successfully in New Zealand previously, and since upskilled overseas. Jamie Joseph turning down the opportunity to apply, in order to stay in Japan, is ominous. The public was keen on Joseph and his much sought-after sidekick Tony Brown, so the fact the lure of coaching the All Blacks wasn’t enough to trump the financial advantages of Tokyo was not a good look. Nor was Dave Rennie not going near the role, because he already had the Wallabies in the bag. Such motivations for not applying would have been unthinkable 16 years ago, and probably explain why New Zealand Rugby sought to protect its reputation by taking the unusual step of issuing congratulatory press statements as soon as each of those appointments were announced. Even with Joseph and Rennie out of the equation, there is still an array of offshore talent not mentioned in media dispatches as contenders, but all of whom are quality coaches. Many have records running teams arguably better than Hansen had when he joined the All Black staff in 2004, yet they all seem to have looked the other way. In England, the former Hurricanes-title-winner Chris Boyd is doing great things at Northampton, while Pat Lam is building up Bristol, after previously taking the Irish minnows Connacht to their maiden Pro 12 title. Both are experienced men who have coached all over the world. In Wales, the former Fiji coach Wayne Pivac won a Pro 12 title with the Scarlets but did not wait for the All Black application invite email, instead grabbing Warren Gatland’s old job. Then, of course, there is Gatland himself, who ostensibly turned down the opportunity to apply because he is committed to the British and Irish Lions. Meanwhile, in Japan, Robbie Deans is a five-time Super Rugby winner, who has won the Japanese Top League title three times and should have had the All Black job in 2007. There is also Joe Schmidt, who has been courted by at least one of the remaining contenders and might come into calculations next time, if his personal circumstances allow a return to full-time coaching. Only one person can be All Black coach, but the quality of his assistants will be judged too, so the seeming lack of enthusiasm is a less than positive legacy of the last two All Black regimes. This is especially so when considering in 2003, when Henry was first appointed All Black coach, the interest was such that he was one of 50 who applied. The appointment of a new chief executive and a new coach offered post-World Cup New Zealand Rugby the chance of a fresh start. If the muted response to the current vacant position is anything to go by, the early pointers are not as promising as they might have been.