Everyone is wondering whether, after refusing to take part in Channel 4’s leaders’ debate, Boris Johnson is now going to avoid being scrutinised by Andrew Neil. I have some experience on this front: last week I was informed that the prime minister would not be turning up to a local hustings in his constituency of Uxbridge and South Ruislip, where I am running as the Labour candidate. In stark contrast to former Tory prime ministers Theresa May and David Cameron, who attended local hustings in 2017 and 2015, Johnson would “not be available”, while the local Conservative Association was “not minded to send a substitute”, according to an email I received from the reverend of St Andrew’s church. That particular event has now been cancelled. Another one is scheduled for 5 December, but the prime minister has told organisers he won’t be turning up for that either. He is denying his constituents the occasion to question, critique and evaluate their candidates side by side. On the one hand, Johnson’s arrogant absence is fitting: he has never been there for the people of Uxbridge and South Ruislip. When the critical children’s ward at Hillingdon hospital was forced to close because the “building was falling apart”, he had nothing to offer. As locals demanded the right to breathe clean air through a categorical commitment to stop Heathrow expansion, he flew off to Afghanistan and avoided the parliamentary vote on the issue. When we begged that he address the cuts to youth services that have starved young people of the social support they need, leaving them vulnerable to violence – as shown by tragic stabbing after stabbing in our constituency – he offered little but condolences. Johnson was parachuted into Uxbridge. This area I grew up in and studied in, and where I live and work today, was a mere stepping-stone to power for him. Some of us knew this at the time of his arrival, but the reality of it has dawned upon many more since. On more than one occasion residents have told us they had hoped Boris Johnson would leave for a “safer” Conservative seat, as rumoured earlier in the election campaign. That many people in the constituency want Johnson out is no surprise to those of us who have seen our local services dwindle and decay. Crippling cuts have driven dozens of our schools into crisis, such as Ruislip High School, which has been deprived of £500 per pupil. To make up for the funding gap, some of our schools have been forced to demand that parents pay for students’ mandatory trips; there have been cases of teachers paying for students out of their own pockets. That said, our community is no exception, it’s typical of life in Tory Britain. On paper, turning round a 5,000-vote majority for the sitting prime minister is not the easiest of challenges to overcome. But the tide of opinion is turning against Johnson, who has regarded his constituents as a hindrance, and treated them with contempt. We’ve seen evidence of an anti-Johnson tactical vote, which is coupled with the mobilisation of students and young people like never before – whether they’ve been registered as voters, signed-up as phone-bankers or recruited as canvassers. A rapid demographic change in Uxbridge and South Ruislip must also be factored in – we’re younger, more working class and there’s more of us from minority communities. I truly believe we are on the brink of a historic victory. Hustings are an important part of the local democratic process. Boris Johnson’s failure to attend and listen to residents, absorb their concerns and answer their questions is symptomatic of his disdain for ordinary people. That’s why I’m challenging him to a head-to-head debate at a time and place of his choosing – all he has to do is show up and face his reckoning. The prime minister can carry on running scared from scrutiny, but he can’t run from the fate that awaits him on 13 December – which just might be the day of an abrupt end to his political career. • Ali Milani is the Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for Uxbridge and South Ruislip