Two fascinating fixtures bookend the Premier League action this weekend. On Sunday afternoon, the top two meet at Anfield in a game that will help shape the title race. And on Friday night, the bottom two meet at Carrow Road for a very different kind of six pointer. Norwich approach the game against Watford in terrible form. Since their shock victory over Manchester City in mid-September, they have played six matches, scored two goals and picked up just one point from an available 18. That victory over City is a real outlier in their season. In fact, it accounts for 43% of the points they have won in the campaign so far. The only consolation for Norwich is that Watford are on an even worse run, having failed to win any of their 11 league games so far this season. Their last two victories in the league came against Huddersfield and Fulham, two clubs now in the Championship. You have to go back to March for Watford’s last victory against a current Premier League club. The last time they went this long without a victory was in the 2006-07 season, when they finished bottom of the league a full 10 points from safety. Despite their winless run, Watford fans have some reasons to be encouraged as they make their way to Carrow Road. Those supporters gave out a collective groan when the club appointed Quique Sánchez Flores to replace Javi Gracia in September, but the Spaniard has brought some stability to the team. Aside from their 8-0 drubbing at the hands of the champions, Watford have shown fight during his second reign, drawing four of his seven league matches in charge. There are mitigating factors for their poor start. Captain and top scorer Troy Deeney has been absent through injury for much of the campaign, as has the club’s record signing, Ismaïla Sarr. With last season’s player of the year, Étienne Capoue, also missing, the returning manager hasn’t the best of luck, but he hopes to have all three available after the international break. Despite missing that important trio, Watford have not looked out of their depth. They have only conceded three goals in their last four league games and came within minutes of beating Tottenham at White Hart Lane last month. Having led the match for 80 minutes, they were very unfortunate not to pick up all three points. When Watford were 1-0 up, Jan Vertonghen brought down Gerard Deulofeu in the box, but the referee did not point to the spot. And then Dele Alli popped up with an equaliser in the 86th minute, even though Flores thought Harry Kane had fouled one of his defenders in the build-up. Failing to win any of your first 11 matches is abysmal by any standard, but other clubs have avoided relegation after similarly dire starts. In each of the last nine seasons, at least one club has stayed up having started the season without a win in their first six matches. Newcastle didn’t win any of first 10 matches last season but still finished 13th. The season before, Crystal Palace beat the drop after losing their first seven matches. After 11 matches, they had fewer points (four) than Watford do now (five), yet they recovered well once Roy Hodgson replaced Frank de Boer and finishing 11th in the table. Palace have a habit of starting slowly. They avoided relegation in the 2013-14 season after picking up just four points from their first 11 games. Hope is not lost just yet for Watford. They just have to follow the lead of Derby County. Back in the 2000-01 season, the Rams didn’t record a victory until their 14th game of the season, but they still managed to beat the drop by eight points. Bizarrely, Derby weren’t even bottom of the table after that run of 13 matches without a win. They didn’t even play that badly. They drew seven of those 13 games and somehow managed to score 16 goals – five more than fourth-placed Leicester City. It’s a funny old game and Watford will feel safer in the knowledge that strange things can happen. Watford fans should also cast their minds back to the example of Blackburn in the 1996-97 season. Like Watford, they didn’t win any of their first 11 games. But they turned things around in their 12th match of the season with a 3-0 win over Liverpool, who were second in the table at the time, behind Arsenal on goal difference. Strange things can happen in the Premier League. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter