Cleveland Browns defensive tackle Sheldon Richardson believes Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Mason Rudolph deserves to be punished for his role in a brawl that overshadowed last week’s game between the two teams. In Thursday’s win over the Steelers, Cleveland’s Myles Garrett ripped Rudolph’s helmet from the quarterback’s head. As the confrontation continued, Rudolph lunged at Garrett. Garrett reared back and, using Rudolph’s helmet, struck Rudolph’s unprotected head. Garrett was suspended indefinitely by the NFL for his actions, and he will have his appeal heard on Wednesday. As the Browns returned to practice on Monday without their best defensive player, Richardson said Rudolph should have been disciplined for grabbing Garrett’s face mask and scratching him. “Of course he was,” Richardson said when he was asked if Garrett had been defending himself. “If a guy is scratching at your face, what you going to do? The helmet is overboard, let’s get that clear. But defending yourself, I don’t blame him for defending [himself] at all.” Garrett was not the only player suspended for his actions during the game. Cleveland’s Larry Ogunjobi was banned one game for shoving Rudolph, while Steelers center Maurkice Pouncey was suspended for three games for kicking and punching Garrett. Richardson believes Rudolph, who is likely to be fined, should also be suspended. “If you’re going to suspend Myles indefinitely, I don’t know, a game or two. A game?” he said. “Make it sound like you just can’t be a quarterback and do as you please in this league. Have some type of consequences for your actions as well. I don’t blame Pouncey for protecting his quarterback. I’d go overboard for my guys, too. So nobody’s knocking him for that. That’s what football is.” Garrett’s coach, Freddie Kitchens refused to address whether he felt Rudolph deserved to be disciplined. “Everybody here saw the tape,” Kitchens said. “I am just here to support. I will support Myles. Our team will support Myles. I am not going to get into that. You saw the tape.” Kitchens was pressed about seemingly sending mixed messages: condemning Garrett’s behavior, but also blaming Rudolph. “I never said anything like that,” he said. “I did not insinuate anything. I was asked for a comment, and I was not making a comment on it. I just asked if you saw the tape, so form your own conclusion. I have my conclusion that I did not say. There is no excuse for that to happen on a football field. I know that, Myles knows that, and all of the players in the locker room know that.” Kitchens met with Garrett on Saturday, and plans to continue doing so. Garrett, the top overall pick in the 2017 draft, is not allowed to be at the team’s facility during his suspension. “Myles Garrett’s a good person,” Kitchens said. “We’re not going to pile on Myles. He had a bad lapse in judgment and that’s it. I’m still a Myles fan and I’m going to support him. ... Myles is part of our family.”