The poet Philip Larkin suggested that “sexual intercourse began in 1963”. But, for 26 million British television viewers, the breakthrough erotic moment came on 9 January 1976. That Friday night ITV screened the first part of Bouquet of Barbed Wire, written by Andrea Newman, who has died aged 81. In the opening scenes of what became a landmark TV show, known colloquially as “Bouquet”, a married London publisher, Peter Manson, has a sulky lunch with Prue, a young woman just back from honeymoon. From his fury at her revelation that she is carrying her husband’s child, and the lingering kisses they share as they part after the meal, the audience was led to believe that Peter was the woman’s former lover, who feels cuckolded by her marriage. But the shocking realisation that Prue, played by Susan Penhaligon, is Peter’s daughter exposed the daring darkness of the drama. Although incest was never depicted or specified, a scene in which Frank Finlay’s Peter stiffly watches, dark glasses blessedly blurring his precise expression, as his son-in-law rubs sun cream around Prue’s bikini-clad breasts, made clear that Newman had knowingly relocated Greek tragedy to the English upper classes. In others of the seven episodes, Peter seduces a secretary, who may reasonably be seen as a surrogate for the young woman he really desires; in another breach of family boundaries, Peter’s wife, Cassie (Sheila Allen), goes to bed with her son-in-law (James Aubrey). Clive James, reviewing the series in the Observer, joked that, “by the end, everyone had been to bed with everyone else, except the baby”. The presenter Roy Plomley, interviewing Newman on a 1980 episode of Desert Island Discs, accused the author of having a “sleazy” imagination, and sniffed that “guessing next week’s [sexual] permutations became a sort of national game”. On the recording, Newman audibly bridles at this comment, replying: “I think there is an emotional logic to it. I don’t see it how the critics have seen it at all.” And, apart from Prue spending quite a lot of time in bikinis or underwear, Bouquet is rarely visually salacious. What shocked at the time – and remains powerful on re-viewing – is the constant boiling atmosphere of suppressed, transgressive desire. The director Tony Wharmby’s bold decision to eschew the musical underscoring common in peak-time fiction – only a few notes are heard at the start and end of episodes – also gives the action the stark intensity of a stage drama. Finlay played Peter as an unstably dormant volcano of longing and guilt. The scripts contain allusions, through a metaphor involving ice-cream, to oral sex, and practices as exotic at the time as the avocado pear that the protagonist orders in a swanky restaurant. The controversy around the drama was also driven by its showing, with social precocity, women wanting and seeking sex. The name that the series made famous was a pseudonym, adopted by the writer when she published her first novel, A Share of the World, in 1964. Unusually, she then solidified her nom-de-plume by deed poll, and it was her stated wish that no attempt should be made by journalists, or indeed obituarists, to publish her birth names. This stipulation seems to relate to a deep sense of privacy, and a feeling that she truly found her identity only when becoming a writer, rather than any rejection of her family. Her 1969 novel A Bouquet of Barbed Wire (the indefinite article disappeared when she adapted the story for TV) is dedicated “to my parents with love”, and she told Plomley that her mother was an “amazing woman” whose contribution included typing up books and scripts from Newman’s longhand manuscripts. Her father was a reporter and photographer, her mother a secretary at the chemical company ICI, where the couple met. Their only child was born in Dover, Kent, but when the second world war broke out the family evacuated to Shropshire, while her father served in the RAF. They moved again, in peacetime, to Cheshire, where Andrea was precociously literary, starting a novel at the age of nine, and musical, winning a piano cup as a teenager. She studied English at London University and, while there, met an older man, to whom she was initially “very happily married”, but whom she later divorced. (She also preferred not to reveal what her briefly taken married name had been.) After 18 months as a civil servant, carrying out a process known as “coding”, which she said involved putting circles around numbers on responses to a government social survey, she taught at Tottenham high school for girls in north London. Her early novels were written, at the rate of 10 pages a day, during the eight weeks of the combined Easter and summer holidays. Despite this fluency, Newman lacked confidence. Even when A Share of the World (1964), set among 1960s students, was accepted by The Bodley Head, she rented, rather than bought, a typewriter, in case success was transient. In an early sign that she wrote in a screen-friendly way, both her debut novel and the second, Mirage (1965), were immediately optioned by film companies, although no movies resulted. Her fourth, Three into Two Won’t Go (1967), about a love triangle among London swingers, did reach cinemas, directed by Peter Hall, although with a screenplay by Edna O’Brien, as at that point Newman had no interest in scriptwriting. The proceeds from the film allowed her to leave teaching, but even then Newman lacked security, returning to the London campus to take an MA in English (special subject, the novelist Graham Greene) to improve her prospects if she had to get another job. Between novels, she also wrote short stories, and was asked to adapt one of them, The Night of the Stag, for The Frighteners (1972), an anthology of half-hour horror dramas made for London Weekend Television and directed by Wharmby. He then hired her to write two scripts for Helen: A Woman of Today, an LWT drama promoted as freshly feminist, although 10 of the 13 episodes were written by men. As a thank-you gift to Wharmby, Newman sent him a copy of A Bouquet of Barbed Wire, a novel now out of print. The series he saw there changed her standing and lifestyle for ever, and gave Finlay a career-defining role as Manson. The protagonist’s surname was provocative, as it was only a few years since the revelation of the crimes of the satanist American serial killer Charles Manson. It is likely that Newman knew what she was doing, as her writing was full of subtle allusions. The sequel, Another Bouquet, a novel and LWT seven-parter that followed in 1977, took Newman’s Manson household even closer to the House of Atreus. A later TV series, An Evil Streak (ITV, 1999), relocated the legend of Troilus and Cressida to contemporary academia, starring Trevor Eve, who would also play Manson in the 2010 BBC remake of Bouquet of Barbed Wire. Newman declined an offer to script that show. Diagnosed with breast cancer in 2004, she was also caring for her mother, who suffered from dementia before dying at the age of 97, and these two trials reduced her literary output in later years. Her subject matter of sexual intrigue inevitably encouraged speculation about a life that she liked to keep private. On his TV chatshow, Terry Wogan asked her, after cataloguing the liberated libidos of her female characters: “Are you like that?” Newman, after a perfectly timed pause, replied: “I have my moments.” She gave another interviewer the discreet precis: “I have been dumped. I have done the dumping. I guess it evens out.” In the TV industry, Newman is at least as significant as an influence as she was a practitioner. The now popular TV genre of glossy sex dramas – Doctor Foster, Deep Water, The Affair – seems unlikely to have existed if Bouquet had not. And at the time LWT commissioned Bouquet, while there were female writers working in British drama – Adele Rose, Fay Weldon, Jill Hyem, Elaine Morgan – the number was shamefully small, and none of them had yet been allowed sole authorship of a show on the scale (seven parts) and scheduling prominence of Newman’s (Carla Lane had been an equivalent pioneer in the sitcom genre). Newman’s Mackenzie (BBC One, 1980), a saga following three families through two decades, was, at 13 parts, the longest original British drama ever commissioned from a woman. Strong women TV writers who emerged in the 1980s - including Lynda La Plante and Paula Milne - walked the path Newman had cleared; La Plante, in particular, following the model of stories that co-existed as novels and mini-series. Newman lived with her illness for 15 years, but the cancer had recently become unresponsive to treatment. The only child of two only children, she left no family survivors, but, sparky and gregarious, had many devoted friends. A favoured relaxation was classical music, especially the Richards Strauss and Wagner, who were high on her Desert Island playlist. Her luxury, as told on the Radio 4 show, was an unlimited supply of Krug ’59 champagne. • Andrea Newman, novelist and screenwriter, born 7 February 1938; died 9 November 2019