I’ve always been passionate about the EU, so when the referendum was announced, I joined the official Stronger In campaign. I wanted to get out on the streets, talk to people, leaflet, run street stalls. I’d been on a few marches before, but never really put myself out there. I felt the referendum was fundamental, threatening freedom of movement and citizens’ rights. I was campaigning near my home in south-west London, which ended up a strongly remain area. But I was engaging with people of all views: anti-Europe voters were more passionate, as they were often outnumbered. Both camps had very different but equally interesting perspectives. On the night of 23 June, I signed up to be a counting agent at my local centre, overseeing it to ensure there was no wrongdoing, and to try to gauge which way the vote was going. Leave and Ukip had their people there, too; we knew many of them from campaigning. As the night went on, they got noisier. By 3am, it was clear leave had won. We were bitterly disappointed, upset, and knackered – I’d been up since 7am. After the vote, Stronger In disbanded, but several new groups rose from its ashes. I joined a remain forum. It was a depressing time: we just had to suck up the result. But being with other remainers kept your spirits up. By October 2016, article 50 had yet to be triggered, and we were still hoping it wouldn’t. Gina Miller had taken the government to court to ask that it legislate before invoking it; Theresa May was trying to ram it through without parliament’s approval. A small group of us turned up outside the High Court to show support for Miller and, let’s be honest, create a photo opportunity. It was early morning, and I was probably there for an hour at most, as I had to get to work. I couldn’t tell you who my fellow remain protesters were. The man on the left appeared out of nowhere: he was a black-taxi driver; he’s still wearing his headset. He unfurled his bit of paper and stood next to us for about 30 seconds. It was the perfect shot. Fair play to him: he was as passionate as us, but for the other side. This was before the shouting and aggression started between leavers and remainers: there wasn’t the huge divide there is now. As well as giving my frustrations a focus, my campaigning has had other upsides: I met my partner Miller won her case a few weeks later, on 3 November. It felt like a turning point – the first time we had some power. A few weeks later, in Richmond Park, Liberal Democrat Sarah Olney beat Zac Goldsmith, who had triggered a byelection by resigning from the Conservative party. We needed both these results; they were hugely cheering. As well as giving my frustrations about the referendum a focus, my campaigning has had other upsides: I’ve made lots of friends, and I’ve met my partner. We started to see each other at protests, including campaigning for the Richmond byelection, leafleting sessions and through the No 10 Vigil campaign group, which holds regular demonstrations outside Downing Street. My next focus is the general election: I’m planning to vote Lib Dem, as they have the clearest policy on Brexit, being the only remain party. And just like before, I’ll be out on the streets. • As told to Hannah Booth If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).