On War and Peace On a shelf near where I sit writing this, there are half a dozen different editions of the book, and I’ve been reading one or other of them for half my life. Despite the heaps of evidence that Tolstoy was in reality half crackers, you would swear from the pages of War and Peace that he was God’s stenographer. On Jeremy Corbyn I admire the way his principles are uninhibited by reason. I also like his beard, which reminds me of one of the beards I grew at various times in my life when I wished to prove I was still a student, even though the years had passed. Corbyn is a student at heart. I was part of the press corps that followed Michael Foot’s kamikaze 1983 general election campaign, and I recognise the look. Foot didn’t have the beard, but he had the same eyes, glittering with goodness. On meeting the Queen Having been instructed to start walking backwards the moment she changed the subject, I found the instruction awfully easy to carry out. The sovereign has a full range of facial effects available, and one of them is an icy blast comparable to the average winter temperature in McMurdo Sound. Also, she is the Queen, whereas you, never forget it, are Joe Shmuck. On epic poems There will still be epic poems, because every human life contains one. It comes out of nowhere and goes somewhere on its way to everywhere – which is nowhere all over again, but leaves a trail of memories. There won’t be many future poets who don’t dip their spoons into all that, even if nobody buys the book. On The Crown I never incurred the royal wrath. In The Crown, everybody does, including Churchill. She catches him lying to her, and she gives him a wigging. John Lithgow reacts as if the palace is caving in around his ears, which is surely an accurate registration of how the grand old man must have felt. Lesser prime ministers also get it in the neck. Macmillan, when she reminds him that he was not only first on the bandwagon in the Suez crisis, but also first off, looks as if he has swallowed a pond full of toads. He conveys this by barely flexing his nostrils, as if having reluctantly detected a bad odour emanating from himself. On the furriness of bears My niece, learning Russian at Melbourne University, spotted an error when I told her that the language is like being embraced by a bear in a fur coat. A bear, she pointed out, has a fur coat already. She was right: I should have said a bear in a brocade dressing gown. But I am delighted she has an eye for detail. On Donald Trump We are told, over and over, about how President Trump, once installed and inaugurated, will destroy the world. How do people know this? I can remember a time when people of good will were equally certain that the newly elected President Ford would destroy the world by accidentally falling against the nuclear button. Though he could be lethal on the golf course, it turned out he was quite safe doing the rounds of the White House, although neither I nor anyone I know – nor, I wager, you – can nowadays give a clear account of what he did while he was there; except, perhaps, for his pardoning of President Nixon. There were people who were enraged that Nixon got pardoned, but they were the same people who were enraged when he got elected. Their real enemy was democracy itself, which is bound, from time to time, to yield results you don’t like. On male violence Early in my life, I discovered that the mere thought of a woman being at the mercy of male violence put me in a panic. Possibly this had something to do with the fact that I was the only male in the house and just six years old, so how could I defend my mother if the bad men showed up? After I got a Ned Kelly cap pistol for Christmas I felt a bit better, but not a lot. On the new generation of TV makers Nothing makes me feel decrepit and obsolete quite as much as when friends of my children make television programmes. That used to be my business, but now it’s theirs. My elder daughter was at university with the brilliant Sally Phillips, who later became one of the all-star cast of Smack the Pony, a show I watched in awe of its precocious maturity and accomplishment. Just lately, she wrote and narrated a documentary about the possibility that we are on the verge of eliminating Down’s syndrome. One of her children has that condition, and radiates so much happiness and sanity that I was continually reminded of what a misery guts I have been at various times of my life. I’m surprised I’m not more of wet weekend now, when I can hear the clock ticking all night: but it would be churlish to complain, and anyway there is too much to do. On the magic of life … “My Japanese maple tree is now in its first flames. Last year I saw the transformation as a sign of the end. Now I prefer to see it as a portent of spring. Each glimpse of the tree reminds me of a beautiful Italian word my future wife taught me 50 years ago in Florence. The word was scorcio (say “score-cho”). It means a glimpse. From one of our coffee bars we could look down a narrow street and see the spire of the abbey-church of the Badia outlined against the sky. The spire was a revelation of elegance, as my tree is now. Looking back, you realise that glimpses are all you ever get. There is so little time.” 