It was written as a novel, but Mark Twain’s 1881 children’s classic depends on a theatrical conceit. Set in the dying days of the reign of Henry VIII, it imagines the meeting of the young Prince Edward and an impoverished commoner. Each is envious of the other’s life and, conveniently, they look alike. In the manner of everything from The Comedy of Errors to the sub-genre of Hollywood body-swap comedies, they switch places and, in so doing, upturn the social order. While Edward has his eyes opened to the injustices of the Tudor legal system, his doppelganger Tom ushers an era of compassion into the royal household. On the stage, where actors assume characters simply by donning their clothes, this levelling idea has extra potency. All it takes for a prince to be taken for a guttersnipe is for a regal tabard to be exchanged for a sackcloth smock. The world treats him accordingly. That’s why, in her superb staging, director Theresa Heskins plays the theatricality to the hilt. Not so much adapting the Twain as plundering it, she presents the story as if staged by a troupe of itinerant players. To underscore the point, the opening song of James Atherton’s rousing score takes its meta-theatrical lines from Shakespeare’s Henry V about the power of the imagination (“O for a muse of fire,” etc). In this context, the pageantry of the concluding coronation is as much a display of theatrical make-believe as the show’s merry cross-casting. “He looks like a prince in a play,” says Tom the first time he sees Edward, blurring the lines further. Making it yet more uncanny is the inspired casting of twin sisters Danielle and Nichole Bird in the lead roles. They would be excellent in any circumstances – Danielle with her toothy entitlement as Edward; Nichole aping the rituals of court with her distorted cockney vowels – but together, they create a dreamlike mirror image ripe with “what ifs?” Energised, driven and playful, they are a joy to watch, holding their place at the spiralling centre of a vigorous ensemble production, alive with music, wit and spectacle. • At the New Vic theatre, Newcastle-under-Lyme, until 25 January.