They go to the pub often, Exley and his workmates, to drink till their trains pull in. When Exley gets home his teenage son’s question is always the same: how was it today? “I could tell you,” Exley replies without fail, “but I’d have to kill you.” Yes, Exley’s a spook, working in counter-terrorism: he’s also a man who doesn’t like to tell anyone anything personal. He uses data and dawn raids to identify an assassin or catch a bombmaker. But nothing makes sense: not the police raid that uncovers explosives in the wrong London flat, not the encrypted diary through which his troubled son speaks to him, and not his wife’s death, years before, when she stepped off the pavement in front of a bus while he strapped their baby into his buggy. The book is made brutally real both by spasms of violence and Ware’s fascination with the mundane Ware, who won the London short-story prize in 2018, has an eye for the absurd and a taste for the off-kilter – his 2015 debut novel, The Fat of Fed Beasts, took in a bank heist, purgatory and bureaucracy. As you’d expect, his third novel is a similarly tricksy beast. Exley investigates a jumpsuited, Go-playing prisoner and uses works of classical philosophy to decode his son’s diary, while navigating office politics and ignoring his own ill health. The diary is mostly about Eyquem, a character based on Exley’s father, who watches beacons from a hilltop – and shares his name with a real-life criminal mastermind. This might all sound a bit cerebral, and it is, but the book is made brutally real both by spasms of violence – slit bellies, bus-stop brawls and mass murder – and Ware’s fascination with the mundane. Routines are at this fine novel’s heart: beer rounds, paperwork, commutes, small talk and the olive-coloured office desks against which Exley desperately scratches himself instead of having an actual conversation with a doctor. The banal becomes eerie as Ware uncovers an alien terrain in “sheep-infested” countryside, the “glottal chug” of olive oil and the “butterscotch water” of the Thames. The Faculty of Indifference is a book of dark shadows and dry humour. It’s a comedy about torture, death and loneliness, and an existential drama about a world that swirls and twists and turns on us without provocation. It loses a little momentum as it moves to a close, but Ware’s strange, lyrical novel has real resonance, finding ordinary life as terrifying as the terrorists who threaten its destruction. • The Faculty of Indifference by Guy Ware is published by Salt (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.