If we have gleaned anything from the craven back-stabbing of Succession, it is that growing up rich is rarely good for the soul. Yet it was not always thus. Back in the mid-2000s, The OC dared to make being part of an absolutely minted family seem genuinely aspirational, emotionally as well as materially. Set in a moneyed beachside enclave of California’s Orange County, here was a teen-targeted soap that was both juicy and thirsty. But at its heart, The OC was a Fresh Prince remix, using a handy court edict to transplant 16-year-old brawler Ryan (Ben McKenzie) from the scum-bum streets of Chino to the affluent bosom of the Cohen clan. From their gigantic kitchen, surfing lawyer Sandy (Peter Gallagher) and his property magnate partner Kirsten (Kelly Rowan) created a safe place for their troubled ward, while smart-aleck son Seth (Adam Brody) fired off geeky zingers over spoonfuls of cereal. Like Ryan, viewers had to quickly adjust to this new privileged existence, a world of ubiquitous flip-phones, Death Cab for Cutie playlists and a preppy private high school with its own rococo coffee shop. Having a hunky new kid on the block kick-started some romantic action, with Ryan catching the eye of school queen bee Marissa (Mischa Barton) and emboldening Seth to woo his long-time crush Summer (Rachel Bilson). The fact that The OC’s social calendar seemed to feature a different school dance, illicit beach party or fancy-dan charity fundraiser every week helped accelerate these liaisons, and the paired-up core four of Ryan, Marissa, Seth and Summer were so cute together that the show had to go to increasing lengths to short-circuit their relationships. It set up a rolling wave of fraught break-ups and moony make-ups, mirrored by similarly moreish misbehaviour from most of the adults: this was Dawson’s Crack, basically. So where did it all go wrong? Welcome to The OC hitch: if you sift through the increasingly scattershot plotting of season three, the shark-jumping moment was when things went all Point Break. In episode four, the newly expelled Marissa began palling around with low-energy surfer dude Johnny (Ryan Donowho), a relationship that also brought her into the orbit of ripped beach bully Volchok (Cam Gigandet). Although there had never been a shortage of either sadsacks or ne’er-do-wells in The OC, this particular pair seemed to sap the show of its usual haywire verve. Poor, puppyish Johnny died 10 episodes later, seemingly just to make everyone around him feel guilty, while the increasingly volatile Volchok eventually killed Marissa, an attention-grabbing but bitter finale to a season that had already felt like an endless bummer. There was still a fourth and final run but The OC had lost its deluxe shine. Amid all the ongoing chaos, selfishness and scandal, though, the Cohen kitchen was always there: a nurturing nest of kindness and empathy, a place for bagels and forgiveness. Sure, they ended up destroying it with an earthquake in the last few episodes. But it lives on in our hearts.