Another insight into the running of the Supreme Horse Racing Club came on Thursday night when it emerged that Open Eagle, who carried the club’s blue and white colours with some success, is now registered with a new owner and trainer and may compete in hunter chases this winter. The Guardian has heard from three people who say they owned a share in the horse, two of whom say they have never been told the club was planning to pass him on to someone else. “I had been made aware through contacts that the horse was being retired from racing,” said Paul Laidler, who has been active in raising concerns about the club through social media. “But I received no communication to that effect from SHRC, despite having requested to be informed. “It came as a shock to see him re-registered with Horse Racing Ireland to go hunter chasing. Why weren’t his owners given the option to take him and rehabilitate him? I would like to see some paperwork relating to the gifting of my assets by SHRC to other parties.” Another SHRC member, who does not wish to be named, says he had a share in Open Eagle and likewise heard nothing from the club about what was to happen with him after his most recent outing in May 2017. But a third owner in Open Eagle, the racing journalist Patrick Weaver, says he did receive an email from SHRC to the effect that a home had been found for the horse, advising Weaver to cancel his standing order that contributed to the horse’s upkeep. Weaver clearly enjoyed his experience of being a partner in Open Eagle, who ran at the Cheltenham Festival, the Punchestown Festival and in a Grade Two in France. However, Weaver said through Twitter that he has never been paid his 5% share of the €59,000 in prize money that Open Eagle won at Punchestown in April 2017. Both Laidler and Weaver now have questions about the justification for the fees they continued to pay for Open Eagle after his last run for the club. Weaver says he continued to pay £120 per month for the following year. Neither Jim Balfry nor Steve Massey, who run SHRC, took calls on Friday morning. Neither man has spoken in public about the story since the club was prevented from running its horses 18 days ago. Horse Racing Ireland continues to seek answers to questions about the running of the club, following concerns raised by its members. There’s been some support for the nap, Lightly Squeeze (2.25), who opened at 6-1 with one firm for the handicap hurdle at Warwick but is now a best price of 3-1. He didn’t show much in two starts over timber for Harry Fry last winter, having joined from Philip Hide’s yard, but it’s fair to expect a step forward here. That’s because he turned in a couple of really good runs on the Flat in the last two months, runs which suggest the five-year-old’s hurdles mark might now be pretty lenient. The hood he has been wearing comes off and Sean Bowen replaces the claimer who rode last winter. There’s a competitive novice hurdle earlier but I think Nicky Henderson’s Kaymar (1.15) is being underestimated at 8-1. He seemed to be the yard’s third string when beaten only by a Charles Byrnes runner in a bumper in June and can do better over hurdles. He’s a half brother to the useful Midnight Shot and his dam was a half-sister to Grey Shot, who some of you will surely remember with fondness. Henderson had a treble at Newbury on Thursday. Thomas Darby makes his chasing debut but could have found an easier place to do it and Maire Banrigh (1.50) appeals as an alternative at 7-4. A point to point winner, she made a sure-footed debut over fences at Stratford last month. Her front-running style ought to put the favourite under pressure at some stage. There could be value in the 6-1 about Dontdelay (2.45), seeking what would be a third heavy-ground success at Hexham. Warwick 12.40 Allmankind 1.15 Kaymar (nb) 1.50 Maire Banrigh 2.25 Lightly Squeeze (nap) 2.55 La Cavsa Nostra 3.30 Hugo's Reflection 4.00 Hunny MoonHexham 1.00 Ribble Valley 1.35 Bingo D'Olivate 2.10 First Account 2.45 Dontdelay 3.15 Letemgo 3.50 No RegretsFontwell 1.25 Gonnabegood 2.00 Sensulano 2.35 Mason Jar 3.05 Mystic Dreamer 3.40 Timcoda 4.10 ThreeunderthrufiveNewcastle 4.35 Tangled 5.05 Brunch 5.35 Abbi Dab 6.05 Astro Jakk 6.35 Rebel State 7.05 Swansdown 7.35 Chloellie 8.05 Gleaming ArchChelmsford 5.25 King Ragnar 5.55 Franconia 6.25 Al Qaqaa 6.55 Squire 7.25 Beechwood James 7.55 Dreamboat Annie