Women’s Football Weekend another marker to cherish The Women’s Football Weekend proved a brilliant milestone for the game, a week on from that record-breaking crowd at Wembley for the Lionesses. A combined attendance of more than 74,000 at six venues across the country, four of which were played at men’s stadiums, was a superb turnout, with more than 23,000 at Anfield and a record Women’s Super League crowd at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, where 38,262 supporters watched the north London derby. The game at Wembley was an emotional occasion, with around 70 former Lionesses – many of whom had never been to the national stadium – invited along. Participation figures in the women’s game have risen to 2.3 million this year, in line with the 50% growth the Football Association targeted by 2020 three years ago. Zinsberger provides much-needed Arsenal steel Kim Little and Vivianne Miedema again provided the magic for Arsenal to wow a huge crowd but it is at the back where, significantly, they are most improved with Manuela Zinsberger keeping another clean sheet. The England defender Leah Williamson and the Republic of Ireland full-back Katie McCabe have also excelled this season but in the Austria goalkeeper Arsenal have located a much‑needed missing link. Arsenal have conceded three goals in six league matches – only Manchester City have let in fewer – and Zinsberger certainly seems to be an upgrade on Pauline Peyraud-Magnin, the France goalkeeper who failed to truly command the 18-yard box. Not only do Arsenal appear much harder to beat but Zinsberger is also capable of kickstarting attacks for a team with an abundance of striking prowess, with a telepathic understanding between Little and Miedema priceless. A little bit of magic from @ArsenalWFC's Kim Little!And a treat for the 38,262 at Tottenham Hotspur Stadium! #WomensFootballWeekend #TOTARS pic.twitter.com/LpT4xdWSNF Flaky Reading exposed by Bristol City When will Reading learn their lesson? They were twice two goals clear in their 3-3 draw at home to Bristol City, with a couple of concentration lapses proving costly. Not so long ago Kelly Chambers’s side were formidable opponents but they appear to have developed a soft centre and a habit of conceding cheap goals. In Fara Williams they possess no shortage of quality, particularly from set pieces, but they are too often frustrating and toothless. Once an awkward proposition for such as Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester City, Reading seem too easy to brush aside these days. There have not been sweeping personnel changes and perhaps Chambers needs to refresh a team guilty of going stale. What. A. Game! 😅@bristolcitywfc equalise to make it 3-3 as @ebony_salmon slots it in!A celebration to match too... 🙌 pic.twitter.com/4DEiU55bbk Neville’s England could learn from Manchester United A 1-0 defeat by Chelsea for Manchester United, who also lost to Arsenal and Manchester City by the same scoreline, is the latest cruel reminder of the fine margins in the top division. For all that a debatable Maren Mjelde penalty was difficult to swallow, there remain reasons to be cheerful for Casey Stoney’s side. Phil Neville, for one, could perhaps benefit from United’s Scrooge-like defending. United are well organised, well drilled and robust defensively, a stark contrast to the manner a leaky England have defended of late. There was not a lot between Chelsea and United in a gritty encounter but there is in terms of resources: last week Chelsea signed Sam Kerr, offering the Australia forward an unprecedented financial package to make her the highest-paid player in the division – the kind of deal that dwarfs United’s modest playing budget. Calm and collected 😅Signed, sealed, delivered 💌@ChelseaFCW make the breakthrough as @MarenMjelde converts from the penalty spot pic.twitter.com/KLCHQryXRO Everton hold the upper hand over Liverpool Merseyside looks set to be blue for the foreseeable future, with Everton and Liverpool ostensibly heading in different directions. Liverpool remain at the foot of the division after Sunday’s defeat at Anfield, with Lucy Graham’s strike the only goal in a brilliant atmosphere. Willie Kirk is enjoying his first full season in charge at Everton while lacklustre Liverpool – not sufficiently backed since last winning the league under Matt Beard five years ago – are in grave danger of sliding out of the top tier. Since then Liverpool have stood still having rested on their laurels while others around them are beginning to reap the rewards of investing at all levels. Everton, for example, are set to move into Walton Hall Park and new players are starting to excel after bedding in under Kirk, the former Bristol manager. Liverpool, by contrast, appear to be heading backwards. This season BT Sport will air more women’s football than ever before, continuing with coverage of Birmingham Women v Chelsea Women on Sunday 24 November on BT Sport 1.