The New Zealand race relations commissioner Meng Foon has labelled racist abuse of English bowler Jofra Archer on Monday “utterly disgusting”, as the country’s minister for sports also condemned the incident. “It’s not a good look for New Zealand, anytime we hurl abuse at visiting athletes and our local sportspeople. It really is disappointing. I commend Jofra Archer for being brave enough to call this behaviour out,” the commissioner said in a statement. “Reports of these incidents of racial abuse put a stain on the sporting code … it’s 2019 and it’s utterly disgusting for an athlete or member of the public to be targeted and abused because of their skin colour.” Foon said bystanders at the game “should call it out immediately and tell the abusers to stop it”. He also advised sporting bodies and clubs to implement anti-racism education and initiatives so that their fans know why racism is never acceptable. The advice from the independent commissioner came as the chief executive of New Zealand Cricket travelled to Hamilton to apologise to Archer in person after he was allegedly racially abused during the match at Bay Oval. David White, the head of New Zealand cricket, said he was “very disappointed” that racial abuse could happen at a game in New Zealand, and it was totally unacceptable. New Zealand cricket would also be studying CCTV footage of Monday’s game in an attempt to locate the alleged abuser, and would refer any information to police for further investigation. “We have zero tolerance for this and we’re looking to get as much information as possible and hopefully find the culprit.” White told RNZ. New Zealand captain Kane Williamson said he would also seek out Archer on Friday to apologise in person. Sports and recreation minister Grant Robertson said he hoped the abuser was found and New Zealand cricket “throw the book at them” “I am pleased to hear David White is planning to travel to Hamilton to apologise to Jofra Archer, racial abuse is totally unacceptable,” Robertson said in a statement. “I trust NZC will track the person who abused Mr Archer down and throw the book at him.” White said extra security measures would be put in place at Friday’s match in Hamilton, including security dressed in plainclothes, to ensure a similar incident doesn’t happen again. “As people go through the gates there will be messaging on the big screens and also the ground announcer, plus also we’re going to have increased security.” White said. Cricket fans expressed their dismay over the incident on social media. The racial abuse of Jofra Archer is pathetic and disappointing. But what is worse is that Kiwis stood by and allowed it to happen. Someone had to tell the abuser to shut up. Don't tolerate racism. Speak up. Speak out. After the match Archer, 24, wrote on Twitter: “A bit disturbing hearing racial insults today whilst battling to help save my team, the crowd was been amazing this week except for that one guy, @TheBarmyArmy was good as usual also.” The alleged incident took place as Archer walked back to the pavilion after being dismissed for 30 during England’s failed attempt to save the Test. The Blacks caps showed their support for rival, describing the abuse as shocking. “We are shocked and disappointed to hear of the verbal abuse @JofraArcher received after the Test today. @englandcricket might be our rivals but they’re also our friends and racist abuse is never okay!”