I was rather grudging in my praise when I first saw this musical in 2004. Richard Eyre’s production, based on the PL Travers stories and the Disney movie and supplementing the Richard and Robert Sherman songs with new ones by George Stiles and Anthony Drewe, was more remarkable for its clinical efficiency than its pulsating joy. Either the show, which has enjoyed a long UK tour, has changed or I have: it now strikes me as rapturously pleasurable. Some things remain the same, and prime among them are Bob Crowley’s ravishing designs. The Banks’ family home, on which the eponymous nanny periodically descends, opens up like the pages of a Victorian picture book. Crowley also switches beautifully between a Raoul Dufy-like riot of colour for the number Jolly Holiday and an austere grisaille for the scenes in the financial institution where Mr Banks works: I’d never noticed before the image of Cratchit-like clerks inscribed on the sloping columns, which gives the place a Dickensian aura. The ecstasy, which is the hallmark of a good musical and which I initially found in short supply, is now present in at least three of the numbers. In A Spoonful of Sugar, thanks to the illusions of Paul Kieve and Jim Steinmeyer, a partially destroyed kitchen is restored to pristine order. The polysyllabic song that starts with “super …” also becomes a word-spinning Cockney bacchanal. Best of all is Step in Time, where London’s chimney sweeps enjoy a night on the tiles led by the amiable Bert. The high point of the show, quite literally, comes when Bert tap dances horizontally on the walls of the proscenium and then upside down on its arch. It says a lot for Charlie Stemp that he retains a boyish cheerfulness even when dancing, Astaire-like, on the ceiling. The biggest change lies in casting Zizi Strallen as Mary Poppins. Long before she flies over the heads of the audience, she suggests there is something unearthly about this life-enhancing nanny. Every movement she makes is balletic – she doesn’t just exit from a room but floats out of it with arms extended. Given that the choreography is by Matthew Bourne and Stephen Mear, it is no surprise that Strallen has something of the duality of the heroine of Swan Lake. On one level, Strallen is a brisk taskmistress; on another, she is a bright-eyed heavenly visitor whose mission is to restore harmony to the Banks family. In an excellent performance, Strallen conveys the insoluble mystery of Mary. There is good work from Joseph Millson as the moody Mr Banks, Amy Griffiths as his frustrated wife and Claire Machin as a cook who, unsurprisingly since the book is by Julian Fellowes, seems to have stepped out of Downton Abbey. It is also a bonus to have the ageless Petula Clark appearing as an itinerant Bird Woman. Travers scholars may still miss the darkness of the books, but for the rest of us the show is an unassailable treat and Eyre’s production has acquired the heart to go with its art. • At Prince Edward theatre, London, until 31 May.