Monkey bread is the perfect sharing bread, and you will want to keep tearing off these spiced and buttery pillows. You will need a bundt tin, as the hole in the centre means that the enriched dough cooks evenly, and the nonstick coating will help the bread slide out easily at the end. Serves: 12 For the tangzhong:25g strong white flour100g water For the dough:160g whole milk, warm50g unsalted butter, melted40g sugar1 tsp salt1 large egg420g strong white bread flour7g yeast For the filling:75g salted butter (or unsalted butter and a little salt)75g unsalted butter1tsp vanilla bean paste60g pecans60g walnuts (or other nuts)100g caster sugar100g light brown sugar1tbsp ground cinnamon1/2 tsp ground ginger1/4 tsp ground nutmeg To decorate:Flaked almondsChocolate sprinklesEdible pen (or a little black food dye mixed with water) Start with the tangzhong: whisk the flour and water in a pan until smooth, place on a low heat and stir continuously until it reaches a pudding-like consistency. Transfer to a bowl, cover with clingfilm and place in the freezer for 10 minutes. Once chilled, transfer to a large bowl together with the dough ingredients, except for the flour and yeast. Whisk everything together, then add the flour and yeast. If using a stand mixer, allow the machine to knead for 10 minutes with the dough hook. If working by hand, use a wooden spoon to combine everything into a shaggy ball of dough, then turn out on to a floured surface. Knead by hand for about 10-15 minutes. Place the dough in a large, lightly oiled bowl, cover with clingfilm and leave until doubled in size. Prepare the filling: melt the butter, mix in the vanilla, then roughly chop the nuts. In a separate bowl, combine the two types of sugars and all the spices. Tear off 100-120g of the risen dough to make 4-6 hedgehogs of varying sizes; just shape the body, with one end narrower than the other. Place on a lined baking tray, cover with oiled clingfilm and leave to rise. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/400F/gas mark 6. Butter a bundt tin, then shape the remaining dough into 40-45 balls. Dip each into the vanilla butter, then the sugar/spice mix, and place in the bundt. Repeat, building up the layers and scattering in some of the chopped nuts as you go along. Pour any remaining butter and sugar over the top. Cover with clingfilm and leave until doubled in size. At this point, the hedgehogs should have risen. Use scissors to snip spikes into their backs, then bake for 12-15 minutes until lightly browned on top. Once cool, decorate with flaked almonds, plus round chocolate sprinkle for the noses. Paint on the eyes with edible ink. When the bundt has risen, bake for about 35 minutes until brown on top. Let it cool in the tin for five minutes before turning out on to a cooling rack. Serve with a sprinkling of extra nuts, and decorate with the hedgehogs.