Australia sealed the three-match Twenty20 international series against Pakistan 2-0 and won their eighth straight game in that form of the game on Friday, comfortably beating the visitors in Perth by 10 wickets. Openers David Warner and Aaron Finch were untroubled at the crease in reply, with Finch’s boundary on the final ball giving him 52 runs from 36 balls. Warner added 48 runs from 35 deliveries as Australia scored 109 without loss in 11.5 overs. Earlier, Mitchell Starc took advantage of a green-tinged pitch to help Australia restrict Pakistan to 106 for 8 after being sent in to bat by Finch. Starc took the key wicket of Pakistan captain Babar Azam, then hit the stumps of No 3 Mohammad Rizwan to be on a hat-trick in only the third over. Haris Sohail survived the hat-trick ball but was lately out for eight, and the damage was done, with Iftikhar Ahmed (45) Pakistan’s only batsman to make a significant contribution, and one of only two batsmen to make it into double figures. Starc took two for 29 while Kane Richardson had the pick of the figures with three for 18 on a bouncy pitch. Warner said: “Our bowlers have done the job this series, so full credit to them.” Babar, the world’s No 1-ranked T20 batsman, managed only six before being trapped lbw by Starc, with the decision confirmed on video review. Seamer Sean Abbott, representing Australia for the first time since 2014, fell to his knees and pumped his fists in the fifth over after dismissing Imam-ul-Haq with a short-pitched delivery which the opener top-edged to Ben McDermott at midwicket while on 14. Abbott was named man of the match. Steve Smith had hit an unbeaten 80 off 51 balls to lead Australia to a seven-wicket win over the tourists in the second Twenty20 on Tuesday in Canberra. The first match was a no result because of rain in Sydney. Despite not needing to bat on Friday, Smith was awarded the player of the series and said: “It was nice to score a few the other day, and be consistent.” Raza Rashid, in his first series as Pakistan captain, said through an interpreter: “Warner and Finch batted very well, and hopefully our bowlers can learn from that.” The teams will now play two test matches, the first beginning in Brisbane on 21 November and the second, a day-night test, from 29 November at the Adelaide Oval.