Tayla Vlaeminck headlines a list of five Australians in with a shot at a Test debut after selectors announced their squad for next month’s women’s Ashes. Coach Matthew Mott on Tuesday unveiled the 14-woman touring party set to defend the title, with Meg Lanning expected to captain the side. Vlaeminck has been named after recovering from a partial anterior cruciate ligament tear, with the 20-year-old speedster having impressed in an Australian camp last month. The talented youngster is yet to tour England in an Ashes series, along with fellow squad members Nicola Carey, Delissa Kimmince, Georgia Wareham and Ashleigh Gardner. None of the group have played a Test for Australia, but could be in line for their baggy green if picked for the red-ball component of the tour. There was no room for spinner Sophie Molineux, who is the only contracted player to miss out after battling to recover from shoulder surgery. But she could still feature in the series after being named in an Australia A squad that will tour at the same time, with selectors happy to swap players between the groups. “We’ve been able to name a reasonably stable squad which is really important with Sophie Molineux the only player to miss out from Australia’s most recent series against New Zealand,” national selector Shaun Flegler said. “Sophie has been doing everything she could do [to] prove her fitness having had a shoulder reconstruction back in February, but she still needs a bit more time to make sure she’s 100%, so she’ll travel to England with the Australia A side. “Tayla was also under an injury cloud but she’s back bowling and has had a terrific off-season up in Brisbane, so we’re really excited to see what she can do in English conditions. We’re fortunate to be able to take an Australia A side to England as well which will give us flexibility with the squad as we move through the various formats.” Nicole Bolton has also been selected, as she returns from time away from the game on personal leave. Ellyse Perry again features as a key player for the Australians, after she scored a double century in the last Ashes Test at North Sydney in 2017, and Alyssa Healy is also there, entering the series as the best short-form player in the women’s game after being player of the tournament at last year’s World Twenty20. Australia: Nicole Bolton, Nicola Carey, Ashleigh Gardner, Rachael Haynes, Alyssa Healy, Jessica Jonassen, Delissa Kimmince, Meg Lanning, Beth Mooney, Ellyse Perry, Megan Schutt, Elyse Villani, Georgia Wareham, Tayla Vlaeminck. Australia A: Maitlan Brown, Erin Burns, Josie Dooley, Heather Graham, Sammy-Jo Johnson, Tahlia McGrath, Sophie Molineux, Georgia Redmayne, Molly Strano, Annabel Sutherland, Rachel Trenaman, Belinda Vakarewa, Amanda-Jade Wellington.