A couple of hours after finishing what was intended to be the first and final draft of this column, I was forced into a rewrite. An excoriating, potentially award-winning polemic that will now never see the light of day, the original version was mildly critical of the kind of football fans who relentlessly bore everyone to tears with grievances regarding their dissatisfaction with the owners of their football club, but are invariably too apathetic to do anything even remotely useful that might in some way lead to the departure of those custodians who are the source of so much disgruntlement. Like those fabled match reports quickly deleted by panicking football writers when Manchester United staged a late smash-and-grab on Bayern Munich’s Champions League hopes two decades ago, the column I had written was largely accurate but ultimately rendered nonsensical by a late, unexpected intervention. As if sensing Newcastle fans were about to be singled out and publicly belittled for repeatedly complaining about Mike Ashley without ever doing anything that might reasonably be expected to help get rid of him, one website devoted to doing exactly that finally invoked the nuclear option and actually called upon fans to stop attending the team’s games. “Enough is enough,” they thundered. “From today, AshleyOut.com is urging all fans to participate in a full boycott of St James’ Park, club merchandise and businesses associated with the club until Mike Ashley leaves the club.” As clarion calls go, it could scarcely be more commendable but given the years of stagnation their club has been forced to endure under its despised owner, you could be forgiven for wondering what took them so long to take up the megaphone. It is no secret that the lot of Newcastle fans has been a largely unhappy one for the vast majority of the dozen years since the billionaire owner of Sports Direct bought the club. Understandably weary of seeing the venerable institution they love so much stuck in a state of almost total moribundity, they have staged protests – however well-intentioned but useless – before. Following last week’s news that Rafael Benítez would be leaving the club after the expiration of his contract, a small group of angry men convened peacefully beneath the bronze feet of Sir Bobby Robson’s statue at St James’ Park to make known their displeasure at Ashley’s lack of enthusiasm for keeping the Spaniard on the books. While their gesture should be applauded, the presence of no more than 40 of them is unlikely to have prompted anything in the way of a reaction from the subject of their derision beyond a shoulder-shrug and trademark self-satisfied smirk. In December last year, the Magpie Group hatched upon the wheeze of making their contempt for their club’s owner known by refusing to take their seats for a home game against West Ham until the 11th minute. It was, they said, a protest they hoped would “bring global attention to the repulsive way Ashley runs the club”, but a general lack of enthusiasm meant it went almost totally unnoticed and did little of the sort. While the 11th minute was chosen to signify the number of years Ashley had owned the club, one can’t help but feel that it was no coincidence it also meant those protesting wouldn’t miss very much of the game. Like fans of so many other English football clubs, those who religiously attend St James’ Park tend to talk a good game when it comes to the public airing of grievances but generally come up short when it comes to doing anything that might detract from their enjoyment of actual football. Few protests encapsulate this half-heartedness as accurately as the utterly empty gesture that is the pre-match “march”, in which fans are called upon to mobilise outside a pub many of them were almost certainly going to be drinking in anyway, before walking a couple of hundred yards in a slightly emboldened manner to a game they had always planned to attend. One of the more memorable and protracted industrial actions in recent decades, the 1980s miners’ strike might ultimately have been unsuccessful, but at least those participating in it didn’t protest by donning helmets, going down the pits and digging coal. By urging all Newcastle fans to boycott St James’ Park completely, the folk behind AshleyOut.com have raised the bar significantly and it will be interesting to see the reaction to their cri de coeur. Not so much “howay” as “stay howay”, one can’t help but feel it is unlikely to gain much traction due in no small part to the disparate nature of Newcastle United’s various fan groups and their apparent inability to agree on anything resembling a coherent, workable plan. “If you choose to turn up to St James’ Park while Ashley owns the club you are welcome to do so,” added AshleyOut.com in its manifesto and there will undoubtedly be no shortage of fans who find the thought of not attending their team’s matches unbearable as they feel it is they and the players who will suffer, rather than the Ashley regime. Despite their understandable reservations, in a one-club city with the Premier League’s seventh highest average attendance, the sight of more than 50,000 empty seats on match days would constitute one hell of a statement. It is one that is unlikely to be made.