John Harris is spot on in his analysis of our busted political system (Any new prime minister is sunk if they don’t fix Britain’s democracy, 17 June). It is no longer an anorak issue to seek to establish a written constitution of revised representative democracy. Central to this is the introduction of proportional representation in all our local, regional and national elections. This would create a multiparty parliament. However, rather than accepting messy coalitions as in most of Europe, we could have a separately elected premier with appropriate veto powers and checks and balances overseen by a constitutional court, so that a premier could attempt to pursue policies endorsed by an electoral mandate. Our overly centralised state has enabled decades of abuses of power by governments ruthlessly exploiting the overweening power of No 10 – through the royal prerogative and other such anachronisms, continually recreating Lord Hailsham’s “elective dictatorship”. We must devolve most of the state’s responsibilities to the lowest functional level, as Harris implies, creating federal provinces, nations and city-regions (such as Greater London) represented in a senate and empowering local government. Never again, after we have resolved Brexit with another referendum, must we allow one where only 37% of the electorate purports to represent the “settled will of the people”. Citizens’ assemblies must be deployed to advise and support parliament. And MPs must reclaim their Burkeian imperative to represent and deliberate: not blindly follow media-whipped vox pops.. If we had had government by Twitter, we would have reintroduced hanging!Philip WoodKidlington, Oxfordshire • There is only one thing I would disagree with in Fintan O’Toole’s article (Brexit Britain is wallowing in corrosive levels of self-pity, 15 June). He interprets the view of the 90% agreeing that “the way Britain is dealing with Brexit (is) a national humiliation” as a verdict on humiliation by the EU. But I am one of the 90% – and for me, humiliation is the chest-beating antics of the complacent incompetents previously sent to negotiate with Brussels and now promising to do so again, the ignominy of having to answer the eternal question from other Europeans about why we are indulging in this act of collective madness and, above all, the horror of electing a man despised outside this country as a liar and charlatan as our next prime minister. The humiliation of this country is entirely self-inflicted.Ian RaganCheltenham, Gloucestershire • Rather than looking at the percentage who did not vote remain, as suggested by Dr Harry Harmer (Letters, 17 June), the most interesting figure from the Brexit referendum result is that the leave majority, at 1,269,231, is very small. This is trounced by the 12,948,081 voters who did not indicate their preference either way, by not voting or by spoiling their ballot papers. The subsequent general election results confirmed this lack of a significant majority by returning a hung parliament. Something the new prime minister will still have to contend with.Marion HineFramlingham, Suffolk • Tom Watson is right (Watson to Corbyn: Labour must lead the fight to prevent Brexit’, 17 June). The irony of Corbyn’s stance is that his position claims to take account of leave-voting Labour voters. However, there is much evidence to suggest that this contingent (often male, white and over 55) is precisely the group that will no longer vote Labour while Corbyn remains leader. While I am a staunch remainer, I share this view. Corbyn lacks the decisiveness to be a leader. Were he to abandon his vacillating policy on Brexit, he would be amazed at how many disaffected traditional Labour supporters would return to the fold.Peter ThomasSalford • Is it so difficult to understand the true nature of our crisis? For over 40 years now the answer to the question of who is in control has pointed to the growing power of the “free-market” multinational corporations and the politicians regulating or deregulating at their demand. The consequence has been the climate emergency and the toxic effects of inequality that John Harris identifies, along with the collapse of public services, the flowering of rogue states and the threat of a world war. Change is imperative.John AirsLiverpool • Vernon Bogdanor’s musings on the destructive consequences of proroguing parliament appear sensible, but his alternative solution to Brexit displays a disgraceful attitude towards Ireland (To shut down parliament would be simple. But it would be an outrage, 13 June 13). He repeats the policies of the most swivel-eyed Brexiters when he states that “the EU, with the consent of Ireland, now needs to show further flexibility by providing for the backstop either to be unilaterally terminated by Westminster, or … allow a sunset clause … so that it automatically comes to an end after a certain period of time”. If, as Bogdanor asserts, “the vast majority of MPs are determined to avoid a hard border”, then why must the backstop be scrapped? The backstop already provides for its being replaced if any alternative arrangement comes about. So the only reason MPs could have for opposing it is that they indeed wish to replace it with a measure that cannot guarantee a soft border in Ireland. Bogdanor says that a no-deal Brexit would damage the Irish economy. So its government should be generous, and this generosity would “help renew the good relations between Britain and Ireland – relations that have been so badly damaged by the Brexit process”. How gracious the UK is. After wrecking the relationship by demanding that peace be sacrificed to Brexit, that unpleasantness is to be solved by Ireland swallowing the rest of its national interest. Then Paddy and Tommy can be the best of friends again, just as they were from the Norman invasion in 1169 to Irish independence in 1922. The UK is no longer an imperial power; it would do well to stop treating Ireland like a recalcitrant colony to be coerced once more.Oscar DespardDublin • Well said George Pticher! If Boris Johnson is elected prime minister all churches should share the blame. Anglicans in particular should remember that two-thirds of them voted Brexit. Only the Church of Scotland and the Society of Friends questioned the way the referendum was conducted, let alone its ambiguous 52/48 result.Rev Dr Donald W NorwoodOxford • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition