Any doubt about Ashleigh Barty’s popularity inside and outside the tennis world has been blown away by the incredible reaction to her French Open triumph. The 23-year-old’s Roland Garros breakthrough not only catapulted her to world No 2 but sparked a wave of support from across the globe. Tennis legends Rod Laver and Evonne Goolagong Cawley led the tributes. Laver, who has been following Barty’s charge courtside in Paris, praised her poise throughout the tournament. “It was great to see Ashley play as well as she did all through the tournament, not just the semi-final and final,” Laver said. “She overpowered the lady she was playing against.” Barty joins Goolagong Cawley, who won the French Open in 1971, as an Indigenous Australians to claim the title. “What a wonderful result for Australia and how exciting that another Aboriginal has won at the French,” Goolagong Cawley said. “All lovers of tennis here and around the world will be delighted by the natural skills and flair Ash possesses. “Now they have developed into a beautiful game full of artistry, movement and power. It was there for all to marvel at in Paris. She is a joy to watch.” Another Indigenous sporting icon, Cathy Freeman, also took time to praise Barty. “Congratulations @ashbar96!!! Making Australia proud!!!,” the Olympic champion tweeted, before signing off with three love hearts in the colours of the Indigenous flag. “Sister,” Barty replied, with the same love hearts sign-off. Even Barty’s opponents couldn’t help but be delighted by her success. Germany’s Andrea Petkovic and American Madison Keys both took to social media to laud Barty despite having been victims of the Australian during the tournament. “This girl kicked mine and everyone else‘s ass this fortnight,” Petkovic tweeted, including the now-famous picture of a young Barty holding a trophy from her junior days. “Ditto on the ass kicking part. Congrats @ashbar96! Well done on your first grand slam. So well deserved,” Keys added. The response was no surprise to Barty’s first coach, Jim Joyce from the West Brisbane Tennis Centre. Joyce joined friends to watch the player he began coaching as pre-schooler make history. “Last night’s win is just part of the fairytale that Ash is living. It’s just a fairytale,” Joyce said. “Wow, she’s won it. I’ve always been told I’m never lost for words, but I’m lost for words thinking about this. I just can’t wait to give her a big hug to tell you the truth.” Barty was blown away by all the well wishers, who included no end of Australian athletes and celebrities as the #BartyParty Twitter hash tag went mad. “It’s incredibly kind, especially from your peers, I suppose, and people that you see every single week and most weeks of the year,” she said. “It’s very kind of them to compliment myself, my game. But I think it’s also a compliment to my team. It’s just been an incredible journey.”