Frankie Dettori has given a significant indication of his confidence in Enable, six days before the superstar mare is due to make her reappearance after an eight-month absence. John Gosden’s charge, winner of the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe for the last two years, is being aimed at a hot-looking Eclipse Stakes on Saturday but her team could hardly be in better form, as trainer and jockey teamed up for a big-race double at Saint-Cloud on Sunday. “She’s really well, I’m very pleased with her,” Dettori said of Enable, whom he had ridden in work three times in the previous eight days. Gallop reports from Newmarket have been very positive about her in recent weeks and her jockey evidently feels the same way. “She’s really come on and she’s ready for the run. We’re very pleased with her,” he said. Unbeaten since April 2017, Enable is just a 7-4 shot for the Eclipse, even though her opponents may include Crystal Ocean, Circus Maximus, Sea Of Class, Magical, Too Darn Hot, Hermosa and Masar. Dettori was speaking after partnering Coronet to victory in the Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud, a race in which the pair were beaten a nose last year. Things looked distinctly unpromising at the turn for home, when Dettori wanted to switch off the rail to move around the leaders but was forced back inside by Mickaël Barzalona determinedly sticking to his line on Morgan Le Faye. Luckily for the eventual winner, Ziyad hung right, leaving a gap which Coronet was brave enough to take and the grey prevailed by a short neck, with her stablemate Lah Ti Dar finishing strongly to be a close third. “I was trying to bully my way out with Mickaël,” Dettori reflected, “but he had too much horse. I saw a gap on the inside and dived for that. It was taking a chance but luckily Maxime [Guyon] didn’t go back to the rail and left it open for me and it got the race won.” Gosden and Dettori left the track with plenty of French prize money, as they also landed a Group Two with Mehdaayih, who had been thoroughly shoved around by rivals when only seventh in the Oaks a month earlier. She holds entries in Goodwood’s Nassau Stakes and the Yorkshire Oaks, which was also suggested by Gosden as a target for Coronet. British stables made a clean sweep of the major races at Saint-Cloud, where Charlie Appleby’s Art Du Val won a Listed prize and Headman was impressive in landing the Prix Eugène Adam, a Group Two, for Roger Charlton. Headman provided his 19-year-old jockey, Jason Watson, with a first success in France. “These are the sort of horses you dream of riding,” he said. Pontefract 2.00 Gullane One 2.30 Monoski 3.00 Daffy Jane 3.30 Fayetta 4.00 Raspberry 4.30 Spiorad 5.00 Regal Mirage Wolverhampton 2.15 Leopardima 2.45 The Groove 3.15 Rich Belief 3.45 Sepahi 4.15 You’re Cool 4.45 Moment Of Hope 5.15 Showdance Kid Windsor 5.45 Cherry Cola (nb) 6.15 Dream Kart 6.45 Tomily 7.15 Takumi 7.45 Embour 8.15 Frontman 8.45 Orliko Catterick 6.00 Mia Diva 6.30 Adam’s Ale 7.00 Robeam (nap) 7.30 The Defiant 8.00 Grand Inquisitor 8.30 Arabian Jazz 9.00 I Could Do Better