Is this the end of Neil Woodford’s career as the UK’s most famous, and most celebrated, fund manager? It could be that serious. Woodford has recovered from setbacks in the past, but they have been of the conventional stock-picking variety – a bad run in the markets. Blocking redemptions from a flagship fund is very different. Punters expect instant liquidity, meaning the right to turn their investments into cash at the drop of hat, more or less. If a manager of a high-profile retail fund can’t fulfil that basic requirement, it is in extreme territory. Commercial property funds took the same route in the credit-crunch era, but that was a case of an entire asset class being affected by a lurch in the market. This problem has afflicted Woodford alone. One big redemption request – reportedly from Kent county council, for £250m – seems to have been the trigger for Woodford to pull down the shutters, but there’s little point searching for external causes. Rather Woodford should look in the mirror. He has been heavily overweight in non-quoted stocks and has taken big stakes in mid-sized quoted companies that are hard to shift quickly. There are not, for example, many overnight takers for 25% of doorstep lender Provident Financial or 20% of Kier Group (see below). Illiquidity is built into Woodford’s portfolio these days. That’s a problem if the redemption demands keep arriving. In his glory days, Woodford worked for Invesco, rather than his own firm and, when the dust settles, he’ll have to answer a few questions. Did working for himself affect his judgment? Who challenged him on the critical questions about liquidity? Why did he invest so heavily in unquoted stocks when his past successes were achieved almost exclusively in the quoted-company arena? Woodford has been a refreshingly contrarian presence in the investment world for three decades and made his name by sitting out the turn-of-the-century dotcom mania in brave and brilliant style. But those triumphs feel a long time ago. One hopes he can turn things around but there is, sad to say, a strong sense that most of these difficulties are self-inflicted. Woodford should have stuck to what he knew best. Kier Group’s £264m rights issue at the end of last year was designed to kill dangerous talk about “the next Carillion”. The comparison was grossly unfair, ran the narrative from the boardroom, but Kier declared that it would be a model of prudence anyway. It would strengthen its balance sheet to please its bankers, stakeholders and anybody else worried about risks in the construction and outsourcing sectors. The pitch wasn’t entirely convincing, which is why underwriters to the fundraising were left with a slug of unwanted stock, and why chief executive Haydn Mursell was dumped soon afterwards. But, hey, at least the debt question had been answered, right? Well, not exactly. Monday’s profits warning sent the share price down 41% to 164p, its lowest level for 20 years, and a far cry from the 409p rights price. Kier is now valued at £270m only six months after it received a cash injection of almost equivalent size. New chief executive Andrew Davies arrived with bad news on many fronts. There are “volume pressures” – meaning not enough work – in the highways, utilities and housing maintenance division. Revenues in the building business will also be lower than forecast. And the worst part was the junking of the promise to show net cash at the end of this month, the most flattering point of the year for a business with huge seasonal cash swings. There is “likely” to be net debt instead. In other words, the chat – still – is about borrowings. True believers will argue that the shares are absurdly cheap if “underlying” profits arrive at the £130m-ish implied by the latest statement. And Kier can still boast that its chief difference from Carillion is intact and permanent: most of its contracts are smaller in size, so there isn’t the same concentration of risk. Yet one can understand why outsiders are alarmed by the pace of events. Only nine months ago, with its share price at £10, Kier cheerfully declared a 69p-a-share dividend, a decision that looks terrible in hindsight. The chairman, Philip Cox, will have to explain how it was made. In the meantime, Davies’ “strategic review”, due next month, is suddenly a key moment. Is even deeper cost-cutting in prospect? Sales of businesses? Whatever it is, the plan needs to be decisive and convincing. His predecessor’s plan A wasn’t.