The board of the Breeders’ Cup will meet on Thursday with a decision seemingly imminent on whether to switch this year’s $28m two-day meeting, which is scheduled for 1 and 2 November, away from troubled Santa Anita Park to Churchill Downs in Kentucky, which hosted the event last year. Preparations to hold the Breeders’ Cup at Santa Anita in just over four months have been continuous since it was awarded the event for a record 10th time in August 2018. The track is one of the most famous and historic in world racing, has an unforgettable setting beneath the San Gabriel mountains near Los Angeles and has been talked about in the past as a possible permanent home for the Breeders’ Cup. It has just endured the most difficult six months in its 85-year history, however, due to a sudden spate of fatal injuries to horses both during races and morning exercise which has attracted nationwide attention. In all, 30 horses died during Santa Anita’s spring meeting, which opened on 26 December 2018. Over the year as a whole, Santa Anita has in fact seen fewer fatal injuries than in many previous seasons, and its rate of 2.2 fatalities per 1,000 starts in 2018/19 is lower than that at Churchill Downs. But there has been little respite in the long series of fatal injuries since December and Santa Anita’s six-month spring season closed last weekend with the track and its executives still mired in controversy.  American Currency, a gelding trained by Jerry Hollendorfer, one of America’s most experienced and successful handlers, was the 30th and final horse to die at Santa Anita last weekend, after which The Stronach Group (TSG), which owns Santa Anita, told the 73-year-old that he “is no longer welcome to stable, race or train his horses at any of our facilities”. Hollendorfer has saddled three winners at the Breeders’ Cup including the Dirt Mile in 2017 with Battle Of Midway, who was among the 30 horses to die at the course this year.  A number of causes have been suggested for the sudden rise in fatal injuries at Santa Anita in recent months, including the possibility that unusually wet weather at the start of the year left the track in an unsafe condition. The fact that race-day medications are permitted in the US has also been highlighted, amid claims that these can mask underlying injuries which would otherwise cause a horse to be scratched from racing. TSG proposed radical plans to address its problems in March, including an immediate ban on race-day medication and also on the use of the whip for encouragement. It has since backed down on the time-scale for those proposals following protests from trainers and jockeys, and it has also placed itself in conflict with the California Horse Racing Board (CHRB) by refusing a request from the state regulator to end its meeting early after the 28th equine fatality on 9 June. All these issues will be considered by the Breeders’ Cup board as it weighs up whether to take the dramatic step of moving American racing’s championship event just four months before it is due to be staged. Paddy Power, which has been offering odds on the meeting’s eventual venue for a couple of week, has Santa Anita as an even-money chance with “any other venue” at 8-11. That effectively means Churchill Downs as nowhere else is thought capable of taking on such a major event at such short notice, and there is anecdotal evidence that the price of a hotel room in Louisville in early November has been rising steadily in recent weeks. It would be a high-risk decision to move the Breeders’ Cup away from Santa Anita so close to the event, and also a further huge blow to one of the sport’s iconic venues to lose the meeting when it is already reeling. The betting, though, may well be right, in suggesting that it is too close to call. Newmarket’s July course stages one of its lesser cards on Thursday ahead of the Festival meeting in a couple of weeks’ time but there are still some interesting contests for punters to ponder including a valuable handicap over seven furlongs at 4.25. Land Of Legends, who makes his handicap debut for Saeed bin-Suroor, seems sure to start favourite here but an opening mark of 91 looks quite stiff on his form to date and Kimifive (4.25) could give him plenty to think about. Joe Tuite’s gelding landed a Goodwood handicap in early May in a decent time and has looked to be still in form in two strong races since at Ascot and The Curragh.  Queen Of Burgundy (3.20) and Maygold (5.30) also have strong claims on the same card, while Crownthorpe (4.05) looks solid at Newcastle as the track opens its three-day Northumberland Plate meeting. Newcastle 1.50 Gale Force Maya 2.25 Gallaside 3.00 Welcome Surprise  3.30 Theatro 4.05 Crownthorpe 4.40 Home Before Dusk 5.10 True Hero Nottingham 2.00 Be Prepared 2.35 Miracle Garden 3.10 Infuse 3.40 Bayroot 4.15 Noble Fox 4.50 Prominna 5.20 The Resdev Way Newmarket 2.10 Tomfre 2.45 Faylaq 3.20 Queen Of Burgundy 3.50 Lyndon B 4.25 Kimifive (nap) 5.00 Ouzo 5.30 Maygold (nb) Leicester 5.55 Incentive 6.25 Mottrib 6.55 Stringybark Creek 7.25 Potenza 7.55 Remembering You 8.25 Swinging Eddie 8.55 Be Thankful Hamilton 6.05 Be Perfect 6.35 One Hart 7.05 B Fifty Two 7.35 Sendeed 8.05 Queen Penn 8.35 Spirit Of Wedza 9.05 Epeius -