It’s been almost three years in the making, but to the huge relief of renters across England, the ban on rip-off letting agent fees finally came into force today. Gone are the £300-plus admin fees and the £100 credit-check fee, the hefty extra charge if you want to keep a cat, or the steep surcharge to move in or out on a Saturday – charges that became routine and could add as much as £800 to the upfront cost of renting a property. From today, a whole raft of often hidden and unfair charges are being swept away for anyone entering into a tenancy agreement. An estimated 4.8 million renting households in England are expected to benefit, saving anything from £200 to £800 for each move. The ban will save renters around £240m a year, according to the government. In another crucial move, landlords or their agents will only be allowed to ask for a deposit of up to five weeks’ rent, which should also aid struggling first-time renters. For many, the ban, which applies to all new tenancies signed from today onwards, and from 1 June 2020 for agreements entered into before today, has been too long in coming. Back in November 2016, the Guardian reported that Philip Hammond’s autumn statement that month would promise to outlaw letting agent fees. The announcement was duly made, but in the face of extensive lobbying against the move by landlords and agents, the policy has only now become law. The ban brings England into line with Scotland and many other European countries. Letting fees were, in effect, banned in Scotland in 2012. While still legal in Wales, the fees are set to be outlawed there from September this year. From today, tenants in England will no longer be asked to pay for credit checks and a host of other extra charges that have become the norm in rental hotspots around the country. Housing charity Shelter says some of the extortionate fees it has heard about include £45 to replace a dustpan and brush, and £200 to check out of a property. The only payments (aside from the rent and relevant utility bills) that landlords and agents can now charge are: • A refundable deposit capped at no more than five weeks’ rent (it’s six weeks where the total annual rent is £50,000 or more). • A refundable holding deposit to reserve the property, capped at one week’s rent. • Payments relating to changes to the tenancy. Where a tenant requests a change to the agreement, the landlord or agent is entitled to charge up to £50 for the work, or the amount of their “reasonable costs” if they are higher (though evidence – such as receipts and invoices – would need to be provided). A change might include amending the names on a contract when one flatmate moves out and the other tenants find someone else to move in, or asking to keep a pet, or requesting permission to sublet or run a business from the property. • An “early termination fee” if a tenant requests to leave before the end of their tenancy. This must be “capped at the landlord’s loss or the agent’s reasonable incurred costs,” says the government. • A “default fee” applies to just two things: late payment of rent (it must be at least 14 days overdue) or replacing a lost key or fob which gives access to the building. With the former, any interest charged can’t exceed the Bank of England base rate plus 3%, while, with the latter, the landlord or agent can only bill a tenant for their “reasonable costs”, and must provide written evidence. • Agents and landlords will not be able to charge for the renewal of a new tenancy. If the tenancy was entered into before 1 June 2019, renewal fees agreed at the time will be payable – but only until 31 May 2020. Other fees that are now banned include: • Viewing fees, charges for inventory checks, “check-out” fees, and charges for professional cleaning at the end of the tenancy. Additionally, charging for a rent guarantor and fees for things such as gardening services, getting the chimney swept and having a property “de-flead” as a condition of allowing a pet in the property, will also be outlawed. Landlords or agents found to be charging illegal fees after today can be fined up to £5,000 for a first offence. If they break the rules again within five years, they face an unlimited fine. During the consultation period, 93% of the tenants surveyed agreed with the proposed ban. It has been introduced in part to encourage more people to consider renting in future, the government has claimed. Letting agents that opposed the move have only themselves to blame after some ramped up charges to ridiculous levels, say campaigners. In 2015, Guardian Money featured the case of renter Rory Gray, who was presented with an £800 bill when he asked to rent a £650-a-month flat in Exeter. The agent in question charged a tenancy fee of £360, an admin fee of £90, a £60 referencing fee, a check-in fee of £90 and a £90 guarantor fee – and if Gray decided he wanted to move in on a Saturday, that would add a further £72. Meanwhile, in 2016, campaigner Vicky Spratt described how she had just paid over another £550 in letting agent fees to rent her latest property. “Over the last nine years, agency fees have probably cost me over £2,000 – and I’m only 28. This is money I’ll never get back. It turns out renting is a lucrative business if you’re on the right side of it – which I’m not,” she said at the time. The ban has been welcomed by charities and many other groups. “This is a landmark moment for the millions of people who rent privately,” Citizens Advice chief executive Gillian Guy says. “For too long, families and other renters have had to hand over hundreds of pounds on unfair and uncompetitive letting fees every time they moved home.” Dan Wilson Craw, director at Generation Rent, which was at the forefront of the campaign, says: “The ban on letting fees won’t just save tenants money when they move home – it also gives them more negotiating power with their landlord. If faced with a rent increase or failure to fix a faulty boiler, tenants can now threaten to move out with more credibility, which should make the landlord think twice. “But the lettings industry has a reputation for inventing things to charge tenants for, so we still need to beware of attempts to get around the law. For the ban to work, local councils must use their powers to crack down on illegal practices – and tenants need to know when to report dodgy behaviour in the first place.”