Manchester City’s Bernardo Silva wants to end a memorable season with a bang by helping Portugal win the Nations League final. The 24-year-old shone during his second season at the Etihad Stadium, with his interplay and impact in front of goal seeing him named in the PFA Team of the Year. “Of course, having a great season at club level has given me confidence coming into the national side,” he said before Wednesday’s semi-final against Switzerland in Porto. “And it would be brilliant to finish this season with a title with Portugal, too. “You always want to win titles. Fernando Santos has already led this team to glory and we have a really tough game in front of us against Switzerland now but we are here and we are in it to win it.” Silva is expecting a tough evening at the Estadio do Dragão, where Portugal will be hoping to return this Sunday for the final. The Netherlands or England will be the opposition and the City man would love to come up against some familiar faces. “I think that firstly we have to be focused on the game against Switzerland, which is very important but it would be great to play against some of my team-mates,” he said. “I know them well. Against some players I have lived and shared so many beautiful moments.” Cristiano Ronaldo looks set to spearhead the Portuguese attack against the Swiss, but there is a new star rising through the ranks. João Félix has attracted admiring glances from the biggest teams in Europe after a stunning campaign with Benfica and Portugal head coach Santos is ready to throw in the uncapped teenager. “He’s been called up for a reason,” he said of the 19-year-old, who is being tracked by both Manchester United and Manchester City. “We need to call up players who can contribute, he has great qualities, he has been showing it at club level and he’s one of 23 players who are here on merit, and if he’s here it’s because he’s ready to play and contribute.” Switzerland approach the semi-final as underdogs but boast the talent and togetherness to harm the Portuguese. Granit Xhaka is hoping to make history with the trophyless Swiss a week on from playing in Arsenal’s galling 4-1 Europa League final defeat to Chelsea in Baku. “It was disappointing to lose the final,” the midfielder said. “We wanted to win the title and move up to the Champions League but it didn’t work out. However, since arriving here in Portugal I have focused fully on the national team, what happened, happened.”