David Brindle’s article (Even new homes are not accessible to all. Blame it on austerity-driven planning cuts, 5 June) shines a light on the struggle that disabled people like myself face in our search for accessible housing that allows us to live with a decent level of independence. I have a rare type of muscular dystrophy and have to use a powered wheelchair to get around. This means stairs in a home are a no go. An ideal home would be one level, with a flat entrance threshold so I can do that simple thing we all take for granted: get in and out of my home. When I started to use a wheelchair full time, so began my quest with my local council to get an accessible home that would give me the independence I need to come and go as I please. I called my local authority persistently every week to tell them my flat was unsuitable for my needs. I was unable to use my wheelchair inside to move and the bathroom was now almost unusable. The unfortunate truth is some councils may tell you that, even if you are disabled, if you’re under the age of 65 you don’t fit the criteria needed to get an accessible home. Hopefully Habinteg’s Insight report will send a message to local authorities about the importance of planning for accessible housing. I had to search for over three years to find a suitable home and I’m very lucky to live in one now. In the future I hope this will be the same outcome for all disabled people in the UK.Kerry ThompsonMilton Keynes, Buckinghamshire • David Brindle’s report on the lamentably low commitment to build new homes suitable for disabled and older people struck a particular chord after my own eight-year struggle to find suitable housing. During my search for an accessible home, some of the problems I faced included the indignity of not being able to access the toilet from my wheelchair, despite installing a through-floor lift. I lived in a home where there wasn’t enough turning space to enable me to go into my children’s bedroom, read them a story and tuck them in at night. Being in an unsuitable property robbed me of those special moments many take for granted. Our home essentially made me more disabled than I actually am. Thankfully, I am now in a home that suits our needs. Habinteg’s report shows that only 23% of homes outside of London and due to be built by 2030 are planned to meet basic accessibility criteria – while just 1% will be wheelchair accessible. I hope that local authorities will now realise the need for accessible housing that families like mine have and include us in their planning going forward.Fiona AndersonBolton, Lancashire • It is shameful that many older people and those with a disability are shut out of the housing market. Unfortunately, some local authorities lack a detailed understanding of the homes required to support those with diverse needs. When they do provide specific requirements to build accessible homes, there is often resistance from developers. We are missing a trick. Our research shows most people in the UK want us to build homes that are accessible to all, and would be encouraged to buy property that included accessible features. Inaction reduces the independence of disabled people and those older people with mobility issues. With action and commitment, we can build better homes that everyone can live in, regardless of their age or ability.Dr Rachael DockingSenior programme manager, Centre for Ageing Better • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition