Tory leadership candidates have insisted there must be no unchallenged “coronation” for frontrunner Boris Johnson at the latest round of hustings. Senior cabinet ministers were reported to have hatched plans to force other candidates to withdraw from the race after Johnson comfortably topped the poll in the first ballot of MPs this week. Among the rivals condemning the revelation were the home secretary, Sajid Javid, and Rory Stewart, who both insisted there must be a proper contest. As he arrived at leadership hustings for the party grassroots organised by the National Conservative Convention on Saturday, Javid said senior figures should learn from the mistakes of the last leadership contest in which Theresa May went through without opposition after Andrea Leadsom dropped out. The environment secretary is to pitch himself as a “unity candidate” capable of attracting leavers and remainers, as he formally declared his candidacy saying: “I believe that I’m ready to unite the Conservative and Unionist party, ready to deliver Brexit and ready to lead this great country.” But robust Brexiters in particular dislike the fact that he stayed loyal even in the final days of the crumbling May regime. He received 37 votes in the first round, coming third. Fears that the foreign secretary would be another overly woolly compromise choice were hardly assuaged when after a set-piece speech he seemed unable to outline why his brand of Conservatism might appeal to voters. Hunt has been backed by Liam Fox. He received 43 votes in the first round, placing him second. The home secretary still has the same weaknesses: he is an uninspiring speaker and some worry he is too fond of headline-grabbing, illiberal political gestures. But he is almost as ubiquitous as Liz Truss, and clearly believes this is his time. He received 23 votes in the first round. The out-and-out favourite, so popular with the Tory grassroots that it would be hard for MPs to not make Johnson one of the final two. He has been relatively quiet recently, beyond his regular Telegraph column, but this is very deliberate. Johnson won the first round with 114 votes. The former work and pensions secretary, who quit last year over May’s Brexit plans, has launched her own in-party campaign group/leadership vehicle called Blue Collar Conservatism, promising to make the party more amenable to voters in deprived communities – mainly through a promise to deliver a strong Brexit and policies such as diverting much of the foreign aid budget to schools and police. Raab got 27 votes in the first round. Few things say “would-be leader in waiting” like a kitchen photoshoot with your spouse, and the former Brexit secretary duly obliged with this imageawash with tasteful pastel hues. He formally launched his bid in the Mail on Sunday. Among the more core constituency of Conservative MPs, Raab has been pushing hard, as has his semi-official “Ready for Raab” Twitter feed. Stewart got 19 votes in the first round. “The party and the country deserve a good choice,” he told reporters outside the event. “I don’t want to see a coronation. There needs to be a proper process that’s followed through. “We had a coronation the last time. That didn’t work out well so let’s not make the same mistake again.” Stewart, the international development secretary, said: “The members of the Conservative party, who are wise, sensible, experienced people, deserve to have a choice. “We should have learned from the last time round coronations are not the way to do democratic politics.” Johnson, who has been criticised by his fellow candidates for his reluctance to appear on television debates and submit to greater public scrutiny, avoided reporters after his Range Rover parked at a side door at a London hotel where the event was held. Stewart, something of an outsider in the contest and among the keenest critics of Johnson, accused the frontrunner of adopting a presidential approach. “The whole genius of British politics is that we don’t behave like American presidents sweeping up in a motorcade. We’re all about talking to people,” he said. On Sunday, Channel 4 will represent the former foreign secretary and London mayor with an empty podium after he declined an invitation to participate in a television debate with his five remaining rivals. Earlier, the former Brexit secretary Dominic Raab lashed out at Johnson, claiming that party members would reject a leader who could be viewed as part of the “privileged elite” and questioning his “mettle” to be prime minister. Asked how he would stop Johnson from winning as he left he hustings, Raab said: “We should have proper scrutiny of everyone. The longer this goes on, the more the underdog gets their shot.” The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, took a less critical approach, refusing to say whether Johnson should take the blame for Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s detention in Iran. On her latest decision to go on hunger strike – which her husband will also take part in from London – he added: “Our message to Iran is whatever the disagreements you may have with the United Kingdom, there is an innocent woman at the heart of this.”