Born in Havana, Estefan, 61, emigrated to the US after the Cuban revolution. She formed Miami Sound Machine with her husband Emilio, and had hits in the 1980s with songs such as Dr Beat, Conga, Rhythm Is Gonna Get You and 1-2-3. The couple have 26 Grammy awards between them. Their story is told in the musical On Your Feet! at the London Coliseum until 31 August. They have two children and live in Miami. When were you happiest?1 March 1991, when I got back on the stage almost a year after a road accident in our tour bus. I felt like I had climbed Mount Everest. That was euphoric. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?I don’t want to sound conceited, but I like myself. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Insincerity and lies. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?Art. We have some Picassos and Diego Riveras. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I wish I was taller. I lost two inches in that accident. I am 5ft. What did you want to be when you were growing up?A psychologist and then a diplomat. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?“Go back to your country.” It was a flight attendant in the United States. We got her fired. What is top of your bucket list?To visit Bhutan, because I’ve heard that it’s the happiest place in the world. What does love feel like?Comforting, solid, unconditional, a drug. What was the best kiss of your life?The most memorable was the first with my husband, because he tricked me into it. It was 4 July 1976, the bicentenary of the United States, and fireworks were going off. He told me it was his birthday and that he wanted a kiss on the cheek. But then he turned his face, and it changed my life. Have you ever said ‘I love you’ and not meant it?Never. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, Jesus Christ and Buddha. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?“You heathen.” What is the worst job you’ve done?I’ve only done two and loved them both – one in the band, and the other as an interpreter in customs. What has been your biggest disappointment?Not yet being able to sing in a free Cuba. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?My life is wonderful – I can’t ask for one more thing. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Being able to communicate with people all over the world through my music. What keeps you awake at night?When I feel that I am unprepared. Before a show I always have nightmares that I go out on stage naked. What song would you like played at your funeral?A song I wrote years ago called Remember Me With Love. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?To live in the moment and not worry about the rest.