Mark Ronson’s broken heart weighs 25kg. It says so on the outside of the wooden crate that takes this large, cracked mirrorball out to the club nights the DJ and producer has been holding sporadically since last year. It sits in front of Ronson’s DJ console, jaggedly reflecting the tutti-frutti light scheme. We’re in a long-serving King’s Cross venue, rather than a place Ronson’s usual clientele, the international jet set, might go to dance. The tinsel decor of his travelling Club Heartbreak is also a little makeshift. Ronson comes penultimate in a four-DJ lineup, most of whom spin a series of “sad bangers” – the go-to phrase sums up Ronson’s fifth studio album, Late Night Feelings, a record that finds the transatlantic super-producer dancing with tears in his eyes. Tonight he starts off wearing a leather jacket with the broken mirror ball motif on the back, but soon strips off to reveal a Faith-era George Michael T-shirt beneath as he does sweaty battle with a pair of headphones. It’s hard to imagine such a gilded, A-list Insta-life actually laid low by intimate pain – not least because the waters in which successful creatives swim supply all sorts of analgesic possibilities, and plenty more fish. The problem with Late Night Feelings is small but significant. The hurt here is vague and the music not dramatic enough But there is something convincing in the notion that Ronson’s 2017 divorce from Joséphine de La Baume, his wife of five years created an internal blemish in an otherwise hunky-dory existence. Pain, Ronson’s fifth album indirectly posits, is universal; a great leveller and, arguably, a far more fruitful space from which to draw creatively than the beautiful people’s party music that has been Ronson’s recent stock-in-trade. Ronson plays many of his own songs tonight, not least his “favourite” from the new album, the Angel Olsen-powered True Blue, which imports Olsen’s trademark reverberating sound wholesale into Ronson’s ambit. (He allegedly first heard her music through the wall of a pilates studio.) But there’s no room for Uptown Funk, the Bruno Mars-fronted monster that renewed Ronson’s commercial cachet: too, well, “up”. Ronson doesn’t sing at all on Late Night Feelings, but entrusts the vocals to an all-female cast. It’s a list that makes a lot of sense: Los Angeles Swede Lykke Li – made famous by one of the most anguished bangers of recent times, I Follow Rivers (2011) – and an even more recent bard of contemporary longing, Camila Cabello. It’s really not a bad record: united in theme and varied enough in treatment not to outstay its welcome, Late Night Feelings is the latest in Ronson’s attempts to steer pop away from ever more crass ear-grabbing tropes. On this count you believe him, up to a point. When he teamed up with fellow super-producer Diplo last year as Silk City, though, Ronson seems to have had few such scruples: Electricity – their hit with Dua Lipa – is no aural wallflower. But tonight Ronson is punting something a little more retro: this DJ set, like his album, eschews the latest sounds for a mashup of tried and tested glitter-as-medicine. This new overtly disco direction might have legs, too. He’s had meetings recently with Diana Ross, the queen of disco, to discuss her next album. It’s significant, though, that Ronson kicks off his hour-long set with I Can’t Stand the Rain by Ann Peebles, famously sampled by Missy Elliott and Timbaland for Elliott’s 1997 hit The Rain. Long before Ronson was the producer winning Grammys for his work on Lady Gaga’s career-rescuing Joanne, or Electricity, he spent the late 90s DJ-ing for the New York hip-hop crowd. “‘What the fuck are you playing, white boy?’” was frequently “a verbatim quote”, remembers Ronson in a recent issue in Interview magazine, where he was grilled (very gently) by Rashida Jones, who was his partner in those days. Ronson’s understanding and respect for hip-hop’s constituent parts – the soul samples, the grooves – endeared him to the rap scene. They ended up being the bedrock of his career. “Amy taught me a lot about heartbreak,” Ronson says, before spinning Winehouse’s evergreen, ever-blue Back to Black. Before Ronson was in cahoots with the bling likes of Mars, he was a sensitive enabler in league with soul revivalists the Dap-Kings. He urged Winehouse – then a jazz singer who Island Records wanted to turn into a pop star – to write what she felt. The result was a one of the biggest albums of the 00s, and the making of Ronson’s reputation, after his minor hit, 2003’s Ooh Wee. Tonight’s set comes five days after the release of Late Night Feelings; Ronson and a few of the album’s vocalists will soon be bound for Glastonbury. Unspoken hopes exist that tonight’s “special guests” might include some of the album’s shinier stars: maybe Miley Cyrus, who sings the album’s most ubiquitous cut, Nothing Breaks Like a Heart, and is expected at Worthy Farm. Cyrus did turn up to the last London iteration of Club Heartbreak last December, but doesn’t show tonight; Ronson makes the best of her absence. In an outbreak of cheesy brio, he plays Nothing Breaks Like a Heart, interrupting it with Lil Nas X’s country trap hit, Old Town Road, which showcases Miley’s dad, Billy Ray Cyrus. From there, Ronson segues into Jolene, the Dolly Parton standard that provided inspiration for Nothing Breaks Like a Heart. Nothing about this is particularly cutting edge. But it leaves you with a big grin on your face, where the mascara was previously running for Winehouse. Ronson’s newer talent is in the house, however – starting with New York’s King Princess, signed to Ronson’s record label and about to release her own debut album. She bounces around while Ronson plays her catchy-enough Pieces of Us. Yebba, a previously unknown Arkansas soul singer, arrives with a pair of backing vocalists to sing Don’t Leave Me Lonely, one of the record’s standout tracks. A disco-soul anthem-in-waiting held up by an unexpected reggaeton shuffle, it supplies guts and grace to an album that doesn’t disappoint, but somehow doesn’t quite end up a classic. The problem with Late Night Feelings is revealed by the DJ set. It’s small but significant. The hurt here is vague and the music not dramatic enough. Ronson spins the title track with its scything disco strings and its nagging “on and on and on” chorus and it totally convinces as wistful party music. But truly great heartbreak songs deal in specifics: flaming locks of auburn hair, eyes of emerald green. Or, as Winehouse put it, in one of pop’s great opening salvos: “He left no time to regret/Kept his dick wet/With his same old safe bet.” The best Late Night Feelings can come up with is one sole occasion when Cyrus nails a place and time: “Remember what you said to me,” she asks, “We were drunk in love in Tennessee?” Late Night Feelings deals in generalisation, and pain is horribly specific.