Jeremy Corbyn once again looks at a political issue and draws entirely the wrong conclusion (Corbyn says Peterborough victory justifies Labour’s decision to campaign primarily on austerity, not Brexit, Politics live with Andrew Sparrow, theguardian.com, 7 June). Labour won with 30.9% of the vote over the Brexit party, which got 28.9%. The Conservative, who had held the seat for 12 years until 2017, was third with 21.4%. The reality is that the rightwing vote was 50.3% and the split rightwing vote gifted Labour the seat by an amazingly narrow margin. Onasanya won in the 2017 election with 48.1% of the vote. If Corbyn thinks he can win an election if he haemorrhages 17.2% of Labour voters in an election like this, he is deeply deluded. It is not remotely supportive of his strategy and shows that Labour’s Brexit policy remains toxic for its electoral future. John CooksonBournemouth • Let’s be realistic about what was in effect a status quo result for Labour in the Peterborough byelection. Lisa Forbes won by 683 votes compared to Fiona Onasanya’s 607 majority in 2017. What has changed is the nature of the chasing pack, and there are some basic conclusions to draw from the result. Labour should be miles ahead and isn’t. The Tories are in serious trouble and know it. The Brexit party should have won but didn’t. The Greens and Lib Dems are improving but still well adrift, and Ukip is finished but won’t admit it. In short, rather like the Brexit shambles itself, little has changed.Toby WoodPeterborough, Cambridgeshire • While Labour is entitled to some celebration over the Peterborough result, care needs to be exercised not to adopt a myopic view of the overall picture and claim it is a victory for Corbyn’s “constructive ambiguity” Brexit policy. Labour’s share of the vote dropped by 17.2% compared with 2017. The party should be winning by huge majorities given the Tories’ indescribably dismal performance across the board. Declaring firm policies to support remain while also proposing an end to austerity to deliver badly needed social and economic reforms are not mutually exclusive alternatives. Indeed the very opposite is true: they are mutually dependent.Nigel de GruchyOrpington, Kent • As the Labour majority in Peterborough was so small, I’m sure that you and your readers will agree that we should disregard it and spend the next three years seeking to overturn it.Tom TrustRedruth, Cornwall • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition