A leaked video clip circulated on social media appears to show Jeopardy phenomenon James Holzhauer finally losing a game. The video purports to show a snippet of an episode scheduled to be broadcast in most US markets on Monday night. If genuine, it means that Holzhauer will end his streak after winning a whopping 32 games in a row. The minute-long clip shows the results come in for the “Final Jeopardy” segment of the show. Holzhauer answers correctly, identifying 16th-century English playwright Christopher Marlowe, but wagers too little to win. With a correct answer and a hefty wager, contestant Emma Boettcher triumphs. “His wager – a modest one for the first time,” host Alex Trebek says, surprised, as he reads the reigning champ’s wager of $1,399. “If you came up with the correct response,” he tells Boettcher, who bet more than $20,000 to bring her total to $46,801, “you’re going to be the new Jeopardy champion. “Did you? You did! What a game! Oh my gosh.” The clip was taken down from various platforms after making the rounds on Sunday but it could still be found on social media on Monday. The streak by Holzhauer, a professional sports gambler, brought Jeopardy its highest ratings in 14 years as viewers tuned in to see if he could break the winnings record of all-time champ Ken Jennings. After Friday’s show, Holzhauer was nipping at Jennings’ heels with total non-tournament winnings of $2,462,216, just shy of Jennings’ $2,520,700. Jennings won a record 74 straight games but Holzhauer has cashed in quicker with a high-risk strategy, usually betting big bucks on Daily Double and Final Jeopardy questions. It is not clear why he would have changed tactics in the latest show. But the champ had suggested his daughter was rooting for him to finally lose. “My kid cried about the possibility of her dad losing, so I told her we could have a party the day after it inevitably happens,” he said Sunday on Twitter. “Now she cries when I win.” An employee at the CBS affiliate in Montgomery, Alabama, which broadcasts the popular quiz show in the morning instead of the evening like most of the country, confirmed to the Washington Post that the leaked moment of Holzhauer’s loss was part of Monday’s show.