The Metropolitan Museum is marking Stonewall 50 with a gay-related theme for its annual gala and the exhibit Camp: Notes on Fashion (free with museum ticket; adult $25, under-12 free, until 8 September). LGBT critics such as RuPaul have suggested the show fails to capture the concept of “camp” and I generally agree. Nonetheless, it’s a great opportunity to see the fun, extravagant side of the Costume Institute’s amazing collection. Also, the show includes a great display of art and objects from LGBT history, including Pennington’s portrait – the only full portrait – of Oscar Wilde, and Paul Cadmus’s often-discussed but rarely seen The Fleet’s In!, with its scandal-rousing scene of mixed gay and straight cruising in 1930s New York. The show Art After Stonewall, 1969-1989 is spread over two spaces: work from the 1970s is at the world’s only museum of LGBT art, the Leslie-Lohman Museum (suggested admission $10, until 21 July), while art from the 1980s is at NYU’s Grey Art Gallery (suggested admission $5, until 20 July). The show clearly sets artworks in the context of the fight for LGBTQ rights and changing concepts of sexuality and gender. Highlights include David Hockney’s unusual portrait of Divine, a Bachardy charcoal sketch of the dying Christopher Isherwood, a great collection of Boston school photographs, and pictures by and of Keith Haring (I especially like an Annie Leibovitz shot of Haring nude and body-painted by himself). The New York Public Library’s Love and Resistance: Stonewall 50 (until 13 July) exhibition features archival material from the period around the Stonewall uprising. Photographs by lesbian activists Kay Lahusen and Diana Davies are the unifying theme but there are also other photos such as Fred W McDarrah’s iconic shot of Stonewall’s strikingly diverse patrons. The ephemera are particularly touching, such as a Gay Liberation Front newsletter from 1970, asking readers to send suggestions about commemorating the Stonewall uprising to Craig Rodwell, one of the organisers of the first Gay Pride march. The Lesbian Herstory Archives (484 14th Street), in Brooklyn’s original “lesbian” neighbourhood of Park Slope has thousands of archival items, memorabilia and artefacts from the city’s lesbian history and culture that will help visitors gain insight into the evolution of the community. It is free to visit but check the opening times, which change month to month. Group tours are available but should be booked in advance. Restaurants Via Carota, Buvette, and the newly opened Bar Pisellino (all in Grove Street, West Village) are owned by the astoundingly successful couple Jody Williams and Rita Sodi, who have bought their passion for – and knowledge of – authentic French and Italian cooking to the West Village with these three classy establishments. Via Carota’s green salad was described as the best in the world by chef and writer Samin Nosrat in the New York Times, while the “near genius” Manhattan served at Buvette is the best in the city, according to grubstreet.com. Local Expeditions, founded by Brooklynite Nancy Blaine, focuses on wallet-friendly walking tours designed by locals that go beyond the usual tourist haunts. The tongue-in-cheek East and West Village tours are particularly good fun and come from a local perspective: for example, the This Used To Be Gay tour, which Blaine developed with her friend Moe Angelos (of performance group the Five Lesbian Brothers). She says: “The neighbourhoods are still kind of LGBTQ but they have become quite ‘status quo’ in the past 15 years or so. I left the West Village in 2001 because all my people had migrated to Brooklyn. That said, the LGBTQ history in the Village is fantastic and there is so much to show. We are really excited about it.” Tours are between two and three hours long and costs between $20 and $60 with 5% of proceeds going to the guide’s preferred charity. The Bureau of General Services – Queer Division (208 West 13th Street, until 15 September), at the LGBTQ Center, is my favourite queer bookstore in NYC with a great selection of ’zines and artist books. Make sure you check out the Bureau’s Y’all Better Quiet Down, a group exhibition of art and ephemera in response to the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising curated by Nelson Santos. At the Brooklyn Museum, the Nobody Promised You Tomorrow: Art 50 Years After Stonewall exhibition (until 8 December) explores the profound legacy of the Stonewall uprisings within contemporary art and visual culture today. The show masterfully embodies queerness at its most fluid and expansive, bringing together the voices of 28 artists born after 1969 whose artworks look at the past in search for mirrors to their own queer identities, while projecting a more nuanced and intersectional future. In the heart of the West Village is Julius’ (159 West 10th Street), the city’s oldest standing gay bar, where the famous Sip-In took place. The 1966 action by the Mattachine Society challenged bars and restaurants that refused to serve alcohol to homosexuals, a common practice at the time. Go for the happy hour (every day from 4pm-9pm) and stay for the comfort food. Take a voguing class (single class $17, held twice weekly from 6pm), at the Gibney Dance studios on Broadway with Jason Anthony Rodriguez, aka Slim Ninja. Vogue is a form of self-expression in which striking elegant poses elevates your confidence and, most importantly, yourself. After body-conditioning and stretching you will find exercises and combinations that weave together key voguing elements such as arms control, runway, cat walk, duck walk, and dips. Alice Austen House on Staten Island was the home of the prolific and pioneering photographer where, rebelling against Victorian mores, she lived with her partner, Gertrude Tate. The museum houses a permanent collection of Austen’s work, with documentary photos capturing city life in the late 1800s and early 1900s, sitting with early images of women dressed in male drag. There are also exhibitions of other photographers’ work – the current exhibition, Stonewall at 50 (until 30 September), includes portraits of 15 intergenerational LGBTQ+ activists and artists by Collier Schorr. (Museum entrance is a $5 suggested donation). Another special exhibition to mark the 50th anniversary of Stonewall, Pride: Photographs of Stonewall and Beyond, is on at the Museum of the City of New York (until 31 December, $18). It is made up of a wealth of images by Fred W McDarrah, former staff photographer for the Village Voice, who worked at the liberal US news and culture paper for more than five decades. The show includes photographs of the initial Stonewall uprising, intimate portraits of significant people in the LGBTQ rights movement, and images of pride marches, protests and other public LGBTQ events. Dance bands from around the world bring a glorious open-air party to Lincoln Center’s Damrosch Park for the annual Midsummer Night’s Swing, with events every night until 13 July. It’s one of the city’s largest outdoor dance events, and has been running since 1988, and includes different live acts each night playing swing, salsa, R&B, disco and tango, alongside DJs, dance instructors and a late-night silent disco. Bayard Rustin’s Residence was the home of the key strategist in the civil and gay rights movements. He was a proponent of nonviolent protest, a mentor to Martin Luther King Jr, and a lead organiser of the landmark 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom. He lived at the Chelsea apartment from 1962 to 1987, and a plaque outside now honours his life and work, including the famous quote: “We need, in every community, a group of angelic troublemakers.” For more on this, there is a Making Gay History episode from 2016 featuring an interview with his partner Walter Naegle, and a 1986 recording of an interview between Bayard and Peg Byron, who was writing for the DC-based gay newspaper the Washington Blade. Mood Ring is a gay bar in Bushwick on Myrtle Avenue, a few steps away from tropical-themed party venue Bossa Nova Civics Club. I’ve hosted my queer Caribbean party “No Badmind” at Mood Ring and the uplifting energy and inclusiveness is what keeps me coming back. The drinks list features astrology-themed cocktails ($11) and this is definitely my go-to spot for a good late night. If you are dedicated to nightlife that has well-curated DJ lineups and champions for underground club-music culture, H0l0 in Ridgewood, Queens is a solid choice. It’s a versatile spot that hosts some of my favenights, such as Gush, a lesbian party for women of colour where, according to co-founder Angela Dimayuga, the pricing “is a reverse economic system from the world outside” – tickets are $5 for femme/non-binary folks, $10 for gay cis men, and $75 for straight men. Nowadays, on the Brooklyn/Queens border, started life as an outdoor bar, restaurant and party space – that’s free to enter. In 2017 it opened an indoor venue and it’s one of my favourite newer clubs. The sound system is everything a club kid desires. The lighting is sophisticated and the fog is always at peak density. The subwoofer will encourage you to move your body regardless of whether you feel compelled to dance or not, it’s hard to resist that bass. Leave your phone in your pocket because the venue enforces a no-cellphone-on-the-dancefloor policy. You won’t need it anyway, you’ll be preoccupied with the infectious techno and club music-filled sets performed by skilled DJs on any given day of the week. Starr Bar is a fairly new venue, in Bushwick, Brooklyn. The venue supports the QTPOC community on a consistent basis, by hosting open-mic music, poetry and performance events, a “political salon” with discussions and accompanying political-themed cocktails, Marxist-feminist happy hour, swing dance classes and much more. Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips