An amalgam of illness, injury and a “killer” heatwave are disrupting England’s preparations for the World Cup quarter-final against Norway on Thursday night but, outwardly at least, Phil Neville remains as oasis of calm. Although England’s manager revealed that his wife, Julie, is so nervous about the game she is “lighting candles and saying prayers” back at the family home in Manchester, Neville himself is staying cool amid rocketing temperatures in Normandy. “I like it being hot and we’ve planned for it,” he said. “If we keep passing it well, the ball won’t get tired. It’s our English mentality to worry about the weather. For two weeks at St George’s Park [England’s national training session in Staffordshire] my players essentially lived in a sauna. We wore thermals. The players enjoy hot weather, we feel good in the heat.” Unfortunately Millie Bright and Lucy Bronze, two of England’s key defenders, are not feeling at all good after succumbing to a vomiting illness while Steph Houghton, England’s captain and best central defender, appears unlikely to recover from an ankle injury. Bright, whose central defensive partnership with Houghton is regarded as the Lionesses’ best pairing, seems to be the worst afflicted and is described as a “major doubt”. Bronze has been unwell for longer and, encouraged by a belief the virus is working its way out of her system, the England medical team are doing everything possible to hasten that process and get her on to the pitch. Houghton had her ankle stamped on in the final minutes of England’s extraordinary 3-0 last-16 win against Cameroon in Valenciennes on Sunday. She has been receiving intensive treatment ever since but appears to be losing her race against time and Neville conceded on Tuesday that his influential captain is a “major doubt”. Rather than appear fazed by such setbacks, England’s coach instead chose to regard them as a vindication of his controversial rotation policy. “People have an obsession with rotation but its for moments like this,” he said. “It means it’s no problem now. If Steph and Millie are out we bring someone else in, no problem. It will be a seamless transition. Everyone knows the system, the way we play, I’ve utter belief in all my players. I said six months ago I didn’t want to get to the quarter finals of the World Cup and throw someone in we haven’t tried or tested. There’s been a plan and it’s for moments like this. “As a coach you plan for these moments. I’m totally relaxed. As a manager you can only worry about those who can get on the bus and those are the fit ones. Injuries and illnesses mean opportunities for others. I would put my life on Leah Williamson and Abbie McManus – Houghton and Bright’s likely understudies – being the best two players on the pitch.” He added: “My girls don’t have any fear of failure. We were crying out for this. We’re not going to say it’s nerve wracking or our bellies are twitching a little here. We will embrace it. The bigger the occasion, the greater the pressure, the more my players embrace it. They’re not going to back off. “Travelling a lot for a number of weeks as we’re doing in this tournament, you are going to pick up bugs. It’s par for the course, it’s a virus. It happens. Lucy is more than likely to be fit for the game but, at this moment in time, she’s not well.” Neville is not underestimating the threat from a defensive formidable looking, rapid counter-attacking Norway. “They’re a really dangerous opponent,” he said. “The most difficult we could have They are a counter-attack team with real speed. We will have to jump up 10% or 15% in our performance levels to be successful.” Julie Neville does not share her husband’s serenity ahead of the biggest game of his fledgling managerial career. “My wife worries like mad,” revealed England’s coach. “She’s from Irish family, she prays, lights candles, she’s really struggling and finding it difficult. She’s maybe best going to sleep for 90 minutes. But, for me, it’s business as usual.”