With Boris Johnson established as the favourite in the Tory leadership race, the other contenders have positioned themselves on either side of the Brexit spectrum as they attempt to build a strategy that can take them into the final ballot of Conservative members. Esther McVey McVey has the hardest line on Brexit, saying she wants to ditch the withdrawal agreement and leave with no deal at the end of October.Dominic Raab The former Brexit secretary wants to leave with a deal and is only planning to ask for an “exchange of letters” to modify the backstop. However, he cemented himself as one of the most hardline contenders when he refused to rule out proroguing parliament to force through no deal if necessary on 31 October. Andrea Leadsom The former cabinet minister is a committed Brexit supporter who is clear she wants the UK to leave on 31 October and consulted clerks about the possibility of proroguing parliament, but has accepted advice against that course of action. She does, however, want to leave with a deal and has a plan to pass mini “bitesize” packages of legislation to demonstrate support for most elements of the withdrawal agreement.Boris Johnson Johnson was first out of the blocks to declare that he wanted the UK to leave on 31 October – deal or no deal. He would not prorogue parliament to achieve that but has set out an ambition to secure a better deal from Brussels before that date. He favours “alternative arrangements” to avoid a hard border in Ireland, so as to facilitate a “managed exit” from the EU. Sajid Javid A former remainer, the home secretary’s position is that he wants to leave with a deal after a renegotiation with Brussels. However, Javid has said he cannot envisage a circumstance in which the UK would need another extension to the 31 October deadline o and is prepared to oversee a no-deal Brexit, putting him in a more hardline place than Michael Gove and Jeremy Hunt.Michael Gove Gove, one of the original Brexit campaigners, is clear he does not want the UK to leave without a deal and would be prepared to go beyond 31 October to achieve a better one. However, he is not ruling out a no-deal Brexit if nothing can be renegotiated. His red line is that Brexit must be delivered before the next election.Jeremy Hunt Hunt is a former remainer who is now clear he wants to leave the UK with a deal and believes that is possible by 31 October. He would send a new negotiating team to Brussels including members of the Democratic Union party and hardline Eurosceptics. If a renegotiation was not possible, then he would be prepared to go for no deal, but he has described that as “political suicide” as it would lead to a confidence vote and potentially an election.Mark Harper The relatively unknown backbencher has not mapped out a detailed Brexit policy but he wants to leave with a renegotiated deal – like most of the other candidates. He says it is not credible to take the UK out of the EU on 31 October but is open to leaving without a deal if revisions to the withdrawal agreement are not possible.Matt Hancock The health secretary has made it clear that no deal is not an option for him so he would be asking MPs to choose between leaving with a deal and not leaving at all. He would also want to renegotiate Theresa May’s deal with a time limit to the backstop, which the prime minister was unable to achieve.Rory Stewart Stewart is arguing for a soft Brexit with a deal possibly involving a customs union. He rules out supporting both a second referendum and no deal.Sam Gyimah The former minister is the radical outlier in the contest because he wants a second referendum. He would like a two-step question of leave against remain and then May’s deal against no deal.