With Pride upon us, you may wish to celebrate by watching something LGBT-themed, but you’ve seen the obvious classics of the genre (from Victim to Paris is Burning to The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant) and the new canon titles (from Brokeback Mountain to Carol to Weekend), and honestly can’t be bothered with the Elton John biopic. What other options are out there? We’ve singled out 10 essential queer works that deserve a wider audience. For every inspirational coming-out story, there are several agonised staying-in ones. They’re not as easy to watch, perhaps, but Oliver Hermanus’s stark, searing drama about a married, middle-aged and terminally closeted Afrikaner man who becomes violently infatuated with his daughter’s boyfriend is a rare and essential study of the inner rot cultivated by years of identity suppression – and a fierce critique of pervasively toxic South African masculinity. Deon Lotz’s performance, tense and bristling with ill-fastened rage and internalised homophobia, is entirely extraordinary; for a complementary portrait of hidden gay identity in modern South Africa, follow it up with John Trengove’s equally impressive, tough-minded The Wound. A study of transgender identity that exposes a film like The Danish Girl for the perfumed, inauthentic travesty it is, Australian director Sophie Hyde’s diary-style film sensitively portrays a transgender man’s year-long transition through the eyes of his accepting but inquisitive 16-year-old daughter, with whom he has weekly visits while undergoing the change. As such, the relationships of both grown parent and adolescent child to their changing bodies – and more internal senses of self – are examined in rare parallel, while as the former, the remarkable performance of gender-nonconforming lead Del Herbert-Jane (initially attached to the project only as a gender diversity consultant) makes a compelling case for not “ciswashing” the casting of such roles. Made in 1983, John Sayles’s grainy, empathetic indie about a New Jersey housewife’s sexual and personal awakening after having an affair with a female college professor holds up more robustly than you might expect, notwithstanding some dated stylistic trappings and uneven acting. There are few dramatic fireworks in this coming-out story, but that’s partly the point – that perfectly unremarkable people in the suburbs can be LGBT too, and that some things change more than others when you realise this. A glittery rainbow road to fabulous self-discovery doesn’t unroll before Lianna when she comes out and leaves her husband: independence and a job at a supermarket checkout are the rewards here, and that’s enough. Queer cinema existed in mostly coded form for the middle decades of film history, but go back to the silent era, and you may be surprised by the untempered LGBT sympathies of landmark films like Ernst Lubitsch’s raucous, stereotype-challenging cross-dressing comedy I Don’t Want to Be a Man, and this piercing tale of unrequited gay love and longtime companionship by Danish master of austerity Carl Theodor Dreyer. Alleged to have been inspired by the French sculptor Auguste Rodin, its narrative of a celebrated painter, spurned by the male model he’s fixated on, who discovers a more loyal love in his dying days is reserved in many senses, leaving largely implicit the matter of sexuality – but emotionally, it gets you right between the eyes. At a time when the British education system is saddled with debate over whether LGBT relationships should be taught in schools, Ron Peck’s unassuming but lingering character study of a gay schoolteacher in 1970s London deserves reappraisal: in its most extraordinary scene, his students barrage him with jeering questions about his sexuality, only to be taken off guard when he responds with calm, informative candour. Elsewhere, it’s a textured, authentic portrayal of everyday gay life in the big smoke, covering casual sex and the club scene – a pre-Grindr realm that nonetheless isn’t entirely removed from today’s reality – with the same frank, straightforward approach as its protagonist. If you haven’t ever seen Dee Rees’s 2011 breakthrough film, know that Meryl Streep is judging you. “What about Adepero Odebye? What about Pariah?” she memorably exclaimed in her Golden Globe acceptance speech for The Iron Lady, noting the unsung indie performances no less deserving of trophies than hers. Streep got the surname wrong – it’s Oduye – but was otherwise completely on point. Rees’s study of a teenage African American lesbian coming out in the face of her mother’s vicious prejudice is not just a representational milestone in the coming-of-age genre, but a stirring, emotionally immediate experience on any terms – and yes, should have made Oduye a major star. In cinema’s long history of hacky, hackneyed meet-cutes, there’s never been one quite like the one that opens Paris 05:59: Theo and Hugo: an 18-minute orgy in a Paris men’s sex club, soaked in crimson light, where the two hip, hot twentysomethings of the title connect amid a veritable spaghetti pile of thrusting body parts. If you expect Olivier Ducastel and Jacques Martineau’s film to continue in the vein of this aggressive opening salvo, however, you’re in for a bittersweet surprise. As the strangers peel away from the club for a night of walking, talking and – here’s where it gets a little less like a gay Before Sunset – panic at the sexual health clinic, what emerges is a fresh, striking snapshot of young gay love and sexuality in the antiretroviral era. A lot of the films on this list have been chosen for their social and political resonance alongside their entertainment value, but I have to be honest about the core virtue of Julian Hernandez’s 140-minute epic of desire and physicality: it’s really, really, really hot. The third in a trilogy of sensual gay experimental films by the Mexican auteur – the other two, A Thousand Clouds of Peace and Broken Sky, are both well worth your while – is the most ravishing of the lot, tangling the restless earthly bodies and urges of young gay men with eerie spiritual challenges and complications. It’s queer eroticism given quasi-mythic grandeur. Cannes rightly swooned over Céline Sciamma’s exquisite lesbian romance Portrait of a Lady on Fire last month, and it looks to be the film that finally seals the French director’s status as an arthouse major. Hopefully, however, it will lead new converts to other highlights in Sciamma’s wonderful, probingly queer filmography – notably this perfectly pitched examination of childhood gender confusion, following a 10-year-old girl, Laure, who adjusts to her new neighbourhood by presenting as a boy to other, unquestioning children. Tackling Laure’s duality with delicate psychological nuance and perceptiveness, Tomboy draws no firm conclusions about her identity, instead making the case for children to explore their gender without pressure or judgment. As the first feature film ever to be directed by a black lesbian – how remarkable that it took until 1996 to reach that milestone – Cheryl Dunye’s debut would have an immovable place in queer film history even if it weren’t as lively, limber and funny as it is. A freewheeling romantic comedy that serves as the basis for both introspective self-portraiture and a pointed lesson in black film history, it stars Dunye herself as “Cheryl”, a video-store worker and aspiring film-maker balancing an up-and-down love life with her research into black female stereotypes on screen – hence that caustic provocation of a title. Much championed by cinephiles and academics, but rarely screened or discussed in the mainstream, it deserves a brighter spotlight.