The Observer’s own Carole Cadwalladr is about to take her place on the bookshelf alongside popular young adult fictional stars such as Alex Rider and Percy Jackson. The journalist who uncovered the Cambridge Analytica data scandal has inspired a new thriller aimed at teenage readers. “I would describe it as Nancy Drew meets The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo,” said Icelandic novelist Sif Sigmarsdóttir, referring to the fictional American teen detective and to Stieg Larsson’s Lisbeth Salander to sum up the mix of styles in her Nordic tale. Sigmarsdóttir, 40, who lives in London and is a published author in Iceland and Britain, sees Cadwalladr as a true role model. “I wanted to do my part. Carole is amazing, because going up against power is hard and can be even dangerous. I have seen some of the online abuse she gets. We need more like her to inspire younger girls,” Sigmarsdóttir said. The Sharp Edge of a Snowflake, published by Hodder later this month, tells of the tireless investigations of a young journalist who, while reporting on a murder, uncovers the dubious practices of a data-driven marketing agency called London Analytica – an organisation determined to protect its efforts to capitalise on people’s personal data. “The story is set in London and Reykjavík,” said Sigmarsdóttir. “My journalist is called Hannah Eiríksdóttir and she has red hair, not blonde, but she does wear Carole’s cool leather jacket. “I want to get teenagers to think about the Cambridge Analytica scandal. They should know what these companies are doing with the information they gather. In my book it is used to target vulnerable young girls, selling them weight-loss pills.” The Pulitzer-nominated Cadwalladr, 49, is delighted to hear of the book: “I’ve been racking my brain about how to bring this story to a wider audience, and particularly a younger one, so I’m delighted that Sif Sigmarsdóttir has written this. These are such big issues. Finding creative ways of getting across what is a difficult and complex story is really key,” she said. She is also pleased by the publisher’s term “feminist Nordic noir”. “This might be my dream genre. The world needs more journalists and I’d be thrilled if a generation of young women were inspired by Sif’s writing to join the fray.”