This article is part of the Guardian’s 2019 Women’s World Cup Experts’ Network, a cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the 24 countries who have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from two countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 7 June. It’s a case of in with the old and in with the older as New Zealand’s Football Ferns look to emerge from the gloom of a succession of unfulfilled new dawns onto the bright stage of the World Cup in France. Putting it bluntly, the celebration of the emancipation of women’s football in New Zealand turned into a bit of a car crash on 10 June 2018. With New Zealand Football having made an unprecedented leap towards equality by granting the nation’s female internationals the same entitlements as their male counterparts (equal pay and business-class travel to international matches), the first new dawn had arrived. A friendly match against Japan in Wellington was billed as a celebration Big things were expected of players who were no longer burdened by a build-up that had traditionally included 12-24 hours cramped in cattle class as they journeyed from their European and US professional clubs. The biggest crowd for women’s football match in the country’s history rolled into to Wellington Stadium to witness, well, an absolute horror show. It was not the fact of a 3-1 defeat but more that acting under instructions from their Austrian coach, Andreas Heraf, the Football Ferns parked something more akin to a jumbo jet than a bus in front of goal. The “anti-football” served up by the Ferns was bad enough to shock the nation. It was a return to the dark ages. Heraf was unrepentant. “We will never have that quality to compete with Japan,” he said post-match, suggesting a team whose results against that country include a 2-2 draw at the 2008 Olympics and a 2-1 defeat at the 2011 World Cup, would have lost 8-0 had they attempted to pass the ball. Heraf’s negativity went down badly in a country that prides itself on wilfully ignoring the realities of its tiny population and geographic isolation. “You can see how I couldn’t stand to wear that fern on my chest any more when his vision was to cower in a corner and not get beat by too much,” the former captain Abby Erceg – who had quit prior to the Japan match – said. With another dozen players subsequently refusing to play again under Heraf, the coach was duly dismissed. Tom Sermanni, a 64-year-old Scotsman who has coached the United States and Australia, was charged with ensuring a second new dawn does not collapse into darkness. So far so good. Erceg and former vice-captain Katie Duncan have returned, bringing over 250 caps of experience with them. The team coasted through a weak Oceania competition in qualifying and beat Norway in a friendly but have also lost warm-up games against Australia and South Korea. The Ferns, it seems, will head to France with a spring in their step and, most importantly, joy back in their hearts. They should not be ignored. He looks like a silver-haired Italian fox and has the name to suit, but when Tom Sermanni opens his mouth it’s clear he hasn’t just flown in from the Med. Sermanni, in fact, hails from Glasgow. After 151 games for Albion Rovers, his playing career took him to Blackpool, Canberra and, fittingly, Christchurch, New Zealand. As a coach specialising in the women’s game, he has been to the very top, leading the US to an historic undefeated season in 2013, only to be sacked early in 2014. Prior to that he served for seven years as head coach of the Matildas. New Zealand doesn’t really do silkily skilled strikers but the country does produce its share of handy defenders, with veteran defender Abbey Erceg the standout in a solid defence. The North Carolina Courage captain has twice quit the national team due to frustrations about conditions and coaching methods, but with those issues ironed out, the 132-cap former captain is now firmly back in the fold. The head of global women’s football is a New Zealander with a passion for mixed martial arts. Fifa head of women’s football, Sarai Bareman, grew up in Auckland, developing a fondness for martial arts watching her brother Eugene compete as a kickboxer. New Zealand is a rare case of a nation that has managed to simultaneously underachieve and overachieve in women’s football. Compared to the nation’s men, who are 119th in the Fifa rankings, the Football Ferns soar as the planet’s 19th-best nation. But they have never advanced from the group stage in a major tournament, despite a clutch of good results against major teams. In fairness, that has been very much the lot of just about every Kiwi football team at major events – even the unbeatable All Whites of 2010 exited the men’s World Cup at the group stage despite not losing. That finally changed at the 2018 Women’s Under-17 World Cup in Uruguay, where the Kiwi side made a thrilling, highly unlikely run to the semi-finals, and ultimately claimed third place with a victory over Canada. That breakthrough effort is viewed as inspirational by the senior women’s team, which knows it could cause plenty of teams headaches in knockout play if they could just find a way out of their group. If a hero does emerge at the World Cup it will almost certainly be goalkeeper Erin Nayler. Her quality is well known to Kiwi fans and, indeed, many in France, where she plays for Bordeaux. They could win it. No, really. That might be fanciful for a team that has never made it out of the groups and are routinely outclassed by the game’s global heavyweights, but the Kiwis will be in it to win it. They have a great goalkeeper, defend stoutly and can score goals – qualities that would make them dangerous in knockout matches, if only they can get there. They’ll likely need to grab a draw against the Netherlands or Canada and defeat lowly-ranked Cameroon. NZF’s total budget for its nine national teams for 2019 is NZ$3.6m (£1.82m). Because of the women’s World Cup more of that budget will be spent on the senior women’s team that the senior men. NZF says it has nearly 30,000 female players officially registered at clubs and another 36,000 in its recreational pathway (football in schools, festivals, holiday programmes etc). This figure has grown by 35% in recent years. Steve Deane is an editor and senior writer for Newsroom. Follow him here on Twitter.