Question: #WhereisYewande? Answer: Enjoying a romantic smooch with dreamy Danny in one of Love Island’s many garden snugs. Since a panicked Twitter search party went out earlier in the month, Yewande – this season’s lone, dark-skinned black woman – seems to be getting more screen time, even as the other islanders’ graft intensifies. So why are Yewande stans still on high alert for heartbreak? Maybe because we remember the struggles of Samira last year, and note that nothing fundamental has changed. Clearly, the producers have made some superficial efforts to address concerns about the show’s diversity. Last year’s starting lineup included one black woman, Samira Mighty, who eventually walked out, and one mixed-race man, Wes Nelson, who made the final. This year, we have seen Yewande, plus Amber Gill, Michael Griffiths, Jordan Hames and, briefly, Sherif Lanre. Still, contestants of east and south Asian origin remain scarce, and although British-Iranian Anna Vakii was billed as a representative of “body shape diversity”, her Kardashian-alike figure could hardly be said to present a major challenge to the reality TV aesthetic. Back on the mainland, the mysteries of human attraction are more subtle by far. But Love Island is not the mainland. Nor is it some kind of romantic utopia floating far above the tawdry concerns of the UK singles market. The same depressing mix of unconscious racial bias, gendered expectations and media messaging is at work here as everywhere else, regardless of whether Caroline Flack has clocked it. If anything, Eurocentric beauty ideals are more strictly enforced on Love Island, where only the most bangin’ bods need apply (this is a visual medium, after all) and the twentysomething islanders are all too naive, bless ’em, to either interrogate their own desires or see much past each other’s surface charms. No, sorry, Molly-Mae, “tall” does not count as a personalty trait. Why do the islanders fancy who they fancy? Why does a date with one person cause flutters of the heart – or fanny, in Maura’s case – while another leaves them cold? It might feel deeply personal, but there is evidence to indicate an uncomfortable overlap between our personal “preferences” and society’s prejudices. An oft-cited OkCupid study, for instance, found that Asian women and white men were the most likely to be rated highly by other users, while black women and Asian men were consistently rated substantially lower. Other dating apps have been shown to both replicate society’s pre-existing prejudices and further perpetuate them; could a TV dating show do the same? Assuming Love Island producers are even considering their role in all this – and they’re probably not, are they? – it’s a tricky bind. On the one hand, only shows such as Love Island have the reach to begin challenging society’s limited beauty ideal – diversity matters! On the other, that’s a pretty heavy burden to put on the shoulders of one sweet-natured 23-year-old from Dublin. It is no coincidence that the show’s black women have displayed not only the requisite good looks, but also impressive careers and impeccable manners to boot. They have had to. Look into Yewande’s big eyes as she pleads with the diary room camera: “Can I catch a break?”, and tell me she hasn’t had a raw deal. At least if there was more acknowledgement of the dating double standards that black women face in majority white settings, she would be spared all the pointless self-doubt and wasted tears. In the meantime, the jury is still out on Danny’s intentions, and Love Island’s unspoken law is as irrefutable now as when Sherif first shrugged his way to the subs bench: guys, it is what it is.