Defending champion Geraint Thomas and rising star Egan Bernal have been named as joint leaders of Team Ineos as the British-based outfit chases its seventh Tour de France win in eight years. Bernal was one of Thomas’ support riders last year but he comes into this edition as many people’s favourite to become the team’s fourth different Tour champion since their launch in 2010. But the 22-year-old would not be in this position if it were not for two accidents: the first being his own in May, which ruled him out of a tilt at the Giro d’Italia, and the second being four-time Tour champion Chris Froome’s season-ending crash at the Criterium du Dauphiné earlier this month. The latter robbed Froome of a chance to win a record-equalling fifth Tour title this year but the former kept Bernal fresh and enabled Team Ineos head Sir Dave Brailsford to go into the season’s biggest race still with two big cards to play. And while the team formerly known as Sky will be riding under a new banner and in new colours, their line-up is just as strong as ever, with the two leaders backed by a supporting cast of Jonathan Castroviejo, Michal Kwiatkowski, Gianni Moscon, Wout Poels, Luke Rowe and Dylan van Baarle. The 33-year-old Thomas has also been in the wars himself, crashing out of this month’s Tour of Switzerland and the Welshman goes into the Tour’s 6 July start in Brussels short of racing this season. In a statement on the team’s website, the Welshman said: “It’s no secret my build-up has been affected by the crash at the Tour de Suisse but I’ve had a good block of training since and I feel ready. “Discussing it with the team, we believe it makes sense to go into the race with joint leaders as it gives us more options. Egan and I will work hard for each other and the team over the three weeks of the race.” Bernal, who made the most of Thomas’ mishap to win in Switzerland, also won the week-long Paris-Nice race in March and finished third in Catalonia a fortnight later. “Last year’s experience taught me a lot,” said Bernal, who is second favourite with the British bookmakers behind Thomas but is two-time Tour champion Alberto Contador’s pick to be wearing yellow in Paris on July 28. “As a rider, whatever you might think about the Tour from the outside you don’t really know it until you have raced it. Now I know what to expect, I can be more relaxed about what lies ahead and even more focused on the racing.” Having previously been reluctant to field joint leaders, Brailsford said last year’s experience with Thomas and Froome, which saw the team claim first and third on the podium, bodes well for more glory this year. “Geraint and Egan are both in great form - they trust each other and we believe that this approach will give us the greatest flexibility on the road and the best possible chance of success,” he said. Earlier on Friday, the team also confirmed that Fran Millar, who has been with the team in a variety of roles since 2010, has become chief executive, based at the team’s Cheshire headquarters.