Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. Jack Kerouac’s On The Road changed dylan37. Here’s why: Recently had one of those brilliant moments that any literature loving parent will treasure. My youngest son, 16, expressed an interest in what’s on my book shelves, and asked for some recommendations. Where to start? Anywhere; excited, energised and thrilled. I read On The Road straight through one hot summer night when I was 16. I finished the last few pages as the early blue morning arrived gently. And I was changed. The book had an amazing effect on me, and I dedicated the next few years of my life to travelling, experiencing, writing, being, and living what I thought life was all about to the absolute maximum. I’ve read it a few times again over the last 30 years, and my attitude to it has changed considerably. I’m aware now that it was always out of time and out of step; a book popular in the 60s, written in the 50s about the 40s. I came to it in the 80s. There are still breathtaking passages of sparkling writing, wonderful imagery and a unique energy and beat. But Dean Moriarty is no longer a hero, and a bit of life experience showed me how callow, false, duplicitous and selfish he was - dying a drugged up death on the railroad before middle age - a dismal end to a life of taking everything and giving nothing. And Sal Paradise was an observer, hanging around and only ever half taking part. Kerouac, himself, died at 47, after years of bitter alcoholism and living with his mother. I still think it’s one of the greatest books of the 20th century, and my changing attitude and reaction to it and its story won’t diminish that greatness. I’ll be fascinated to learn what my 21st century boy makes of it. We’ll be fascinated to hear about it here too. Elsewhere, 25aubrey has just finished William Peter Blatty’s The Exorcist: Never thought I’d say this, but every page is as good as every scene in the movie. Powerfully gripping, one of those rare books that become welded to your finger tips. “Voluptuousness rampant” now, as vermontlogger reports on Zola’s Nana: It’s a highly coloured story of voluptuousness rampant, hurricanes of extravagance, and unhesitating deception all round, with not one honest character, except at moments Nana herself - superbe fille, superbly realized - who is at least forthright about her desires. The writing seems to be freer than in earlier volumes, less drawn from notes, as if it came more easily to him to imagine conversations in the louche world of theatre types and demi-mondaines. This being Zola, there are some very dark passages too, including the final great tableau which neatly ties up a number of story lines amid the noise and alarums of approaching war. “I read Superior: the return of Race Science by Angela Saini in one sitting yesterday,” says gavernism: I was in turns worried, educated, and fascinated by it. Saini takes you step by step through the history of eugenics and phrenology. She shows the worrisome return of certain theories from the late 19th century that seem to be revivified by a cross current of factors. It’s a real thought provoker and I would like to recommend everyone read it, if only to see if you agree with me that it is clearly a timely and possibly timeless book. The “sensational” Lady Audley’s Secret by Mary Elizabeth Braddon has impressed SydneyH: The author is often paired with Wilkie Collins, but in style and content this novel is a match with The Mystery of Edwin Drood by Dickens. I think the text is often noted for its plot, but what is probably under-acknowledged is that the prose is gorgeous. I don’t want to say too much, because it is a mystery after all, but this is the best book I’ve read so far this year. Brobat recommends Thomas Mann’s Buddenbrooks: Mann’s attention to detail is microscopic, not only does he take you on a voyage into the human history of history a family’s life, but the circumstances in which it lives - right down to the design of the upholstery of the furniture. You may think this rather dense stuff, but once you get all these details, you get drawn into the fabulous world which Mann depicts. Finally, let’s hand it over to Besonders who has written an extraordinary summary of War And Peace: This book is very similar to Pride And Prejudice, if Jane Austen had written Pride And Prejudice for an Eastenders storyline, with all the characters belonging to high society, fretting about Brexit, and if all of Europe and its neighbours were trying to settle Brexit by battles between their armies and coalitions of armies. The novel is divided into five books, each book divided into three or four parts, each part divided into chapters of two or three pages. My copy is 1212 pages long, not including the epilogues. Book three, part one, chapter seven ends with “And then the war began…” Literally “…” – like a sequel is in production. In my copy that’s on page 672. Book three, part two, chapter 29 ends with “The first shots”. That’s on page 845. That’s 173 pages between the war beginning and the first shots. (Well, the first shots that are part of the novel’s action). And all 173 pages are brilliant. Fantastic. Makes it sound like the book isn’t long enough… “I’m a grammar-school boy, I do my homework.” Geoff Dyer on the art of non-fiction. The world according to John Waters, as interpreted by Alan Cumming. James Meek on translations of Pushkin. Get a plane to New York because on 8 June the Walt Whitman Beard & Moustache competition is happening. Walt Whitman manuscripts in the Library Of Congress. The malign influence of Ayn Rand. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!