Environmental campaigners have boarded an oil rig in the north of Scotland as it was being towed out to sea and are staging a protest on board. Greenpeace activists say they scaled the 27,000-tonne rig – thought to be operated by BP – as it attempted to leave Cromarty Firth. The protesters are calling for BP to end the drilling for new oil wells and say they are prepared to stay onboard the rig for days. At approximately 6.30pm on Sunday evening, campaigners in a boat pulled up alongside the rig near Inverness, climbed aboard and unveiled a banner declaring a climate emergency. BREAKING: Two activists are blocking a @BP_plc oil rig from setting out to the North Sea where it intends to drill for 30 million barrels of oil. We're in a #ClimateEmergency - the age of oil is over. RT to show your support! #NoMoreOil Currently occupying a gantry on a leg of the rig below the main deck, the activists want to stop the drilling rig reaching the Vorlich oilfield, where it is believed to be trying to extract up to 30m barrels of oil. Jo, a Greenpeace activist from Scotland who is aboard the rig, said: “Warm words flow from BP on their commitment to tackling climate change, yet this rig – and the 30m barrels it seeks to drill – are a sure sign that BP are committed to business as usual, fuelling a climate emergency that threatens millions of lives and the future of the living world. We can’t let that happen – that’s why we’re here today. “The government may be bent on draining the North Sea of every last drop of oil, but this clearly contradicts their climate commitments. The perverse idea we must maximise our oil and gas reserves cannot continue. “That means the government must seriously reform the Oil and Gas Authority and instead invest heavily in the crucial work of helping oil communities like those in Scotland move from fossil fuels to the industries that will power our low carbon future.” Responding to the protest, a spokeswoman for BP said: “In all operations safety is our top priority. While we recognise the right for peaceful protest, the actions of this group are irresponsible and may put themselves and others unnecessarily at risk. “We are working with Transocean – the rig’s owner and operator – and the authorities to assess the situation and resolve it peacefully and safely. “We share the protesters’ concerns about the climate. We support the Paris agreement. And we are working every day to advance the world’s transition to a low-carbon future.” Police Scotland said they were aware of an ongoing incident, but that the situation was currently within the jurisdiction of Cromarty Firth’s Port Authority. A spokesman for the Port Authority said he was unable to comment at this stage.