The Democratic presidential field is currently so crowded with candidates that it is difficult for televised debates to be anything but a frenzied spectacle, in which nearly a dozen people interrupt each other trying to spit out their talking points as quickly as possible. Thursday night’s debate in Miami wasn’t exactly substantive and elevated. But it was reliably entertaining, far more so than Wednesday’s debate (on which our broken clock of a president had an accurate take). And it did provide useful insight into the differences among the candidates and how the race might unfold. The two most obvious observations are: Joe Biden performed miserably, while Kamala Harris was in excellent form. The standout moment of the night was a jaw-dropping exchange between Harris and Biden on segregation and busing. Harris told Biden that she had been hurt by his nostalgic recollections of relationships with racist senators. She pointed out that he fought against busing in the 1970s, an issue that was deeply personal for her, as she had been bused as a child. She spoke movingly about the pain caused by Biden’s stances. It was an opportunity for Biden to show some thoughtfulness and contrition over one of the ugliest parts of his political history. He did not take that opportunity. Instead, he accused Harris of smearing him: “It’s a mischaracterization of my position. I did not praise racists.” But Biden has indeed praised racists — he gave a glowing eulogy at the funeral of infamous segregationist Strom Thurmond. Biden then had the audacity to frame his opposition to busing as a “states’ rights” issue; he had not opposed busing, he said, merely the federal government’s attempt to force racial integration. Bennet raised his national profile earlier this year when the senator, typically known for his congeniality, delivered a fiery speech on the Senate floor, accusing Republican senator Ted Cruz of shedding 'crocodile tears' over the government shutdown. Biden unsuccessfully ran for the nomination in 1988 and 2008, and his campaign is likely to be dogged by controversy after allegations from several women they were left feeling uncomfortable by their physical interactions with him. If successful, Biden would become the oldest person to be elected president in US history. Now in his second term as mayor of New York City, De Blasio is a hometown foe of Donald Trump's running on the message that there's plenty of money in the country but it's in the wrong hands. With a progressive track record but a chorus of critics in New York, can this Democrat overcome his late start and win the chance to take on Trump? Booker first made a name as the hands-on mayor of Newark. Known for his focus on criminal justice reform and impassioned speeches on immigration, he has though been criticized for ties to Wall Street. Buttigieg wants to be the first openly gay millennial president. A Harvard graduate and Rhodes scholar, he became the youngest mayor of a mid-size US city at the age of 29. As a Navy Reserve lieutenant he deployed to Afghanistan. Castro casts himself as an antidote to Trump and the adminstration's hardline immigration policies. The grandson of a Mexican immigrant and raised by single mother, the 44-year-old Democrat is one of the most prominent Latinos in Democratic politics. He has delivered his message of pragmatism to voters in all 99 of Iowa’s counties since he officially kicked off the race in July 2017. The multimillionaire banking entrepreneur wants to build a big-tent party that appeals to independents and moderate Republicans. An Iraq war veteran who has vowed to run a campaign focused on issues of 'war and peace'. Gabbard made history as the first Samoan American and the first Hindu elected to Congress. But progressives are wary of her past conservative views on on social issues. Years before the #MeToo movement, the New York senator was leading efforts in Congress to combat sexual assault in the military and on college campuses. The former corporate lawyer has embraced a slate of economic ideas supported by the party’s progressive wing. At 88, Gravel will be the oldest candidate to be run for the nomination. However, according to his campaign, the staunch non-interventionist is not running to win, but to challenge Democratic orthodoxy on foreign policy. Will this little-known quixotic figure succeed? Harris is one of Trump’s fiercest critics, and has built a national reputation grilling administration officials during their confirmation hearings. A former state attorney general and the daughter of immigrants from India and Jamaica, Harris believes she has the unique profile to take on Trump. Before he served two terms as governor of Colorado, the 67-year-old Democrat worked as a geologist for a petroleum company. After a lay off, he switched careers and opened a successful brewpub in Denver that helped to revitalize the city’s downtown. Inslee is running as the “only candidate who will make defeating climate change our nation’s number one priority”. As the country experiences more powerful hurricanes, scorching wildfires and submerged coastlines, polls show public concern is growing. On Election Night 2018, Klobuchar coasted to a third term as senator in a state Trump almost won. Next morning she was on every short list of potential presidential candidates. Supporters say her success with rural voters makes her a formidable candidate in the Rust Belt, while her calm demeanour provides a clear contrast with Trump. Facing long odds, Messam, the son of Jamaican immigrants to the US and a former receiver for the Florida State Seminoles football team, is tossing his hat in the ring anyway. The 44-year-old businessman became Miramar’s first black mayor when he was elected in 2015. The Harvard educated Marine veteran arrived in Congress with a bang, after unseating a nine-term Democratic incumbent in a Massachusetts primary in 2014. Moulton has continued to make waves by calling for 'generational change' in Democratic leadership and supported an effort to block Nancy Pelosi from becoming House Speaker in 2018. A one-time guitarist for an El Paso punk band called Foss, O’Rourke had kept a relatively low profile as a three-term congressman with little name recognition. He rose to national prominence during the 2018 midterms, when his bid to unseat Senator Ted Cruz garnered unprecedented grassroots support and a historic fundraising haul. Elected to Congress in 2003 at just 29, Ryan represents the blue-collar voters Democrats hope to win back in 2020. He won national attention when he challenged Nancy Pelosi for Democratic leadership in 2016. He has continued to push for a generational change in leadership. Sanders turned a long-shot, anti-establishment bid for the presidency into a “political revolution” that energized the party’s progressive base. His political career began nearly 40 years ago, but it wasn’t until his 2016 run that Sanders became a national figure as a new generation of Democrats – and 2020 contenders – embraced his populist economic policies. Raised in Iowa and California, the 38-year-old Democrat would be among the youngest candidates in the race. Swalwell serves on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence investigating Russian collusion, a position that has earned him frequent appearances on cable news shows. Her sharp criticism of Wall Street and big corporations has made Warren a favorite among progressive activists, and she will campaign on a message of a rigged economic system and income inequality. This is not the spiritual guru and a new age author’s first foray into politics: in 2014, she mounted an unsuccessful congressional bid in California. Her entry adds some star-power to the race that may attract more celebrities. A former tech executive and entrepreneur running the longest of long shot campaigns centered on the perils of automation. His central plank is a plan to give every American adult a salary of $1,000 per month, paid for by a tax on companies that benefit the most from automation. Lauren Gambino, Sam Morris and Martin Belam Harris forcefully rejected this spin, noting that the whole point of federal action on civil rights is to override the inaction of racist local governments. But she could have gone further. Biden was simply lying about his history. He had actually said that “busing is a bankrupt concept”, and recently-revealed documents show he actively sought the support of segregationists on the issue. It’s not surprising that Biden declined to apologize to or even empathize with Harris. As a general rule, Biden does not apologize, even for egregious remarks. “I’m not sorry for anything I have ever done,” he has said. He also declined on Thursday to clarify or reframe his recent remark that “nothing would fundamentally change” for the wealthy if he became president. He reaffirmed that he is offering a backward-looking politics that wishes to “restore the backbone of America”, making the absurd claim that Donald Trump is the “only president in our history” who has “equated racists and white supremacists with ordinary and decent people” and “engaged and embraced dictators”. (Has he ever read a book on American history?) It’s still not actually clear whether this tendency will hurt him. In a way, it’s all part of the “Biden brand”, and older voters may not be repulsed in the way that younger and more progressive factions in the Democratic party are. Yet even those most blasé about Biden’s tendency to make appalling remarks (and then double down on them) will be disappointed by his debate performance. Much of the time, he seemed lethargic, almost indifferent. Harris, on the other hand, was confident and pressed her case with verve. She spoke vividly about the consequences of climate change and the lives of immigrants and challenged Biden on the Obama adminstration’s deportation record. (Unfortunately, her actual record on immigration somewhat departs from her stirring humanitarian rhetoric, and she has shown a willingness to fabricate her history on the issue.) It also became clear that Harris is now presenting herself as firmly on the “Sanders left”. She was the only candidate other than Sanders himself to advocate eliminating the private insurance industry, and condemned the influence of the rich and powerful more aggressively than almost any other candidate. Harris’ economic populism may be difficult to swallow given her history, but it’s clear that she intends to compete for the supporters of Sanders and Warren. Bernie Sanders was his usual self, thunderously denouncing America’s grotesque inequality. His performance was neither outstanding nor disappointing. Sanders’ best moment came during the debate’s brief section on foreign policy, where he highlighted his opposition to the Iraq war, his success in getting the Senate to end US support for Saudi Arabia’s bombing of Yemen, and the need to maintain peace with Iran. He forcefully defended abortion rights, but missed an opportunity to talk about racial justice. He was, as usual, needlessly cagey on the question of whether Medicare For All will raise people’s taxes. He should get better at stating up front that it will, and then discussing why people still come out ahead on the bottom line, rather than appearing to have something to hide. He also gave a frustratingly vague answer on how he would implement Medicare For All, saying that he’d implement it by mobilizing a social movement. It would be nice if he pointed out that there are serious policy thinkers who are working on the design and funding of single-payer healthcare. Otherwise he makes room for critics who say he is impractical and utopian. Few of the other candidates got much of a chance to distinguish themselves. Pete Buttigieg was polished and articulate, especially as he talked about how his military background informed his support for stricter gun controls. But, in a Democratic field overstuffed with bland white guys, he needed to live up to his hyped reputation as a political wunderkind. That he didn’t do, and he was somewhat blindsided when Eric Swalwell (of all people) effectively challenged him on his failure to discipline his municipal police chief and his misleading remarks about his power to do so. Andrew Yang briefly plugged his basic income scheme, but was given little airtime. John Hickenlooper was most effective when emphasizing specific accomplishments in government, but lapsed back into lazy warnings about “socialism”. Swalwell distinguished himself mostly by the number of times he demanded that we “pass the torch” to a new generation. Michael Bennet did not say a single memorable word. Kirsten Gillibrand appeared to be reading every sentence from a teleprompter, though it was impossible for this to be the case. Marianne Williamson gave the most “unique” answers. Asked about her first policy priority, she said she would make a congratulatory phone call to the president of New Zealand. Her closing statement was a somewhat charming tribute to the political importance of love. These will get her labeled something of an eccentric, but she also made the most powerful moral case against the Trump administration’s immigration policies, calling them “collective child abuse” and making the important point that “if your government does it that doesn’t make it any less of a crime”. The candidates were generally impressive in their pro-immigration sentiments. Joe Biden was caught off guard when he was asked why the Obama administration had deported so many millions of people. On a day when prominent Democrats have capitulated on the issue, it’s not clear how many of them will back up tonight’s words with substantive commitment to immigrant rights. The debate had so many speakers and so many issues in so little time that not much could happen beyond crosstalk and quick bursts of campaign rhetoric. At least climate change was discussed, albeit briefly. None of the candidates from the “back of the pack” did much to move forward. Harris certainly proved that she may be a formidable challenger to Sanders and Warren, not to be underestimated. Biden showed himself unprepared and vulnerable, though it’s not clear how it will affect his support. He affirmed that his politics are retrograde and ignorant of the urgency of racial and economic justice. Sanders continued to draw the debate in the right direction, emphasizing the struggles of working people and the need for sweeping, rather than piecemeal, political change to build a better and more just society. Nathan Robinson is the editor of Current Affairs