Born in Dublin in 1941, artist Michael Craig-Martin grew up in the US and studied at the Yale School of Art and Architecture. In 1966 he moved to Britain, where he had his first solo exhibition in 1969. During the 1980s he was a tutor at Goldsmiths College, where he taught many of the emerging Young British Artists. His work has been exhibited all over the world, and his latest show, Michael Craig-Martin: Sculpture, is at Gagosian, Britannia Street, London, until 3 August. Palazzo Grimani, Venice I’ve just come back from Venice, and of course the Biennale is on, but this is the thing I saw that most overwhelmed me. It’s a stunning 16th-century palazzo and has two exhibitions – one ancient and one modern – in the same place. The first is a beautiful collection of abstract paintings by Helen Frankenthaler, from 1952 to 1992. There is also a room called the Tribuna: it’s full of classical arches, alcoves, niches and pedestals, with more than 100 classical sculptures of different gods and goddesses, in different scales. You will never see a more extraordinary place. Louvre Abu Dhabi I was recently in Abu Dhabi for a conference, and though I had read and heard about the Louvre, I was unprepared for how absolutely fantastic it is. It’s a very low, gentle dome, like a geometric metal grid in several layers, so that light filters through. It’s open, so if it rains, the water will come through. The materials, the proportion and just everything about the interior is beautifully done – then you go through and come out into a plaza with water on all sides. I don’t think I’ve ever been to a museum that was more beautiful. Amazing Grace I was taken by a friend, knowing nothing about the film, and I was floored. At the peak of her power in 1972, Aretha Franklin decided to make a recording of authentic gospel music, with an audience, in a Baptist church. Sydney Pollack filmed it, but bizarrely didn’t use clapperboards, and after it was filmed it was impossible to match the sound recording with the visuals. Now producer Alan Elliott has been able to do it using digital technology, and it’s extraordinary – it gives you the sense that you’re there. I found myself weeping through half of it. Killing Eve, BBC One I didn’t watch this originally, then I saw it won all the awards, so naturally I got curious and watched it on BBC iPlayer. What an amazing series: the characters are so special, so eccentric – every single person is such an individual. The confrontations between the psychopath and her pursuer, and their bizarre bonding – you’re constantly waiting to see what’s going to happen next, and it’s never what you expect. It seemed very contemporary and very stylish, and I found myself watching four or five episodes at a time. Gloomsbury, BBC Radio 4 This is the funniest thing on radio. It’s supposed to be about Vita Sackville-West at Sissinghurst and her circle of friends, and their names have been slightly altered: she becomes Vera Sackcloth-Vest, Virginia Woolf is Ginny Fox. In one episode, the Prince of Wales comes to see the garden at “Sizzlinghurst” and he’s making a pass at Vita, then two unexpected guests arrive – Gertrude Stein and Wallis Simpson – and he quickly drops Vita to go off with Wallis. The cast, including Miriam Margolyes , John Sessions and Alison Steadman, are fabulous and clearly having so much fun. It’s simply marvellous. Harry’s Dolci, Venice When I was in Venice I was invited to dinner here. The Dolci has a beautiful terrace, but it was too cold, so we went inside, which you wouldn’t normally do. It was quite a large room, very classic: elegant but not fancy, with quite simple decor. The restaurant is extraordinarily expensive and has an amazing reputation. Very often places that have such reputations are not so wonderful in reality, but everything we had was impeccably done. I’ve had sea bass many times, but this was the best I’ve ever had.