There will be no second “Nole slam” for Novak Djokovic after the world No 1’s quest to win four consecutive grand slam titles was ended by Austria’s Dominic Thiem in a dramatic semi-final at the French Open. In a match that was suspended on Friday night, Thiem took the third set and though Djokovic levelled, the fourth seed held his nerve, eventually, to clinch a 6-2, 3-6, 7-5, 5-7, 7-5 victory. On Sunday he will play the 11-times champion, Rafael Nadal, the man who beat him in last year’s final. Thiem led 5-3 in the final set and had two match points but could not take them and Djokovic levelled at 5-5. However at 6-5, when he created a third match point, he powered a huge forehand to clinch victory after four hours and 13 minutes. “It was an amazing match, my first five-set match at Roland Garros,” Thiem said. “I am here in the semi-finals with maybe the three best players of all time, so to beat one of them is unbelievable. It’s amazing for me.” The match had been called off on Friday when horrendous winds made it virtually unplayable, following a rain delay. Resuming at one set all, with Thiem leading 3-1, Djokovic was quickly back on track, levelling at 4-4. But Thiem pinched the set after a couple of trademark backhands. A rattled Djokovic argued with the umpire, Jaume Campistol, for giving him a warning for taking too much time on serve in the last game of the third set. “You play tennis, right?” he asked. “So you how it is in this kind of situation, 5-6, long point, crowd still clapping, right? You know how it is. OK, well done. Well done man. You made yourself a name. You made yourself recognisable now. You get all the credit.” The fourth set was a messy affair, with three consecutive breaks in the first four games and even the net cord getting in on the act – a couple of freakish bounces off the net going against the world No 1 – but Djokovic took it to force a decider as Thiem double-faulted. The final set was an epic in itself. Thiem led 4-1, with deuce on Djokovic’s serve when rain forced the players off for about 50 minutes. When they returned, Djokovic hit back to get back on serve. Thiem broke again to lead 5-3 and at 40-15, had two match points, only to miss two simple backhands as the tension rose. Djokovic broke back but Thiem held for 6-5 and then finally got over the line with another break.