Jeremy Corbyn has indicated he will not bow to shadow cabinet members and move towards a second referendum after Labour narrowly beat the fledgling Brexit party in the Peterborough byelection. Arriving in the Cambridgeshire city after the party’s candidate Lisa Forbes won by 683 votes, leaving the Tories trailing in third position, he called for the “squabbling contenders” within the Conservative party to give the public a general election. The shadow transport secretary, Andy McDonald, a close ally of Corbyn, signalled earlier that Labour wanted a second referendum on Brexit and would campaign to stay in the EU. The Labour leader, flanked by Forbes and Louise Haigh MP, who masterminded the byelection victory, told Labour supporters in the city centre the party “is not at the stage yet” to push for a public vote. Asked about Labour splits over a so-called people’s vote, he said: “Obviously every party discusses its own position and its own strategy. I have said all along that we would put to parliament our proposals on a customs union on a trade relationship and the dynamic protection of consumer and workers’ rights. “As our conference resolution agreed last September, we would then be prepared to put that to a public vote. We are not at the stage yet where parliament has actually voted on that. I think it would be much better if there was actually a general election.” McDonald told the Today programme on Friday that a no-deal Brexit would mean “our economy is completely trashed”, including the destruction of steel, car and other manufacturing industries. “We accepted the outcome of the referendum and we would leave the EU on terms that would protect our economy. That is not now available to us.” McDonald said a no-deal Brexit, or any deal that came through parliament, “should go back to the people”. Amid cheers from supporters, Corbyn called for Tory leadership contenders to give the general public a chance to vote them out of office. “On the day that Theresa May ceases to be leader of the Conservative party, my message is to all the squabbling contenders for the Tory party leadership: Bring it on. “We are ready for a general election at any time,” he said. Despite Corbyn’s attempts to use the victory to champion Forbes as a new MP, Labour MPs and Jewish campaign groups expressed unease at her election. It was revealed last weekend that Forbes, a Unite union activist, had liked a Facebook post saying May had a “Zionist slave masters agenda” alongside a video of children praying after the New Zealand terror attack. Another posting from Forbes said she had “enjoyed reading” a thread that said Islamic State was created by Mossad and the CIA. She later apologised, saying she had meant to “like” the video of children praying in solidarity with the Christchurch attacks, not the accompanying views. After her victory, the Jewish Labour Movement said Forbes needed to go “far further” to demonstrate to the Jewish community that she was not racist. The Labour backbencher Jess Phillips said she could not be as “gleeful or proud as I’d want to be [following the byelection in Peterborough] because of how it shows that antisemitism is becoming normal in the party”. “Lisa ignored and endorsed antisemitic things, I’ll take her explanation and apology at face value and look forward to her proving, as others have, that actions not excuses alone can heal,” she said. “But with every case the party’s values chip away and our ability to stand up against hate erodes.” Haigh, who worked closely with Forbes, said the emergence of the postings was a low point for the campaign. “The whole campaign team were really upset when the posts that Lisa had mistakenly engaged with came to light and that was definitely a very difficult point for the campaign. But Lisa fully accepts they were wrong. She is really, really sorry. “I will be working with her to engage with the community and deepen her understanding and help her to be an ally in the future.”