For most of its existence the functionality of Twitter has been limited to a few basic options: keeping up with news and arguing with trolls. Lately it has also been a way to transmit the neuroses of Donald Trump into all of our phones on a near constant basis. But this week a Twitter user devised a use of the social media platform that’s actually fun – a choose-your-own-adventure game involving Beyoncé. It’s your first day on the job and Beyoncé is getting ready for a red carpet. What are you getting her for breakfast? Yogurt, granola and strawberries or a 5 star breakfast. pic.twitter.com/05Zq5Ccai5 OK, so this is one of the more fun things I've ever seen on Twitter. https://t.co/CTaAEII3FC yeah, they gotta start giving pulitzers for tweets. https://t.co/cq28YzELpz In the game, “Being Beyoncé’s assistant for the day”, the object is simple: don’t get fired – and it’s a lot harder than it sounds. Celebrities who might know a thing or two about having personal assistants have had trouble themselves, including Questlove, who tweeted that he “failed the first time”. Chrissy Teigen said that she only made it about three rounds, while her own assistant got fired immediately. My own assistant just got fired on the very first question https://t.co/VrTrv8Y26k While the choices on any given prompt might seem obvious to members of the Beyhive, the difficulty comes in trying to anticipate the whims of a Beyoncé character who, at least in this game, seems like something of a tyrant. She nods at you for choosing the healthy breakfast, then ask you to FaceTime her daughter who are you FaceTiming, Blue Or Rumi? pic.twitter.com/W60trwCI3J Asked which of her children you should suggest she FaceTime at one turn in the game, if you choose incorrectly you are let go on the spot. She says “She’s only 2....” then has her team of lawyers send you a termination letter. pic.twitter.com/BF0Iu863d3 It’s not entirely clear why getting yelled at and terminated by Beyoncé is such an avid fantasy for so many, but contemporary fandom is strange, and who are we to judge? The person behind the game is Landon Rivera, a student in Los Angeles. He made the game for obsessive Beyoncé fans, he told Vice, “but then it got really popular”. It has been retweeted almost 100,000 times in the few days since he posted it. “I’d probably end up fired if I was her assistant,” Rivera he said. “I’d definitely try to ask her all kind of questions, like how long did it take to get Lemonade ready, did she have [the] Everything Is Love album planned, why didn’t she release the Formation world tour DVD?” Of course, there is the slim chance that Beyoncé herself is behind this and it’s all real, as actor Shay Mitchell tweeted. What if Beyoncé actually made this and she's having Twitter track people's selections so she can find her next assistant.... https://t.co/0cWqITE98e