Sam Gyimah on Sunday became the 13th contender to replace Theresa May as Conservative leader. Just think: if only four more Tories join the contest, there will be one candidate for every single percentage point the party racked up in this weekend’s Observer/Opinium poll (a paltry 17, nine behind the Brexit party which now, for the first time, leads the pack in Westminster voting intention). Now that’s what I call a target. Yes, it’s only one survey of popular opinion. But the poll enshrines the fundamental problem confronting the Conservatives in this race. It also helps to explain why the support of Donald Trump for Boris Johnson will not harm his chances in these very specific circumstances, and why Nigel Farage is playing such a central role in the whole fetid business. One way – the normal way – of considering this election is to assess each of the candidates as a prospective leader of party and nation. If the Tories are wise, they will consider carefully the claims of Jeremy Hunt, a seasoned veteran of government who has already proved to be a much more capable foreign secretary than Johnson (to be fair, he could hardly be worse). Matt Hancock – in spite of his sticky interview on Newsnight last week – is the future-facing candidate, especially good on the social implications of the technological revolution. Penny Mordaunt is, so to speak, the “woke Brexiteer”: a true believer in the UK’s departure from the EU who is also a committed social liberal. In contrast, Esther McVey – in her attitude to the teaching of children about diverse relationships – apparently disregards the Equality Act 2010. Sajid Javid is mysteriously persuaded that the other 27 EU nations will reopen negotiations if he becomes prime minister. Andrea Leadsom speaks of a “three-point managed exit” – a euphemism for no deal that is rather like describing the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as a “bilocational fissile intervention”. Dominic Raab stares at the camera with cold assassin’s eyes that suggest it is not May he really wishes to replace but Daniel Craig. The trouble with such an inventory of the runners and riders is that it does not truly capture the exceptionalism of this particular race. Normally, Conservative MPs and (to a lesser extent) members at least ask how each of the candidates might reach out to non-traditional Tory voters. This strikes me as a good question, given that the party has not won a sizeable Commons majority since 1987. It was the question that David Cameron tried to answer in the leadership contest of 2005. And even May herself, in her “burning injustices” speech in Downing Street of July 2016, at least began her premiership claiming to represent the whole nation rather than simply the interests of the Tory base. Three years on, the Conservative movement frets for its very survival. It has failed to deliver Brexit (or to offer the public the chance of ditching the whole cursed project). It has squandered the Commons majority won by Cameron in 2015. It has been humiliated in local and European elections. The sudden rise of Nigel Farage’s new party has forced it to confront – not before time – the prodigious volatility of contemporary politics, and the total folly of taking anything at all for granted. Not surprisingly in these circumstances, the Tory movement is mortally terrified of a general election (opposed by 80% of party members, according to a Conservative Home poll released on 30 May). In their different ways, Michael Gove and Hunt are addressing these fears in their respective campaigns. Both know that Johnson’s vulnerability is his readiness to countenance a no-deal exit – or rather the likely political consequences of that readiness. Gove and Hunt alike calculate that the Commons would use the provisions of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act to force a general election, rather than allow the UK to tumble off the cliff edge. Both argue for flexibility over the current Brexit deadline of 31 October – in Gove’s case, informing cabinet colleagues that he is ready to delay the UK’s exit until late 2020. Both, by the way, are quite right: a new Tory prime minister proposing that the UK leave without a deal on or before 31 October would indeed be risking a general election in which the Tories could easily be crushed. The patriotic case against a no-deal strategy is self-evident. But narrow party-political calculation for the Tories ought to be straightforward, too. Yet – it cannot be stated too often – these are not normal times. As much as they fear a general election, Tory members have also drunk the Kool-Aid when it comes to Brexit: for them, it has ceased to be a geopolitical and commercial process and become a religion. Three-quarters of them favour a no-deal exit – far ahead of any other option. It is not just that they fear the Brexit party. They want to be the Brexit party. They long for the simplicity of Farage’s demagoguery, the uncomplicated fervour of his rallies. After three years of parliamentary drudgery, they crave the politics of spectacle, excitement and tub-thumping vindication. So when they see Trump speak supportively of Johnson on the eve of the president’s state visit, they observe one shameless populist recognising another – a man with whom, in less than two months, he could be doing business on the hotline, discussing fast food and nuclear codes. And God help us, they approve. It is extraordinary to think that, not so very long ago, the Conservatives considered themselves – with statistics on their side – as the “natural party of government”. Now they more closely resemble a herd of lemmings, squeaking furiously about who should lead them to oblivion. How noisy the Tories have become, and how small. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist