Questions of identity and belief go to the heart of who we are. Important to us individually, they also determine the shape of our lives – and confer advantages and disadvantages. Equalities legislation in the UK outlaws discrimination by employers and service providers on grounds of nine protected characteristics. These include sexual orientation, reassigned gender, race, sex and religion. Despite this, prejudice based on these factors has not been eradicated. On the contrary, the evidence is that bigotry’s role in aggravating offence is on the rise. Similar trends are apparent in other parts of the world, particularly where authoritarian populists are in charge. This seems obvious in the sense that the election of rightwing nationalists appears to validate their rhetoric, leading to a hate crime surge. Specific incidents are harder to lay at the feet of such politicians. In the UK, Brexit’s populist rhetoric has been linked to a sharp rise in such offences. Seen in this light, the attacks on two lesbian couples over the weekend, one on a London bus and the other on a Southampton street, are a reminder that this nation cannot be complacent about the threat it faces. Both couples were assaulted by strangers. After several decades of progress on gay and lesbian rights, starting with the partial decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1967, the UK is confronted with an ugly spurt of homophobic violence. In addition, police said a racist motive was among lines of inquiry in the case of a German teenager, thought to be of Lebanese origin, who was left with serious head injuries following an attack by a group of teenagers at the weekend in Canterbury. Those responsible for such acts must be brought to justice. But such events should also give pause for reflection to other people, who would never themselves dream of screaming abuse or physically attacking someone, but who may, deliberately or not, have contributed to a culture of growing intolerance. Politicians and campaigners such as Katie Hopkins or Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, who make a career out of stirring up division, are easily identified. But there has also been a more general coarsening and polarisation of public discourse. This has been painfully evident over recent weeks in Birmingham, where protests by parents against LGBT lessons at one primary school spread to others, encouraged by activists said by MPs to be “religious extremists”. While the original school has engaged a mediator, the dispute at a second school continues. Labour whips are right to rebuke Roger Godsiff MP for supporting the protests, which have been banned by the high court from the school’s immediate vicinity. Peaceful demonstrations are part of democracy’s fabric. Intimidation is not. The same is true in Scotland, where plans to create “buffer zones” around abortion clinics are being considered because of the aggression of anti-abortion protesters. Lessons in tolerance are needed. But it is not only children who need to learn to treat other people with respect. Last week the lesbian feminist campaigner Julie Bindel, who is also a Guardian contributor, was left shaken after she was verbally abused and lunged at by a transgender activist after a public meeting in Edinburgh. The argument between trans activists and feminists regarding proposed legal reforms has unfortunately become extremely bitter. Both groups feel their identities and beliefs are threatened by each other. Finding a way through the current impasse will not be easy. Any efforts to reach an accommodation deserve support. Physical threats and violence against marginalised groups, including women, trans and gay people must end.