There is a passage from Jilly Cooper’s Rivals which, despite first reading it in my early teens, has stayed with me, popping into my head with increasing frequency now I’ve stepped over the threshold into the over-40 bracket. Lizzie Vereker, the curvy, middle-aged wife whose rat of a husband is cheating on her, is contemplating her misery and “feeling rather old and dried-up”. So she rubs “skin-food into her face, only to realise she’d forgotten her neck, which is supposed to betray your age most, so she rubbed the excess skin-food down into it. Then she remembered you were supposed never to rub skin-food downwards as it made your face droop. Would her life have been different, she wondered, if she’d always remembered to rub skin-food upwards? Would James have stayed faithful to her?” Lizzie gets her happy ending (with a corpulent Cockney millionaire). She’s also left me, on the rare occasions I remember to use any “skin-food” (I like to call it “moisturiser”), carefully rubbing it upwards. She’s no middle-aged cliche, but a survey of more than 1,000 women over 40 has found that more than half (51%) feel that older women in books do fall into “cliched roles”. Fifty per cent of the women surveyed said that older characters are shown “as baffled by smartphones, computers or the internet”, 35% felt older women were portrayed as “uninterested” when it came to sex scenes, and 21% said women came across as “desperate”. Only 10% felt older women were portrayed as “sexy”. Carried out by Gransnet and HarperCollins’ division HQ, the survey heralds the launch of a fiction competition for women writers over the age of 40, for stories featuring a lead character over the age of 40. Women over 50 are the fastest-growing group of workers in the UK HQ executive publisher Lisa Milton admits that while the imprint publishes “many” books by women over 40, and “many” with female characters over 40, it’s “not enough”. “We know that women over 50 are the fastest-growing group of workers in the UK, and it’s important that we publish to reflect the world around us,” she says. It’s a laudable initiative – it was only a year ago that the actor and writer Barbara Ewing was talking about how her novel, The Actresses, about women in their 50s, had been issued with a cover featuring a young woman; Hilary Mantel described women over 50 as “the invisible generation”. But there are an awful lot of excellent novels featuring older women out there already. From my own beloved Jilly’s Etta Bancroft in Jump! (“sweet, kind, still beautiful”) to Jonas Jonasson, Rachel Joyce, Joanna Cannon and Libby Page, elderly protagonists aren’t hard to find. I adored Alice LaPlante’s murder mystery Turn of Mind, about a murder suspect with Alzheimer’s; Kazuo Ishiguro, Nobel laureate no less, features an elderly couple at the heart of The Buried Giant. MC Beaton provides some middle-aged detection in Agatha Raisin, and there’s a wealth of middle-aged protagonists negotiating the vicissitudes of life and family in books from Elizabeth Buchan, Harriet Evans, Anne Tyler and Elena Ferrante. I’ve just finished Anne Youngson’s gentle, moving, joyous Meet Me at the Museum. Shortlisted for the Costa first novel prize and recent winner of the Paul Torday Memorial prize – Youngson, by the way, published it when she was 70 – it follows the letters exchanged between a grandmother in her 60s in East Anglia, and a museum curator in Denmark. Youngson’s protagonist, Tina, is beautifully realised – and although there’s no sex, desperate or otherwise, she’s perfectly capable of sending an email. Youngson’s editor at Transworld, Jane Lawson, acknowledges that older women can often be predatory, lonely or suffering from dementia. But Tina is “none of these”. “She is a strong character in her own right,” Lawson says, “with no issues or insufferable discontent. The story comes from the central character’s own determination to find a new life, a new experience. She doesn’t feel remotely encumbered by age and she is not defined by her age. My own bookclub of fortysomethings adored this book, not for its depiction of a ‘feisty’ older woman, but simply for its tender insight into the human heart, its warmth, and even its bite.”