My teenage self once attended an interview wearing baby-pink everything: suit, shoes, handbag. I didn’t get the job. Sartorially, matchy-matchy is a faux pas – but not so in beauty. At Vivienne Hu, pink was used on lids, cheeks and lips with aplomb. The key to success IRL is to vary tones and texture, eg pale matte pink on cheeks, a deeper shade on eyes and a hint of gloss on the lips. Add a dark eyeliner, mascara and strong brow and you won’t resemble a walking homage to Barbie. 1. MAC Let’s Mesa Round Lipstick £17.50, maccosmetics.com2. MAC Pink Swoon Blush £19.50, maccosmetics.com 3. Damn Girl! Mascara £22, toofaced.com 4. Estée Lauder Oh Naturelle! Face Palette £38, esteelauder.co.uk 5. Pat McGrath Mini Lust Trio in Cool £33, selfridges.com Some of the longest conversations I have revolve around Afro hair. I always say my hair talk makes War and Peace look like a subheading. There are many reasons for these ongoing dialogues. Afro hair carries with it a complex history and many women of colour have convoluted relationships with their hair, so detangling all of this takes time. Products also make up a huge part of the conversation. Finding products that work on chemical-free, natural Afro hair (particular with a tight coily pattern) is an unending pilgrimage. Afro hair, surprising to most, is actually quite fragile, has a tendency to dryness and breakage, so needs intense hydration. Alas, most products don’t touch the sides. Curlsmith, a wonderful vegan and organic hair product line, works brilliantly and this treatment serum should be a staple. It is formulated with jojoba, avocado, oat, andiroba, macadamia and apricot, which softens, hydrates and transforms brittle hair. Despite the putty-like texture, it is light enough to be used as a daily moisturiser, but I find it really comes into its own when used as a deep conditioning treatment. The results are phenomenal. Unlike Curlsmith, most brands, shamefully, do not cater for Afro hair, which is another reason I have endless conversations about hair.Curlsmith Intensive Treatment Serum, £29, feelunique.com Flower power Looks like a mist, acts like a serum. Formulated with organic roses, it delivers 24 hours of hydration and works like a dream on dry skin. Elemis Pro Collagen Rose Hydro-Mist, £43, elemis.com Thanks a bunch Made from the oils of Rose de Mai found in Grasse, this gorgeous fragrance celebrates the founder’s enduring love for the rose – and her 25 years in the business. Jo by Jo Malone Rose Petal 25, £110, spacenk.com Natural selection This clean, eco-friendly, rose otto soap has been infused with manuka honey, goat’s milk and camomile for a skin-soothing experience. Ashley and Co Bubbles & Polkadots Mini Bar, £9, ashleyandco.co Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.