Look at the hellish picture above these words. It looks as if someone has made a baby drink plutonium. It’s not nice, is it? You’re looking at the snappily named Light Therapy Golden Facial Treatment Device from MZ Skin. A golden facial sounds quite the off-menu request, but this is a big deal in dermatology circles, an at-home version of the LED phototherapy beloved of celebrities. I struggle to reconcile its voguish credentials with the gape-mouthed horror before me. The machine is dull gold with a brown headstrap and is quite, quite chilling. It looks like one of the masks with which Mayans decorated their dead, to face a long battle in the underworld. What a mouthwatering prospect. Inside, it is even stranger, with 150 numbered LEDs arranged grid-like on a face-hugging sheet, encased within the chunky frame. Surely it won’t work. It has a plastic signal box and many wires, and it looks as if someone has grafted the face of Thomas the Tank Engine on to a potato waffle. But where wellness goes, we go. I strap it on. Press the buttons. Wait to ascend to Xibalba, to meet the God of the Corn. Appearances can be deceptive. Of all the stuff this column has looked at, LED phototherapy so far claims the most scientific validity. It was developed to assist pain management and wound healing, after researchers noted the surprising effects of certain lights on skin. The idea is that, at specific wavelengths, photon energy is transferred into cells, activating changes to their collagen production, inflammation response and pigmentation. The evidence points most clearly to benefits around scar healing, as well as acne vulgaris, rosacea, and herpes simplex and zoster. (Oddly appealing names.) But there is more limited evidence that phototherapy may combat wrinkles, brighten skin and generally give you a youthful glow. Early experiments prompted hair regrowth on a rat’s back or something, and since then the dermatological industries have been desperate for us to give it a go. I don’t have a great time inside the mask. I have a small, pea-shaped head and the headset is heavy and large, with only one adjustable strap, so the entire thing feels as if it is hanging off my eyes. I later test it in front of friends, who confirm the look as “very Leatherface” (from the Texas Chainsaw Massacre). Teeth visible. Eyelids inside the eyeholes, forced closed and sad. It gets more upsetting when I turn the lights on with the wired controller. One can choose between five colours and adjust their intensity, and the timer function goes up to an hour. Yellow light is meant to reduce redness. White, near infra-red light, repairs the dermis. Blue is supposed to be good for clarifying the skin, and also making it look as if you are in a sordid mashup of Eyes Wide Shut and Tron. “Immediately post-treatment, the skin appears perfect, youthful and radiant,” the blurb says. I can’t say that’s true. I endure the mask for 20 minutes, avoiding all mirrors. Immediately post-treatment, I look … exactly the same. I do have a glow, but this is from the light sheen of sweat on my brow and cheeks. Or is it fear? To experience the full benefits, you are meant to do this for half an hour, several times a week. I do a few more sessions, trying different lights, but eventually get bored. Even if the golden facial works as miraculously as claimed, is it worth the discomfort? Or having to spend hours resembling a budget horror villain on his way to meet a Mesoamerican maize deity? It is not. Plus, it costs £385. You could buy a cheap washing machine and an expensive pub lunch for that, and still have change for the bus home. It is hard to say whether or not light therapy is a magic cure. Those with specific skin conditions, or sensitivity to other types of facial, should probably try a clinic session first. Everyone else, take a look at yourselves. If this is the alternative, better to just accept the ageing. I never thought I’d say that. In that sense, it has been a very effective therapy. Sorry again for the picture. Don’t trust me, trust Selma Blair Mz Skin’s products boast a plethora of celebrity fans, including Selma Blair, Princess Charlene of Monaco, Jess Glynne and Donna Air. Which could be the latest Sugababes lineup, as far as I know. Wellness or Hellness? My friends won’t be seen dead with me any more. 2/5