Lydia Williams Plenty of opportunity to show her good footwork on the ball. The Australian defence confidently switched play through the keeper. 7 Ellie Carpenter Good outing from the athletic right full-back. Shone brighter when Raso joined the game and they combined to feed Kerr for Australia’s third goal. 7 Karly Roestbakken A very tidy showing at left-back on her first start for the Matildas. Good positional play, and defused a number of Jamaican attacks. 7 Alanna KennedyAnother flawless game from Australia’s centre-back with critical tackles, and went close a few times with chances at the other end from set plays. 7 Steph Catley Nice work on the ball, but exposed a few times by the excellent Shaw for Jamaica. 6 Katrina Gorry Physical game from the midfielder, covering plenty of territory and winning possession in the middle of the park. Served up a pearler for Kerr to head in for Australia’s second close to half-time. 6 Emily van Egmond Good positioning but needs to value possession and distribution needs more attention. 5 Emily Gielnik Fed Kerr beautifully from wide on the left for the first goal despite being camped on the right flank for much of the match where she had good service from the midfield. Managed several threatening balls into Kerr but needed some more diversity. 6 Lisa De Vanna Solid outing from the stalwart in her 150th cap for Australia but didn’t have the impact she would have wanted. 6 Sam Kerr (captain) Four goals in a dominant display from the captain where the game plan, in the first half at least, was to put the ball on Kerr’s head. Her hunger in both defence and attack foiled a few Jamaican attacking raids, and she was rewarded with a well poached fourth. 9 Subs: Caitlin Foord (for Gielnik 59) 7; Hayley Raso (for DeVanna 63) 7; Aivi Luik (for Gorry 87) 6 Nicole McClure Stepping up as the second-choice keeper, McClure had no chance with either of Kerr’s headers. Lifted in confidence as the game progressed until giving away a howler for Kerr’s fourth. 4 Sashana Campbell Good cover on De Vanna slowed down Australia’s attack until the rest of the Jamaican defence could drop. Quick feet and evasive skills sparked some attacks late in the first half. 6 Konya Plummer One of the strongest in defence and managed to slow down numerous waves of attack. 6 Allyson Swaby Left Kerr all alone for the second goal and had to work hard to keep tracking back with her in the second half. 4 Deneisha Blackwood Always managed to get her body in the way of Geilnik’s crosses. Ran strongly at defence in the second half. 6 Chantelle Swaby Very quiet as holding midfielder with no real impact in the game. 4 Toriana Patterson Did well to control an often ping-ponging ball through midfield and making Gorry bite. Lucky to not give away a penalty. 6 Khadija Shaw Great runs from deep in her half caused numerous early scares for Williams but did not find much support for her crosses. Consistently tested Australia’s defence and her strong run through midfield put Saloun through for Jamaica’s goal. 8 Mireya Grey Quick feet getting the ball out of her half. One of the quickest on the park and easily able to get away from her marker and also apply strong pressure to any of Australia’s offence. Best chance of the first half with a header that just flashed wide of the far post off a corner. 7 Cheyna Matthews Pushed hard on Catley but couldn’t break through despite applying heavy pressure to Australia’s midfield. Worked well with Shaw to put the most pressure on the Matildas’ defence in the first half. 7 Tiffany Cameron Very quiet first half with no real impact. Substituted at half-time. 4 Subs: Havana Solaun (For Cameron at HT) 7; Trudi Carter (for C. Matthews at 59’) 6; Jody Brown (for Grey at 72’) 4