Kerry Hudson’s memoir, Lowborn, (originally a column in the now defunct online women’s magazine the Pool), is so harrowing that you have to keep reminding yourself that these are not mere “stories”, but devastating life experiences that had to be endured. Early on, submitting a bleak listing of youthful chaos (including nine primary schools, periods in care, a sexual-abuse child-protection inquiry, abortion, rape), it’s as though Hudson is warning the reader: “Brace yourself.” Hudson is now an award-winning writer (Tony Hogan Bought Me an Ice Cream Float Before He Stole My Ma; Thirst), happily married, and “passes” in her new, more advantaged world (working-class people will know exactly what she means). Feeling caught between two realities, she decided to revisit the many towns where she grew up poor, to, in a sense, reclaim herself. She writes: “I realised that I could only really answer these questions if I went back. If I looked my monster in the face in the hope that it would be a shadow, after all.” Hudson's heart breaks throughout, not just for the helpless child she was, but for the others still out there What emerges is a vivid, highly personal memoir set against the backdrop of a still broken welfare system, with Hudson observing: “We live in the world’s sixth-richest economy but one-fifth of us live in poverty.” Born into “a clan of matriarchal fishwives” in Aberdeen, Hudson was dragged by her volatile mother on a series of “fresh starts” (Canterbury, North Lanarkshire, Sunderland, Great Yarmouth), to live in unfurnished council properties, squalid B&Bs and precarious sublets. Despite tight finances – there were times she had to wash her body and hair with Fairy Liquid – she was a cheerful, adaptable child and a voracious reader (the one lifeline that never let her down). “I am proudly working class,” writes Hudson, “but I was never proudly poor.” Along with the poverty, there were extremes of neglect and dysfunction, including spells in care, being dumped for days by her mother on ill-equipped babysitters, being warned by her stepfather not to put her hands down the back of a sofa (because there might be used needles), and, sickeningly, being discovered to have genital warts at the age of 10. Little wonder that Hudson landed, disturbed and scrabbling, into a wild hedonistic teenage “with a vacuum where my self-esteem should be”, mistaking sexual attention for power, being raped and having a second abortion. Yet she managed to halt her downward spiral: “I saw something on the horizon, and I ran. I ran, and I never looked over my shoulder.” Revisiting the street where she was raped, Hudson realised her past hadn’t destroyed her: “I’d made fucking lemonade.” In a sense, Hudson has written a powerful book about survivor’s guilt – certainly, her heart breaks throughout, not just for the helpless child she was, but for the others still out there, slipping through austerity-hit welfare safety nets. Lowborn is also about the masks that working-class people are forced to wear as they move among people who, even well meaningly, deny and diminish their experiences. While Hudson’s honesty has cost her (she and her mother are estranged), and she starts the book terrified that her past will expose her to others as “lesser”, ultimately, her quest releases her. “In retracing the lines that held me to the path of the past, I’ve freed myself from so much shame and fear”, she writes. The result is not a “misery memoir”, rather it’s a compelling story about grit, hope and a young woman running towards an implausible “something” on a distant horizon, and actually getting there. With half of all authors and writers coming from the middle class, compared to just 10% from working-class backgrounds, Common People, a collection of working-class writing (poetry, memoir, essays) edited by author Kit de Waal (My Name Is Leon), is an attempt to redress the balance. An eclectic mix of 34 original pieces, Common People features established writers, from Damian Barr on being fitted for his school uniform and Louise Doughty musing on her Romany heritage, to Jill Dawson on hearing Ted Hughes read his own poetry. Stuart Maconie, in a love letter to the Wigan housing estate he grew up on, writes: “It works well as a symbol of a depersonalised urban aesthetic, but it was also home.” Elsewhere, new voices include Loretta Ramkissoon’s evocative account of life in a tower block, Elaine Williams yearning for freedom in a strict Caribbean household in Sheffield, Alex Wheatle’s stark poem, Dear Nobody (“low esteem wants to party”), and many more. While Dave O’Brien’s essay on class and publishing drives home the miracle of Common People even existing, the myriad themes (darts, pool, libraries, prison, cats, Stalin, strikes, violence, peaches, racism, love, pain, courage, dreams) showcase the diversity and talent of working-class voices, in a collection fizzing with originality and energy. • Lowborn: Growing Up, Getting Away and Returning to Britain’s Poorest Towns by Kerry Hudson is published by Chatto & Windus (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99 • Common People: An Anthology of Working-Class Writers by Kit de Waal is published by Unbound (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99