Maurizio Sarri accepted on his unveiling as Juventus manager that he will have to win over some of his new club’s fans because of his association with their Serie A rivals Napoli. “I arrive with scepticism, just as I did with all my other clubs,” said the Italian, who signed a three-year contract in Turin after leaving Chelsea this week. “I understand that, but I know only one way to change that and that is to win and convince while entertaining and getting results. For three years [at Napoli] I would wake up and think about how to defeat Juventus, because they were a winning team. I gave 110%, but we still couldn’t do it. I will now give everything for this club.” Sarri joins the Italian champions after a single season in charge of Chelsea despite signing a three-year deal in west London last summer. “The Premier League was a great experience but in the latter half [of the season], I felt a professional and personal need to return to Italy,” said Sarri, who will now be nearer his elderly parents. “I feel that I have respected everyone and I gave my all.” Addressing the criticism he faced during his time in England, he said: “The world of the English media is well known to everybody: there are great newspapers and also some tabloids. This is something which strengthens you a lot. What I was a little disappointed with was the fact that here in Italy, what the [English] tabloids wrote was mainly reported. But all of the criticism and the attacks, the pressure – it will strengthen you.” Sarri appeared undaunted by the prospect of building on the work of Massimiliano Allegri, who led the club to five consecutive titles – a run that stretches to eight altogether. “I have never seen so much determination on the part of a club to hire a coach,” he said. “They had a great attitude which convinced me, they were very strong feelings. I expect to wake up every morning studying how to win games. Winning continuously is always hard and Juventus have an obligation to always win. This is the crowning achievement of a long career.”