Karen Bardsley Distribution went unpunished thanks to VAR’s intervention. Otherwise authoritative with routine saves. 7/10 Lucy Bronze Assured excellence. Consistently ambitious running up the right flank plus an assist. 8 Steph Houghton The captain was inspired to open the scoring with a precisely steered indirect free-kick. 7 Millie Bright At times a commanding presence at centre back alongside Houghton but guilty of some sloppy passes. 6 Alex Greenwood The defender swept in England’s third goal from a set piece, her high point in the game. 7 Jill Scott Needed to be combative in the heart of midfield. An important presence on her 140th cap. 7 Keira Walsh Not really eye-catching but tactical diligence important in allowing Scott more freedom. 6 Nikita Parris Back in the team, after sitting out the final group match, with an understated performance. 6 Fran Kirby Nimble conductor of the attack returned, with smart passes and imagination to make a difference. 7 Toni Duggan Always hunting space, she instigated Greenwood’s goal from a corner routine. 7 Ellen White A player Phil Neville describes as undroppable led the line and slotted England’s second. 7 Subs: Jodie Taylor (for White 64) 6; Lucy Staniforth (for Scott 78) 6; Leah Williamson (for Parris 84) 6. Annette Ndom Bemused to be punished for picking up a back pass, and struggled to get close to any of England’s goals. 5/10 Yvonne Leuko Booked early for an elbow to the face on Parris. Summed up the heightened emotion that did not do Cameroon any favours. 5 Augustine Ejangue Head in hands to give away a free-kick with a loose touch of a back pass which offered England the breakthrough. 6 Estelle Johnson Cameroon’s most accomplished defender but it was too big an ask to marshall all the problems they faced. 7 Aurelle Awona A tough afternoon as she endeavoured to keep track of the flank containing Bronze and Parris. 6 Ajara Nchout  Tearful on the pitch as her goal – a fine finish - was disallowed for a marginal offside in the buildup. 7 Michaela Abam Some clever touches and powerful surges from midfield as Cameroon tried to fight back. 6 Raissa Feudjio In the second minute showed a willingness to disrupt with a harmless if unsubtle body check. 6 Jeannette Yango Strained to make a positive impact and let a match of this importance pass her by. 6 Gabrielle Onguéné The golden talent of this Cameroon team, moments of flair and composure showed her quality. 7 Gaëlle Enganamouit Led the line and waited for support, had to work hard to stretch the England defence. 6 Subs: Alexandra Takounda (for Enganamouit 53) 6; Ysis Sonkeng (for Ejangue 64) 6; Ninon Abena (for Abam 68) 6.