The World Cup knockout stages have, in effect, begun early for us but as Eoin Morgan keeps reminding the players and supporters, our fate remains in our hands. Personally I see these final group games against India and New Zealand as an opportunity to be embraced not feared. The defeats to Sri Lanka and Australia have hurt us. Australia outplayed us in the first 10 overs of each innings at Lord’s and some days you can take losing to the better side. But the Sri Lanka game at Headingley is one that still eats away at us a bit because, to be honest, there is no way we should have lost that match. It wasn’t an easy pitch to bat on but beyond Lasith Malinga, who bowled brilliantly, I don’t think their attack should have troubled us like it did chasing a target of 233. If we had been chasing 300, we probably would have got it. My belief is that we got too obsessed with the trickiness of the pitch and we lacked some of the intensity that has been our approach over the past four years of one-day cricket. When I got out attempting a second six in a row, I walked off knowing people were going to get stuck into me. I targeted Dhananjaya de Silva and if I had cleared the fielder – a metre in difference – our chase would have got that bit of extra momentum. And to be honest, I’d still rather get out playing that shot than the one against Australia, trying to guide a single only to edge behind when the ball seamed. The difference is, you get out playing a defensive stroke or a guided shot like that, the criticism isn’t nearly the same. More credit goes to the bowler too. But break it down and the two reactions don’t make sense. Both shots are played on merit and both are failures in execution, rather than selection. Yet attacking shots attract more heat. Totals have been lower in this tournament and that could be down to pitches and weather. But it is also the difference between a World Cup and a series, where you adjust to the opposition as games go by. In tournament cricket, with a new opponent each game, I think you actually need to play to your own strengths more. The pressure of being the home side shouldn’t be a factor. Our next opponent, India, are a good reminder of this because we don’t have to deal with nearly the same amount of expectation as they do. They are superstars back home. Win and they are showered with praise, lose and they are on the receiving end of harsh criticism. And they aren’t able to lead everyday lives when they’re not playing because of the attention they receive. I have seen this first hand playing alongside Virat Kohli in the Indian Premier League. We have known each other since our under-19 days but over the past couple of years, at Royal Challengers Bangalore, we have become good friends. I don’t want to pump his tyres up too much before a big game but he is a motivated, driven and dedicated cricketer. People see him on the field and think they know him; that’s he’s this intense, fiery character. But away from cricket he’s a very chilled guy. He loves a bit of banter, either giving it or taking it – although to be honest, not many people dare to give it to him. It’s like how Jonny Bairstow and David Warner became friends at their IPL team. But then switching to become opponents in international cricket is very easy. Virat knows he’s there to score runs for India, while I’m here to get him out (or score some myself). It means a lot to get a player like him out but you can be still be friends trying to do it. I grew up playing against friends and cousins in the park and it was some of the most competitive cricket I have played. The key here is respect. Yuzvendra Chahal, India’s leg-spinner, is another IPL team-mate. He’s also a great guy and very funny. Overcoming his spin pairing with Kuldeep Yadav will be important on Sunday. We managed this last year during the ODI series win and the key will be to have the right mindset again; not to get sucked into conditions or the situation too much – play each ball on merit. That’s how guys like Jonny Bairstow produce their best cricket. Jason Roy is the same. He just goes out and plays. He’s still smart with it but it’s all about how he approaches it on the day rather than the bowlers he is up against, and that’s why he’s so feared. Clearly he’s been missed both individually and as an opening pair with Bluey. We all hope Jason is fit for Edgbaston on Sunday, which will be a special game for me if selected. Warwickshire may not be my county any more but it’s a World Cup match in the city I was born and still live. It is always buzzing and whenever I am back I feel right at home again. It’s the best ground in the country. In 2014, my first year as an England player, I got booed by some India fans at Edgbaston every time the ball went near me. I probably took it more personally than I would do now. I’d like to think we’ve all grown up a bit since.