Tuukka Rask made 28 saves, Brad Marchand had a goal and an assist, and the Boston Bruins beat the St Louis Blues 5-1 on Sunday night to even the bruising, physical Stanley Cup final at three games apiece. David Pastrnak had one of Boston’s four goals in the third period and an assist, helping the Bruins force the 17th Game 7 in Stanley Cup history. Brandon Carlo, Karson Kuhlman and Zdeno Chara also scored. “We’re fighting for our lives obviously,” Marchand said. “When you play desperate, I think you see everyone’s best game.” Boston also were involved in the final’s last Game 7, winning the championship at Vancouver in 2011. Rask was a reserve goaltender on that team eight years ago, while Marchand was a key performer. They will go for another championship on Wednesday night in Boston after losing to Chicago in the 2013 final. “The whole hockey world loves a Game 7, so it should be a great night in Boston and may the best team win,” Bruins coach Bruce Cassidy said. Ryan O’Reilly scored in the third period for St Louis, who are looking for the franchise’s first Stanley Cup title in their 51st season. Rookie Jordan Binnington finished with 27 stops. “We have to move on, get ready for the next one,” O’Reilly said. “We’re confident. We’re a great road team. Maybe that’s our story. Maybe we have to get it done on the road.” Backed by an electric Enterprise Center crowd that included actors Jon Hamm and Jenna Fischer and Cardinals catcher Yadier Molina, wearing a No 49 Blues jersey in honor of suspended forward Ivan Barbashev, St Louis looked a step off for most of the game. Prime scoring opportunities were derailed by misplaced passes or ever-so-slight timing issues. The unflappable Rask can have that effect on a team. And whenever the Blues threatened, the Finnish star was there. “He’s our best player,” Bruins defenseman Charlie McAvoy said. “He just steps up when it matters and we have all the faith in the world in him ... He’s our rock.” The crowd chanted “Let’s Go Blues!” in the final moments, hoping to give St Louis a boost for their trip to Boston. “Listen, if you told me four months ago we were going to be in the finals in Game 7, I think I’d take it,” Blues coach Craig Berube said. “We’ve been a good road team. We’ve won twice up there in this series, so we’re a confident group.”