I wish I had a time machine so I could go back to the moment before I entered the Royal Academy’s 2019 Summer Exhibition, and then turn away. This is a memory I don’t need. Since seeing this sprawling dustbin of has-beens and never-will-be’s I have been weighed down by its depressing dullness. It was like being locked for days in a garden centre. Last year Grayson Perry turned the RA’s 250-year-old open-submission art show into something subversive and hilarious. Any doubts that its anarchic spirit should be credited to him and him alone are removed by this year’s return to abominable form. The latest selectors, led by Jock McFadyen, have assiduously removed every trace of the wit and cleverness with which Perry brought this bloated corpse of a tradition to temporary life. True, this year’s show makes a fainthearted attempt at anarchy, but in doing so it just underlines its profound establishment complacency. Banksy now seems to be a regular. Perhaps in real life he is a 70-year-old Royal Academician who paints geese. Here he shows a rat smashing open the lock on a closed UK border barrier. But this work falls flat – Banksy’s strength is a sense of context. When he gets a self-destroying artwork into a Sotheby’s auction or paints a mural overnight in Wales he wins through guerrilla-art unexpectedness. Here he’s just a guest at the tea party. He’s not the only proper artist to have fallen into this grey stew that boils out individuality. Paula Rego and Charles Avery are among the well-known talents who struggle bravely to make it into something more. Bob and Roberta Smith, the poor person’s Perry, has curated a room – and what a trite, sentimental display it is. He shows a text painting about a conversation he had with a child, and a print that says: “Art makes children powerful.” Really? What power does it give them, exactly? What is he on about? Smith’s vague do-gooder idealism is typical of this show. We’ve seen the cool, conceptual side of political art in a succession of recent Turner prizes and biennales. Now here’s the uncool, concept-free version. Guess what? Artists who submit to the Summer Exhibition are really worried about the state of the planet! Huge tracts of the show are taken up by this anxiety, expressed through third-rate landscape art and silly sculptures. There are pictures of whales and icebergs that belong in a hotel restaurant. Other issues get the same brainless treatment. Ishbel Myerscough’s painting Lily and Quaye is a portrait of a mixed-race couple in their underwear that seems to think it is antiracist, yet actually displays a nervous fixation on race. Liam Walker’s lachrymose drawing Rule Britannia Etc contrasts a glossy ad with the plight of a homeless girl whose puppy eyes are kitsch puddles of bathos. Claire Douglass exhibits The Garden of Earthly Delights – not Bosch’s original but her updated version in which an array of modern Britons engage in pursuits ranging from dancing to sadomasochism. The RA touts it as a modern masterpiece but it’s just a fussy anodyne exercise in pedantically painted mild satire, with all the artistic power of a model railway. It’s not fair to single out specific embarrassments from a heap of thousands. It is the ordinariness of the art here, and the scale of that ordinariness, that makes the Summer Show such a blight on the season. The clever trick Perry pulled was to go against the grain of an open submission show, where the decent thing is to reward talent even when it’s far short of genius. Perry did the mean, indecent thing and chose nonsense you can laugh at over stolid efforts you can’t. This year ruthlessness has been replaced with fairness. The result is a show with no laughs, no surprises, just wall after wall cluttered with the latest productions of exhausted RAs next to the creations of Cheltenham’s finest amateurs. Only one artist survives the show, and the Academy clearly knows it. It shows Anselm Kiefer’s contribution in a space of its own, the surrounding array of dross separated by an expanse of clean wall. Kiefer shows every year in the Summer Show. This year he exhibits a colossal landscape of mud whose perspective lines sweep away vertiginously. It’s a shock to see something so great amid this weary defeat. And to see one of Germany’s great contemporary artists overshadow every British fart in the place is a more damning comment on Brexit Britain than Banksy’s wimpy rat. Perhaps this exhibition is, after all, a true picture of Britain at a moment of national failure. There is a tired, inward looking, end-of-the-road quality to this sour show. No new ideas, no vigour. Meanwhile on the European continent, an artist of Kiefer’s quality exuberantly splurges another stonking masterpiece. Maybe art was only ever something we borrowed from Europe. Looking at this pitiful array of the overpromoted and the underthought makes you wonder what will become of the British, left to ourselves. At the Royal Academy, London, from 10 June to 12 August.