As if nine favourites for Royal Ascot were not enough, Aidan O’Brien added another big-race contender to his team for next week’s meeting on Friday when Fleeting, last seen finishing third behind Anapurna in the Oaks at Epsom, was supplemented for Thursday’s Ribblesdale Stakes, a race her trainer has won three times in the last five seasons. Fleeting’s addition to the field for the Group Two contest took bookmakers and punters by surprise, and having been unquoted for the race by most firms overnight, she was introduced to the betting at 9-2 before shortening to a top price of 7-2, half a point behind Sir Michael Stoute’s Queen Power at the head of the market. O’Brien has been the leading trainer at the Royal meeting for the last four seasons and nine times in all, and while his lifetime score of 65 winners is still 14 winners adrift of Sir Michael Stoute’s record total of 79, O’Brien will hope to close the gap, perhaps to single figures, over the five days next week. His first Royal winner, Harbour Master in the Coventry Stakes in 1997, arrived 20 years after Stoute broke his duck in 1977. Friday’s six-race card, in which O’Brien will saddle short-priced favourites in both of the day’s Group One races, could prove particular rewarding. In addition to Hermosa, the 1,000 Guineas winner, in the Coronation Stakes and Ten Sovereigns in the Commonwealth Cup, the stable also has the market leaders for the Albany Stakes and King Edward VII Stakes earlier in the afternoon. Ten Sovereigns set off as the favourite for the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket in early May but appeared to be beaten by lack of stamina, fading to finish fifth after travelling as well as any of his opponents until a furlong out. “We were delighted with Ten Sovereigns in the Guineas and we were always thinking in our mind that we would run him in the Guineas and then bring him back for this race,” O’Brien said on Friday. “We’re looking forward to getting him back over six furlongs. He travelled so well in the Guineas but this was the trip he was very comfortable at last year, so you’d imagine he’ll be happy.” Ten Sovereigns is a 7-4 chance for the Commonwealth Cup while Hermosa is even shorter in the betting for the Coronation Stakes at 5-4. O’Brien’s other market leaders in Group One events are Le Brivido, at 9-2 for the Queen Anne Stakes which opens the meeting, and Magical, the 7-2 favourite for Wednesday’s feature race, the Prince Of Wales’s Stakes, while the last two winners of the St Leger will represent him in Thursday’s Gold Cup. “Le Brivido ran a very good race in the Lockinge [at Newbury in mid-May],” O’Brien said. “Ryan [Moore] just said that he got caught up in traffic at a bad time when the race was just getting going. “Magical has done everything right so far this season and has won three races. Last year we were getting her ready for the Oaks but she had a setback which meant we had to go gentle for a lot of the year with her. She started to get it together before [Champions Day at] Ascot where she won the Fillies’ and Mares’ and then she went to [the Breeders’ Cup in] American were she was just beaten by [dual Arc winner] Enable.” O’Brien’s record haul from a single Royal meeting is seven winners, in 2016. Four victories were enough to see him finish as the week’s top trainer 12 months ago when, unusually, none of his winners set off as the favourite and while Order Of St George, Winter, Caravaggio and Churchill have all obliged at odds-on since 2016, O’Brien has also sent out winners at 33-1 and 14-1 in the same period. O’Brien is no better than 4-7 to finish the Royal meeting as the leading trainer while Ryan Moore, his principal jockey, is 8-11 to be the leading rider ahead of Frankie Dettori on 7-2. The going was mostly good to soft when I worked on Friday’s tips at York and I had hope it would stay that way but it’s soft all round now and a GoingStick of 5.7 suggests it may be pretty hard work. For that reason, I’ve cooled on Sir Dancealot in what ought to have been a winnable Listed race, and will wait for him to get good ground or better.In a hot 10-furlong handicap earlier on the card, Ghalib (2.20) is being predictably overlooked at 9-1, there being plenty of tempting alternatives to Rebecca Bastiman’s runner. But he’d dropped a long way in the ratings before winning well against 14 rivals at Hamilton last week and a 4lb penalty still leaves him very well treated. He gets soft ground again, a surface on which he has often done well, and the only major question is whether he can run to a similar level again. I think the odds more than compensate for the risk he may not.Otherwise, Richard Fahey is the trainer I’m rooting for on the Knavesmire. His Right Action (3.30) has a handy inside draw in the seven-furlong handicap and is reunited with Silvestre de Sousa, who is two from two on him, both times in big-field handicaps like this. I think he can be forgiven a modest effort last time under a big weight in a race for amateur riders on a much faster surface. He’s 8-1.Later, Fahey fields Society Queen (4.40), who has twice run well at Chester this year but basically gave herself too much to do with slow starts there. This place may suit her better and she won a nursery here last summer. She’s 6-1.At Sandown, Ouzo is odds-on to defy a penalty but at 4-1 I’ll take a chance on God Has Given (3.10), whose form has a progressive look since he joined Ian Williams. Cheekpieces are tried and the yard is going well.At the end of that card, 9-4 is perfectly fair about Gary Moore’s Goshen (5.25), officially 5lb well in under a penalty for an easy Brighton win last week. That was on good going but he’s by Authorized out of a Poliglote mare and if that’s not soft-ground breeding I don’t know what is. It comes to something when we’re getting wet-weather abandonments in the middle of June but that’s where we are after a week in which it felt like most of the country had basically fallen into the sea. Friday’s cards at Newton Abbot and Chepstow have both been called off, while Saturday’s meetings at Worcester and Leicester have also been lost.It’s a great pity about Chepstow, as I had high hopes of a Gay Kelleway double there, but 32mm of rain in the last day left the Welsh track with no chance. Their drookit clerk, Libby O’Flaherty, tells us through Twitter: “It’s more like jump racing weather”. Of course the track we were all waiting to hear from was Ascot, where the latest bulletin for next week's meeting described the straight course as good to soft and the round course as soft, good to soft in places. Chepstow 1.40 Lady Alavesa 2.10 Robsdelight 2.45 Indian Creek 3.20 Satchville Flyer 3.55 National Glory 4.30 Nette Rousse 5.00 AnifYork 1.50 Olcan 2.20 Ghalib (nb) 2.55 Chattanooga Boy 3.30 Right Action 4.05 Sir Dancealot (nap) 4.40 Society Queen 5.15 Speed CompanySandown 2.00 Dream Kart 2.35 Visible Charm 3.10 God Has Given 3.45 Herculean 4.20 I Am Magical 4.50 Valence 5.25 GoshenNewton Abbot ABANDONEDAintree 5.55 Ormesher 6.25 Must See The Doc 7.00 Lofgren 7.30 Asylo 8.05 Capital Force 8.35 Dragon Houdini 9.05 Smith's BayGoodwood 6.05 Cardano 6.35 Diva Kareem 7.10 Mugatoo 7.40 White Chocolate 8.15 Aperitif 8.45 Hereby