We ordered two sofas from Harveys nearly five months ago and were told delivery would be in eight weeks. In due course, I got a message asking me to call to arrange for our delivery. Straight afterwards, I received two more messages saying the original notification was sent in error and to ignore it. A week later, we received another request to call to arrange delivery. I was given a date and asked not to dispose of our existing sofas until the day before, when we would be sent a confirmation message. We complied, hired a van and took our old sofas to a local refugee family. A couple of hours later, Harveys called to say the sofas would not be delivered. They have since given us countless promises of delivery dates and kept us on hold for hours. For the last two months we have had to sit on a cold, hard floor. My four-year-old has had surgery and we had to bring her bed downstairs so she had somewhere to sit, both my daughters had chickenpox, and I am now pregnant and feel very sick, as well. We need those sofas. After months of asking for a temporary one, I went in store to be provided with a tiny two-seater. We are a family of five. I’m at my wits end. NA, Manchester You might still be on the floor with morning sickness so severe you were hospitalised had you not invoked the media. The day after I contacted Harveys press office it summoned the initiative to call you. The £2,500 order was delivered by the end of that week. Harveys accounted for this disgraceful behaviour by explaining, illuminatingly, the delay was “due to a delay with the fulfilment of the order”. Pressed for further insights, it blames that favourite corporate culprit, a “system update” which disrupted “a large number” of orders. It elaborates: “The items were not sent to our distribution centre for onward delivery to the customer in a timely manner, then once they were transferred to the correct warehouse an IT issue disrupted the order, meaning that it wasn’t showing where it should be for the bookings advisers to arrange the delivery. “We are taking steps to improve the level of service we provide. As part of this process, we are retraining staff and rationalising our stock holding across all our distribution centres to help simplify our delivery system.” When I pressured it about compensation for your ordeal, it offered to stump up £250, a tenth of the purchase price, and raised this to £400 after you understandably objected. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions