A lot of people are wary of vegan pastry, but you genuinely won’t be able to tell that this pastry is vegan. It tastes buttery and melts in the mouth, thanks to the ratio of coconut oil to flour. Make sure to include the sugar, as it gives the pastry a little more flavour and helps it to brown. I prefer the tofu-based filling to egg-based quiche; all the vegans and non-vegans I’ve served it to love it. Makes eight 10cm tartletsPrep time: 20 mins for the pastry, plus 20 mins for the fillingBake time: 30 mins For the pastry360g plain flour½ tsp salt20g caster sugar215g organic extra-virgin coconut oil (not liquid – it should be room temperature and scoopable)65-80g cold waterA little vegan margarine For the filling1 medium red onion, diced150g tenderstem broccoli, chopped small2½ tbsp olive oil430g soft or silken tofu (after water is drained)¼ tsp turmeric2 tbsp nutritional yeast flakes¼ tsp Indian black salt (kala namak)Small handful of fresh basil½-¾ tsp salt½-¾ tsp black pepper To decorate5 baby plum tomatoes5 black olivesHandful of pine nutsA little extra olive oil Heat the oven to 190C/170C fan/375F/gas mark 5. For the pastry, mix all the dry ingredients in a large mixing bowl. Add the coconut oil and use your fingers to rub it in until the mix resembles fine breadcrumbs. Add the water to combine and form a ball. Try to work the pastry as little as possible. Place on to a lightly floured surface. Lightly flour the top and roll to about 2-3mm thick. Stamp out eight 12cm circles and use these to line your 10cm tart tins, lightly greased with the margarine. Trim off the excess pastry. Use the side of your finger to press the pastry around the fluted edge. Prick the bottom of the tart using a fork. Place in the fridge to chill. Fry the onions and the broccoli over a high heat with 1 tbsp oil, until softened and much reduced in size. Drain the water from the tofu, and add to a bowl along with the turmeric, nutritional yeast (crumble to a powder between your fingers), black salt, the remaining olive oil and the torn basil. Add salt and pepper to taste. Add the cooked vegetables and stir together. Set aside. Line the tart shells with aluminium foil then fill with baking beads or rice. Blind bake for 15 minutes with the foil on, then five minutes with the foil and beads removed. Add the filling, pressing it down to fit in as much as possible. Slice the tomatoes and olives and arrange on top, then brush with a little oil. Add the pine nuts to complete the face. Bake for a further 10 minutes or until the filling feels springy. Leave to cool in the tins for 10 minutes before removing and serving.