The International Cricket Council has asked India’s MS Dhoni to remove an army insignia from his wicketkeeping gloves, prompting New Delhi to weigh in after a nationalistic furore in the country. Dhoni is an honorary lieutenant colonel in the territorial army and sported its dagger insignia on his gloves during India’s opening World Cup match against South Africa. The ICC said its clothing and equipment rules allow only manufacturers’ logos on gloves and Dhoni and the India team had not sought permission to sport the badge. India’s prime minister Narendra Modi’s nationalist government on Friday urged the country’s cricket board, the BCCI, to sort out the matter. “The government does not interfere in matters of sports bodies, they are autonomous,” the sports minister, Kiren Rijiju, said on Twitter. “But when the issue is related to the country’s sentiments, then the interest of the nation has to be kept in mind. I urge the BCCI to take appropriate steps on the issue.” The BCCI said it has already written to the ICC seeking permission for Dhoni to sport the insignia. The controversy has prompted passionate responses from both ruling and opposition politicians, Bollywood stars, as well as the public. The hashtag #DhoniKeepTheGlove has been trending on Twitter India. Fawad Chaudhry, a federal minister in Pakistan, said Dhoni was in England to play cricket, not for any war. Dhoni and his teammates wore army camouflage-style caps in a one-day match against Australia in March to show their solidarity with Indian paramilitary police killed in a militant attack by a Pakistan-based group. The team, led by Virat Kohli, also donated their earnings from that match to the families of the defence personnel who died on duty. Meanwhile, Adam Zampa has been reprimanded by the International Cricket Council after breaching its code of conduct in Australia’s 15-run World Cup win over West Indies. The Australia leg-spinner was heard using an audible obscenity by the umpires after completing the 29th over - his seventh - in West indies’ pursuit of 289 at Trent Bridge on Thursday. Zampa admitted to the level one offence, negating the need for a formal hearing, and one demerit point has been added to his disciplinary record, with four in the space of 24 months leading to a possible ban.