Michael Parker’s extraordinary, ambitious, many layered memoir opens with a remarkable scene from 2006, a double civil partnership ceremony in the town of Machynlleth in rural Wales, only two years after such things became possible. The two couples are a fortysomething Parker and his somewhat younger lover Peredur, and Reg and George, respectively 79 and 89 years old. “Their 62 years together encompassed the full gamut of society’s attitudes,” Parker writes. “For the first 18 years of their relationship, its very existence was illegal. Yet they were together long enough to go from being outlawed by the state to being married by one of its officials.” The younger couple had become close friends with the older, but they were astounded to discover, when Reg and George died, that they had been bequeathed their grand house, Rhiw Goch, and all its contents, including their diaries, letters and photographs (many of them, says Parker, full of a “shy, sly, homoeroticism”). Consciously modelled on EM Forster’s Howards End, On the Red Hill revolves around the house and its inhabitants, past and present. But its scope is immense, integrating five distinct strands: the personal histories of the two couples, the history of gay men in the 20th century, the history of the area, nature’s yearly cycle and, a little more fitfully, a meditation on the nature of Welshness. It is nature that provides the metaphorical underpinning. The book’s form is striking: divided into quarters, each divided into four – an element, a season, a direction, a person – it is arranged in a series of concentric circles: crop circles, as one might say. The central thread of the narrative is the profoundly alienated author’s quest for a place in which he feels he belongs. He details his grim childhood, at first alleviated and then blighted by his discovery of the bodies of other boys; his getting drawn along with other lads into a paedophile ring; his growing body dysmorphia, seeing his physical self as somehow different from his inner self; his headlong flight from anyone who expressed too much enthusiasm for him. In one remarkable photo, wearing the most exiguous of posing pouches, George brandishes his bicycle over his head In his 20s, he had begun to identify Wales as the place where he might finally find peace. “Had someone asked me to imagine my improbable dream, I would have hesitantly talked of Wales, of an old stone house, of night skies, and open fires, of a man I loved and who loved me back, of a dog and walks and swims in cool green waters … ” All these things, we discover, he has achieved; but have they brought him the profound rightness of being that he craved? Only up to a point. He recognises in himself a condition that he identifies with a Welsh word, hiraeth, which seems to be the equivalent of the German sehnsucht and the Portuguese saudades – a deep and possibly unassuageable longing for his heart’s homeland. When he was a boy tormented by what he was told were shameful impulses, he experienced, for a brief period, intense religious feelings; they soon passed, but he still feels at core a need to connect with something beyond words, beyond mere human emotion. “Whatever my faith was called, I knew from my very earliest encounters that Wales was its home.” But still there is a vein of discontent that he cannot wholly extirpate: sometimes he has nights when “restlessness and fury are scratching my innards” and he forsakes the hearth of the home that he and Peredur (Preds) have made together, and hurls himself out into the dark. “The night punches me in the innards … I see nothing but a black wall and no escape …” He thinks of the city streets of his past. “That is who I am, my brain thunders, not this, not here, not ever.” This strong vein of melancholy is never far away: there is an unresolved quality about his self-portrait in the chapter that bears his name, as if, despite his profoundly satisfying relationship with Preds, he is still the man he was, in the grip of a neurotic promiscuity, a feeling of self-repulsion, a searing resentment of what society has done to him. This turbulent energy stirs the book out of any nostalgic pastoralism in which it might have luxuriated. His re-creation of the lives of Reg and George, ultimately crowned in happiness and fulfilment despite the constrictions imposed on them by society, is exemplary gay social history, of a kind we deeply need. It is personal and particular, and immensely enlivened by photographs of George, whose body was his temple, in various stages of undress, wiry, muscled and hairless, like a fakir. In one remarkable snap, wearing the most exiguous of posing pouches, he brandishes his bicycle over his head. In his 60s, he has become, as Parker says, “the streamlined man-machine of his dreams”. Towards the end of the book, Parker allows himself a vision of a gay heaven, a New Year’s party, with among the guests Walt Whitman and Edward Carpenter, Ivor Novello, James Baldwin, David Hockney and Lord Montagu, AE Housman, WH Auden, with JR Ackerley helping Forster to direct a remake of the skinny-dipping scene from A Room With a View. It is a touching, Blakeian scene, though owing perhaps more to Peter than to William Blake. Parker’s prose is lush and vivid; just occasionally the descriptive passages are so rich that one recoils. The sense of quotidian drama is a little excluding, like listening to someone on acid – and indeed, he is a little partial, he tells us, to the odd magic mushroom. At the culmination of the book, headed “Peredur”, we learn a great deal about his qualities, the man’s depth, his innate charm, his depth, his relationship to the land, his instinctive homebuilding. What we don’t really get is a description of him – his face, his body, his smell. So this climactic chapter is ultimately somewhat impersonal. Peredur, like Reg and George, is elevated (but also slightly reduced) to an archetype. Parker links him to his namesake, the hero of The Mabinogion, whose quest for justice is finally rewarded when he discovers Carreg y Noddfa, the stone of sanctuary. Finding the stone, Peredur is given “the fairest river valley he had ever seen”. “That too,” Parker says, in the curious, ecstatic, unresolved last line of the text, is his “for now, for never, for always”. It is a haunting ending to a book that is deep in riches and profoundly uncomfortable at heart. • On the Red Hill is published by William Heinemann (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.