A woman is urging holidaymakers to avoid Tui prepaid travel money cards after the firm took all of the near-€300 (£260) balance she held on her card because she hadn’t used it for a few years. The holiday giant, which offers prepaid cards to help customers manage their holiday spending, told Sue Probyn that its terms and conditions allow it to remove all balances held on cards after six years have elapsed. Probyn, a retired accountant who lives in Exeter, says she is astonished at the firm’s actions, and now faces a long-winded claim to the Financial Ombudsman Service to try to get her money back. She says she is bemused as to why Tui did not write to her warning her of its impending move. Instead it simply sent an email to an old email address that she does not use any more. One consumer expert branded the account closure as very harsh, and it poses the question as to whether the term, buried in the firm’s terms and conditions, could be deemed to be unfair. UK banks and building societies are not allowed to grab balances held in so-called dormant bank accounts until they have remained untouched for at least 15 years, and the customer is no longer contactable. Even then, the bank has to reunite the customer with their cash if they later emerge. “Back in 2012 I loaded up the prepaid card with just over €600 and used some of the money during a visit to Austria the following March. I then mislaid my log-in details and eventually found them in March of this year. But when I looked at the account, my balance of €296 had been taken as an account breakage fee,” says Probyn. The company told her that as the last transaction had been in March 2013, as per its terms it had emptied the account of the entire balance. “They claimed they emailed me a month before to warn me this was going to happen, but they had an old email address and therefore I did not see it. I have complained that in my view it was unreasonable, but this has got nowhere. There must be lots of people with outstanding balances on cards – if feels as though my money has been stolen,” she says. Probyn is just the latest pre-paid card user to be hit with unexpected charges that are often buried in the small print. Guardian Money has long warned users to be wary, and better still, to keep their money in their own bank account. Every year millions of pounds is lost as a result of cards not being used or simply being forgotten about. We have likened them to gift cards in the past. Banking expert Andrew Hagger, who runs the MoneyComms.co.uk website, says Tui’s stance appears very harsh. “I’d want to know why the company didn’t write to the customer before the six-year deadline. They would have had her address. To just send out an email and to take €300 because they had not heard back is extreme in my view,” he adds. Despite this, Tui remains unrepentant. “We can confirm that the terms and conditions do state that if the Tui single currency card is not used within six years of the last transaction, the funds will be removed as a breakage charge. Ms Probyn did accept the terms and conditions when she applied for the card. We did email her to inform her before the funds were removed, but she had not notified us that there had been changes to her personal details,” says a spokeswoman.