Presumably Brooks Koepka will spend the build up to the final round of this US Open finding a reason to bear a grudge against Gary Woodland. As things stand, Woodland represents the biggest danger to the making of history by Koepka. Victory at Pebble Beach on Sunday would render Koepka only the second player, and first since 1905, to win this major in three consecutive years. Through 54 holes, Koepka – who makes a point of deriving inspiration from negative forces, real or otherwise – trails Woodland’s 11 under par by four. The scale of Koepka’s potential triumph should not be overstated; victory in this US Open would represent a fifth in just nine major starts. “I feel good,” said Koepka after a 68 as moved him to minus seven. “I feel like if I can just make a few putts, I could be right there, right next to Gary. And it’s been very close. I’m pleased at how I’m playing. I’m pleased at how I’m striking the ball. “I feel as confident as ever right now. It’s probably the best ball-striking week I’ve had. Pebble’s greens are so small. I think I only missed one green today, maybe two. To hit as many greens as I have the last two days, the ball-striking is right where I want it.” Woodland must hope his get out of jail cards weren’t used up during day three’s 69. He chipped in to save par at the 12th. Having played the 14th like an 18-handicapper, he holed out from 43ft to prevent a dropped shot. This is unchartered territory for Woodland, whose best major finish is tied sixth, but he will begin the final day with a one-shot shot cushion. Justin Rose is Woodland’s closest challenger. Koepka, on whom all eyes will inevitably fall upon, has Louis Oosthuizen and Chez Reavie for 54-hole company. Rose’s Saturday 68 was wonderfully tenacious. He has delivered a staggering 34 single putts through three rounds. Unlike Woodland, whom he will again have as a partner on Sunday, Rose has also prevailed in this environment before. Rory McIlroy’s 70 moved him to six under. If that means the Northern Irishman still had a chance of a second US Open title, McIlroy looked bruised by a dropped shot at the 17th. There was little at all wrong with McIlroy’s tee to green play on Saturday; putts just wouldn’t drop. “I definitely think I can shoot 65 or 66 on this golf course,” said McIlroy. “That’s probably what it is going to take tomorrow. Everything has got to be on. You’ve got to get off to a fast start, you’ve got to play the par fives well and you need to hit it in the fairways all day. It’s difficult. It is possible, but it is difficult.” Matt Kuchar and Chesson Hadley are a shot adrift of McIlroy. The all-European four under quintet comprises Danny Willett, Graeme McDowell, Jon Rahm, Henrik Stenson and Matt Wallace. Tiger Woods appeared for his third round wearing neck tape, demonstrating fitness issues remain a constant for the Masters champion. Woods’s 71 means he is level par on aggregate and, legitimately, aiming for a top-10 finish at best here. “When it’s cold like this everything is achy,” Woods explained. “It’s just part of the deal. The forces have to go somewhere. And if they’re not in the lower back, they’re in the neck, and if not, they’re in the mid-back and if not they go to the knee. You name it. “Let me put it this way, I feel every shot I hit. I think that’s always going to be the place from here going forward.” Image of the day was provided by Stenson, who was pictured lying in the rough, next to a fan he had hit with a “semi shank” on the 16th. This was a typical act of decency from Stenson, who explained the scenario after signing for his 70. “He’s in good spirits because he’s taking selfies of himself while he’s down on the ground,” Stenson said. “I walk up to him. I said, ‘I’m sorry.’ What else can you say? And he says, ‘Can you do me one favour? Can I take a picture with you?’ So next thing I’m down on the ground as well, taking a picture, laying down with him and his girlfriend. “It feels like he’s had maybe one or two refreshments that might have eased the pain. I don’t know if he’s got a concussion but I asked for his details so I can contact him at a later date and check up on him. I might send him a couple of dozen balls or something to try to make up for my poor shot.”