With Neymar and Edinson Cavani both struggling for fitness, PSG’s attack became (nearly) the sole property of Kylian Mbappé this season. Ángel Di María had his moments but Mbappé’s scoring totals are already the stuff of legend; no French player had scored more goals in Ligue 1 in 50 years. Given that he missed half a dozen matches through suspension and a handful more owing to injury, Mbappé could take aim at the league’s all-time record of 44 next season. This was perhaps Dimitri Payet’s poorest season in a Marseille shirt. He scored four goals and set up five more in the first two months of the campaign but, from that point onwards, he didn’t score again and only picked up two more assists. Rudi Garcia often dropped Payet for Lucas Ocampos as he sought to inject more pace into wide areas. However, during that early, stirring run Payet served up an emphatic reminder of his class with a gobsmacking goal against Guingamp. Latching on to Jérémy Sorbon’s weak clearance just outside the area, Payet walloped the ball home with such precision and power that there was little Karl-Johan Johnsson could do. Despite being six months older than our player of the season, Lyon’s midfield tyro Houssem Aouar deserves to be recognised. His combination of wiry strength, close control and scoring ability were truly remarkable this season. Capable of playing wide on the left or as a No 10, he was often played in central midfield alongside Tanguy N’Dombélé, but still managed to record seven goals and seven assists in the league – no mean feat given his position. The 20-year-old is both Lyon’s present and future. Lille’s extraordinary season has gone a little unnoticed in light of PSG’s dominance. However, they met in mid-April with the title (mathematically) on offer and Christophe Galtier’s team dismantled PSG spectacularly in a riotous game. Helped along by Juan Bernat’s dismissal at 1-1, Lille were devastating. Nicolas Pépé and Jonathan Bamba used their power, pace and precision push Lille into a lead after half-time before towering headers from centre-backs Gabriel and José Fonte sealed the club’s best night since they won the title in 2011. Not only has Christophe Galtier taken his team from relegation fodder to second place, but he has done it with attacking flair. With a defence buoyed by the arrival of José Fonte, Lille have struck the perfect balance of solidity and lightning pace on the counter. Nicolas Pépé has become the league’s breakout star and, alongside him, canny youngsters Jonathan Ikoné and Jonathan Bamba have combined to make them a compelling watch. The summer window could unsettle this side, but Galtier was the best manager in France – and perhaps the best in Europe – this season. Little was expected when Nice paid €3m for Youcef Atal last summer. He had struggled with injuries last season and was not even a regular for Kortrijk in the Belgian league, so was expected to play a support role at Nice for ageing full-back Christophe Jallet. Instead, Atal finished as the club’s top scorer and most important player. He has pace, skill, an eye for a pass and a waspish intensity and he consistently impacted games this season despite Patrick Vieira’s increasingly conservative outlook. His stunning hat-trick against Guingamp in April was a highlight. Mike Maignan, LilleKenny Lala, StrasbourgJosé Fonte, LilleYunis Abdelhamid, ReimsFerland Mendy, LyonThiago Mendes, LilleTéji Savanier, NîmesYann M’Vila, Saint-ÉtienneNicolas Pépé, LilleKylian Mbappé, PSGNeymar, PSG Subs: Walter Benítez (Nice), Marquinhos, (PSG), Youcef Atal (Nice), Ángel Di María (PSG), Florian Thauvin (Marseille), Andy Delort (Montpellier), Flavien Tait, (Angers) Angers once again managed to avoid relegation, finishing 13th despite their limited resources. Jeff Reine-Adélaïde looks a promising prospect and Flavien Tait continues to impress with his creativity, but no one excelled (and also disappointed) more than Ludovic Butelle. Capable of the sublime, he is sometimes let down by his handling and control. Although, even at 36, he is still one of Ligue 1’s best shot stoppers. This save is one of many potential candidates. Relegated, injured and out of form, Nacer Chadli’s season with West Brom had been disastrous, but as Belgium swept down the field to complete a stunning injury-time comeback against Japan at the World Cup last summer, Chadli’s terrible year was forgotten. Monaco, not a team usually subject to forces such as World Cup-generated hype, signed Chadli on the strength of his displays in Russia. It proved to be one of many mistakes made by the club this season. Struggling with injuries and devoid of form once more, Chadli was lucky not to be relegated again as Monaco finished 17th. He didn’t score, didn’t set up a goal, was hardly fit and averaged 3.6 out of 10 in L’Équipe’s rating. Playing everywhere from right-back to left wing to centre-forward, the versatile Ripart finished as Nîmes’ top scorer with eight goals. An academy product, his first season in Ligue 1 was an unabashed success, and his goal celebration quickly became famous, paying tribute to the city’s famous bull ring with an elaborate cape. Honourable mention to Mario Balotelli, of course, for his selfie and for his rock, paper, scissors routine with Florian Thauvin, but it is hard to look past Ripart wearing his passion for his hometown club on his sleeve. Romain Danzé was 15 when he signed for Rennes in 2001. After 376 appearances, the stalwart defender, now 32, was sent off in style with his face plastered across Roazhon Park above the caption: “Your name will remain engraved for eternity.” Upon receiving his award for Ligue 1’s player of the season, Kylian Mbappé’s acceptance speech was a little leftfield. “This was the only title I was missing … I feel that it is time for me to have more responsibility. Maybe here in Paris, I would be happy, or maybe somewhere else. In any case thanks everyone!” Although the suggestion he would leave was later walked back, his “message” was “sent”, explaining later that “when you are at such an occasion you can send messages, I think I have sent mine. If I speak more it will be too much and that is not the message I wish to send.” His play for more power at the club was as poorly received as it was clumsily constructed. Despite overperforming for long spells last term and seeing his best players sold over the summer without the merest hint of replacements, Antoine Kombouaré was given little time at Guingamp this season. With the club bottom of the table at the start of November, the former PSG manager was sacked. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Guingamp still finished bottom. Kombouaré, however, survived. Dijon, also at risk, snapped him up in January. He succeeded in keeping them up, dragging Dijon over the line in a nervy relegation play-off with Lens on Sunday night. Next season may be equally tricky but Kombouaré will hope to hang around for a lot longer. Monaco were eviscerated once more in the transfer window last summer, with Thomas Lemar and Fabinho leaving. They struggled badly at the start the season and Leonardo Jardim left in October. It seemed a bitter end for the Portuguese, whose domestic and European success had made Monaco one of the world’s most talked-about clubs. However, there was intrigue aplenty when Thierry Henry replaced him. Henry’s tenure was even more of an embarrassment and Jardim returned in short order. A vaguely impressive streak of 15 points in seven matches righted the ship and, in the end, that was enough to keep them up. Monaco look no better off now, though, and the Henry experiment should serve as a cautionary, grass-is-greener tale for clubs eager to change their managers. PSG were beating Nîmes 4-2 on a bad-tempered afternoon when Kylian Mbappé turned in the centre-circle and made a break for it. Téji Savanier’s dangling boot made sure he didn’t get far. Incensed, Mbappé jumped to his feet, barged Savanier to the floor and was quickly sent off. “It was that last tackle,” explained Mbappé in the aftermath. “I am not going to linger on it, but I think that it had no place on a football pitch.” Amid the ensuing scuffle Savanier, who pointed out that Mbappé will have to get used to similar treatment from now on, also saw red. Mbappé received a three-game ban for his on-pitch reaction. Unfathomably, Savanier was eventually suspended for five games for an incident that was worth little more than a booking – seemingly because of Mbappé’s off-pitch reaction. Perhaps most memorably, Mbappé’s admission that “if I had to do it again, I would,” underlined his shortening temper since joining PSG. He’s not the grinning teenager from Monaco anymore. With Lille struggling with injuries and transfers at the back, the arrival of José Fonte from China, despite his experience, seemed desperate. Lille’s financial straits had seen the departures of Ibrahim Amadou and Yves Bissouma from midfield, as well as jet-heeled right-back Kévin Malcuit; the arrival of Fonte seemed a sign that Lille would be Saint Étienne MK II, playing somewhat negative, cautious football. However, that was far from the case. Fonte’s passing ability proved instrumental in allowing Lille to build from the back at will and his aerial ability remains undiminished. He impressed throughout the season and only missed two matches. It was not quite Peter Odemwingie’s infamous deadline-day trip to Loftus Road, but it was close. When PSG representatives met with Everton midfielder Idrissa Gueye’s agent in a Liverpool hotel on 29 January, it looked as if Thomas Tuchel’s desperate search for a midfielder was over. Tuchel is still looking, however. While a sale may have been agreed in principle, Everton coach Marco Silva was not so keen – reportedly even threatening to resign in protest. Everton quickly backed out of the deal and Gueye’s desperate journey to Paris, à la Odemwingie, proved fruitless. “They put the brakes on immediately,” Gueye later told L’Équipe. “I told the club I wanted to take this golden opportunity to go to Paris. A huge challenge, especially at the age of 29.” With eventual signing Leandro Parades’ move proving ill-fated, Gueye may yet get his chance this summer. If the UNFP manager of the season award was decided solely on resources and expectations versus consistent results, Stéphane Moulin would win every year. During his eight years in charge of Angers, Moulin – now the longest-serving manager is Europe’s top five leagues – has dragged the club out of Ligue 2 and, despite being among the favourites to return every season since, comfortably kept his team in Ligue 1. Astute recruitment, often from the second tier, and a functional yet bold outlook have made Angers extremely difficult to beat. Despite the repeated sales of his best players and an ageing squad, Moulin always finds a way to comfortably, and quietly, survive. Dimitri Payet is also a candidate for this award, as is Lyon’s Moussa Dembélé, for positive reasons, but it’s hard to ignore how divergent Balotelli’s motivations were between Marseille, who he joined in January, and Nice, for whom he failed to score in 10 appearances, a spell marked by public bust-ups with manager Patrick Vieira. With Rudi Garcia now replaced by André Villas-Boas, Balotelli may not be in France for long, but he offered a potent reminder of his talent and provided Marseille fans with a brief bit of hope in a disappointing season. • This is an article from Get French Football News• Follow Adam White, Eric Devin and GFFN on Twitter