When Faith Ringgold graduated from high school in 1948 she headed to the City College of New York to sign up for an art degree. Ringgold lived around the corner from the campus in Harlem, and used to “see the boys coming out of the subway and going up the hill to the college”. It had never occurred to her that they were all white, and that it was a men-only college. When the bemused college administrators informed her she wouldn’t be able to attend, Ringgold refused to budge. She wasn’t taking a stand, she just didn’t understand why they were telling her she couldn’t do art. “Art is what I wanted to do,” she says matter-of-factly. “As a child you think you have the freedom to do what you want. You learn later in life that maybe you’re not supposed to do this or that. Then, hopefully, you realise that you can try.” Eventually, a college official helped her sort out a compromise. Women were allowed to teach – that was acceptable; she could get an art degree as long as she minored in education at the college’s teaching institute. She was in, but it wasn’t exactly a breeze from there: she experienced racism and several teachers tried to discourage her. But she never doubted her ability: “Sorry, but I’m here. And I’m going to be here. And you better know it.” Ringgold has certainly made good on her words. The 88-year-old isn’t just a successful artist: she’s an author, activist and cultural icon. Her career has been prolific and diverse; she’s worked across 16 different media. A survey of her work spanning 50 years is about to open at the Serpentine in London, her first in a European arts institution. I’m chatting to Ringgold at ACA, the New York gallery that has been representing her since 1995. We’re sitting in leather armchairs next to Tar Beach #2, one of her signature “story quilts”. She turned to quilting out of necessity. She enjoyed sculpting in wood and clay but the dust provoked her asthma, so she started experimenting with “soft sculpture”, combining fabric, painting and narrative. She produced her first such work, Echoes of Harlem, in 1980 in collaboration with her mother, Willi Posey Jones, a fashion designer. Quilts were practical for other reasons. Ringgold, a vocal feminist, didn’t want to rely on her husband to help her carry her work to a gallery – “That ain’t right!” However large her latest piece, she could just roll it up and take it wherever she needed. Quilts also became a stealthy means of getting her own story out there. “I have always wanted to tell my story or, more to the point, my side of the story,” Ringgold writes in the preface to her memoir, We Flew Over the Bridge, which was published in 1995. Her first autobiography, completed in 1980, was met with a string of rejections. “It was then that I hit on the strategy of self-publication through masked performance pieces and readings of my story quilts at college lecture dates and exhibitions,” she explains in her book. For a long time, quilts have been both a utilitarian and subversive medium. “It was an art form that slaves used to keep themselves warm and to also import their art because they couldn’t bring the art forms that they practised in Africa,” she tells me. “This was a way of them being able to continue their art in a way that was acceptable to the slavers because it was keeping them warm.” Tar Beach #2 is one of a number of story quilts in Ringgold’s Woman on a Bridge series, named after the tar rooftops of the apartment buildings in Harlem where people used to go to cool off on a hot day. Ringgold was a child during the Harlem renaissance; artists and musicians such as Jacob Lawrence, Duke Ellington and Aaron Douglas lived around the corner from her family. “There was excitement and festiveness” in the air, she says. People would gather on the roofs and tell stories: “I guess that’s why I became a storyteller, because I heard so many stories.” Another of Ringgold’s story quilts, Coming to Jones Road #6: Baby Freedom Came One Night, is hanging nearby. The series was partly inspired by Ringgold’s experience of moving to a house in New Jersey in the 90s. She’d bought the property from another artist and planned to build a studio, but the neighbours weren’t keen on a black neighbour and took her to court. “The neighbours figured, ‘If we keep her from building this studio, she’ll go. We’ll stall her, and eventually she’ll leave.’ But they didn’t know: I’m not going anywhere.” In Coming to Jones Road Part 1, Ringgold tells the story by harking back to the experience of runaway slaves migrating to the north. “Out of every awful thing is something beautiful,” she says. “As an artist I want to see the beauty, especially in situations that I can’t change and that are so prevalent.” Ringgold is adept at presenting ugly themes in beautiful ways. There have been times when people have spectacularly missed those layers. In 1970, just after her second solo show in New York, Ringgold caught the attention of David Rockefeller, the chief executive of Chase Manhattan bank. He sent a couple of representatives to buy a piece to hang in the bank. They walked past the pieces that looked too obviously political and then stood approvingly in front of a piece featuring the American flag. “The flag, very patriotic. Yeah, let’s get it,” she remembers the woman saying. “And then the guy says to the woman, ‘But did you read it?’ The woman began to read the letters in the star section of the flag. “D-I-E.” That was fine. Edgy but fine. “Yeah, but put your head to the side, to the left side, and read,” Ringgold told them. “OK, hold on. ‘N-I-G-G ...’ Oh. Oh my goodness.” The pair ran out of the door and did not buy the piece: Flag for the Moon, Die Nigger, 1969. (Eventually they returned and bought a more palatable piece called Black Light #9: American Spectrum, which is in the Serpentine show). Ringgold has lived through momentous political and cultural change. Is any of her current work addressing Donald Trump? “Oh my God,” she says with a laugh. “You had to bring him in! Well, I’ve started a series on him: Trump the Chump. I’ve done lots of sketches on him. And I’m gonna come up with some paintings shortly. He is something, he really is.” The Trump sketches are just a diversion, a form of art therapy, rather than a real project at the moment. Ringgold’s current focus is a series about ageing called Aging-aling-aling. All over the world people are living longer and longer, she notes, and this series will be an exploration of our elongated lives. While she may be nearing 90, age hasn’t slowed her down much. She still gets up early and heads to her studio to paint every morning. “I want to get that work done,” she says. “I don’t stop until it is done.” • Faith Ringgold is at the Serpentine Gallery, London, 8 June to 8 September. An Evening with Faith Ringgold is at the Conway Hall, London, 6 June.