A much-vaunted Australian side recovered from the threat of group stage ignominy in a match featuring five goals, VAR, a comeback from 2-0 down and champion players inspired by enmity for each other. Given the intense rivalry between the nations in recent tournaments, Fifa proceeded with caution, appointing a Swiss referee. Esther Staubli attempted to govern proceedings with cool neutrality but the temperature only continued to rise inside the Stade de la Mosson. Marta, back in the blue of Brazil and keen to exert her influence imperiously, received the first talking to. A minute later Andressa caught Tameka Yallop with a flailing arm before the veteran Formiga was the first in the book for a calculated foul. Emily van Egmond and Cristiane squared up off the ball, the snarls continued, Tamires clattered Ellie Carpenter and Caitlin Foord returned the measure on Andressa. With almost 20 minutes gone Yallop went down in the area under the challenge of Thaisa. VAR suggested a handball in the buildup making any foul moot, but it was a use of the hand by Elise Kellond-Knight moments later that drew a short blast from Staubli’s whistle. Brazil’s right-back Letícia Santos marauded forward, and her opposite full-back was adjudged to have a hand on her shirt inside the box. Up stepped Marta. A flare of the nostrils, a puff of the cheeks from the six-time world player of the year. Lydia Williams picked one side; Marta the other. If USA’s celebrations against Thailand had become a talking point, Marta almost taunted her opponents with a full-bench low five as Brazil’s staff and players flocked to the sideline. As the match recommenced, both sides maintained the incredible intensity. Tamires nutmegged Emily Gielnik, before finding Debinha. She crossed for Cristiane and the woman with eyes on the golden boot rose above Steph Catley, who was pressed centrally because of Clare Polkinghorne’s injury. Catley, the natural left-back, was giving away 5cm. It could have been a foot such was the Brazilian’s determined climb. A perplexed look flickered across Ante Milicic’s face. His side were two down but had hardly put a foot wrong. As Brazil lowered their intensity ever so slightly, in first-half injury-time there was a lifeline for Australia as Foord bustled home a clever flick from Chloe Logarzo. Vadão, Brazil’s manager, responded quickly. Marta and Formiga came off at the break; the former still shy of fitness, the latter carrying a booking. Ludmila joined Cristiane up front as Brazil reverted to their more customary 4-4-2. Debinha nutmegged Alanna Kennedy before flashing a shot across the goal. Both sides showed touches of the highest quality amid a contest of unabating aggression. Brazil became more compact, allowing Australia to make the running. Just shy of the hour Logarzo fired centrally for Sam Kerr, who did not connect but her presence was enough to distract Bárbara in goal. It was 2-2 and the noise inside the stadium ratcheted up once more. The game went end-to-end. Debinha threw herself at an Andressa cross, with bodies sprawled inside the box, and then Australia celebrated a third. Carpenter had looked for Kerr but the striker was in an offside position. VAR intervened, showing the final touch had come off the defender Monica, and Kerr was controversially deemed not to have interfered. Monica, now carrying the weight of Marta’s armband, told her teammates to calm down, keep their self-belief and maintain their courage. Kerr improvised with a first-time shot, defying physics as it almost found a way home from an impossible angle. Australia stuck to their task and the side who ended their 2007 World Cup and 2016 Olympic campaigns were vanquished. This was a remarkable contest – of passion and skill – and a reminder of what lies ahead as the competition heats up. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.