You win some, you lose some. It’s what I used to say to the Under-9s team I coached. But I was talking as much to myself and the parents as to the kids. No one likes losing. Losing’s not why you play sport. Yet losing can be a major lesson in life. How you lose and how you respond to setbacks tells us a lot about what you are made of. Do you learn from mistakes, embrace critique, adapt and move forward? Or do you stick stubbornly to what you’ve always done and ignore there’s a problem at all? After the Matildas lost their first World Cup game to Italy and then went two down against Brazil, we saw what they’re truly made of. It’s called toughness. Resilience may be an over-used buzz word, but it also describes this team perfectly. And it’s not often talked about, but when it comes to resilience there is also a sense of flexibility and adaptability to it, and a willingness to change. The call to change the risky offside trap against Brazil to a safer dropping of their defensive lines gave the team a much-needed and greater pliability. It was the right decision to make, and one which demonstrated a degree of fearlessness in the face of potential criticism. It is the players who need the thickest of skins, given the daily abuse they have to endure. So it was a breath of fresh air to see Sam Kerr call out her “haters” after the match. The last time I checked, sexuality has nothing to do with how she plays, and it’s reassuring that players are willing to speak out as honestly off the pitch as they play on it. It also showed the extent of this tournament’s reach away from the pitch; equality, sexuality and social leadership are hardly the usual topics making headlines at such a sporting event. I put out a tweet before their second game, focusing on pride and passion. “Forget tactics,” I wrote, to the shock of some. But don’t worry, I love tactics. Sharing the couch with one of the top students of the game, Craig Foster, I could talk about them all day. There are so many different ways to play the game and foundational concepts that, when applied, can shape and influence behaviour on the pitch. Of course, prepared and practised strategies are important; they take up the majority of focus for high performing teams. But what about the idea that a game is far more than just executing pre-planned tactics? That it’s also about adapting and playing the game in a certain moment? About problem-solving and about resilience? We don’t talk enough about the unpredictable nature of sport. No one knows what’s going to happen. You might practise 100 free-kicks in training, but none will bear resemblance to an opportunity that comes along on match day. Isn’t that why we love football? Who would watch a game if we knew what was going to happen? Despite all the advancements in technology, the human element cannot and certainly should not be removed. When a player steps into an arena, the only thing that’s predictable about the game is its unpredictability. The only sure bet is no bet at all. A former mentor of mine, Tom Sermanni – the current New Zealand coach – used to say before our biggest games: “I don’t know what’s going to happen out there, so play the game on its merits.” I remember thinking it was something of a strange concept – a coach who should want to appear in total control of his team’s destiny, yet one who was able to bring comfort in his humble acceptance of the unknown. Who would have guessed Italy would score a last-minute winner? Who knew that Australia would be able to go from the depths of despair at 2-0 down against Brazil to score three and record a famous victory? This team thrives on a challenge and seem to embrace the moment before moving on, very quickly. All that matters is the next move if they are to come out on top. After a turbulent buildup and start to the tournament, their never-say-die attitude and resilience have ensured the Matildas are very much alive and kicking in this World Cup. Their next challenge sees them face Jamaica and the temptation is to predict a comfortable Matildas win. But then we can’t forget the lessons learnt we have learnt – that no game is predictable, and that all they have is the moment. And once the players reach that moment, whatever it may offer them, they’ll have to accept it, learn from it and move forward.