Francisca Lara blew Chile’s chance to dramatically claim a place in the last 16 of the Women’s World Cup. Needing to beat Thailand by three goals in their final Group F game to set up a showdown with England, Chile were leading 2-0 courtesy of an own goal from goalkeeper Waraporn Boonsing and Maria Jose Urrutia when VAR awarded an 85th-minute penalty. With history beckoning for La Roja in their debut World Cup, Lara rattled her spot-kick against the crossbar, allowing Nigeria to claim the last of the four places open to the best third-placed sides. Lara’s missed penalty was one of a host of chances missed by Chile during a pulsating match in Rennes as they laid siege to the Thai goal for most of the game. In the first half, they twice struck the woodwork, with Urrutia’s goal-bound strike taking a slight deflection off Natthakarn Chinwong and onto a post. Four minutes from the break Rosario Balmaceda rattled the crossbar with a rasping right-footed drive from distance. Thailand, who were hammered 13-0 by the United States and 5-1 by Sweden in their opening two group matches, did mount attacks of their own in the opening 45 minutes. A low curler from Silawan Intamee was deflected inches past the post, while goalkeeper Christian Endler was forced to tip over the bar an attempted 35-yard lob from captain Kanjana Sung-Ngoen. England will face Cameroon in the last 16, with a potential quarter-final against Norway or Australia ahead. Hosts France and defending champions USA are on course to meet in the last eight and are on England's side of the draw. Germany are favourites to reach the final from the bottom half, but are joined by four other sides ranked in the world's top 10 – although Sweden face Canada and Netherlands play Japan in the last 16. Norway v Australia Nice, 22 JunEngland v Cameroon Valenciennes, 23 JunFrance v Brazil Le Havre, 23 JunSpain v USA Reims, 24 Jun Italy v China Montpellier, 25 JunNetherlands v Japan Rennes, 25 JunGermany v Nigeria Grenoble, 22 JunSweden v Canada Paris, 24 Jun Three minutes after the interval, though, Thailand conceded their 19th goal of the tournament in calamitous circumstances as a low drive from Yanara Aedo cannoned back off a post, onto the legs of goalkeeper Boonsing and over the line. Ten minutes from time Urrutia made it 2-0, flicking a raking ball into the area from Paloma Lopez past the hapless Boonsing from 12 yards. Urrutia then came within inches of making it 3-0 three minutes later when she poked a goal-bound effort past Boonsing, only for Pitsamai Sornsai to hack off the line. Boonsing’s studs-high challenge on Urrutia, though, led to a VAR review, and the awarding of the penalty that Lara thundered against the woodwork. Despite seven minutes of added-on time, Chile could not find the goal they needed to secure their last-16 place, resulting in many of their players breaking down in tears at the final whistle.