Wallabies coach Michael Cheika has flagged his side will adopt a new style of attack following the departure of former attack coach Stephen Larkham, who claimed the pair had fundamental differences in their philosophies. And the Wallabies’ plan of attack at the World Cup later his year might be a case of “everything old is new again” as Cheika goes back to his roots in an attempt to revitalise the team, which last year endured their worst season since 1958. Significantly, both Cheika and Berne are products of Sydney club Randwick, whose famous running rugby style of game is based largely on the concept of flat-line attack, taking the ball to the line and executing moves in the teeth of the defence. As attack coach for the Melbourne Rebels, Berne introduced a flat-line attack to the Super Rugby team this year, exposing the benefits and risks of the system. While it is true that a lot of teams play that way, none played flatter than the Rebels. With Will Genia and Quade Cooper directing the play, the tactic was highly effective in the early rounds of this season, but once teams figured out what they were doing they were able to negate Melbourne’s attack. This was because the Rebels did not have sufficient variation and there was no plan B once they were found out. If Cheika and Berne re-introduce the flat-line attack to the Wallabies, they will need to learn the lessons of the Rebels’ season to ensure they are not as easily shut down. That said, the Wallabies and the Rebels cannot be practically compared because they have different personnel. The Super Rugby club are unlikely to supply many players to the Wallabies’ starting line-up and there will be different players executing the flat-line attack. Genia is almost certain to start at halfback for the Wallabies, but it is highly unlikely Cooper will be his halves partner. The only other Rebels who might start in the Wallabies backline would be outside backs Marika Koroibete, Reece Hodge, Dane Haylett-Petty and Jack Maddocks. But they won’t all be there. Notwithstanding the NSW Waratahs’ disappointing season, incumbent Wallabies five-eighth Bernard Foley will probably hold onto the gold No 10 jersey for the World Cup, although Brumbies playmaker Christian Lealiifano is worthy of consideration. At his best, Foley has the ability to take the ball to the line and ball-play in the face of the defence, which is what is needed for a flat-line attack to work. If Cheika opts for the super-sized centre combination of Samu Kerevi and Tevita Kuridrani, the Wallabies will certainly have the potential to get across the advantage line, but will lack a playmaker in the midfield. But Kerevi’s superb off-loading skills in traffic would suit a flat-line attack. If Kurtley Beale played fullback, he could slot into second receiver, particularly in phase play, to give the Wallabies’ backline another ball-player. Cheika will need forwards who not only bend the defensive line with their ball-running, but who can stress the defence with passing skills and footwork. It is possible that only two Rebels forwards – second rower Adam Coleman and No 8 Isi Naisarani – would make the Wallabies’ starting line-up. The Brumbies will probably supply most of the tight-five, while Michael Hooper and David Pocock (if fit) will be somewhere in the back-row, but Cheika must also consider loose forwards such as Pete Samu and Jack Dempsey, whose passing and running skills would suit a flat-line attack. There must be variation in the attack. Any attacking system that becomes predictable is doomed to failure, especially against the well-trained defences the Wallabies will encounter at the World Cup. Cheika probably hasn’t sat around for six months just thinking about a flat-line attack, if indeed, that is what he is concocting. That would be the Wallabies’ core strategy, but presumably the coach will have something up else his sleeve for the World Cup. While speculating about what attacking strategies Cheika and Berne will devise for the Wallabies, it is worth remembering they share a background in rugby league. Cheika played junior rugby league for the Sydney Roosters and is a student of the game, while Berne’s father, John, played one Test for the Wallabies as a centre before switching to rugby league and playing for South Sydney, Eastern Suburbs and Cronulla-Sutherland. If there is going to be a “winged keel” in the Wallabies’ attacking repertoire, Cheika and Berne will more than likely borrow some ideas from the 13-a-side code. The ancient Randwick flat-line attack coupled with modern rugby league manoeuvres may well be the fusion that helps the Wallabies to cause some surprises at the World Cup.