Joyce Carol Oates was born in New York in 1938 and has published more than 100 books including novels, plays, short stories, poetry, and nonfiction. She has won many awards, including the National Book award, two O Henry awards, the National Humanities Medal and the Jerusalem prize (2019). Oates has taught at Princeton University since 1978. Her new novel, My Life As a Rat, explores – through the story of an adolescent girl, Violet – themes that permeate her writing, including social, racial and gender equality. You write in the acknowledgments that My Life As a Rat appeared in its earliest form as a short story titled Curly Red in Harper’s magazine in 2003, reprinted in the anthology I Am No One You Know in 2004. Why did you decide to develop it into a novel?I had long meditated upon the life of a girl who had impulsively blurted out the truth under duress, within a few seconds assuring that her clannish family will reject her and that she will become an “orphan”; she will spend much of her life trying to return to her family, hoping to ingratiate herself with them. Over the years I’d accumulated many notes and scenes, and I had always known how Violet’s story would develop. Many of your novels explore family conflict – this new one probes the tension between family loyalty and independence...It does seem that the classic family unit is predominant in our lives, and that it is difficult, particularly for a young person, and perhaps for a girl, to break free of the spell of familial love – which can be possessive and stultifying as well as nourishing and enlivening. I have dedicated the novel to my friend of many years Elaine Showalter, who’d been disowned by her family when she married “outside her faith”. (This is simplifying a complex situation, but essentially that was the reason.) We are all bound to our families and it is a sort of fairytale nightmare if one might be disowned or rejected. In the novel, Violet speaks out about a crime – the racially motivated assault of a high-school student. You have previously said novels of yours grew out of living in Detroit during racial tensions. Did that influence this novel?Yes, My Life As a Rat takes place in an urban area similar to Detroit, but also to many post-industrial cities in the US where racism is long entrenched, rarely challenged in the system, and only comes to the attention of a wider world when there are outbursts of what is called – diplomatically – “urban unrest” (more crudely, and misleadingly, these incidents are often called “race riots” – an insidious way of blaming victims when they rebel against their oppression). Did you want to show the importance of speaking out against injustice despite the consequences? I thought that was powerfully portrayed.Yes, I think we must do this. I was struck years ago when the brother of the Unabomber cooperated with the FBI to identify his serial-killer brother, Ted Kaczynski – a courageous act – but was denounced in some quarters as a “rat”, as if family loyalty to a murderer was more important than saving the lives of victims to be! There must be civil and moral laws higher than the tribalism of the family, the clan, and the political party. Civilisation collapses when we don’t apply justice unilaterally. The US is undergoing this sort of slow collapse of ethics and civil law under the Trump administration, which prosecutes and pardons indiscriminately, depending upon political loyalties. It’s very destructive, particularly for younger generations, to observe adults behaving in ways that are unethical or criminal. You have written an essay entitled Why Is Your Writing So Violent? about being asked that question reproachfully…Probably this issue is not so relevant now, but there seemed to be a general consensus, even among writers, that female writers should focus upon domestic life, family life, childbirth, raising children, marriages, romance… I can’t tell you how many reviewers, among them women, chided me repeatedly for daring to write about quite different subjects. One reviewer, for the now-defunct Saturday Review, quite an influential magazine in the 1960s, bluntly told me to focus on women’s issues and leave the “big, social novel” to Norman Mailer. You have described the “daily scramble for existence” of your working-class upbringing. Did you draw on it as Violet strives to survive?Yes, Violet is directly a child of that “daily scramble”. Her father is very like my own father, Frederic Oates, who always had second jobs in order to support our family. I did not have six siblings – only two – but I grew up in a Catholic milieu in which large families were commonplace and a father working very hard, and a mother at home, also commonplace. Violet is violated in different ways, including physical and sexual abuse, but ultimately survives and even in some ways thrives. Did you purposefully show hope?Most people have reserves of stamina, stoicism, energy and hope that are not greatly tested in the course of their lives. I do believe that a young woman like Violet would survive her difficulties and eventually define herself as independent of the opinions of her bigoted family members. She would find a way to establish relationships and eventually to love another person who was worthy of her love. I believe in particular destinies – people who are “made for each other” and only have to discover each other. There have been happy resolutions in my life, numberless times, and so I don’t feel that I am forcing a positive ending. One reviewer told me to leave the ‘big, social novel’ to Norman Mailer You are noted for being prolific. What is your writing routine?Since the death of my husband, Charlie Gross, on 13 April, I am scarcely writing at all. I go through the motions – looking at notes, meditating – trying to write dialogue, scenes, but I am just too distracted and too tired. After my first husband, Ray Smith, died in February 2008, I was also exhausted for a long time and did not feel that I’d “recovered” – emotionally, psychologically, but also physically – for two or three years. So I suppose the past will repeat itself and there is not much that I can do. I’ve even written a memoir about that experience – too painful to look into now, but I recall the final line (which I adamantly believe): that the widow’s first and most crucial task is to keep herself alive. What helps to keep you alive?Keeping oneself alive after the loss of a spouse is an enormous challenge. Certainly meaningful work is necessary but also, perhaps more so, the support of a few close and loving friends. You’re an astute reader as well as writer. Which books are on your bedside table?I have just returned from the Jerusalem prize ceremony and Jerusalem International Writers’ festival and have been reading Israeli writers, most recently Michal Govrin’s The Name (now, here is a novel about obsession!), Amos Oz’s A Tale of Love and Darkness – a masterpiece – and short stories by Etgar Keret, brilliantly edgy, unsettling, Kafkaesque and often very funny. What kind of reader were you as a child?A very grateful reader. My first, most important book was Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, and Through the Looking-Glass – given to me by my Jewish grandmother when I was nine years old. How do you organise your books?Not very systematically, I’m afraid. In the beginning, when I was quite young, I hadn’t many books, so it was relatively easy to organise; now, with my late husband Charlie’s collection of books melded with my own, scattered through our large house, I have more or less given up and just add books to shelves that are designated for “new” books. To add to the confusion, I am a juror for three writing prizes and these bring staggering numbers of books; some of these I give away, but many I keep since they are, in fact, worthy books. Charlie did not believe in getting rid of books – ever. He said he had a Jewish prejudice against destroying or discarding any books. • My Life As a Rat by Joyce Carol Oates is published by Fourth Estate (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846