Neil Woodford was once the UK’s biggest star fund manager, personally managing a £25bn mountain of money on behalf of pension funds and other investors at Invesco Perpetual. When Woodford, now 59, decided to quit Invesco and go it alone in 2013 it was a huge shock for the fund management industry, with many experts predicting investors would withdraw huge sums from Invesco to follow their man. The editor of financial news service Citywire, Gavin Lumsden, tweeted: “Invesco must be wetting themselves. Neil Woodford setting up a new fund manager.” Patrick Connolly of financial advisers Chase de Vere said it would be “impossible for Invesco Perpetual to replace Woodford with somebody of similar standing because, particularly in the world of UK equity income funds, there is nobody of similar standing”. Invesco shares slumped by 7% on the day Woodford announced his departure. At Invesco Woodford held control of huge stakes in some of the UK’s biggest firms, and his opinions mattered. His criticism of AstraZeneca chief executive David Brennan in the 2012 shareholder spring was widely regarded to have cost him his job, and his critique of BAE’s attempted £28bn merger with Airbus is acknowledged as one of the reasons the deal collapsed. Woodford, who was widely referred to in the media as an investment “hero” and fund management “star”, had done exceedingly well over his quarter century at Invesco Perpetual. A £1,000 investment placed when he started at the firm in 1988 would have risen to £23,000 by the time he left. Woodford accidentally fell into fund management and hadn’t heard of the term until he rocked up in the City in the 1980s sleeping on his brother’s floor while looking for a job. He got his first break in insurance, before drifting into fund management. He had left school wanting to fly fighter jets but couldn’t pass the RAF’s aptitude test, and instead read economics and agricultural economics at the University of Exeter. Feeling he had outgrown Invesco Perpetual, he set up his own firm Woodford Investment Management in 2014, ditching the City of London (which he complained was too noisy and stressful) for an industrial estate near Oxford. Within two weeks of launching, he had raised £1.6bn, a UK record, and it quickly grew to £16bn. In its first full year his flagship fund returned 16% and Woodford, a devotee of veteran US investor Warren Buffett, was dubbed the “Oracle of Oxford”. But since then he appears to have lost his Midas touch. Woodford scrapped performance bonuses for his staff – which in fund management can stretch above £10m a year to top performers – insisting they were “largely ineffective” and can lead to “wrong behaviours”. Instead, he gave them all a big pay rise. Despite his fund’s dreadful performance, Woodford paid himself and his business partner Craig Newman nearly £37m in the 2017-18 financial year. Woodford Investment Management paid a £36.5m dividend to a company called Woodford Capital, in which Woodford holds 65% and Newman (the fund’s chief executive) has a 35% stake. When questioned about the performance of his funds over recent years, Woodford has been very defensive. Asked by the Financial Times in December 2017 if he ever doubted his judgment, Woodford replied: “Daily. You must never, as a fund manager, stick your head in the sand saying ‘everybody go away, I’m right, I’m right, I’m right’. You’ve always got to expose yourself to criticism and the analysis that you may be wrong.” Woodford went on to say that the secret of successful fund management was a balance of arrogance and humility. “You have to have a sufficiently strong arrogant gene to back your judgment, back your conviction. If you didn’t, you would end up with a portfolio that looks very much like the index. But, equally, you must have the humility to accept that you will get things wrong.”