I Think You Should Leave With Tim Robinson is one of the greatest television programmes of 2019 so far. Put simply, it is a reinvigoration of the sketch show. It is short (episodes are just 15 minutes a pop), it exists on a plane of gloriously busted logic, and it is the sole reason why I haven’t been able to dislodge a song about skeletons from my mind for the past six weeks. However, on closer inspection, I Think You Should Leave has one gaping flaw. There isn’t enough of it. Sure, Netflix has recommissioned it, but that still means we won’t see any more new episodes until 2020. As of now, only two hours of I Think You Should Leave exists in the world. Which is, to quote a man more profound than I will ever be, stinky. However, salvation of a kind still exists. I Think You Should Leave’s co-creator Tim Robinson has a smattering of work to be found elsewhere. On Netflix, you can find his episode of 2016’s little-loved sketch show The Characters, which, in retrospect, was the closest thing we have to an I Think You Should Leave pilot (the opening Sammy Paradise sketch easily stands alongside anything from his newer show). But the real gold is to be found on in his sitcom Detroiters (which for UK viewers is streaming in full on NowTV, with episodes also available to purchase on YouTube premium and Google Play). In Detroiters, Robinson co-stars alongside Veep’s Sam Richardson (who also appears in I Think You Should Leave’s legendary Baby of the Year sketch) as ad executives who exist to serve Detroit’s underperforming businesses. As premises go, it’s just about as down the middle as you can get. And yet it quickly unspools into a puddle of absurdity that’s just as finely honed as anything on I Think You Should Leave. The very first episode announces itself in a reasonable enough way – Robinson and Richardson interrupt a restaurant meeting to hustle for an opportunity to pitch for Chrysler – before its true nature unveils itself. The pair start throwing a ball around their office to generate ideas. The game gets ugly. Richardson bangs into a window. Robinson is amazed that it didn’t break, so they start hurling larger and larger objects at it. By the time they are finished, almost half the episode has passed. By the end, the plot has petered out in favour of brilliant, joyous, stupid set-pieces. And this is how the series continues. They spend one episode mucking around on a motorbike; another attempting to nail the jingle for a local wig firm; another reacting in horror to a defecating car. Fans of I Think You Should Leave have plenty to gnaw on here and the season one finale might just contain Tim Robinson’s finest ever skeleton gag which, given that he’s now technically the global poet laureate of skeleton jokes, is really saying something. Only two seasons of Detroiters exist. In its day it was badly marketed and little watched; and the second season bears traces of network tinkering, with the key Robinson-Richardson relationship diluted with some less than convincing ensemble work. However, those who loved it loved it. At the end of last year, after Comedy Central sealed the fate of the show, Seth Meyers used Vulture to lobby for its renewal elsewhere. “There are so many wonderful comedies on television today,” he wrote. “Shows that present new and interesting perspectives and make you think about the world in ways you never have before. Detroiters was not one of those shows. Detroiters was an old-school cackler. The only thing it ever made me think was, ‘I can’t remember the last time I laughed this hard at a television show.’” Detroiters isn’t quite as avant-garde as I Think You Should Leave. By necessity, the leads in a sitcom do need to sometimes appear vaguely human. As a result, there’s a thick seam of dumb sweetness running right the way through it that should make it more palatable to outsiders. Detroiters exists right at the sweet spot between I Think You Should Leave and Stath Lets Flats. Try to tell me that it doesn’t sound incredible. And did I mention the pooing car?