The US border patrol’s arrests of migrants at the border with Mexico hit their highest level in more than a decade in May and officials warned they lack money and resources to care for the surge of parents and children entering the country. Agents made 132,887 arrests in May, the first time that detentions have topped 100,000 since April 2007, and the highest monthly total since Donald Trump took office. Of those detained 11,507 were children traveling alone, while 84,542 were family groups. The latest figures are the highest monthly total in years, but illegal border crossings are still below a historic high at the start of the 21st century. Last year, 396,579 undocumented people were apprehended after entering the country illegally, while in 2000 the figure was more than 1.6 million. In the early 2000s, however, undocumented migrants were mostly single Mexican men seeking work, who were quickly deported by the border patrol. The current surge consists of a growing number of families and minors seeking asylum after fleeing violence, drought and hunger in Central America. US authorities have struggled to find suitable accommodation for migrants while their claims are processed. Photos of families waiting in jam-packed cells and in outdoor enclosures have sparked outrage. Six children have died in the last year after being detained by border agents. Government inspectors last week announced that a 125-person facility in El Paso, Texas, held 700 people one day and 900 another day. They were packed in so tightly that some resorted to standing on toilets. Most border crossers are from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador, countries racked by gangs, violence and poverty. Many are expected to eventually request asylum. Border patrol facilities are not designed to hold families with children as young as newborns, like the people who enter the US daily. Children are routinely detained for longer than the 72 hours allowed by federal law and US Customs and Border Protection guidelines. The agency cites long-term detention facilities for parents and children that are at or above capacity. “We are bursting at the seams,” said Randy Howe, CBP’s executive director of operations. “This can’t continue.” Donald Trump has asked for $4.5bn to address the influx of migrants, but Congress has yet to approve it. He has also threatened to impose a 5% tariff on Mexican products if authorities there do not curb migration from Central America. Mexican officials went to Washington this week to lobby the Trump administration not to implement its threat. Mexico has offered more options to Central Americans to stay in the country legally and allowed the US to return thousands of migrants who have asylum cases pending under a Trump administration initiative currently being challenged in court. About 200 Mexican police and immigration agents blocked the advance of about 1,000 Central American migrants on a southern highway on Wednesday. The US border patrol says agents in El Paso, Texas, encountered more than 1,000 people crossed into the US in a single group just last week. Agents made 38,630 apprehensions in and around El Paso in May. “We’re not seeing any signs of anything dropping off,” said Brian Hastings, the border patrol’s chief of law enforcement operations.