A high-flying young jockey suffered excruciating embarrassment two days before Royal Ascot, Oisin Murphy failing a breath test for alcohol before racing began at Salisbury on Sunday. The 23-year-old, odds-on favourite to become champion jockey for the first time this season, was prevented from taking his five rides at the Wiltshire track and missed out on a winner when Tribal Craft scored under David Probert. The infraction was all the more surprising because Murphy had made a lengthy television appearance early that morning, appearing sober and lucid as he discussed his career on Racing TV’s Luck On Sunday programme. Murphy did not immediately return phone calls seeking an explanation for his positive test. He has suggested in the past that he abstains from alcohol, though he was a teenager at the time. The alcohol limit for jockeys is low, set at 17 micrograms per 100ml of breath, less than half the limit for drivers. Other jockeys have learned the hard way that even a small amount of drink can cause them disciplinary problems the following day, the risk being exacerbated by their low weight and the fact that they are usually dehydrated. There is no doubt that a top jockey’s schedule leaves little time for self-indulgence and Murphy spoke of that in a recent Guardian interview. “I don’t really go anywhere,” he said. “I live riding out, or at the races, or in my car or on planes on Sundays to France and Germany. So I don’t really socialise that much with people and I’ve got the same circle of friends that I’ve had since I was an apprentice. But it’s only denial if you admit it to yourself.” What happens next for Murphy will depend on how far his reading was over the limit. In the best-case scenario, he might receive no more than a caution, as the disciplinary panel is bound to take into account the fact that he missed a day’s riding at Salisbury. It remains to be seen whether any of Murphy’s employers will look askance at the news; he is the retained rider to Sheikh Fahad of Qatar. Carlisle2.00 Space Ace 2.30 Diamond Shower 3.00 Dream House (nb) 3.30 Chinese Spirit 4.00 Praxidice 4.30 Rosin Box 5.00 Matewan 5.30 Brutalab Catterick2.15 Miss Lucy 2.45 Tricky Dicky (nap) 3.15 Grand Inquisitor 3.45 John Clare 4.15 Champagne Marengo 4.45 Morning Duel 5.15 Rockley Point Windsor5.40 Kaylen’s Mischief 6.10 Passing Nod 6.40 Raahy 7.10 Grapevine 7.40 Danzan 8.10 Hamish 8.40 Oydis Nottingham5.50 Bredenbury 6.20 Lady Calcaria 6.50 Hawaam 7.20 Tangramm 7.50 Chance Of Glory 8.20 Fitzrovia 8.50 Battle Of Issus It is an unwelcome distraction for Murphy at the start of the biggest week in British Flat racing and he may feel under additional pressure to perform during Royal Ascot. He is expected to be much in demand, with five rides already booked for Tuesday’s racing, including the fancied Guildsman in the Coventry Stakes. Later in the week he will be on The Tin Man, a previous winner of the Diamond Jubilee Stakes.