Of course the first-past-the-post system is “unfit for a multi-party age” and has itself suppressed any possibility of multi-party representation (Andrew Rawnsley, Comment). This has suited both Labour and Conservative but it is unfair, which is a gentle way of saying that it is grossly undemocratic. Tony Blair did a great disservice to the nation when, having commissioned the Jenkins report on electoral reform (ER), he shelved it. However, a year earlier in 1997 he’d just won an election with 64% of the seats from 43% of the votes. It is only too clear that parties and their supporters approve of ER when they think they will benefit from it, and vice versa. A sensitive measure of fairness is to assess the number of votes it takes to elect one MP. In 2015, at one extreme, the SNP achieved one member for 26,000 votes, through 34,000 for Conservative and 40,000 for Labour to around 300,00 for the Lib Dems and 3,860,000 for Ukip’s solitary MP at the other. The trend was the same in 2017. There are no perfect voting systems but there is no good reason for continuing with one of the worst. One quotation from the beautifully written Jenkins report is: “That the voters do not get the representation they want is more important than that the parties do not get the seats to which they think they are entitled.” Just so. He recommended what he called AV+, a variant of the alternative member system (AMS). This is much better than FPTP but preserves the MP’s constituency link and is easily understood and managed. People would at last feel their votes count. All parties should include reform in their manifestos and if they don’t I’d want to know why.Dr Gerald Wallen Exeter The Treasury’s view of the climate emergency may well be shortsighted (Business leader), but senior civil servants have their work cut out just to keep up with the falling cost of renewables between one committee meeting and the next. The International Renewable Energy Agency says that the cost of solar PV and onshore wind decreased by 13% last year and that renewable power is already the cheapest source of electricity in many parts of the world. Former US energy secretary Steven Chu confirms that the cost of renewable energy at the best sites is now as low as 2 cents per kilowatt hour – and falling. Meanwhile, the oil and gas sector is planning to spend more on exploration and extraction and seems either unaware of the accelerating transfer to clean technologies or overreliant on unproved carbon capture methods. The danger is that, as households, car owners and industries choose greener options, trillions of pounds of insurance companies’ and pension funds’ assets may become stranded beneath the seabed. If, as seems increasingly likely, the market may eventually manage the demands of the Paris agreement, perhaps the Treasury should concentrate on discouraging investment in the oil and gas industry. Eurof ThomasCardiff As a white, heterosexual male, I appear to have upset Barbara Ellen (“It’s time gay people stepped aside… hetero whiners have rights too”, Comment). May I apologise on behalf of myself and others like me who have spent their lives unaware of the misery that we have brought to so many people? Most of my friends and acquaintances are heterosexual, though a few would describe themselves as LGBT. No one appears to question their own or anyone else’s sexuality and I would argue that there is a general acceptance and tolerance of each other. I have to say that I have never come across this group of whining, privileged people with whom Barbara Ellen appears to associate. Most people I know get on with their lives and other people. John TaitFalkirk Simon Tisdall’s horrendous account of the under-reported conflicts in Cameroon and across the Sahel region, coupled with the reports that do reach us of the conflict in Yemen, must lead us to ask: who provides the weapons of murder? Who sells the guns and ammunition used in these conflicts? (“In a world full of festering wars, why are so many of them ignored?”, World) The answer is that Britain does, in company with other industrialised countries. According to the Campaign Against Arms Trade, in the four years since the Saudi-led coalition started its attacks in Yemen, “the UK has enabled the war with £5bn of arms sales”. The Civilian Impact Monitoring Project reports that airstrikes, some with UK-made aircraft and bombs, killed or injured more than 400 children in the last year alone. If we knew more about these wars, perhaps we would ban such exports and campaign to persuade other industrial nations to do the same. Instead, our government allows DSEI, one of the biggest arms fairs, to come to London in September and will welcome arms dealers and military delegations from around the world.Michael BasseyCoddington, Newark, Notts One thing your article on care workers didn’t mention was the pay (“Revealed: 6,000 residential care workers suffer violent attacks”, News). My 25-year-old granddaughter, a graduate, earns the minimum wage at a nearby care home for people with dementia. The weeks of training for the 12-hour shifts included methods to avoid assaults, including punching and groping. She bathes the residents, feeds them, cleans them when they soil themselves and lays them out when they die. I wouldn’t do this work for twice the living wage, let alone £8.21 an hour. She finds the job very rewarding. But she has no chance of getting her own home. And what of her future? She is looking to find a kinder, fairer country to emigrate to. What have we come to?Pat SmithBishampton, Pershore, Worcestershire My late father’s wartime and postwar experience provides a textbook example of the “never again” instincts of D-Day veterans described by Will Hutton (“These old heroes evoked a glorious shared purpose. It’s now under threat”, Comment). Coming from the poorest part of Newcastle, he spent five years in prison camp. However, his friendly disposition meant that he learned from his German captors to “speak the language like a Prussian”. After 1945, he was a natural for the Tyneside Anglo-German Friendship Society, through which he met German guest workers helping to get industry going again in Gateshead. In due course, my parents celebrated their silver wedding anniversary with their friends in Bavaria. Incidentally, he had served in the Tyneside Scottish Battalion of the Black Watch, which provided another cross-cultural experience of sorts in a camp where many came from beyond the Cheviots. He would have had nothing but scorn for the dangerous anti-German fantasies spewed out by gung-ho Brexiters.Geoff ReidBradford, Yorkshire As an Essex man, could I ask Euan Ferguson to explain what he meant in his review of 63 Up (Television, the New Review) when he described naughty Tony as “now Essexed in every sense”? I hadn’t noted that Tony now writes serious music like son of Essex Mark-Anthony Turnage, or perhaps he has joined a book club (we have the densest concentration of them in the country)? I would remind Euan of Germaine Greer’s description of the place as “a county of wide open skies, pretty girls and no snobs”.Michael MuntWivenhoe, Colchester