Magna Grecia, one of the first horses beaten in last month’s Irish 2,000 Guineas, remains among the possible runners for an outstanding renewal of the St James’s Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot in 13 days’ time after he was found to have pulled a hamstring when returning to light exercise after his run at The Curragh. Magna Grecia was the first of Aidan O’Brien’s three Classic winners in Britain so far this season when he took the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket on the first weekend in May. He was then sent off as the 6-4 joint-favourite for the Irish equivalent alongside Too Darn Hot, last year’s top juvenile, but faded rapidly from three furlongs out behind the 16-1 winner, Phoenix Of Spain. At the time, it seemed possible that a draw close to the stands’ rail might have exaggerated Magna Grecia’s superiority at Newmarket but the news that a minor physical problem emerged following his poor run in Ireland will offer reassurance to punters if he makes the line-up for the feature race on Royal Ascot’s opening day. Phoenix Of Spain and Too Darn Hot are also on course to run in the St James’s Palace Stakes, where they could be joined by Persian King, the French 2,000 Guineas winner, and King Of Comedy, a stable companion of Too Darn Hot at the John Gosden yard. King Of Comedy took the Heron Stakes at Sandown on 23 May, the same race which Gosden won in 2018 with the subsequent St James’s Palace winner, Without Parole. O’Brien also strengthened his hand for the Royal meeting on Wednesday when it was revealed that Hermosa, already the 1,000 Guineas winner in England and Ireland this spring, will miss the French Oaks at Chantilly to run instead in the Coronation Stakes on day four of Royal Ascot. Hermosa was a 3-1 chance for the Coronation Stakes overnight but shortened to a top price of 7-4 following confirmation that she will attempt to emulate O’Brien’s filly Winter, who took both Guineas and then followed up at Ascot two seasons ago. O’Brien has saddled at least one Group One winner at the Royal meeting every year since 2006, though he drew a blank with 17 runners in the first seven Group Ones 12 months ago before Merchant Navy’s win in the eighth and final top-grade event, the Diamond Jubilee Stakes. In addition to Hermosa, O’Brien is also responsible for Ten Sovereigns, the favourite for the Commonwealth Cup, while Le Brivido, who joined his yard from Andre Fabre over the winter, is vying with Mustashry to head the market for the Queen Anne Stakes, which opens the meeting.