The row between Donald Trump and Sadiq Khan has escalated again after the US president called the London mayor “a disaster” in response to violence in the capital, where three men have been killed in separate attacks in less than 24 hours. Retweeting a post by right-wing commentator Katie Hopkins about the killings, the president said the capital needed a new mayor “ASAP” and that Khan “will only get worse!” LONDON needs a new mayor ASAP. Khan is a disaster - will only get worse! https://t.co/n7qKI3BbD2 Trump then followed his tweet up a few hours later with another attack on Khan: “He is a national disgrace who is destroying the City of London!” The original post by Hopkins called the capital “Stab-City” and “Khan’s Londonistan” alongside two screenshots of BBC News articles detailing the violence. He is a national disgrace who is destroying the City of London! https://t.co/l3qcUS17jh She wrote: “20 hours in Stab-City UPDATE 2 stabbed to death 1 shot dead Three stabbed - but not dead. Wandsworth & Tower Hamlets This is Khan’s Londonistan.” A spokesman for the mayor said in response: “Sadiq is focusing on supporting London’s communities and over-stretched emergency services. “He has been in regular touch with senior Met police officers last night and throughout the day. “His thoughts are with the victims’ families. He is not going to waste his time responding to this sort of tweet.” The Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn attacked the president, saying it was “absolutely awful to see @realDonaldTrump using the tragedy of people being murdered to attack the Mayor”. He tweeted: “@SadiqKhan is rightly supporting the police to do their job while Katie Hopkins spreads hateful and divisive rhetoric. “They seek to divide at a time we need to come together.” The US president and London mayor have clashed in the past, including on Trump’s state visit at the start of June. Trump branded the mayor a “stone cold loser” in a two-part tweet as he touched down in Britain on 3 June. The Labour mayor then accused the president of “playground behaviour” and claimed he was a “poster boy” for the far-right. The Metropolitan police said 14 people – including several boys and a girl – had been arrested in connection with the incidents in Wandsworth, Plumstead and Clapham.