At least three people from the UK, as well as two from the US and an Australian woman, are reported to be among a group of eight climbers who have gone missing in the Himalayas after a heavy avalanche. It is believed the climbers, including an Indian guide, failed to return to base camp after their attempt to climb to the summit of Nanda Devi, India’s second-highest mountain at 7,434 metres, on a previously unclimbed route. India has sent out a search team on foot, but they are not expected to reach the amateur climbers’ last known camp for three days. However, it is hoped that a helicopter will be able to drop rescuers in on Sunday. “We always have hope, but to be practical, we have to be prepared for bad news,” Indian Mountaineering Foundation spokesman Amid Chowdhury told the Australian Associated Press on Saturday. A UK Foreign Office spokesperson said: “We are in contact with the Indian authorities following reports that a number of British nationals are missing in the Indian Himalayas. We will do all we can to assist any British people who need our help.” A spokesperson from Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was “providing consular assistance to the family of an Australian that may be among a group of trekkers missing in the Nanda Devi area of India. Due to privacy obligations, we are unable to provide further information.” In a Facebook post last week, the company that arranged the expedition said: “The Nanda Devi team has reached their second base camp at 4,870 metres, their home for the next week. After a recce of the route they will be making a summit attempt on an unclimbed peak at 6,477 metres.” The missing eight were reportedly part of a larger contingent of 12 who began their ascent from the village of Munsiyari, in the hill state of Uttarakhand, north India near the western Nepal border, on 13 May. However, by last Saturday, just four of the group had returned to base camp and authorities were informed of their disappearance on Friday, officials told local media. It is unclear whether the climbers went missing during their ascent or descent, while the cause of their disappearance remains unknown. The group said it had trekked into the heart of the Nanda Devi sanctuary “with the ambition of summiting a virgin peak”. The complete trip was expected to take about 24 days. It follows a number of deaths on the mountains this year, with five people – including a British man and an Irish man – reported to have died last week amid overcrowding and poor weather. There have reportedly been a record 381 permits issued to scale Everest for this climbing season.