Karen Bardsley Was unoccupied for large periods and could do nothing to stop Emslie’s deflected shot. 7 Lucy Bronze Linked up superbly with Parris on the right while also carrying out her defensive duties. 7 Steph Houghton Marshalled England’s defence well until she gave the ball away to Evans, which led to Scotland’s goal. 6 Millie Bright Struggled against Cuthbert’s pace at times. Forced to come off with an injury in the second half. 6 Alex Greenwood Not able to get forward as much as Bronze but did not put a foot wrong in defence. 6 Keira Walsh A solid presence in midfield alongside Scott and they did not let Scotland create many chances. 6 Jill Scott Strong in the tackle and hugely influential in England’s midfield, dictating play from her deep role. 8 Beth Mead Created a few chances from the left but failed to score. Had a goal disallowed as White was offside. 6 Fran Kirby A joy to watch when on the ball but did not manage to run the game from a central role. Substituted. 5 Nikita Parris The star of the show. Dangerous every time she touched the ball and scored an ice-cool penalty. 9 Ellen White Preferred to Taylor and threatened all afternoon. Lovely left-footed finish to put England two up. 8 Subs Abbie McManus (for Bright 55) 6, Karen Carney (for Mead 71) 6, Georgia Stanway (for Kirby 82) 6 Lee Alexander A superb performance and had no chance on the goals. The highlight was a low save from White. 9 Sophie Howard Mead managed to get past her on a few occasions but the right-back looked composed overall. 6 Jenny Beattie A fraction late for her challenge on White for England’s second. Booked for a rash challenge on Parris. 6 Rachel Corsie Strong in the air but lost out in a challenge against Kirby as England scored their second goal. 6 Nicola Docherty Had it tough against Parris and Bronze and struggled at times. Unfortunate to give away the penalty. 5 Lisa Evans Did not get into the game at first but fared better in a central role. Played a big part in Scotland’s goal. 6 Christie Murray Struggled to get into the game as England dominated midfield. Taken off as Scotland chased the game. 5 Kim Little Never gave up but unable to stamp her authority on the game. Felt as if she was outnumbered. 6 Caroline Weir Was not given any time on the ball by the England midfielders. Gave the ball away too many times. 5 Claire Emslie A tough game for the Orlando Pride wide player but improved in the second half and took her goal well. 6 Erin Cuthbert Chased relentlessly throughout but her best chance, towards the end of the first half, went just wide. 7 Subs Kirsty Smith (for Docherty 54) 7, Chloe Arthur (for Howard 74) 6, Lizzie Arnot (for Murray 87) n/a