Things are changing in the world of elite swimming, and some would say not before time. Beginning in early October and culminating just before Christmas in Las Vegas, the first International Swimming League (ISL) season will take place across Europe and the USA. Some of the world’s best swimmers will compete for significant prize money with a first season budget of US$20m, funded by the ISL’s founder, Ukrainian billionaire and swimming fan Konstantin Grigorishin. $7m of that will go to athletes and teams in prize money. Grigorishin believes “the IOC [International Olympic Committee] and international federations … don’t respect athletes, they don’t consider them like partners”. He says the new league is about “putting power back into the hands of athletes … championing the right of professional swimmers to make [the] living they deserve, and to have a greater say in the way their sport is run”. This sort of breakaway league in top-level sport has happened before, most notably, perhaps, in the 1970s with Kerry Packer’s World Series Cricket. But as with any large new international venture of this nature, there have been teething problems and the sport’s governing body, Fina, has put various roadblocks in place. The ISL had planned to hold its first event in Italy last December but that was cancelled after Fina said the event was “non-approved” and threatened suspension for any swimmer who took part. The ISL and some swimmers, including Hosszú, filed lawsuits against Fina for being anti-competitive. There were reports stating that Fina had asked for US$50m to officially sanction ISL events. Fina retreated and announced in January 2019 that swimmers were permitted to compete in events staged by independent organisers but that it would not recognise records set at such events. In a development that will no doubt lead to more pressure on Fina, numerous leading swimmers backed the launch in December 2018 of the Professional Swimmers Association, which aims to advocate with event organisers and regulatory bodies for the welfare and earning potential of athletes. Elite swimmers have been unhappy with Fina’s handling of their sport for some timeso it is perhaps unsurprising they are eager to try something new and will help them maximise the money they can make in their short careers. In what seems a direct response to the ISL, Fina recently introduced its Champions Swim Series, offering the most prize money in the body’s history. Participating athletes’ travel costs were covered and they also received appearance money. The inaugural series took place in China, Hungary and the USA in April and May this year. The ISL season involves teams of 24 (12 men and 12 women) competing in short-course sprint, relay and skins races for team points. No athlete who has previously been banned for doping is allowed to swim in the ISL. There are playoffs and finals, individual and club prize money, and appearance money for clubs. In its first year, the league will have eight teams – four from Europe and four from the USA. Not all the swimmers are American or European, though; the teams comprise swimmers from all over the world. Many of the top international swimmers have signed up: European names Katinka Hosszú, Adam Peaty, Sarah Sjöström and Laszlo Cseh; US stars Katie Ledecky, Nathan Adrian, Lilly King and Natalie Coughlin; and South African gun Chad le Clos. Australian swimmers taking part include Cate Campbell, Kyle Chalmers, Bronte Campbell, Emma McKeon, Mitch Larkin and Ariarne Titmus. Swimming has always been a popular sport in Australia, where many Olympic and world champions are household names, but in other parts of the world that is not necessarily the case and it might only come into the general public’s consciousness every four years during the summer Olympics – and even then, perhaps only when someone such as Michael Phelps achieves extraordinary success. The ISL aims to change this. It wants to make its events media-friendly, achieve a viewing audience of at least 100 million over five years, attract sponsors, bring an entertainment component, and work on fan engagement, including merchandising. It also advocates for gender equality. Australian swimming fans are used to is seeing plenty of successful female swimmers – women have long been among the nation’s greatest champions, especially in the past 15 years and since 2004, only three men have been named Australian Swimmer of the Year – but again, this is different overseas, especially in the USA. The emphasis on gender equality – each team to have equal numbers of men and women who will receive equal prize money, equal media attention, and so on – has drawn excited comments from elite US women swimmers, including Ledecky and King. The ISL has plans to extend the season in 2020 and add four more teams, two each from the USA and Europe. Could its events devalue Olympic success? Might some swimmers forgo or downplay the Olympics in favour of earning more money? It could happen, especially for athletes who are in the final parts of their career. The swimming world ­­– athletes, coaches, fans and all – will be fascinated to see what happens next.