If you had told me that simply hopping on a train to backpack around Europe at the age of 17 would set me on a path which would define my future life and career, I’d have laughed in my Maggi noodles. But, in the 30 years since my mum waved me and two friends off from Oxenholme station, I’ve completed an MA in south-east Asian history, lived and travelled for seven years in Asia and Australia, worked for some of the world’s leading travel companies and now have my own travel PR business. Interrailing was, for me – and for anyone who embarks on a similar rite of passage – about way more than a “holiday”; it was about discovering people and places away from parental gaze; exploring beyond safe harbours; growing up; making friends – and mistakes; being independent and so, so much more. Like every intrepid explorer, the highs were just that: arriving at our first stop, Paris, to find it was the Bastille Day bicentennial and the city had transformed into a giant party; climbing the Tower of Pisa (though we later discovered we’d missed a storey, thinking the seventh floor was the top); waking up to sunrise beyond the windows as we traversed the Alps; being bought ice-cream in Geneva by an elderly Swiss benefactor at a nearby table who knew we were broke. The lows, though, while tear-jerkingly, homesick-inducingly awful at the time, were actually the most character building, providing memories that have endured the most: returning to a hostel in Naples to find we’d missed curfew and been locked out; getting on the wrong train in Rome four – count them – times; jumping off in the middle of nowhere, a little scared by drunken twentysomething Italians only to find no campsite (a rubbish tip and a bivvy bag sufficed); running out of money, completely, in Vienna after having our only collective credit card stolen. Perhaps the most bizarre experience of all was in Austria, where by complete coincidence we met the headteacher from my friend’s school who was unaware the PE teacher had “lent” us the school tent. What were the chances? It was remote, you had to cross a lake from the train station to get there. He and his family were staying in a caravan, it was freezing and raining and they took pity on us, inviting us in to warm up and have tea. Things may have changed a lot since 1989, noodles have improved and “home” is never further than a mobile phone call or email away, but at its heart the interrailing experience is as life-changing as it ever was. Go.Rebecca Scrase Last year, after my A levels, I went away for just over three weeks with three of my school friends. It was my first independent trip and we planned it all ourselves with the Interrail app, which was really easy. We opted for the 10-day travel pass and went to Brussels, Amsterdam, Berlin, Prague, Vienna and Budapest, and ended with six nights’ clubbing on the island of Pag, Croatia. I’d definitely recommend this – finishing with a few nights in one place. We researched our accommodation and found Airbnb was often cheaper than hostels, costing around £8 a night each. I’d been working to save for the trip and all the travel and accommodation came to under £1,000. Do some research on destinations before you go – it helps you budget if there’s an activity you want to do that costs a bit more, like a spa party in Budapest. We did a pub crawl in Prague which cost about €15, but it actually meant we saved money because it included a drink in each bar plus entrance to a club. Another way to manage money is use a Revolut card; there’s no charge and the app shows what you spend as you go. It was an amazing trip. Even though we’d organised everything with the app, you still get a real sense of adventure exploring all these new places – and travelling by train is such a great way to really see a place.Augusta Hyde, 18 My mum always told me Interrailing was cool, but it never really appealed … Then I looked into the cost of going to Thailand for a month, and it was huge in comparison. I’m on a gap year after A levels and have been working to save for the trip. I’m going with two school friends and we’ve planned it using a website called Euroventure, which has suggested itineraries – or you can build your own. We’ve gone for “the full hog” – 11 cities in 28 days, including Amsterdam, Berlin, Prague, Budapest, Rome, Venice and Paris. It even prebooks our hostels, and it’s costing us about £1,300, including all travel and accommodation. It’s the biggest thing I’ve ever done.Henry Twigg, 19 Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.