The Conservative leadership hopeful Jeremy Hunt has won the backing of Penny Mordaunt, a key Brexit supporter, in his second coup of the week after gaining the support of Amber Rudd, a leading Tory moderate. Launching his campaign to enter No 10, Hunt made the case that he was the most serious and experienced would-be leader, in an apparent rebuke to his main rival, Boris Johnson. The foreign secretary, who is now second favourite in the race, gave a speech in London, with his wife, Lucia, numerous MPs and other supporters in the audience. Hunt’s pitch was that he would deliver Brexit before allowing a general election, saying the failure to leave the EU had “put our country and our party in grave peril”. His message that he wanted to avoid a general election was applauded by supportive MPs. “Without a deal, any prime minister who promised to leave by a certain date would have to call a general election to change the parliamentary arithmetic. That is an election we would lose badly. If we fight an election before delivering Brexit, we will be annihilated,” he told the audience. Hunt also repeated his claim that European leaders have told him they are ready to strike a deal and recognise the Irish backstop will not get through parliament. But unlike Johnson, he indicated he would be willing to take longer than the period between now and 31 October to secure the UK’s departure from the EU if more time is needed to strike a deal. “The leadership I offer is based on one simple truth: without Brexit, there will be no Conservative government and maybe no Conservative party,” Hunt said. “If we want a deal, we are going to have to engage seriously with Brussels. From my conversations with European leaders, it is clear to me there is a deal to be done, they want us to come up with proposals.” Hunt gave his launch speech shortly after two rivals kickstarted their leadership campaigns on Monday, when about 11 candidates are expected to submit eight nominations from supporters to the 1922 Committee. Matt Hancock, the health secretary, said he wanted his campaign to be about a “front story”, not a backstory, and warned the Conservative party was in danger of allowing the obsession with Brexit to stop it focusing on the future. A third candidate, Dominic Raab, offered a take-no-prisoners approach to the Brexit negotiations, promising a tough new stance with Brussels but refusing to rule out proroguing parliament in order to deliver a no-deal Brexit in October, should no new concessions be found. “We’ve been humiliated as a country in these talks with the EU,” he said. “We’re divided at home and demeaned abroad.”