Matt Groening could do no wrong in 1999. The Simpsons was still both witty and money-spinning, and he could get any project he wanted greenlit – even a sci-fi comedy cartoon called Futurama. The show began with New Year’s Eve 1999, when disillusioned pizza delivery boy Philip J Fry fell into a cryogenic vat, only to awaken 1,000 years later in “the world of tomorrow!”. His excitement at his new life was tempered by finding out everyone in the future has a career assigned by the government, and his job was to be a delivery boy for Planet Express – motto: “Our crew is replaceable, your package isn’t!” On board the Planet Express spaceship with the immature and slovenly Fry were cyclops orphan Leela, drunken robot Bender, clumsy intern Amy and incompetent alien medical lobster Dr Zoidberg: a crew of misfits seemingly designed to connect directly to the types of misfits who watch cartoon science fiction. Every mission was an adventure, whether it be discovering a parallel universe in a cardboard box or battling parasites in Fry’s bowels. Present-day celebrities made cameos as preserved heads in jars, which was a lot more satisfying than how The Simpsons handled them. Everyone from Stephen Hawking (“That physicist who invented gravity”) to Al Gore (“Inventor of the internet”) was willing to be decapitated to appear on the funniest show on TV. Unlike some shows aimed at nerds that just shouted science words and played a laugh track (bazinga!), Futurama really was as clever as it seemed. Jokes about superdupersymmetric string theory or written in binary code were included for viewers with the nerd credentials to recognise them. Unfortunately, the Fox network, which initially aired Futurama from 1999 to 2003, didn’t know what to do with it. Despite fan outcry, it axed Futurama after four brilliant seasons. But, like the show’s Zombie Jesus, Futurama was brought back from the dead, moving to Comedy Central in 2008. Many of the old writers had moved on to bigger things, however, and instead of leaving a perfect legacy of genius comedy, the show decided to try new things. Like being stupid. And unfunny. If you can’t come up with one good idea for an episode, the thinking on the undead Futurama seemed to be, why not just mash multiple tired ones together? The real low point came in the Futurama Holiday Spectacular, which combined songs with heavy-handed ecological morals across three unrelated stories. Murderous Christmas trees conquering Earth was, somehow, not the worst thing about it. In one classic early episode we learned that after Fry was frozen his loyal dog Seymour spent the rest of his life waiting outside Fry’s old pizza shop for his master’s return. The montage of the years passing before his death is often ranked among the most moving moments in TV history. Even this couldn’t be left alone in the reboot, however. When time travel is introduced – always a killer in sci-fi plots – Seymour is given a happy ending, robbing his first death of its meaning. Who would have guessed that the creator of The Simpsons wouldn’t know when to let go?