Frankie Dettori almost brought Britain’s betting industry to its knees for a second time on Thursday , 23 years after his Magnificent Seven winners at Ascot cost the bookies tens of millions of pounds. There is a statue of Dettori near the entrance to Ascot’s Royal enclosure to mark his astonishing day in 1996, and he joked that the course “might need to get another statue” after winning the first four races on Ladies’ Day with a flawless series of rides. Lester Piggott, in 1965, was the last jockey to ride four winners on the same afternoon at the Royal meeting. A’Ali (5-1), Sangarius (13-2) and Star Catcher (4-1) all won for Dettori before Stradivarius, at even money, completed the four-timer in the Gold Cup, the biggest race of the week. “He is a phenomenon,” John Gosden, the trainer of Stradivarius, said. “Frankie is like a player who gets to the final of Wimbledon and then raises it to another level. “For a kid of 48 he is remarkable. And when he rides here he goes to another level. “He’s been in the gym, working out, and then he comes and rides out for me and he’s so relaxed. The horses are here to do a job, but he does it so beautifully with them and that makes a difference.” Dettori was short of racing room in the closing stages of the Gold Cup but waited for a gap to appear and seized his chance when it did. “I don’t normally hear the crowd because I’m so focused [on the race] but the roar from the crowd was incredible,” Dettori said. “This horse has captured people’s imaginations and we’ll bring him back next year.” Dettori’s winning streak came to an end when he could finish only second in the fifth race after leading with a furlong to run. “Twenty years ago I would have won that,” Dettori said. “It was 16-1 this morning and it was favourite [at the start], he gave me a great spin but it wasn’t to be. Listen, I’ve had a good day so I’m not going to cry.” Despite his failure to win either of the last two races on the card, bookmakers said it had been one of their worst days at the Royal meeting. “We are hugely relieved to have avoided the worst-case scenario of a Magnificent Six,” said Nicola McGeady of Ladbrokes. “But we are by no means celebrating. A four-timer for the most popular jockey at the biggest meeting of the Flat season is a shocking result and can only be described as a bloodbath.”