What were you hoping for?To meet the love of my life. But on a more realistic level, a free meal with someone tall, kind and nice, who could use chopsticks. First impressions?Tall, friendly face, maybe a little awkward (possibly just nerves). What did you talk about?Blind dates, how competitive we both were, our different levels of hatred of London, and our mutual appreciation that neither of us was vegan. Any awkward moments?Me stepping on him when getting to my seat. Him flinging his chopsticks on to the floor a second time. Good table manners?It quickly descended into chaos. I ate with my hands but he had chopsticks flying everywhere, so I think we were even. Best thing about Tom?His enthusiasm about trying the weirder things on the menu (kid goat momos and rabbit wonton), and his appreciation of Wetherspoons. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yeah, he seems easy enough to get along with. Describe Tom in three wordsPoor chopstick game. What do you think he made of you?Awkward and talked too much. Did you go on somewhere?We tried to find a ’spoons, but Google Maps snaked us and we ended up in a Greene King. And... did you kiss?Nuh-uh. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We should’ve ordered more cocktails. Marks out of 10?Where 1 is being on a date with an actual rock, and 10 is leaving your knickers at a house party: 7. Would you meet again?We’ve been messaging, so who knows. What were you hoping for?A fun and memorable evening. First impressions?Attractive and much, much cooler than me. What did you talk about?Trashy TV shows, who should get the last chicken momo, and what not to mention in these answers. Any awkward moments?I dropped the chopsticks on the floor… twice. Made much more embarrassing by the fact I showed off with them earlier. Good table manners?Wonderful. Best thing about Alice?She was very comfortable taking the lead, which made up for my inability to make decisions. Would you introduce her to your friends?Definitely. Describe Alice in three wordsIntelligent, confident, refreshing. What do you think she made of you?I’m not sure I was her type, but I think we both enjoyed the evening. Did you go on somewhere?Yes, an incredibly classy establishment that certainly does not have a reputation for cheap drinks (and rhymes with Breene King). And... did you kiss?As romantic as tube station lighting can be, we did not. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wish I had read up on chopstick etiquette. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Absolutely. • Alice and Tom ate at Fatt Pundit, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com