Sir Philip Green’s retail empire has staved off collapse after winning the backing of creditors for a rescue plan that involves the closure of 50 stores and 1,000 job losses. Landlords of Arcadia Group’s 570 UK standalone stores, which are home to Topshop, Burton, Dorothy Perkins, Topman, Wallis, Evans, Outfit and Miss Selfridge, approved the plan on Wednesday, averting a slump into administration that would have put a further 17,000 jobs at risk. Green told Sky News: “It is good to know there is still support out there for the business, for my family and for me. Even if you score in the 95th minute, a win is still a win.” Ian Grabiner, the chief executive of Arcadia Group, added that the company was now on “a much firmer footing”. “I am confident about the future of Arcadia and our ability to provide our customers with the very best multi-channel experience, deliver the fashion trends that they demand and ultimately inspire a renewed loyalty to our brands that will support the long-term growth of our business,” he said. But retail industry experts said that rent cuts and store closures would not be enough to guarantee Arcadia’s long-term survival. Richard Lim, the chief executive of consultancy Retail Economics, said: “There’s still a huge battle ahead. It’s not just fewer stores that are needed to ensure Arcadia’s long-term survival. It ultimately needs a leaner business model, including less staff and fewer brands, as well as investment into its identity and customer experience to fend off online and value retailers.” Chloe Collins, a senior retail analyst at research firm GlobalData, said Arcadia would need to invest much more than it had so far promised in updating its stores and online services if it was to compete effectively with the likes of Asos, Boohoo.com and H&M. “Arcadia’s leading brands – Topshop and Topman – still have a strong following among millennials. However, many of the other, such as Miss Selfridge and Dorothy Perkins, are now irrelevant in a highly saturated market and chances of revival are slim, leading landlords to question whether other retailers could offer their spaces more longevity.” Landlords’ concern about dowdy stores and hefty rent cuts meant that Arcadia struggled to secure agreement for the complex deal, which required the approval of 75% of all creditors and at least half of landlords. They voted on seven company voluntary arrangements (CVAs), which are insolvency procedures that have been used by a string of high-street names to shut stores, including New Look and Mothercare. Arcadia, which was advised by insolvency experts at Deloitte and property consultants GCW, sought to win over landlords with an initial promise to give them a 20% stake in the business and invest an extra £50m in the stores as part of a £135m turnaround plan intended to help Arcadia compete with rivals such as Asos, Zara and H&M. That was not enough for some landlords, however. This forced Arcadia to adjourn voting on the restructure last week while it tried to win over detractors. Late last week the Green family offered to put up about £9.5m a year over three years, so that rent cuts for landlords would be reduced to 25%-50% from the 30%-70% previously planned. That move finally won over sufficient creditors in Wednesday’s vote. The CVAs, which involve at least 23 store closures and rent cuts on almost 200 stores, are part of a wider restructure in which about 25 more UK stores will close as the property arms of Miss Selfridge and Evans are put into administration. The group is also closing its 11 US Topshop stores and has closed all but one of its remaining Australian stores in recent weeks. Further UK stores could also close under the deal as landlords subject to rent cuts have a year in which they can turf out Arcadia in favour of other better-paying tenants. Green and Arcadia won support for the restructure from the Pensions Regulator, the group’s pension fund trustees and the pension protection fund, an industry-backed lifeboat for collapsed companies’ savings schemes. That came after Green’s Monaco-based wife Tina, who is the official owner of Arcadia, agreed to pump £100m into the scheme over three years alongside a £285m contribution in property assets and cash payments from the company itself. The pension funding package and wider restructure will not be secure for another 28 days, however. That’s because landlords and other creditors are able to legally challenge the outcome of the CVA vote during that period. The pension fund had a major influence on the outcome of the vote because of the scale of its deficit, which could rise to £750m. Arcadia launched the CVA process last month after saying it faced “significant financial difficulties” amid “challenging market conditions”. It warned that if the restructure deals were not approved the company was “highly likely, either immediately or after a short time period, to enter into insolvent administration or liquidation”.