Labour has held on to the marginal seat of Peterborough, defeating predictions that the contest could deliver a first byelection victory to Nigel Farage’s Brexit party. Addressing her supporters early on Friday following the count, Labour candidate Lisa Forbes said: “Tonight’s result is significant because it shows that the politics of division will never win.” Forbes won 10,484 votes, beating the Brexit party’s Mike Greene, who took 9,801 votes, a margin of just 683. The Conservatives were beaten into third place with 7,243 votes. Turnout was 48%. Nigel Farage, the Brexit party leader, left the count through a backdoor just minutes before the result was announced. After the result, Jeremy Corbyn said the Tories had been pushed to the margins because of the policy of cuts and disastrous handling of Brexit.  “This result shows that in spite of the divisions and deadlock over Brexit, when it comes to a vote on the issues that directly affect people’s lives, Labour’s case for real change has strong support across the country. I look forward to welcoming Lisa to parliament next week,” he said. Greene said the Brexit party had made a significant breakthrough, despite not winning. “We have shaken up British politics with none of the data that is necessary to win a parliamentary election,” he said. “We’ve had two parties ruling for decades, that’s not happening any more.” Stewart Jackson, the former Conservative MP for Peterborough, said the Tories suffered because of the failings of the parliamentary party. “There has been no leader and Brexit policy has been a shambles. Once we deliver Brexit, and get a new leader in place, I think this seat will be back in contention,” he said. The Liberal Democrats came fourth in the byelection with 4,159 while the Greens came fifth with 1,035 votes. Brexit party insiders said Labour’s reliance upon a mainly Pakistani vote in inner-city wards had been the difference between the parties. “Some of these houses had 14 people in them registered to vote. It would be interesting to see what proportion voted Labour,” said one. Labour have denied relying on the city’s Asian voting, and insisted that it was a “racist trope”. Richard Tice, the chair of the Brexit party, said the party lost because “we have been here four weeks, they have been here 100 years, they know where the voters are, that is how it works.” It is a setback for Farage’s fledgling party, which argues for a no-deal departure from Europe and made a strong showing in last month’s European elections, securing the largest share of the vote and winning 29 seats. This was the first Westminster constituency it has tried to win since it was founded four months ago. Although an opposition party is expected to win byelections, Labour was seeking victory in a seat that voted 60% to leave in the EU referendum. Labour activists have acknowledged that they also had to combat anger over the party’s selection of Fiona Onasanya as its last candidate. She was forced to stand down after lying to police about a speeding ticket following a recall petition across the constituency. The victory will help Corbyn in his fight with critics within the party who have tried to persuade the Labour leader to change course over Brexit. Shadow cabinet members such as Emily Thornberry have urged him to change policy to campaign for a second referendum. Other senior figures, such as the party chair Ian Lavery, have argued that Labour will be decimated in parts of northern England and Wales if it attempts to run another referendum. Corbyn has said Labour would back a referendum on a Brexit deal but not necessarily one that included an option to remain. Party insiders said they won because they had built a comprehensive database since January, were backed by hundreds of Momentum activists, and campaigned on local issues. One Labour fixer said before the result: “If we pull this off, it will show that you can run a local campaign and beat a huge national issue. We have policing, fly-tipping and education; they have Brexit, Brexit and more Brexit.” Forbes faced controversy in the week before the poll over a Facebook post she “liked” which said Theresa May has a “Zionist slave masters agenda”. She told The Sunday Times she apologised “wholeheartedly for not calling out these posts” and that she had liked the video attached to the post, “not the views expressed in the accompanying text”. .