“I asked my mother when I went to church on Sunday: ‘Why is everything white? What happened to all the black angels?’” So Muhammad Ali told an interviewer, before giving a knowing look and – boom! – the punchline. “Black angels are in the kitchen preparing milk and honey.” What’s My Name: Muhammad Ali (Sky Atlantic) suggests that the greatest boxer the world has ever seen changed his name from Cassius Clay and became a devotee of Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam because the Christianity of his childhood whitewashed the past and heaven, too. If there is a heaven worth the name, then Ali, who died three years ago, is in it. Although not, you suspect, making snacks for white folk. The director, Antoine Fuqua, strives to deliver what Ali, quoted at the outset, wanted: “A life story should be … everything in it. Why I joined Elijah Muhammad. What experiences I had racially.” What Ali experienced racially was typified by his return to his hometown of Louisville, Kentucky, after winning a gold medal at the 1960 Olympic Games. A waitress at a downtown diner told him: “We don’t serve negroes.” “I don’t eat them, either,” the teenage prodigy answered. “Just give me a cup of coffee and a hamburger.” Whether it went down quite like that is another matter. Ali’s self-narrated legend eclipses whatever narrative Fuqua may have wanted to tell. That said, Fuqua obligingly banishes the memory of Will Smith’s Ali biopic and aspires to the poetry of When We Were Kings, Leon Gast’s Oscar-winning 1996 documentary about Ali and George Foreman’s Rumble in the Jungle. Louisville, at least, spurred little Cassius to take up boxing. The 12-year-old resolved to learn to box just to whup the boy who stole his bike. A year later, he won his first bout; by 1964, he was heavyweight champion of the world. That world title bout with Sonny Liston demonstrated his ruthlessness in the ring and mastery of that now ubiquitous art form, cryptohomicidal trash talk. A kid in a television audience asked whether, after he had beaten the champion, Clay would ask for a rematch: “After I beat Sonny, you couldn’t melt him and pour him on me again.” By then, the National Security Agency was tapping Ali’s phone because he refused the Vietnam draft. “I’m not going 10,000 miles from home to help murder and burn another poor nation simply to continue the domination of white slave masters of the darker people the world over.” Cassius Clay, showboating boxing prodigy, was dead; long live Muhammad Ali, African-American hero. Fuqua revels in narrating Ali’s 1967 bout with Ernie Terrell, the man who made the mistake of not respecting this name change. When, in pre-fight trash talk, Terrell called Ali by his old name, Ali snapped. “I’m going to whup him until he says my name.” During the fight, Ali danced around, shouting at Terrell: “What’s my name?” Although he beat his foe savagely, he refused to move in for the knockout. We never learn if Terrell called Ali by his name afterwards. Later, banned for three years from boxing and threatened with five years in jail and a $10,000 fine for refusing the draft, Ali was superbly, wittily sanguine: “So I’ll go to jail; so what? We’ve been in jail for 400 years.” Fuqua, though, betrays Ali’s notion of a life story. Everything is not in it. Even though Ali said in 1967: “My toughest fight was with my first wife,” his family life is off-limits. Nor, sadly, does the film include footage from the Broadway musical Buck White, in which he starred in during his lay-off, as a militant black professor. Instead, the first part of this gripping three-hour biography ends with the revenge-seeker’s comeuppance. Returning to the ring after the ban to reclaim his heavyweight crown from Joe Frazier, he was decked twice and lost. The shock defeat poignantly echoed Anthony Joshua’s recent humbling – another handsome, stylish boxer laid low by a smaller, gnarlier foe with less in the way of looks to lose. It wasn’t the only time Ali was revealed to be less than perfect. As the credits roll on part one, Fuqua chooses to play Stand By Me. Oh dear, I thought, he has chosen an outtake of Ben E King singing off-key. But no. The credits reveal that the singer was one Muhammad Ali. In one area of life, at least, the Greatest had feet of clay.