Name: Clemmie Hart. Age: Unknown. Appearance: Rare. Occupation: Agent. Talent agent? Exactly. She was Anneka Rice’s agent for nearly 10 years. Oh, how lovely. Who is Anneka Rice? You know, the super-enthusiastic presenter of Treasure Hunt and Challenge Anneka. I remember. But what has she done lately? Celebrity Mastermind, Hunted. She has also got a one-woman show on Radio 4 next week. What’s it called? It’s called The Clemmie Hart Years. She’s doing a one-woman show about her agent? Ex-agent. Isn’t anyone worried Clemmie Hart might sue? She can’t. Clemmie’s dead? Not exactly. Clemmie’s in a coma? Clemmie never existed. Clemmie’s a ghost? Rice made her up. Clemmie’s a hoax? Of a sort. In 2004, Rice declined an offer to appear on a cookery show alongside the former Blue Peter presenter Mark Curry, to be called Curry and Rice. As a consequence she was fired by her agent. Sounds as if two people made a wise move there. But the offers kept coming in, and Rice had no one to field them. So she created Clemmie. Yup – mostly as a way of turning things down. “It kind of killed me to say no, but I had small children,” Rice told the Radio Times. “Sending emails from Clemmie made me feel part of it still.” A curt, dismissive alter ego to do your dirty work. Makes sense. The thing is, even though she was just an email address, everyone really liked Clemmie. They kept inviting her to events and social functions. Obviously she couldn’t go. Obviously. She had no corporeal form to put the dress around. People must have wondered what she looked like. When Rice accepted a guest spot on a celebrity hypnosis show hosted by Phillip Schofield, she took her friend Lisa to the meeting as Clemmie. The real Clemmie would have advised against taking that job. There is no real Clemmie. Oh yeah. What happened in the end? Rice got worried about the long-running deception being revealed, so she sent round an email announcing that Clemmie was pregnant and leaving work. Now she has a real agent. Has anyone seen Rice and her so-called real agent in the same room? Good point – fool me once. Do say: “Hi Clemmie! Long time no see! How old is your baby now?” Don’t say: “Dear Ms Hart, we at Acas believe you have a strong case for constructive dismissal.”