Tottenham Despite spirited performances in defeat against Internazionale and Barcelona, Tottenham found themselves with only one point from three matches after throwing away a lead against PSV Eindhoven. Given only a 15% chance of progressing by Gracenote Sports, the Spurs manager, Mauricio Pochettino, said their run was “nearly over”. Two late Harry Kane goals helped them to beat PSV before a tense win against Inter meant they travelled to Barcelona needing to match Inter’s score against PSV. With five minutes to go and Inter level, Spurs still trailed 1-0. Lucas Moura then converted Kane’s cross to complete what Pochettino had called “mission impossible” and Spurs squeezed through on goals scored. Liverpool An opening win against Paris Saint‑Germain, courtesy of Roberto Firmino’s injury-time winner, raised expectations for the campaign. However, their woeful away form left Liverpool’s qualification at risk as a late goal in Naples and a shock defeat in Belgrade against Red Star threatened to derail them. After losing again in Paris they were left on the brink of an exit, needing to beat Napoli in their final game to progress. On a tense evening Mohamed Salah broke midway through the first half to squeeze the ball past David Ospina and edge the Reds into the last 16 on goal difference. Tottenham Tottenham 3 Borussia Dortmund 0; Borussia Dortmund 0 Tottenham 1 Tottenham served notice of their threat in this year’s tournament with two superb performances to defeat the highly rated Borussia Dortmund. The first leg began slowly but Spurs emerged after the break with a fresh sense of attacking vigour. Son Heung-min side-footed Jan Vertonghen’s cross into the net to earn them the lead. Then, with seven minutes left, Vertonghen slid in for a goal of his own before Fernando Llorente ensured Spurs took a three-goal cushion to Germany. A solid defensive display and Hugo Lloris’ brilliance in goal calmed any nerves before Harry Kane’s 24th European goal put the tie beyond doubt. Liverpool Liverpool 0 Bayern Munich 0; Bayern Munich 1 Liverpool 3 A first-leg stalemate, where a wasteful Liverpool failed to take their chances against Bayern, meant that Reds fans travelled to Munich with trepidation. Without a win in five Champions League away days, there seemed little hope of arresting the slide at the home of the German champions. In a game of few chances Sadio Mané’s chipped strike was cancelled out by a Joel Matip’s own-goal as the sides went in all-square. After the break Liverpool’s cutting-edge shone through with Virgil van Dijk and Mané finding the net to complete a mature display that had Jürgen Klopp proclaiming them “back on the top level of European football”. Tottenham Tottenham 1 Manchester City 0; Manchester City 4 Tottenham 3 A helter-skelter tie that will be remembered as much for the use of VAR as its frenzy of goals. After winning the first leg 1-0, helped by a missed City penalty, Spurs travelled north with burgeoning expectations. Raheem Sterling’s third-minute strike set up a frenetic start. Then, when Son Heung‑min’s rapid double was answered by Bernardo Silva and Sterling the tie was all-square for 20 minutes. City took the lead before the ball bundled in off Fernando Llorente’s hip, with VAR awarding him a goal. In a dramatic final twist Sterling looked to have stolen it but VAR again intervened to disallow his effort and send Spurs through on away goals. Liverpool Liverpool 2 Porto 0; Porto 1 Liverpool 4 Naby Keïta’s first Champions League goal for the club settled the Reds’ nerves at Anfield before Roberto Firmino doubled the lead as they eased to victory. In the second leg Liverpool faced an early onslaught from the Portuguese side but once Sadio Mané tapped home in the 26th minute their nerves began to settle and their true class told. Goals for Salah, Firmino and Van Dijk followed to propel Klopp’s men to what he called the ‘crazy’ achievement of a second successive semi-final. Tottenham Tottenham 0 Ajax 1; Ajax 2 Tottenham 3 Tottenham produced a miraculous comeback to blow Ajax away and charge into the final. After a composed Dutch performance subdued them at home, Tottenham started terribly in Amsterdam to go into half-time three goals down. Lucas Moura then produced an outstanding individual performance to drag his side back into the game and through to the final. His two goals in five minutes gave Tottenham hope before Ajax seemed to stem the tide. Then, in the 96th minute, Moura appeared on the edge of the area to steer the ball past the keeper and cap what Christian Eriksen called “a ridiculous game”. Liverpool Barcelona 3 Liverpool 0; Liverpool 4 Barcelona 0 A tie which will go into the annals of footballing history. Lionel Messi’s masterful double at the Camp Nou looked to have secured Barcelona’s eighth European Cup final. Returning to Anfield a week later, Klopp warned that “this Liverpool never quits” and, when Divock Origi struck in the seventh minute, fans began to dream. Georginio Wijnaldum’s quick-fire double edged Liverpool closer. Then, in the 79th minute, Trent Alexander‑Arnold caught Barcelona napping, finding Origi with a quick corner. The forward fired the ball into the net to send Anfield into pandemonium and Liverpool into the final.