The Australian federal police are raiding the ABC offices in Sydney over a series of articles the broadcaster ran in 2017 into the clandestine operations of Australian special forces in Afghanistan. The raid on the Ultimo office comes just one day after the AFP raided the home of News Corp Sunday political editor Annika Smethurst over articles she published in 2018 on proposals to expand Australia’s domestic surveillance capabilities. The ABC warrant names reporters Dan Oakes and Sam Clark, as well as ABC news boss, Gaven Morris. In a statement less than an hour after the AFP officers entered the office, the ABC managing director, David Anderson, called the raid “highly unusual”. “This is a serious development and raises legitimate concerns over freedom of the press and proper public scrutiny of national security and defence matters,” he said. “The ABC stands by its journalists, will protect its sources and continue to report without fear or favour on national security and intelligence issues when there is a clear public interest.” The ABC reported AFP officers entered the Harris Street premises just after 11.30am. It is understood the broadcaster had some notice of the raid. AFP arriving at ABC. Not sure “welcome” is quite the right word. pic.twitter.com/oRVng3bH2x The executive editor of the broadcaster’s news section and head of its investigative journalism unit, John Lyons, began live tweeting the raid as it began. HAPPENING NOW: AFP raid ABC headquarters in Sydney over a 2017 story on 7.30. @annikasmethurst yesterday, then @BenFordham asked by Home Affairs for a source, now the ABC. Is this the new normal? Lyons reported the ABC’s lawyers asked the officers if the raid had anything to do with Tuesday’s raid on Smethurst, to which they answered no. The ABC’s legal counsel has informed the officers the broadcaster would waive no rights and “reserve[d] [the] right to take injunction against the warrant”. Lyons said six AFP officers moved to level 11 of the building to conduct a “search for emails etc”, with the officers saying the search was confined to “very specific matters”. AFP RAID: The AFP tell us they are interested in “certain things.” In March 2019, Daniel McBride, a former defence lawyer, was charged on five counts of leaking classified materials for blowing the whistle on the alleged misconduct by Australian special forces in relation to the “The Afghan Files”. He has been committed to the supreme court for trial. The ABC raid comes less than 24 hours after AFP officers served Smethurst a warrant to search her Canberra home, phone and computer 14 months after she published a story over a top-secret proposal to expand the nation’s domestic surveillance agency’s capabilities. The AFP spent almost eight hours at Smethurst’s home in a raid condemned by her employer, the media union, the national press gallery, some politicians and digital rights and human rights groups. The Government has serious questions to answer on this. Press freedom is a critical part of our democracy. Ping @withMEAA https://t.co/WSZYgpmbDv On Tuesday afternoon, Sydney radio 2GB host and Sky News presenter Ben Fordham said he had been contacted by home affairs officials after he reported asylum seeker boats were headed to Australia. Fordham said the officials told him he was not the target of the home affairs investigation, but the department was seeking to establish who had leaked him the information. During a press conference in London, Scott Morrison attempted to distance himself from the Smethurst raid, saying it was a matter for the AFP and he was “untroubled” by the upholding of Australian laws, but believed in press freedom. The attorney general, Christian Porter, told ABC radio on Wednesday morning he had not been briefed over the Smethurst raid but did not believe she or her employer were the ultimate target, which appeared to contradict an AFP statement that the warrant related to the “alleged publishing of information classified as an official secret”. “Police will have their reasons for conducting a warrant in a certain way,” Porter told Radio National. “But the investigation is, as I understand it, under the very longstanding provision of the Crimes Act that relates to the official misuse of unauthorised or information, so an unauthorised disclosure of the information by an official to a third party. “So the investigation, if I can summarise in broad terms, is not about the journalist per se, it’s about someone who may or may not have made an unauthorised disclosure against the terms of a very well-known provision of the Crimes Act to a third party.” On Tuesday, the AFP said the warrant did relate to the publication of the information. Updated statement re. this morning’s warrants in Canberra. This warrant relates to the alleged publishing of information classified as an official secret, which is an extremely serious matter with the potential to undermine Australia’s national security.https://t.co/BfWkTYXQFN The AFP has not clarified what law its investigations relate to in either case. Section 79 of the Crimes Act includes the offence of “communicating or allowing someone to have access to prescribed information without authorisation with the intention of prejudicing national security”. In a press conference held before the news of the ABC warrant broke, the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, condemned the Smethurst raid as “outrageous”. “People do have a right to know if the government has proposals to interfere with their privacy in a way which I believe, is something that Australians should have some say over or at least knowledge of,” he said. The legal director at the Human Rights Law Centre, Emily Howie, said the government’s new espionage laws, passed with the help of Labor last year, raised concerns over the future of public interest journalism. “The new espionage offence is just the latest law to cover government in a shroud of secrecy and prevent insiders from speaking out. It’s a dangerous law that goes too far and damages press freedom and should urgently be reformed,” she said. “The raids highlight just how dangerous it has become for whistleblowers to reveal information in the public interest. “It’s outrageous that journalists and their sources could face life imprisonment for revealing information that protects all of us. They should be lauded for revealing the truth but instead they face the real possibility of prison time. “Without a free press, we don’t have democracy. We don’t know what our government is doing in our name. New espionage laws criminalise journalism and put us all at risk of not knowing what broad powers our intelligence services are using against Australians.” The media union, the MEAA, said the ABC raid, less than 24 hours after the Smethurst raid represented “a disturbing attempt to intimidate legitimate news journalism that was in the public interest”. Marcus Strom said both the Coalition and Labor needed to “take collective responsibility for the legal framework they’ve created that is allowing for what appears to be a politically motivated assault on press freedom.” Media statement: Second AFP raid in two days a disturbing ‘new normal’ that seeks to criminalise journalism. https://t.co/66rTDaE1A9 #MEAAmedia #pressfreedom pic.twitter.com/m3ATYXdrvD “A second day of raids by the Australian federal police sets a disturbing pattern of assaults on Australian press freedom. This is nothing short of an attack on the public’s right to know. “Police raiding journalists is becoming normalised and it has to stop. “These raids are about intimidating journalists and media organisations because of their truth-telling. They are about more than hunting down whistleblowers that reveal what governments are secretly doing in our name, but also preventing the media from shining a light on the actions of government,” he said. “It is equally clear that the spate of national security laws passed by the parliament over the past six years have been designed not just to combat terrorism but to persecute and prosecute whistleblowers who seek to expose wrongdoing. These laws seek to muzzle the media and criminalise legitimate journalism. They seek to punish those that tell Australians the truth. “Yesterday’s raid was in response to a story published a year ago. Today’s raid comes after a story was published nearly two years ago. Suddenly, just days after a federal election, the federal police launches this attack on press freedom. It seems that when the truth embarrasses the government, the result is the federal police will come knocking at your door.”