Later in her career, Baroness Warnock, architect of the UK’s fertility legislation, apologised for having “got surrogacy wrong all those years ago”. The 1984 Warnock report should not, she said, have condemned the practice. Her views had been coloured by her experience: as a mother, she would have found it impossible to hand over a baby she had carried. Maybe it’s a good thing, then, that none of the UK law commissioners who have just set out proposals to make surrogacy easier, is capable of succumbing, as she did, to sentimental prejudice. By great good luck – for the occasional woman has, in the past, talked her way in – the six-strong Law Commission of England and Wales, tasked with modernising the law, is all male. The public can be confident that there was never a chance these reformers could allow an understanding of how it feels to carry a child, to undergo this all-consuming physical upheaval, to give birth, and then to live with the irreversible physical aftermath, to compromise their assessment of whether surrogacy is a gendered industry that this country can, ethically, encourage. Not unlike the reformer of Swift’s A Modest Proposal, they can claim not to have “the least personal Interest in endeavouring to promote this necessary Work having no other Motive than the publick Good of my Country, by advancing our Trade, providing for Infants, relieving the Poor, and giving some pleasure to the Rich”. Though, in their case, rather than breeding children for food they propose meeting the growing demand for surrogate babies with a well-regulated production line of British-based gestators. To date, the respectful response to Professor Nick Hopkins et al – the commissioners are keen, for instance, to advertise praise for the “building families through surrogacy” consultation from screenwriter and activist Dustin Lance Black – suggests that this peerless objectivity, on a subject often conceived of as vaguely women-related, is something that might usefully be applied to many other ethical and legal questions. Next time reforms relating to, say, religion or race are examined, it might be advisable to make sure that the panel’s discussions are likewise free of personal insights, from people of faith or colour. True, in the new surrogacy report, the all-male Hopkins delegation collaborated with the Scottish Law Commission, of which the leader and two (out of six) members are women; overall, no more than three female to nine male surrogacy reformers (Warnock’s 1984 commission had five women and 11 men). With the risk of subjective female input thus kept at safe levels, the commission was still obliged to mention criticisms of surrogacy familiar since the practice became, as it puts it, “a subject of interest to feminists”. Though even non-feminists, such as the Indian government, have recognised that poor women have been exploited on behalf of fertility tourists. Around half of the UK’s surrogacy arrangements are contracted commercially abroad, in the absence of adequate research or concern about the long-term impact of these deals on surrogates. Domestically, around a third of “carriers” may also be the baby’s biological parent. The precious “genetic link” with a child that the commission hopes to offer more would-be parents, presumably evaporates, for surrogates, after handover. The commissioners’ unwavering commitment to surrogacy clients requires them to set aside, too, the reasons why successive countries have restricted or banned commercial surrogacy. The abuse of human rights also concerns the UN. Last year, its special rapporteur Maud de Boer-Buquicchio recommended that, to counter exploitation and commodification of children, “the surrogate mother retains parentage and parental responsibility at birth” (the Law Commission suggests the opposite). She added that there is no “right to a child under international law”. Hopkins’s reforms seem more sympathetic to the delusion, long cultivated by fertility industry shysters, that the desire for a biological child – because others may have one effortlessly – cannot justifiably be thwarted. “Sometimes,” the report says, rather carelessly of the implications for property, “surrogacy can be the only way for people to have children who have a genetic link to them.” Not all people, obviously. “Surrogates are generally economically and socially less well off,” the report confirms, “than intended parents.” Unaccountably, affluent women almost never seem to have babies for very poor couples. But if the projected normalising of UK surrogacy will change little for impoverished childless people, it could usher in a golden age for post-Brexit manufacturing. Plainly, much will depend on adequate recruitment of strong, young, non-criminal surrogates, preferably with good teeth, and on judicious pricing. Purely altruistic surrogates, although these noble women do exist, are already too few to satisfy the increasing demand for own-gamete children. In any case, the commission hopes, with helpful regulation, to “encourage those wishing to enter into surrogacy arrangements to do so in the UK rather than overseas”. What figure would make the pregnancies worth women’s while, while leaving us competitive with Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, the US? It is at this point, where the commissioners invite consultees to address appropriate remuneration and accounting, with due attention to receipts for extra food (“women need additional calories during the final trimester of pregnancy”), that the repeated echoes of Swift’s breeding programme (“always advising the Mother to let them Suck plentifully in the last Month, so as to render them Plump, and Fat”) become actively unsettling. For the question of costs leads, inevitably, to that of insurance. “Pregnancy and childbirth,” the men point out, “carry with them the risk of significant complications, including death, so it may be reasonable for surrogacy agreements to make provision for compensation if complications arise.” Whatever the appropriate amount is for, say, “the loss of the surrogate’s fertility following removal of her fallopian tubes or ovaries or a hysterectomy”. So consultees might want to consider if it may be yet more reasonable to accept that desire for a genetically linked child can never justify asking a perfect stranger to endanger her health or life. Unless female survival is another subject of interest only to feminists. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist