“Beware those men, the jokers and the tricksters and the clowns. They will laugh us into hell.” Marvellous things, art and life. You can write such a line months ago, as Russell T Davies did for his character Muriel, with one set of images in mind and find it broadcast four nights after a televised debate among a new crop of contenders – the greatest one of all empty-chaired for the night, leaving plenty of space for the memories of his gaffes to rush in, so that if you marshalled them into one big, sloppy mental ball you barely missed the man at all. Years and Years concluded its six-part run last night at pace. We open, as has become customary, with the latest socio-political fillips (BBC charter has been withdrawn, monkey flu has reached France, food banks are closing for lack of donations) being quickly sketched into the background That already includes biblical rains, coastal erosion, mass internal migration and refugees still fleeing European revolutions and Ukrainian civil war, energy and information blackouts, council estates involuntarily gated and curfewed and, of course, the fascistic Four Star party in power and Vivienne Rook as prime minister, running “erstwhile” camps full of untraceable migrants. Years and Years has been a bright, beautiful collage making a terrible picture, and the finale put the finishing touches to it. A barnstorming speech by the Lyons clan’s matriarch Muriel about their – our, every ordinary person’s – share in responsibility for the world clattering to hell in a handcart lined with cheap T-shirts and padded with complacency inadvertently galvanises the family in various different ways. Rosie, her business red-zoned out of existence, gets in the van that once provided her livelihood, and ploughs through the security fence around her estate, with her fellow inhabitants filming everything so history cannot be rewritten. It’s a micro-version of the larger operation orchestrated by an ailing Edith to spring Viktor from the camp Stephen secretly transferred him to in revenge for, as Stephen saw it, causing Danny’s drowning. Bethany and her omniscient implants are drafted in to help, and Edith – a warrior to the end – uses Viktor’s escape plan as the springboard for an uprising. A missile launcher takes out the camp’s signal blocker, inmates’ phones come to life and the revolution, it turns out will be televised, streamed, uploaded and distributed so far and wide that even the ruling party’s internet-scrubbing powers won’t contain it. Stephen too plays his part in bringing down the house, an act of redemption that might have rung a little hollow for those of us who never quite bought his descent – however angry at life and grief-stricken about Danny he was – into vindictive near-murderer, but was welcome nevertheless. After a fast and furious 45 minutes we ended with a quieter epilogue, as technology (rightly, never an unalloyed good or evil in Davies’ eyes but always a neutral instrument placed in people’s hands for them to decide its use) once more offered liberation, this time to Edith. It went on a little too long and you got the sense, as you did in many of Davies’ Doctor Who episodes that he can’t bring himself to say goodbye to his creations quite as quickly as he should, but it tied up loose ends and gave most of the emotional catharsis we needed, even if it did ultimately end on an open note. It wasn’t the most subtle work and it wasn’t aiming to be. What it was was an unwholesome amount of fun-slash-devastation; soap-operatic in the best way, with (Stephen’s mis-step aside) character never sacrificed to plot, but plot there being aplenty. It wore its concerns lightly but never lost sight of them. By humanising such abstract, knotty problems as the power of technology, the creep of surveillance capitalism, and what we frogs should do as the water starts heating up, and by personalising such intractable problems as refugee crises and the competition for scarce resources, it probably reached more people with greater effect than any number of handwringing articles could do. Queer as Folk may remain Davies’ masterpiece, but this was a glorious – prescient, funny, warm, frightening, compelling – companion piece. It’s just a terrifying pity the future is arriving so soon.