With Donald Trump admitting he would accept foreign intelligence on his political opponents, late-night hosts had a fresh crop of material. On The Late Show, Colbert began: “Every night, I stand up here and make jokes about all of Donald Trump’s lies. But today, I think I might owe him an apology. Because it turns out, it’s even worse when he tells the truth.” In an interview with ABC’s George Stephanopoulos, Trump admitted he would freely take information from a foreign power on his opposition. Colbert suggested this just might renew the Mueller investigation: “Right now, you gotta imagine Robert Mueller is just getting home with all of his boxes after clearing out his office, turns on the TV, and he’s like ‘Damn it, honey, I’m going back to work. I’ll see you in another two years.’” In the same interview, Trump said he had never called the FBI. Colbert didn’t dispute this, mimicking Trump: “I’ve never called the FBI. Not even when I fired the FBI director. They had to hear it from CNN.” But Colbert laid bare the severity of what Trump’s remarks: “We laugh because it’s evil, and it’s evil and it’s stupid. For the last two years, every other word out of this guy’s mouth was ‘no collusion.’ He personally dictated the statement about Don Jr’s Trump Tower meeting, saying it was about adoption, so we wouldn’t know about the collusion. He spent two years, according to Robert Mueller, obstructing justice so we wouldn’t know the truth on his level of collusion. Then, George Stephanopoulos says, ‘Hey, if a foreign government wants to collude, would you do it?” Colbert then responded as Trump, “Sure, who wouldn’t collude?” Later, Rick Santorum defended Trump by saying his explanation was filled with filler words that do not mean what they mean, giving the example “I think.” Colbert quipped: “Yes, true. You can always tell that it’s just filler words that mean nothing whenever Rick Santorum says, ‘I think’.” Meyers started out with the less-important part of the ABC interview. “You’d be forgiven for thinking Donald Trump actually doesn’t do that much as president, but you’d be wrong. He’s actually got a very important job, as we learned today from an interview on ABC. Trump is in charge of picking new paint colors for Air Force One.” In the interview, Trump showed Stephanopoulos several designs for the presidential aircraft. Meyers said: “All right, I think I know what happened here. Trump’s staff just gave him a menu with a bunch of airplanes on it to keep him busy while they run the government.” But he quickly turned to the more headline-worthy news in the interview. “There it is, he just said it. The guy who has spent two years scream-tweeting ‘No collusion!’ is now saying, ‘If anyone’s down to collude, I’m your guy.’” He even expressed surprise at Trump’s brazenness: “If Trump would have been president during Watergate, he would have left a business card at the break-in.” While Trump dealt in hypotheticals, Meyers felt this was an open confession to collusion, “Trump’s episode of Law & Order would have been about six minutes long.” Trump later said he had never called the FBI. Meyers scoffed at this explanation, telling his audience, “Oh, really? You haven’t? Because I’m shocked to hear that the famously corrupt New York real-estate mogul who owned Atlantic City casinos, doesn’t pay his taxes, has been sued thousands of times and paid hush money to cover up an affair with a porn star doesn’t have a great relationship with law enforcement.” Trump loves law and order… until the law doesn’t follow his orders. pic.twitter.com/OrUWu5AlL0 Trevor Noah’s Daily Show monologue also revolved around the ABC interview. “Russian meddling, two years of Mueller, and that shitty Game of Thrones ending – after all of that, Trump has turned around and said that he would accept foreign help to win the 2020 election. Like apparently, foreign dirt is the only import he won’t put tariffs on.” Noah then posed the question: “Why would Donald Trump do anything differently in 2020 if he never faced any real consequences for 2016?” The host then showed clips of Trump defending this action, even saying “The FBI director is wrong,” to which the audience expressed shock. Noah also tackled other parts of Trump’s answer, including the part where he said he had never called the FBI, even after seeing “a lot of things”, with Noah inquiring: “Now I’m just wondering what other crimes Trump has witnessed that he didn’t report.” He also called attention to the “Prince of Whales” typo in Trump’s tweet. “Unless Trump secretly met with Free Willy, that’s not how you spell Prince of Wales!”