Jasper Cillessen Grateful Sancho’s header was straight at him, and for VAR’s intervention late on. 6/10 Denzel Dumfries• Seemed to take offence at Chilwell’s presence, but his challenge to deny Rashford a second was stunning. 6 Virgil van Dijk The boos that greeted his every touch demonstrated his current status. As imperious as ever. 8 Matthijs de Ligt Talented youngster atoned for his horrible error for the penalty to thump the Dutch level. Booked. 6 Daley Blind Struggled against the scuttling pace of England’s wingers but his experience probably told in the latter stages. 6 Marten de Roon Busy at De Jong’s side, contributing to the lengthy spells of Netherlands possession. 6 Frenkie de Jong Ran the show for long periods, conducting Dutch progress with his tidy use of the ball. 8 Georginio Wijnaldum Energetic, when bursting forward strutting across the turf with all the confidence of a Champions League winner. 7 Steven Bergwijn England struggled to cope with his bustling strength and direct running down the flanks. 7 Memphis Depay His misses from excellent opportunities looked so wasteful but his hassling still yielded the goals in extra time. 7 Ryan Babel Peripheral for long periods with his replacement, Promes, far more of a threat. 5 Subs: Donny van de Beek (for De Roon 68); Quincy Promes (for Babel 68); Davy Pröpper (for Bergwijn 90); Kevin Strootman (for De Jong 114). Jordan Pickford There were three fine, instinctive saves from Depay before teammates left him exposed. 7/10 Kyle Walker Struggled throughout and, with younger men threatening his place, his days as England’s right-back feel numbered. 4 John Stones A rusty display, and that error in possession in extra time will haunt him for some time. 5 Harry Maguire Far too sloppy, with the ball and without, where England needed him at his authoritative best. 5 Ben Chilwell Nervous whenever Bergwijn charged up the flank, and exposed defensively too often. 5 Ross Barkley England’s most progressive midfielder, but his extra-time error summed up a fading display. 6 Declan Rice Severely tested while the Dutch pinged their passes, and unable to impose any control in the centre. 5 Fabian Delph All energy, working feverishly to frustrate the Dutch, though might have done more with the ball. 6 Raheem Sterling Clipped the bar in stoppage time, but England needed more to mark his 50th cap. 6 Marcus Rashford Great anticipation to earn the penalty, and a fourth goal in seven caps, before succumbing to injury. 6 Jadon Sancho There were flashes of quality, class and pace, all decorated with that nutmeg on De Ligt. 7 Subs: Harry Kane (for Rashford h-t); Jesse Lingard (for Sancho 61); Jordan Henderson (for Delph 77); Dele Alli (for Rice 105).