Fifa has awarded Qatar the next two Club World Cups, for this December when Liverpool will represent Europe as champions, and 2020. Both will be “tests” for the World Cup being held in the Gulf state in 2022. Explaining the decision on behalf of the Fifa council following their meeting before Wednesday’s annual congress in Paris, Victor Montagliani, the president of the Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football, said: “I think it’s a great opportunity to test the facilities. I think it hits all the marks. It will be good for Qatar to have those events over the next two years and test out their transportation, their accommodation, their stadiums. I think it’s a good exercise.” Montagliani acknowledged Fifa had made the decision to send two more of its competitions to Qatar without having discussed human rights problems in its meeting. “Not today, not in the council meeting, but those issues are part of the ongoing discussion between the special administration which deals with this on a daily basis and obviously the local organising committee,” he said. The decision follows a report last week from the Qatari committee responsible for organising the 2022 World Cup documenting its progress on providing welfare for workers. The report found nine men aged between 26 and 49 had died while in their accommodation after collapsing, having breathing difficulties or being found unresponsive. One man also died on a construction site. Tej Narayan Tharu, 23, as reported by the Guardian in November, fell while working on the Al Wakrah stadium. The report states that following an investigation, safety improvements were made to onsite working and several health and safety managers were sacked. Nicholas McGeehan, who raised serious concerns in 2017 with research about the health impact for construction workers in the Gulf’s “life-threatening” heat and humidity , was highly critical after the release of the latest figures: “These nine deaths are from only the supreme committee’s World Cup workers, a tiny proportion of the Qatar migrant workforce. It is unsafe to work in those conditions without very substantial safeguards. The Qataris should have independently investigated the health risks and put those protections in place.” Hassan al-Thawadi, the chairman of Qatar’s supreme committee, also speaking after the Fifa council meeting, accepted “there is still a long way to go” for the welfare of workers. “Every death is a tragedy, it’s as simple as that,” he said. “On the ones that are addressed in the report as non-work-related deaths, we have started a medical study with a local university. We have instigated on our projects annual health checks.” He referred to the Qatar government’s implementation of a recommended minimum wage of 750 rials a month – £160, just over £40 per week – and said it is due for an increase. The supreme committee has put in place a refund system for workers who have paid recruitment fees to agents in their home countries, which are now outlawed, and the government itself is working on a reform programme with the International Labour Organisation. “While progress has been made in the state of Qatar there is still a long way to go,” Thawadi said. “We are working very hard with NGOs, medical institutions, trade unions, universities, to do everything we can to address these issues.” Thawadi said he welcomed the opportunity for Qatar to host the Club World Cups, describing it as “exciting times,” and a chance to rehearse their operations and stadium plans before the 2022 World Cup, now confirmed to be 32 teams. Qatar does not have alcohol freely available, but Thawadi said opportunities for supporters to drink in designated are incorporated into their plans.