The story of Roky Erickson – like those of his contemporaries Syd Barrett, Skip Spence and Peter Green – is one unbalanced by circumstance. Like them, Erickson spent much of his adult life as a cautionary tale about the perils of LSD and inner exploration. But, as with them, he could not have become a cautionary tale had it not been for the extraordinary music he made before the edge of the world rose up to embrace him. The second album Erickson made with the 13th Floor Elevators, Easter Everywhere, is one of the most dizzying artefacts of the first psychedelic era. It is a record that seems to embody Erickson’s definition of psychedelia – “It’s where the pyramid meets the eye, man” – and one that, like that definition, makes no sense and perfect sense at the same time. Easter Everywhere doesn’t sound like a band trying to create something self-consciously psychedelic; it sounds as though they think they’re making a rock’n’roll record, with the obligatory Bob Dylan cover, Buddy Holly-styled guitar licks, proper choruses and hooks. They just happen to be making it on a planet where nobody else lives, resulting in an album that floats untethered by the constraints of reality. It’s an album of both clarity and mystery: just listen to Slip Inside This House. Erickson had been pushing R&B to new places before the Elevators. In 1965, his group the Spades released a single containing two Erickson songs that became crucial to the Elevators – You’re Gonna Miss Me and We Sell Soul. But the leap into innerspace came when he paired up with Tommy Hall to form the Elevators in Austin, Texas, later that year. Hall was the psychedelic visionary – the one who shaped the band’s debut into being The Psychedelic Sound of the 13th Floor Elevators, the principal lyricist, and the player of the electric jug, the sound that gave the band their unearthly wobbliness – while Erickson was the singer and main composer; and what extraordinary music he composed. On that debut album, Roller Coaster is disorienting and sinister, a combination of rock’n’roll and raga-like intensity; Reverberation (Doubt) a claustrophobic nightmare; Fire Engine is garage rock taken to its logical extreme. As Rob Chapman wrote in his book Psychedelia and Other Colours: “The Psychedelic Sound of the 13th Floor Elevators and its follow-up, Easter Everywhere, contain some of the most primal yelps of discomfort and joy heard anywhere in rock’n’roll.” Yet, incredibly, the Elevators were also, albeit briefly, a band in the pop market. When the single You’re Gonna Miss Me became a US hit, they weren’t sequestered in a ranch on the Texas plains doing endless acid – well, they were doing acid, just not in the middle of nowhere. On 23 September 1966, for example, they were in California. The day began with a 7am performance on a ferry ride around Alcatraz Island for KFRC radio competition winners. The band disembarked, headed to the airport, and flew to LA to film a performance of You’re Gonna Miss Me next to Dick Clark’s swimming pool for his TV show Where the Action Is. This was followed by two evening gigs – one at the “Teens’n’Twenties” night at the Rollarena in San Leandro, the other in San Rafael. They could do it because, as contemporary recordings prove, they were a blistering, disciplined live band, whatever their lifestyle. Under Hall’s leadership, the Elevators were compelled to embrace psychedelics, which was not good for Erickson, who was taking acid by the fistful, and was, in his bandmate Ronnie Leatherman’s words, “a vegetable” by 1968. His contributions to their third album, Bull of the Woods, were minimal, and May the Circle Remain Unbroken is racked and disturbing, while still beautiful and haunting. Then, in 1969, came the rupture with the world, when he was arrested for possession of marijuana and diagnosed with schizophrenia. To avoid jail time, he pleaded insanity and was admitted to Rusk State hospital, a maximum security institution in Texas, where he was subjected to electroshock treatment and prescribed Thorazine. When he emerged, three years later, Erickson was an entirely different man. In the subsequent years plenty of music emerged, often seemingly inspired by horror movies, sometimes very good, but never equalling those extraordinary first two Elevators records. His own life continued to be governed by chaos and ill-health. Interviewers would encounter a man seemingly unable to comprehend questions, let alone answer them. Occasionally his profile would rise – as it did in 1990, with the tribute album Where the Pyramid Meets the Eye, or in 1995, when the Butthole Surfers helped him make All That May Do My Rhyme – and then he would drift away again. Then, in 2001, his brother Sumner became his legal guardian, and Erickson gradually recovered enough to make a modest comeback, including a gig at the Royal Festival Hall in 2007, and the album True Love Cast Out All Evil, on which he was backed by Okkervil River, in 2010. There’s little point pretending that Erickson’s solo recordings, or his work with backing bands the Explosives and the Aliens – whatever their merits – will be his legacy. His contribution to rock history is narrow – in effect, a brief couple of years from late 1965 to to the end of 1967 – but it is deep. He and his bandmates created a music that didn’t seem contrived or self-conscious, but reached out into the universe with wide eyes and open minds. They travelled to new places. And Erickson should be treasured for making the journey, rather just being an object of fascination for what he had become on his return.