Now that Grand Designs is basically a show where you watch a marriage disintegrate as a posh shed goes over budget, and Location, Location, Location is just worried-looking couples telling Kirstie and Phil that, yeah, if a two-bed flat is all they could afford in 2019’s housing market they suppose they could give a child away, how do we get our fix of property porn on telly? Look no further than new 10-part drama What/If (Netflix, out now). Because honestly: nobody can be watching this for the actual story. What/If is a high-camp drama from Mike Kelley, and like Revenge, his other glossy mega-hit also with incredible houses, it follows a formula: beautiful and intelligent genius (in this case Lisa, played by Jane Levy) and her hot-but-stupid love interest (Sean, played by Blake Jenner) go to war with a mysterious older woman – in this case billionaire businesswoman Anne Montgomery, a gorgeous, insanely camp Renée Zellweger, all pencil dresses and purring and gin martinis. Anne makes Lisa a deal: she will fund her medical research, but in return Anne gets to spend one night with Sean. The catch, aside from the big question: “Would you prostitute your husband for $80m?”, is that Sean can never tell Lisa what happened that night. If he does, Anne gets to keep Lisa’s pioneering biotech company. So far, so Indecent Proposal – but then What/If spins off into about 12 insane plots, all based in breathtakingly classy houses, tastefully decorated apartments and, yes, a mansion on a mountaintop only accessible by helicopter and with its own sex steam room. Beat that, Kevin McCloud. What/If plays out like the writers wrote each individual episode, filmed it, went out on a bender and turned up the next day asking: “What now?” One minute it’s a sexy psychodrama, the next it’s a B-movie horror, then someone accidentally takes magic mushrooms and it’s part bargain-bin Broad City, part student art film. There are international conspiracies, a sex scene to the music of the Backstreet Boys, and at one point Renée Zellweger threatens to kill Lisa with a bow and arrow. Whole plotlines go nowhere: there is a weird character who dates one of Lisa and Sean’s school friends who gets lots of screen time then is never seen again after episode seven. Their mates Todd and Angela get a soapy storyline about an affair, which never connects back up to any of the main plot. One episode, everyone is convinced someone is evil; the next, they’re a trusted ally. All the characters get an unnecessary backstory. The show sags in the middle but then speeds up at the end, with a reveal so over-the-top and extreme, if you don’t scream out loud, you aren’t watching properly. Renée Zellweger, however, is incredible. She shags the handyman in the sex steam room, sobs into her cuddly toy tiger and commits arson, all while her blowdry stays perfect. Is this so bad it’s good? Maybe. Is it so bad it’s actually bad? Also maybe. Like Netflix’s You before it, it’s definitely more “binge-watch-WhatsApp-group-obsession” than Emmy nomination. It doesn’t matter. All that matters is the houses. Also: Renée Zellweger, and the sex steam room. But mainly the houses.