Stylish, forward-thinking, technically impressive, San Francisco Ballet carries all the hallmarks of its home city. The California company has an admirable commitment to new work and this season of four programmes features 10 ballets all new to the UK. The opening programme (A) is dedicated to Alexei Ratmansky’s Shostakovich Trilogy. Ratmansky is a master choreographer and his work’s immediate watchability belies some inner secrets to unlock. This triptych is steeped in Soviet Russia – the system under which Ratmansky grew up and Shostakovich struggled to conform to – from exploded iconography (hammer and stars) hanging over the stage to images of fear, unity, power, order and despair. Ratmansky clearly has an affinity with Shostakovich’s mercurial music. The first ballet, Symphony #9, sets up the connection with the score as paramount. In every switch and turn of mood the dancers are there: the breezy buoyancy, the knowing humour, the luxuriantly stretched lines. Ratmansky makes use of classical ballet’s inheritance while casting it anew. He corrals the corps de ballet into unison shapes – a single body amplified into solid geometry – while soloists pull off casual moments of audacious virtuosity. Notable among the excellent dancers is Sofiane Sylve, who brings hard-edged glamour to the Balanchine-esque Piano Concerto #1. The trilogy’s central section, the Chamber Symphony, has Ulrik Birkkjaer representing the composer himself (the symphony was said to be autobiographical). There’s a sense that what we’re seeing is the artist’s fantasy, his memories, muses, the materials of his creative world – sometimes within his grip, sometimes not, sometimes thwarted by the system around him.The company’s second programme (B) showcases three very different choreographers. There’s the elevated beauty of Edwaard Liang’s The Infinite Ocean, inspired by Olafur Eliasson’s Weather Project installation at Tate Modern (AKA The Big Sun). It’s a piece that glows and shimmers, not quite touching reality, and features the divinely snaking port de bras of Yuan Yuan Tan.Then there’s the storytelling prowess of Cathy Marston in Snowblind, a cleverly condensed retelling of Edith Wharton’s novella Ethan Frome. Birkkjaer’s Ethan is straitjacketed by duty to his needy but dominant wife (Jennifer Stahl), whose presence is so cold that when she puts a hand on her maid Mattie’s shoulder it’s as if the chill has been conducted into Mattie’s bones. Marston uses a small chorus of dancers to create the storm of swirling snow in a piece that’s stripped back, yet strong on atmosphere. From sober literature to artpop, a ballet set to the songs of Björk sounds amazing but it’s the only dud note. Arthur Pita (who devised the decor as well as the choreography) has gone all out with the visuals: mini silver palm trees dropping from the sky, tinsel, masks, Marco Morante’s ornate bodystocking costumes turning the cast into odd gods and exotic creatures. Perhaps it’s all trying too hard.Maybe it’s not Pita’s intention but Björk Ballet doesn’t feel very true to the spirit of the Icelandic icon. Her music can be deeply romantic and intimate, but she’s never resorted to sexy cliche. Yet here, her song Bachelorette comes with flesh and harem pants like an X-rated Aladdin. The work is not without its highlights, but the ballet-rave climax to Hyperballad comes off more like a balletcise class at the gym. Euphoria is elusive. • Programmes C and D continue at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 8 June.