Everyone loves banana bread. It’s simple to make and a great way to use up overripe bananas. But do you know what? It’s even better when you slice it up, pop it in a griddle pan, add a bit of butter and sandwich the slices together with some blackberry compote and macadamia praline. It’s a real winner served with a glass of milk. Prep 45 minCook 1 hr 30 minServes 8-10 285g plain flour1 tsp bicarbonate of soda½ tsp fine sea salt 110g unsalted butter, cut into chunks, plus extra for greasing 225g golden caster sugar 2 large eggs4 ripe bananas, flesh cut into chunks90ml buttermilk 1 tsp vanilla extract For the filling225g fresh or frozen blackberriesZest and juice of a lemon 1 ½ tbsp honey1 ½ tbsp golden caster sugar 25ml water1 tbsp cornflour mixed with 2 tbsp water For the praline 300g caster sugar 4 tbsp water200g macadamia nuts To finishSunflower oilKnob of butter Heat the oven to 170C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4, and grease and line a 2lb loaf tin with baking paper. Sift the flour, bicarbonate of soda and salt into a large mixing bowl. In a separate bowl, cream the butter and sugar until light and fluffy. Add the eggs, bananas, buttermilk and vanilla extract to the sugary butter and mix. Fold in the flour mix, then pour into the tin sure it’s level. Bake for an hour and 10 minutes, or until golden brown, risen and a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. Meanwhile, the filling. Put all the ingredients into a medium-sized pan and cook over a medium heat until thick and glossy, stirring occasionally. Remove from the heat, pour into a bowl and leave to cool. Put the caster sugar and four tablespoons of water in a large, heavy-based saucepan set over a medium-high heat, until it turns a deep amber colour. If you are worried about overcooking the caramel, have a bowl filled halfway with cold water to hand; you can dunk the saucepan into it to stop the cooking process. Once you’ve reached your desired colour, Add the nuts pour on to a silicone mat or greaseproof paper. Leave to set. Once set, break the praline into pieces and blitz to a smooth paste in a food processor. Store in an airtight container until you’re ready to use. Once the banana bread is ready, put the tin on top of a wire rack and leave to cool slightly, then turn out. Once cool, cut into 10-15mm slices. Spread one side of each slice with butter. Flip half the slices over and, on the non-buttered side, spread with a generous amount of praline paste and some blackberry filling. Top with a buttered slice (with the buttered side facing upwards). Put a griddle or frying pan over a medium heat, add a little sunflower oil and place one sandwich in the centre of the pan. Cook for two minutes on each side, or until golden brown. Repeat with the rest of the sandwiches. When they’re all cooked, cut them into triangles, sprinkle with a little icing sugar and enjoy.