The long-running legal case in which Megan McCann, a student from Northern Ireland, was suing the bookmaker Bet365 for £1m in unpaid winnings has been discontinued shortly before it was due to return to court in Belfast, prompting speculation Bet365 has agreed to a settlement over the disputed bets almost three years after they were placed in June 2016. A Bet365 account in the name of McCann, who was a 19-year-old student at the time, placed a stake of almost £25,000 on 12 horses running in races at Bath, Kempton Park and Naas on 22 June 2016. Bet365 accepted the bets – a combined total of 960 £13 each-way Lucky 15s – which were mostly successful and returned a total payout of £984,833. However, Bet365 refused to pay the winnings, claiming the original stake for the bets had been provided by a third party in contravention of the firm’s terms and conditions. It also refused to refund the £25,000 stake. McCann launched a legal action against Bet365 two years ago and the latest in a series of court dates working towards a full hearing of the case was scheduled for Friday morning. However, the listing was removed earlier this week and an administrator at Belfast’s high court confirmed on Wednesday that McCann’s legal team had lodged an official “notice of discontinuance” in the case. While punters who have followed the case will be pleased if it transpires that some or all of the £1m winnings have been paid, the news it will not reach a full hearing could also leave a lingering sense of frustration that significant questions about the robustness of a major bookmaker’s T&Cs will not be tested in court. McCann’s statement of claim alleged Bet365 and other leading online bookmakers habitually engage in “unconscionable practices” when dealing with their customers, and that they actively discriminate against shrewd punters who are able to make their betting pay. Many successful punters find it almost impossible to get their bets accepted and their accounts are either closed or, more usually, restricted to stakes of £1 or less. As a result, some are known to resort to using “clean” accounts opened by family members, friends and acquaintances to place stakes on their behalf. Bet365 did not respond to a request for comment on Wednesday.