It’s taken decades for doctors to convince the public that proper sun protection is vital in helping to prevent potentially deadly skin cancers, only for scientists to conclude that in protecting ourselves from the sun, we may also be shunning its health benefits. A fascinating New Scientist report recently warned of a significant increase in vitamin D deficiency, associated with MS, cardiovascular and autoimmune disease, weaker teeth and bones, and more. It seems the common assurance that we’ll “get what we need” from everyday exposure is no longer reliable, while supplements (I take D3 on doctor’s orders) provide variable results. Of course, none of this is a green light to be reckless. Sun damage is the primary external causal factor in premature skin ageing and skin cancers, so if we must be in strong sunlight, a broad-spectrum SPF is the only sensible option. I take the view that the more affordable the body suncream, the more liberal and frequent your application is likely to be (save your money for posher facial sunscreen). Besides, I want something I can chuck in my sons’ school trip backpacks, without worrying that it might not return home. Sainsbury’s makes terrific suncare (3) from just two quid for 75ml of invisible, moisturising SPF30 (remember the difference between SPF30 and 50 is relatively tiny). There are no duds here: I’ve happily topped up for my own family when we’ve run out mid-Cornish holiday. I’m also a huge fan of Bondi Sands suncare – mainly, it must be said, because it smells like coconut cream and is available in an SPF30 oil (2; £7.99, 150ml) for that 1970s beach-holiday vibe. For the hyper-sensitive, the extra money spent on Ultrasun is well worthwhile. Two of my friends’ children react horribly to anything but Ultrasun’s Super Sensitive Family Formula SPF30 (1; £19 for 100ml), and yet it doesn’t feel like being basted in medicinal ointment for the rest of the family. Everything above is cruelty-free. The scientific and medical advice is aligned in saying that we should all continue to wear sunscreen; but the NHS recommends some sun, and the New Scientist recently suggested that a short bout of summer sunlight (roughly speaking, two to eight minutes for caucasian people, 25-35 for people of colour) on unprotected arms (you can keep your face safely creamed) at around noon each day should see us suitably topped up with Vitamin D. During a UK winter, we’re apparently a lost cause, so keep taking those supplements. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.