Born in South Africa, Pietersen, 38, was first selected to play cricket for England in 2004. The following year, the batsman was on the Ashes-winning team. He captained England in 2008-9 and was named Player of the Tournament in England’s 2010 T20 World Cup win. His international career ended in 2014 when the England and Wales Cricket Board sacked him. His BBC Radio 5 Live podcast about rhinos, Beast Of Man, is on BBC Sounds. He is married with two children. When were you happiest?With no shoes on in the African bush with my family. What is your greatest fear?Bringing up my children in the world of social media. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Impatience. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Rudeness. What was your most embarrassing moment?When you end up on the front, middle and back pages of newspapers for the wrong reasons, it’s never, ever fun. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?Cars. I’ve got a Tesla at the moment. What is your wallpaper?My wife and children on safari in Kruger national park. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I am very comfortable with who I am. I do regret that stupid hairstyle I had when playing the greatest ever Ashes series. If you could revive something extinct, what would you choose?The northern white rhino. If we don’t act now, by 2025 all the white rhinos will be gone. How do you relax?In Africa, in the swimming pool and on safari. In the UK, I play golf almost every day. What did you want to be when you were growing up?A pilot or a ranger in the bush. What or who is the greatest love of your life?My wife, Jess, and our children Dylan, eight, and Rosie, three. What do you owe your parents?Everything. Mum looked after four boys and dad was a civil engineer. You realise when you become a parent how much your parents did – the opportunities they gave you. What is the worst job you’ve ever done?Nappies aren’t fun! What has been your biggest disappointment?The way I left English cricket. I was scapegoated for the Ashes tour in 2013-14 and there was a bitter battle between the England Cricket Board and me for a few years. How often do you have sex?Since the end of March, I’ve been on 31 aeroplanes, so it’s been quite difficult... What is the closest you’ve come to death?Being charged by a white rhino on a walking safari. It came running towards us and I froze, which is the right thing to do. If it had hit us, it would have been goodnight. What song would you like played at your funeral?We Weren’t Born To Follow by Bon Jovi. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?You’ve got two ears and one mouth, listen more than you speak.