Simon Armitage wrote his first poem when he was 10 for a school assignment. “I didn’t know what a poem was. I knew it was short, so that was appealing,” he confesses when we meet at the London offices of Faber, which has published his work for more than 25 years and where his books – 28 in all – take up a couple of shelves on an impressively appointed bookcase. His teacher selected six poems to put on the wall; Armitage’s wasn’t among them. “What particularly upset me was that for the first time, maybe ever with a bit of writing, I’d actually put some effort in,” he recalls. “And I was quite pleased with the thing I’d made. So not to be among the chosen was a setback.” Sometimes he wonders if he has been pursuing a “career of revenge” ever since. On 10 May Armitage succeeded Carol Ann Duffy to become the 21st poet laureate: as he jokes each time he finishes a poem, “Stick that on your board, mister!” The official call from No 10 kept being delayed – “she’s quite busy, apparently” – but after Theresa May had congratulated him and outlined the job requirements (there aren’t any), they had a chat about geography (in which they are both graduates: May from Oxford, Armitage from Portsmouth Poly). “Five minutes and that was it.” His parents cried when he rang them to tell them the news. “They’ve wanted it for a long time,” he says, recalling the moment in the early 90s when he told them he was giving up his job as a probation officer to concentrate on poetry. “There were a lot of unknowns. So it was great to go back to them and say it sort of worked out,” he adds with endearing understatement. He and his wife, radio producer Sue Roberts, celebrated with a bottle of champagne and a jump on their daughter’s trampoline in the back garden of their home – Emmeline, a prize-winning slam poet, is now in her first year at university – a few miles from the village of Marsden where he grew up and his parents still live. Every so often, he is struck by the realisation that he has followed in the massive footprints of his hero, fellow Yorkshireman Ted Hughes, who was poet laureate until his death in 1998. “His poetry woke me up, not just to poetry, but fundamentally,” he says. “He came from the next valley. The house where he grew up looks almost identical to the house I grew up in.” When Armitage started writing in his early 20s the idea that he might get published was a “fantasy. I had no literary pedigree. Poetry still felt like quite a closed establishment.” But, he reflects, “I suppose I always thought, if he can do that from there, why can’t I do it from here?” He collected Queen's gold medal last month. The winner is traditionally introduced to the Queen by the poet laureate – in this case, himself The departing professor of poetry at Oxford University, Armitage has already won pretty much every poetic laurel going, and last year won the Queen’s gold medal. He collected the award last month in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace, where the winner is traditionally introduced to the Queen by the poet laureate – in this case, himself. “Here he is and here I am,” he laughs. “It’s a shame really because I would have liked Carol Ann to be able to do that.” The search for a new poet laureate can be a fraught affair. In 1999 Tony Blair reportedly thought Duffy too controversial a choice and recommended Andrew Motion instead. Today, with record poetry sales, the rise of performance poetry, “Instapoets” and a new generation including Kate Tempest, Hollie McNish and Rupi Kaur making “poetry cool again”, Armitage’s appointment was met with questions as to whether, in 2019, the top job should go to a middle-aged white man. (Imtiaz Dharker, who calls herself a “Pakistani Scottish Calvinist Muslim”, was tipped to become the second female laureate, but took herself out of the running last month.) “I just hope that I won’t be judged on my identity, but on my values and what I bring to those issues,” Armitage says. “I think I’ve got a good track record on that front.” In many ways his wide-ranging writing life has been “a 30-year apprenticeship to this moment”, as demonstrated in a new collection, Sandettie Light Vessel Automatic, made up of poems written as either commissions or collaborations. He is looking forward to being able “to lend a voice” to the exhilarating changes in a genre that “even 10 years ago still looked like a relatively mono-cultural experience”. Although “these are really exciting times”, he cautions against complacency. “If you talk to people from diverse or disadvantaged backgrounds they will still say they feel under-represented, under-served, under-recognised.” Despite having been a high-profile fixture of the poetry scene for the last three decades, he is still keen to stress his northern, outsider status. “Keep your distance London”, he wrote in a 2014 letter addressed to the capital. “It probably helps living up there in terms of an attitude,” he says. “You are operating from the margin or outside the centre.” The morning we meet he had taken a train from Wakefield to King’s Cross, and “walked across London utterly incognito”. There’s something about poetry “which is about leading from the back”, he says. “You can still operate under cover.” As his friend and fellow poet Glyn Maxwell remarked: “Being famous and being a famous poet are two completely different things.” The title poem in his first collection, Zoom!, which launched his career in 1989, zooms from a terraced house to a “neighbouring galaxy” before plummeting back down to a supermarket check-out queue – a blueprint for Armitage’s knack of focusing on the mundane (spark plugs, say) while reaching for the stars (most obviously in his 1997 collection CloudCuckooLand). His wit, grit and gift for mixing the demotic with the metaphorical have long made him the people’s poet, whose “no brow” (his description) work spoke to the Britpop-New Labour moment. But the young poet who wrote in “Goalkeeper with a Cigarette” that he had “no highfalutin song / to sing, no neat message for the nation” has now become his country’s team captain. Today, he describes himself as “prompt, diligent and fearful of missing deadlines” – a far cry from the “mad, bad and dangerous to know” writer of Romantic tradition. But at 56, with his trademark earring and floppy fringe (“My father thought it bloody queer, / the day I rolled home with a ring of silver in my ear / half hidden by a mop of hair”), he says he still feels like the “new kid on the block”. An “obsessive” Smiths fan, he used to sing in a band called the Scaremongers, and has just finished an album with his new “ensemble”, the Land Yacht Regatta, which he describes as “more spoken word and electronica”. And he’s surely the first poet laureate to moonlight as a DJ. Since his appointment, he has been criticised by some in the poetry community for being “too approachable” and by others as “too complicated, too highbrow”, he says. The late Irish poet Dennis O’Driscoll sniffily observed in a review in 2000 that Armitage “likes to have it both ways”, he is a “streetwise poet”, cheekily “two-timing Radio 1 and 3” – but then went on to tip him as “a poet laureate in waiting”. Two decades later, if Armitage has a mission statement it is “to try and keep the middle of poetry in the centre ground. Poetry is already an obscure art form, so if you are an obscure poet within that you’re really obscure, you are operating beyond Pluto.” He once compared his frustrations with “the smallness” of poetry to “talking down a toilet”. “It doesn’t always get the audience and the readership that it needs or it wants,” he says now. But he also sees it as the antidote to “the constant diarrhoea of information”. He wants “poetry to be able to speak to people who would go to a cinema or a gallery or a museum or a show … to have a voice in that marketplace.” Big P political poetry rarely works. Poetry is the art of subtlety and to meet these subjects head-on isn’t my style Few poets have so enthusiastically “got out from behind the keyboard and the dusty tomes … to go into the schools, prisons, communities and hospices”, as he wrote in an impassioned op-ed for this paper last autumn, in what now looks rather like a bravura job application. “I’ve never been satisfied with the idea that poetry just lives in books. ‘Poetry is a go anywhere art form’”, he says, quoting the Australian poet Les Murray, who died in April. Like another laureate, John Betjeman, Armitage is fairly comfortable on TV, but he doesn’t do Twitter (“It’s just not my thing”), remembering Ted Hughes’s dictum of “always keeping something back”. Most significantly for the new job, he has been unafraid of taking on “moments of national or collective consciousness”, such as the millennium, the 9/11 attacks and most recently Brexit, in his poem “The Brink”. “I have chosen to dive into those occasions,” he says of his sense of artistic responsibility to engage with the world. But he’s always “tried to talk about the universal in terms of the particular”, such as the fictional British trader in the north tower of the World Trade Center in “Out of the Blue”. “That’s my modus operandi,” he says. Does a public poet require a new approach? “I can’t change my poetics over night. Big P political poetry rarely works anyway. Poetry is the art of subtlety and to try and meet these subjects head-on isn’t my style. I’m not even sure it is poetry’s style.” How is he going to deal with the expectation to respond to events at the call of news editors rather than the muse? Both Motion and Duffy endured a mixed reception each time they entered the public arena – a din amplified for Duffy by social media. He would “rather have a kicking” for saying “no” than for a bad poem: “I don’t want to give anybody anything that I don’t think is any good.” He is keen to collaborate with other artists – so maybe a pop song or installation for the next royal baby? Armitage has found the poetic in prisons, porn and Poundland. “I’m only interested in everything”, he says, quoting Murray again, and credits this eclecticism to not having had a formal literary education. He “arrived at literature like a kid in the sweetshop” and worked his “own way outwards and backwards” from the then-modern poets he grew up with (he particularly remembers an all-male 1970s anthology called Worlds) in a “kind of retrospective education, all the way back to Homer”. While his reworkings of Homer’s Odyssey and Euripides’s Heracles may seem a world away from his grittier Larkinesque poems, they explore similar questions of masculinity – “How can you be a hero in your own home, as a father?” – that have preoccupied him since his 20s, now that “those ideas of heroism that you grew up with on TV and in comics are not really viable options any more”. He has also sought to use poetry to express the point of view of “people from the margins not properly able to articulate for themselves, or voices that have been lost or taken away”, such as the residents of a Rochdale housing estate in Xanadu (1992) or the murdered teenager Sophie Lancaster in Black Roses (2012). And then there is his nature writing (Hughes’s muddy footprints again), which has seen him take to the hills with his accounts of trekking the Pennine Way (Walking Home, 2012), or physically writing on to the landscape in Stanza Stones (2013). A series of poems on the subject of rainfall, carved into rock faces around Marsden, these stones are “probably the most satisfying” as well as the most “complicated and arduous” of his projects. He is “absolutely determined” that writing about the environment, “the issue of our time”, will be at the heart of his 10-year tenure, with a new award (he’s looking for sponsors) for poets responding to the crisis. He also has more concrete poetry ambitions, with dreams of establishing a national centre, “a place that hosts and houses what I think of as these islands greatest art form”, he says. “So if you know somebody who has got a spare building …” Motion famously grumbled that the laureateship had been “very, very damaging” for his own work. Is Armitage worried about the curse of the poet laureate? “No. I can’t help writing poems. I was at home the other day. I got up in the morning thinking: ‘I’m the poet laureate!’ Two hours later I was writing a poem. I just can’t help it,” he says. “You can only walk around your own house for a few minutes every day thinking ‘I’m the poet laureate!’ You have to go and do something real, which in my case is writing poems.” • Sandettie Light Vessel Automatic by Simon Armitage is published by Faber. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.