Gentle Mark Rylance, that mercurial British actor, has done his bit to haul the ecological record of BP back into the limelight. He stepped away from his formal association with the Royal Shakespeare Company this weekend because of its continued receipt of sponsorship from the global oil business. “I do not wish to be associated with BP any more than I would with an arms dealer, tobacco salesman or anyone who wilfully destroys lives of others alive and unborn. Nor, I believe, would Shakespeare,” he said. Rylance is, like a growing band of outspoken artists, keen to use his fame to call big institutions to account. He is even bold enough to regularly question the assumed identity of Shakespeare himself. Only this month he wrote a piece which argued that fans of the plays should stay open to the idea that they “were actually made by a collaborative effort among artists”, men and women, working together. So Rylance is a brave provocateur, and such people have an impact, whether they are ordinary citizens, like the climate protesters who recently demonstrated at an open-air screening of the Royal Ballet’s Romeo and Juliet, also sponsored by BP; or whether they are well-known artists, like Nan Goldin, whose courageous focus on the murky source of some Sackler family money forced the National Portrait Gallery to refuse its cash in March. It is inspiring – in a way. We would all like to live more purely. And since Rylance brought Shakespeare into it, let’s quote Falstaff, who promised that if he ever did “grow great” he would stop drinking “and live cleanly, as a nobleman should do”. It is fair enough for Rylance to want to live cleanly. But should Britain’s cultural institutions also be expected to be cleaner than the rest of us? The danger is that theatres and orchestras, ballet and opera companies, many already in financial peril, will become the obvious targets, while the population carries on fuelling the gig economy or driving up global heating by buying cheap T-shirts online. Cynics have argued that the true, hidden function of “the arts” has always been as a social marker. From the Medici onwards, the rich have adored the gloss of sophistication offered by association with highbrow creative types. And corporate sponsors love having a flashy entertainment venue for those wealthy clients who don’t enjoy tennis or horse racing. But these days “the arts” are also used as a moral laundry for corporations, and this is what Rylance especially dislikes. Art-washing, to use the current term, only really works if theatres and the wider arts are considered good and worthy. But are they really? Is offering a predominantly white and privileged audience a chance to get together doing society any good at all? What’s more, plenty of acclaimed art has had a questionable influence, from the passive “male gaze” in painting, to the Wagnerian search for an Übermensch and the casual violence of Quentin Tarantino films. Art should not have to be worthy. In fact, being seen as worthy is part of the reason culture is viewed with such suspicion in this country. Politicians avoid being seen at arts events, other than Glastonbury. If it were only the smug clubbiness of the arts world they mistrusted, that would be understandable. But there is a widely held theory that all artists are woolly liberals who should not encouraged. If “the arts” do have moral value it probably resides in the way they can stretch our understanding and, as argued most recently by the former Arts Council England chair Peter Bazalgette, exercise our collective empathy muscles. This is why a decision that six writers took last week to step away from the Bradford literature festival because of anti-terrorism funding is worrying. If we keep stepping away from everything, where will we ever meet? It would certainly be more difficult to boycott BP directly, but it might be better than calling for an end to the RSC’s cheap ticket scheme for young people. Theatre is potentially a good way to bring us together to raise questions. Even Shakespeare, whoever she was, had to dance around the court politics of royal patrons to get those inclusive, questioning plays performed. • Vanessa Thorpe is the Observer’s arts and media correspondent