Food should never just be fuel, but it should at least put something in the tank and keep you properly sated. Salads aren’t the obvious lunch choice if you’ve got, say, a hill to climb in the afternoon, but this soba noodle one is different. It’s fresh, cool and crunchy enough to qualify as a salad, but interwoven with the grace and body of the mighty buckwheat noodle. It is designed with a post-meal adventure in mind. So, noodle power! And power to the noodle salad. I used mixed wholewheat and buckwheat soba noodles (I like Clearspring’s), but if you need gluten-free ones, by all means use 100% buckwheat. If you do so, be sure to rinse them very well in cold water after cooking. Chinkiang vinegar is a black rice vinegar that’s widely available in Asian food stores and online. Prep 15 minCook 25 minServes 2, generously For the dressing10 spring onions, trimmed and finely chopped4cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely grated3 tbsp toasted sesame oil3 tbsp black Chingkiang vinegar4 tbsp light soy sauce1 tbsp brown rice syrup (optional)1 bird’s eye chilli, finely chopped For the noodles200g soba noodles250g Tenderstem broccoli, trimmed200g green beans, tailed1 red onion, peeled and cut into 8 wedges2 tbsp rapeseed oil¼ tsp salt4 tbsp Thai basil and/or mint leaves Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/ gas 7. For the dressing, put all the ingredients in a small saucepan, bring to a boil, then take off the heat and put to one side. Bring a large pan of water to a boil, then cook the noodles according to packet instructions. Drain and rinse under cold water, then leave to one side to drain. Pop the broccoli and beans in a large bowl with the onion wedges. Drizzle over the oil and sprinkle over the salt. Mix with your hands, then tip into a baking tray and roast for 10 minutes (keep the bowl unwashed for later). When the vegetables have cooked, tip them back into the bowl, add the drained noodles and dressing, and toss with your hands. Tear or chop the herbs, toss them through, then serve while the vegetables are still a little warm. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.