When Yoko Ono fled Japan for America in the 1950s, it was a difficult time for her and her mother after the second world war. Though she wasn’t a refugee, she empathizes with migrants being an immigrant herself. “I didn’t have this kind of experience,” Ono tells the Guardian. “But I felt I could have had it, as an Asian, and as a woman who spoke out.” Now, the artist is bringing two artworks to New York as part of the 18th annual River To River Festival, running until 29 June, which is presented by the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council. Ono is showing her sculpture Add Color (Refugee Boat), where she has put a rowing boat in Manhattan’s Seaport district – the same place where the first Europeans arrived at New York harbor. “The Seaport district was once a center for immigrants, merchants, artisans and workers,” said Ono. “The environment was very much like what I experienced with my mother.” Here, the public is provided with canisters of paint to write their thoughts onto the walls, floor and onto the boat of this downtown gallery space. On a recent visit to the exhibit, the white-painted brick walls read phrases like “Protect the persecuted,” while others say, “Tear down the wall” and “Kindness and compassion above all.” According to a 2018 report from the UN Refugee Agency, 70m people have been displaced across the world, the highest number in 70 years. And according to Unicef UK, 365 refugees have died trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea in 2019. Ono claims her relationship to the refugee crisis began as it did for many others – by reading the initial news reports a few years ago. “Just like you probably did, when I saw the boat with many people in it, it hit me, and I clearly heard my heart going, bump, bump, bump!” she said. “But at the same time, I immediately thought it’s a good subject for me as an artist,” said Ono. “I wanted to share that feeling I had in my heart with the audience and invite them to participate.” The New York-based performance artist, musician and writer was a pioneer of conceptual art in the avant-garde art scene of the 1960s. Despite being subjected to decades of misogynistic and racist vilification as the wife of John Lennon (Paul McCartney says she did not break up The Beatles), she finally landed a retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in 2015, made the music charts with her group Yoko Ono and the Plastic Ono Band but remains overlooked. Lennon once called her “the world’s most famous unknown artist”. She fought her way through a male-dominated art world in the 1960s, but has always used her art as a vehicle for peace advocacy and activism, whether it was her bed-in peace protest with Lennon or her Artists Against Fracking project she co-founded with her son Sean Lennon in 2012. Today, she’s full of riddles and rhyme. On her Instagram, she asks: “I think it’s better to dance rather than to march through life, don’t you?” In her almost haiku-like sentences, she is perfect for Twitter. In one tweet, Ono says: “We were very wise when we were young. We are getting a bit doubtful of ourselves now. Don’t be. The child in you will save you.” When asked what she wants to teach people about refugees through this artwork, she keeps her stance as an artist. “I don’t feel like I am a teacher,” said Ono. “When I open my mouth, everything comes out, and that’s a good thing.” Ono thinks we can help refugees by starting with ourselves. “One thing we can do is not call them refugees, they are people,” said Ono. “And there are many things we share, and we should share them.” Ono has always been a consummate collaborator. Her famous 1964 artwork Cut Piece wouldn’t have been possible if visitors didn’t pick up the scissors in the same room as the artist to cut off her garments, which made the piece as chilling and powerful as it was. The same goes for her Wish Tree, where she invited people to write down their personal wishes on small pieces of paper and hang them on a tree inside a museum. Her instructional artworks, like in Painting to See the Skies, from 1961, tells us to “Drill two holes into a canvas, hang it where you can see the sky.” But unless we, as viewers, do this, it remains an idea in our minds. (A collection of her poem-performances can be found in her 1970 book, “Grapefruit: A Book of Instruction and Drawings”). In other words, without our participation, Ono’s artwork wouldn’t be complete, many wouldn’t be finished. When asked why she wanted the audience to write their voices on this boat, she has a reason. “It’s the most fascinating thing to do,” she said. “The scribbles will be picked up by somebody in the end of the world.” She adds: “Please come add your hopes and beliefs to the boat, so that it is created as a reflection of all New York.” Also as part of the festival, Ono is showing The Reflection Project, where a series of posters are pasted around downtown Manhattan, including the Fulton Center, 28 Liberty and The Oculus at Westfield World Trade Center, where passersby can stumble upon her phrases, all written in black and white. It’s meant to slow people down. One reads “Dream,” while another says, “Remember Love.” There’s even a poster that says “Imagine Peace,” which ties into the name of a light sculpture memorial to Lennon she created in Iceland (Lennon’s Imagine album was released in 1971). Many of these are pasted up in high-traffic areas, offering a stark, minimal alternative to the onslaught of advertising. “I can’t wait to see The Reflection Project transform lower Manhattan with my artworks,” said Ono. “I hope they make busy New Yorkers stop rushing through their day to ‘Imagine Peace,’ ‘Remember Love’ and ‘Dream.’” Ono is 86 this year. She unfortunately didn’t make the opening of the exhibition and only agreed to do this interview through email, with questions passed along through an intermediary. After providing answers, she gave an extra “P.S.” at the end of the interview, a sentence that reads like a poem. “Addendum from Yoko,” she writes at the end of the interview. “As I write to you, pigeons are flying over the park. We are sharing this world, and I like that.”