Jon Cruddas’s attempt to defend Jeremy Corbyn’s triangulation over Brexit ducks two key points (Labour can’t afford to lose its working-class heartlands by backing remain, 26 June). 1 Labour chose to abandon its working-class heartland well before the EU referendum. The New Labour project was rooted in the belief that Labour could ditch clause IV, and commit to an anti-working class neoliberal agenda, secure in the fact that, in Peter Mandelson’s words, the working class had “nowhere to go”. The 2015 general election saw the end result of this when Labour suffered what Jon Cruddas then called its “worst defeat since 1918”. By region, Ukip’s biggest gains were in the Labour heartlands of Yorkshire and the north-east, and across the north Ukip averaged 16.9% in Labour-held seats. The EU referendum result could be predicted from the 2015 pattern. Paul Mason’s call, quoted by Cruddas, for Labour to now build around “the globally oriented, educated part of the workforce” is calling for it to do what it already does. 2 Cruddas says, rightly, that “political parties do not just exist to chase votes”. But Labour under Corbyn fails as a political party on any other terms. It is clear from the fact that the Brexit project was engineered by Boris Johnson, Farage, Rees-Mogg et al that it is intended as a post-regulatory anti-worker race to the bottom, but Corbyn’s strategy is built around reading Harold Wilson’s biography to see how Labour fought the battles of 1975. The pervasive myth that, under Corbyn, Labour has been transformed into a reforged social movement runs parallel to the delusion that Corbyn has been vigorously arguing for some putative radical agenda to unite the working class across the Brexit divide. Had Corbyn forcefully highlighted in 2016 the likely impact of Brexit on British industry, on growth, and hence on working-class living standards, we may have then avoided the turmoil of the subsequent years. As it stands, even those of us who support remain have to accept that instead we have been forced into the same position as pro-Europeans faced in France re the 2005 European constitution referendum – telling a disenchanted section of the working class that they will be made to keep voting until they get it right. Some of the blame for this must lie with Corbyn’s passive approach to opposition.Nick MossLondon • As an erstwhile colleague of Jon Cruddas at Warwick University I was pleased to note that his thoughtful article contained far less spin than the offbreaks he used to bowl for the university staff cricket club. However, over and above his analysis of shifting demographics and the tactical need to forge electoral alliances across classes, there is a fundamental political principle that he himself articulates perfectly: “Political parties do not exist just to chase votes. They are traditions built around competing theories of justice and democracy … [which are] at the heart of the party regarding its character and purpose; even existence.” In 1975, like the leader of Cruddas’s party, I tramped the streets (of Coventry) in the campaign to withdraw from what was then the EEC, supposedly in pursuit of the Bennite demand to “regain parliamentary sovereignty” but, probably like Corbyn too, more inspired by the far-left slogan to “Say ‘No’ to the bosses’ Common Market”. But that was then and this is now. And, unlike Corbyn, I can appreciate that, imperfect though it may be, the primary overarching vision of the EU is not economic but political; and that in a world now dominated by nationalists, populists and isolationist anti-democrats in the mould of Trump and Putin, Labour is nothing if not internationalist. As the deputy leader of the Labour party to his great credit continues to insist, Labour’s core “values are as the party of remain”.Professor Rob BurnsProfessor emeritus of German studies, University of Warwick • Jon Cruddas is correct to recognise the “role work plays in our lives”. But his article fails to acknowledge the conditions in which a great deal of paid work now takes place (zero-hours contracts, low pay) and the existence of work that is not paid – notably the work of care. This harking back to a view of work that is essentially derived from ideas about a male, manual working class (even as that had anachronistic features at its time) ties Labour into a validation of a world that is as much a fantasy as those of Brexit and Farage. Cruddas is right to reject what he describes as ideas about “networked youth” but wrong in assuming that the politics and the very culture of class that he validates should be the basis for progressive politics. Resistance to the current insecurities of paid work, the ongoing refusal to see unpaid care as work and the denial of material support to the vulnerable are part, with forceful policies to prevent environmental degradation, of the building blocks for policies of socially equitable politics. It is these realities – as well as the impact of more tolerant social values – that Labour needs to confront and assert, rather than its current Faustian pact with those noxious and reactionary policies that are drawn from that same deep well of nostalgia, dreams of imperial power and entitlement.Mary EvansPatrixbourne, Kent • John Cruddas’s article was thoughtful but didn’t really convince. Working-class voters are indeed a declining element of our politics and have been for decades – I tend to agree with Paul Mason that to survive the party has to reach out to our growing support in the big cities. Blair revitalised Labour when he reached out to middle-class voters and won three elections. To assume Labour leave voters – and they were only about a third of Labour supporters who voted that way in 2016 – will opt for Farage in a new election is debatable. It overlooks the fact that working-class voters don’t necessarily see Brexit as their most important issue: surely Labour’s policies on social and economic matters will serve as a decisive counter attraction? Supporting remain wholeheartedly offers much more relative political benefits.Bill JonesBeverley, East Riding of Yorkshire • Here are a couple of simple ideas for Jon Cruddas and all who aspire to govern. Work out what policies you think will be best for the country and its people, not what is best for the Labour or Conservative parties or your own career. Explain why you think these policies would be best. Ask the people to vote for you so you can implement those policies.Dr Brian O’CallaghanSonning, Berkshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition