Ashleigh Barty will become the first Australian in 43 years to reach the top of the WTA singles ranking after she won the Birmingham Classic grass court title on Sunday. The 23-year-old beat Germany’s Julia Görges 6-3, 7-5 in the final, meaning when the new WTA rankings are released on Monday she will knock Japan’s Naomi Osaka off the summit. Barty, the French Open champion, actually gave up tennis in late 2014 and played Big Bash cricket for Brisbane Heat before returning to the sport in 2016. The last Australian woman to reach the No 1 ranking was Evonne Goolagong in 1976, although it only came to light 31 years later after the discovery of an error in the records. “I’m a little bit speechless at the moment,” Barty said during the on-court trophy presentation after extending her winning streak to 12 matches. “It’s been a whirlwind few weeks for me, a whirlwind year, but to be able to follow in the footsteps of Evonne, even to be mentioned in the same sentence as her is incredible. “What she’s done for our sport, for Australians all around the world, she’s put us on the map and what she’s done for indigenous Australians as well has just been remarkable. You always dream of it [being world No 1] as a little kid but for it to become a reality is incredible. It’s not something that was even in my realm, this year we were aiming for top 10 and now to be where we are is a testament to all of the people around me. “We started from scratch three and a half years ago without a ranking and now to be where we are is not only for me, but a massive, massive achievement for them.” Addressing final opponent Görges, Barty added: “It’s just been the most incredible journey for myself and my team and Jules, I couldn’t think of a better person to share the court with. We’ve had an incredible week in singles and doubles, you’re one of my best friends on tour and have always been there for me since I was a little tucker running around annoying everybody.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Görges added: “She served an ace when I had set point so I think that says it all. It was a high-quality match and she deserved to win. I did everything I could today but she was better. I’m very happy this week got seven matches which is what I wanted.” Meanwhile Roger Federer warmed up for next month’s Wimbledon championships by swatting aside David Goffin 7-6 (2), 6-1 to win the Halle Open title for the 10th time on Sunday. The world No 3 fired seven aces and broke Goffin’s serve three times to see off his Belgian opponent in 83 minutes for a 102nd tour-level title and one that moved him to within seven of Jimmy Connors’ record. It was also the 19th tour-level title on grass for the 37-year-old, who will be among the top contenders at Wimbledon as he looks to increase his grand slam haul of 20. “It’s unbelievable. I never thought when I first played here that I would win 10 titles,” Federer said.