A couple pose for their pre-wedding photos on a street in Beijing Chinese couples used to be satisfied with a single black and white photograph taken on their wedding as a memento of their special day. But times have changed dramatically, and the wedding photographs, especially pre-wedding photo sessions, have become big business in China. A couple pose at the 27 Rome Brand photo studio The busy streets of Wuhan (left) and Beijing are backdrops to photos In the main touristic spots in different cities across China, it is easy to see couples having their pre-wedding photoshoots, which become the must-have for every Chinese couple before their marriage. Unlike western weddings, where couples usually have their photos taken on their wedding day, for Chinese people it is quite popular to have their day-long photo sessions way before their actual weddings. Sometimes it can be half a year or even a year in advance of the ceremony. Fantastic, artificial studio settings are popular A couple pose in a studio recreation of Cambodia’s Angkor Wat (left), and a jungle (right), both at 27 Rome Brand Photos on the Bund in Shanghai Some couples even choose other countries for their pre-wedding sessions. Often for their photoshoots couples go for traditionally romantic cities such as Paris. Pre-wedding photos in front of a replica of the Eiffel Tower, at World Park in Beijing Those who can’t afford such a trip to have pre-wedding photos with the Eiffel Tower can have their photo taken in front of Chinese replicas of the main world’s tourist sites. Other couples prefer more traditional outdoor locations, like Beijing’s Hutong neighbourhood, or to be surrounded by nature like in Dali, where lots of couples do their pre-wedding photography next to Lake Erhai. A Chinese couple pose next to Lake Erhai in Dali, Yunnan province The Yellow Sea in Qingdao serves as a backdrop for happy couples A night-time shoot on the beach at Gulangyu Island, in Xiamen These sessions can range in price from a few hundred up to thousands of dollars, with companies providing clients with everything from outfits to makeup and transportation. Brides typically have at least three dress changes per shoot. Inspired by the traditional western style, many choose a flowing white wedding dress, a Chinese-style red gown, and something more modern. A weary assistant holds a light reflector 27 Rome Brand (top left, right and above) offers a variety of sets The shoots are just one part of a booming industry in China. A wedding for most newly married couples can run from 50,000 yuan (£5,700) to 200,000 yuan, with larger amounts not uncommon in big cities like Beijing or Shanghai. China’s wedding industry was valued at 1.46tn yuan in 2017, and it is expected to grow to 3tn yuan by 2021. A studio chair awaits the next bride