Israel Folau has hit out at the decision to shut down his crowdfunding page – which was intended to cover the costs of his legal challenge against Rugby Australia – saying it is evidence of a mounting campaign of discrimination against him and that his website has faced cyber-attacks. Folau’s fundraising page for his court action has been removed for breaching GoFundMe’s terms of service, the digital fundraising platform said, with all donors to be refunded. A spokesman for Folau characterised GoFundMe’s decision to take down his fundraising campaign as “very disappointing”. “Unfortunately, GoFundMe has buckled to demands against the freedom of Australians to donate to his cause,” a spokesman said. “There appears to be a continuing campaign of discrimination against Israel and his supporters.” The rugby star had collected more than $750,000 as of Sunday night as he sought donations from the public for his legal fight, with a $3m target. “Thankfully, several organisations have already expressed interest in supporting Israel’s efforts to raise money for his ongoing legal case,” a spokesman said. Folau had his $4m employment contract terminated in May after he made social media posts saying “hell awaits” homosexuals, which were deemed in breach of its code of conduct, and after previous warnings from Rugby Australia not to denigrate people on the basis of their sexuality. The player announced he would challenge the decision in court and set up a GoFundMe account asking for donations to “stand up for the word of God”. His spokesman said the former Wallaby was grateful to the 10,000 plus people who had believed in good faith their donations would aid his case. He said Folau’s website had come under “sustained cyber-attack” and there had been a “deliberate attempt to vilify his wife Maria for supporting her husband”. “While Israel does not intend to respond in detail at this time regarding the accusations thrown at him or his family he wants it known that these attacks have hardened his resolve,” the spokesman said. GoFundMe Australia removed the crowdfunding page on Monday. “As a company, we are absolutely committed to the fight for equality for LGBTIQ+ people and fostering an environment of inclusivity,” its manager, Nicola Britton, said. Rugby Australia’s chief executive, Raelene Castle, said: “From our perspective [GoFundMe] is a place where sick children get support, so it’s certainly not a strategy we think is appropriate.” The controversy has also extended to Folau’s wife, Maria, who plays netball for the Adelaide Thunderbirds. She reposted her husband’s GoFundMeCampaign on social media. “While Netball SA in no way endorses the reposting, we do not believe Maria has contravened our social media policy,” Netball South Australia’s chief executive, Bronwyn Klei said in a statement. “Maria is a key member of the Thunderbirds. Not only has she provided great strength and leadership on court, she attends and works with netballing clinics, spends a lot of time with fans, engages with local communities and passionately encourages young kids with their netball dreams. We continue to support her as we support all our players.” Klei clarified her organisation does not endorse the repost and is committed to diversity and inclusion. Netball great Liz Ellis was furious with the code’s response. “As much as I love watching ⁦Maria Folau play netball I do not want my sport endorsing the views of her husband,” Ellis tweeted.