I apply for an Indian tourist visa after going online and googling “India tourist visa”. I have travelled to India before – and unfortunately was robbed on my first day (during a street food tour in Old Delhi) after I gave my wallet to a friend to put in his backpack for safekeeping. While sampling samosas, his backpack was slashed with a knife and my wallet taken. This visit will be different. I am determined not to be robbed again! On Monday, applying for a tourist visa, I become bored with the amount of questions on the form. Mother’s maiden name? Her date of birth? My bank account details? Four photos of me? A scan of my passport? My last trip to India? Where did I go? (“Delhi,” I answer somewhat sourly). The fee for the visa is almost $300. That’s weird, I think. It should be US$80. I don’t think much more of it, until Wednesday morning in London, when I can’t access my online banking. Calling my bank in Australia, I am put through to the fraud team. “We think your account was accessed without authorisation,” they tell me. Using my details from the fake Indian visa website, someone has made a copy of my bank card and attached it to their phone. The previous night they have gone on a spending spree around Melbourne. They have hit up Puma, a Caltex and a 7-Eleven. Could it have been me, they ask? “Last night I was in Chelsea having dinner with Bob Geldof,” I reply indignantly. “Sir Bob Geldof. I mean he was at the next table, he wasn’t actually with me, but yeah, he was NEAR me … I was having dinner near Bob Geldof on the other side of the world, not at Caltex.” To stop the fraud, the bank tell me they have to block my card, which puts me in a tough position. I’m overseas and about to go travelling. Another card won’t reach me in time – yet I only have £15 in my wallet. The fraud person at my bank agrees to unblock my card briefly so I can get some cash out, “but only for 30 minutes. By 7pm Australia time we’ll put the block back on it permanently.” “You’re lifting the block now?” “Yes, now, for 30 minutes.” “But I’m still in my pyjamas!” I chuck on some clothes and run down to Tottenham Court Road like a contestant on Supermarket Sweep. It’s horrible. Back out on street. Remember coffee ordered. Run back, get it. Coffee cold. Order another while I still have my card I race into a coffee shop. “FLAT WHITE TO GO. I come back.” Finding the nearest cash machine, I take out the maximum amount of money but it’s still nowhere near enough for two weeks’ travelling. Shove cash wad in wallet but it doesn’t fit and bulges out precariously. Race across the road, narrowly miss getting hit by doubledecker bus. I need shoes and sunglasses. Must buy before card expires. Run to Primark. Shop too large and confusing. People walk slowly, staring at their phones. Thought this was supposed to be fast fashion. Pick up random ugly shoes and sunglasses and do not try them on. No time! Back out on street. Remember coffee ordered. Run back, get it. Coffee cold. Order another while I still have my card. Run out on to road with a coffee in each hand. I need to get presents for my London hosts. Run to a flower stand. “You take card?” “Yes.” “Give me some of those and some of those! I pay now!!!” Drink both coffees (one too hot, the other one cold) while flowers wrapped and start shaking with caffeine and stress. Ten minutes left! Run to book store, yank a greeting card off the shelf for hosts. It could say anything. I have no time to check. Six minutes left. Too many bags now, and my cash falling from wallet. Knock over a stack of books with my oversized stems of flowers. Why did he give me giant flowers? Looking for presents for hosts. Books. Too many! Coffee jitters! Grab something with a yellow cover by author I have never heard of, blurbed by other authors l have never heard of. This will have to do! I will read it on the plane. Person on till has sleepy voice. Says: “The till’s just waking up, it’s a bit slow today.” I scream but hold it in. He asks me how my day is going “so far”. “So far, so bad!” Buy book and card, leave store, remember I need to get presents for hosts. Have only bought present for self and giant flowers. Two minutes. I grab two random books from shelf. Something about the financial crisis? Something about female friendship? Race to till that’s still waking up. German woman gets in before me. No!!! I have 90 seconds. She’s not even buying anything. She wants … she wants … WTF does she want? A book? Yes! On “walking”! FFS, narrow it down!! I’m almost standing on top of her, dribbling with stress. I have a minute to buy my hosts these random presents before my money is cut off!!! She’s trying to explain the book. But she’s doing it wrong! Instead of naming the author, she’s slowly describing to the clerk the book’s dimensions. She draws a book in the air with her fingers. “It’s this size.” “It’s the size of a book!” I yell out. The clerk sends her to the back of the shop. I throw down my books. “Scan now or it may not work.” It’s almost 7pm in Australia. I wave my card over the machine. “Arrgh, work! Please!” We wait as the hour ticks over. “Approved.” • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnist