Who trusts Boris Johnson? Not, apparently, his team. The paradox of the race to lead the Conservative party, and therefore Britain, is that those convinced that Mr Johnson is an irresistible, unstoppable electoral force at the same time appear terrified that he may encounter meaningful scrutiny. His conversations in Westminster are reportedly shadowed by an MP acting as minder. The televised debates to which he has agreed will take place only after members have received their ballot papers: “If you want the job, you have to turn up for the interviews,” goaded Jeremy Hunt, adding later that his rival “needs to show he can answer difficult questions”. Perhaps Mr Johnson will formulate answers soon. But at the hustings in Birmingham he was evasive when pressed repeatedly about why police were called in the early hours of Friday to the flat he shares with his partner Carrie Symonds. The man who says the public want straight-talking politicians tried to dismiss and then dodge the question, with a long digression about Routemaster buses and other defensive, rambling evasions. Contrary to some of this weekend’s commentary, what happens behind closed doors should not always stay there. When a woman screams at her partner to “get off me” and “get out of my flat”, calling the police is a responsible thing to do. The neighbour who did so says he was frightened and concerned for those involved; another neighbour also considered dialling 999. When police say no offences or concerns are apparent and no further action is needed, as on this occasion, the matter would in normal circumstances end there. But running for prime minister is not, by definition, a normal circumstance. Mr Johnson’s personality has always been both a political strength and weakness: for all his popularity, doubts over his temperament and judgment have long dogged him. Those questions are rightly becoming more pointed as he approaches No 10. One answer, from his former editor Max Hastings, is that “I’m not sure he’s capable of caring for any human being other than himself.” His record in office, too, is one of carelessness and self-promotion. As mayor, he was careless with public money, backing the doomed garden bridge which cost taxpayers £43m. As foreign secretary, he was careless with Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s fate; Iran used his remarks to haul her back to court. Again and again – as a journalist, MP and Brexit’s cheerleader – he was and seems utterly careless about the truth, appearing committed only to whatever advances his prospects. Tory members, and voters generally, may have priced his character in. Previous trespasses have been forgiven. Yet in polls before and after the Guardian broke news of the incident, his lead as the man judged best to be prime minister by voters slid from 27 points to 11. His eight-point lead over Mr Hunt among all voters became a three-point deficit. What some find amusing in an MP or mayor, and tolerable in a foreign secretary, may look less funny in a potential PM. Mr Johnson’s political success has rested on his persona of plain-speaking affability and charm, and latterly his hard-Brexit credentials. Under the lens, even the latter are looking fuzzier, as he tells MPs of various persuasions what they want to hear. The Tory membership will decide whether Mr Johnson reaches Downing Street. Their judgment is not a representative one and may not be a good one, but should be an informed one. The public, denied the right to choose our leader, have at least a right to know who is being imposed upon us. Scrutiny is not only appropriate. It is necessary.