The tournament is being hosted by a European nation, France, for only the third time. The host cities reflect the cultural and geographical diversity of their country. Montpellier and Rennes are cities ensconced in Medieval history, Grenoble is set against a mighty Alpine backdrop, and Nice is the flashy but beautiful hub of the Côte d’Azur. Lyon is one of the gastronomic capitals of Europe, so one imagines the steak-and-ale pies at the Stade de Lyon (capacity 57,900) are top notch. Paris is Paris, and will hold a ‘Fan Experience’ in the admittedly stunning Forum des Halles shopping centre that Fifa is optimistically describing as “unmissable”. It all kicks off on Friday, when the hosts take on South Korea. Kick-off is 8pm UK time. The tournament runs for a month, concluding with a lazy Sunday afternoon final in Lyon on 7 July. There are 24 teams, split across six groups of four. There are nine from Europe, four from Asia, three each from Africa, South America and collectively from North America and the Caribbean, and two from Oceania. Qualification started in April 2017 and ended in December 2018, via a mix of groups, tournament performance and play-offs. The top two teams in each of the six groups automatically qualify for the last 16. The third-placed teams are then ranked in a mini-league, with the top four also progressing. It’s a straight knockout from there. The USA generally remain favourites to retain the title they won for a third time in Canada in 2015. They have the most experienced and recognisable squad, and a tradition of winning. A shaky couple of years including a poor showing at the Rio Olympics in 2016 and the departure of a couple of key players mean it’s up for grabs though. Japan have reached the past two finals but look less likely to compete this time out. French club football is the pinnacle of Europe, and much of the France team play for the continental champions Lyon. Anything less than a semi-final would surely represent disappointment for them. Netherlands have a couple of stand-out players and won the last European Championship, and Germany are always strong, which brings us nicely on to ... Pretty good, actually. Ranked third in the world by Fifa, they could reasonably claim to be the best of the rest after the USA, whom they finished ahead of to win the SheBelieves Cup in March. Phil Neville didn’t always impress during his fledgling media career but has done an impressive job in trying circumstances as England’s manager, fostering a strong team spirit. All of England’s players are professionals, which isn’t true for most countries competing. England finished third at the last World Cup, and stars of that tournament such as Lucy Bronze, Karen Carney and Fran Kirby remain mainstays in the side. SkyBet has France very slight favourites at 10-3, ahead of USA at 7-2. Germany and England make up the rest of the top four, at 11-2 and 6-1 respectively. Cameroon, Jamaica and Thailand are least likely to win, at 500-1. The Netherlands boast Vivianne Miedema, arguably the best striker in the world, and Lieke Martens, a skilful midfielder who lit up the 2017 Euros. Carli Lloyd grabbed a 13-minute hat-trick in the 2015 final, but Alex Morgan has been USA’s talisman for the past couple of years. Sam Kerr is Australia’s captain fantastic. The Ballon d’Or winner Ada Hegerberg will not be playing because of a protest against the Norwegian FA. No eye-watering television subscriptions are required in the UK, with the BBC retaining exclusive broadcasting rights. BBC One is showing a good number of evening games, and the rest are on BBC Two, BBC Four and the Red Button. In the US the tournament is being televised on Fox Sports. SBS is showing every Matildas game on free-to-air TV in Australia. And of course, wherever you are, don’t miss the Guardian’s minute-by-minute coverage online at theguardian.com. England begin their campaign with a delicious clash against Scotland on Sunday. The game kicks off at 5pm, and will be live on BBC One. Assuming France and USA top their groups and win their last-16 ties, they will have a tantalising quarter-final showdown on Friday 28 June (8pm kick-off).