Geography, history and comedy. Those were Michael Palin’s favourite subjects – broadly defined – at school, and they’re the threads connecting what might otherwise look like a crazily paved career. That’s the argument, tenuous at times, of this solo show, in which the ex-Python delivers a fascinating precis of his 2018 naval history book, Erebus, and a whistle-stop tour of the preceding six decades of his professional life. It is as entertaining an evening as you’d expect from telly’s Mr Congeniality, although the seriousness of the history lecture might surprise those who stumped up without reading the small print. Palin spends on hour tracing the journeys of HMS Erebus to Antarctica and back, then on its doomed mission to navigate the Northwest Passage. There are slides – maps, daguerreotypes of the protagonists, snaps of Palin’s travels – and touching quotes from sailors’ letters home. His book is available “at all good bookshops,” says Palin – though one might doubt, come the interval, whether there’s much about Erebus left to learn. The second half recounts Palin’s prior career, from boarding school to Oxford to having petals strewn at his feet by film and TV’s powers that be. I exaggerate, but only slightly. His has been a gilded life, a fact sportingly acknowledged with reference to a spoof award he once received from Private Eye. We’re led from Goon Show fandom via university friendship with Terry Jones to his writing break on The Frost Report. Then comes Monty Python: he reads out a prim list of cuts to Holy Grail proposed by the censor, and scenes that never made Life of Brian’s final script. Save a brief update on Jones’ health (he was diagnosed with dementia in 2015), there are few insights, intimacies or gossip. There’s barely time: an hour on stage can’t do justice to a 55-year career. Certainly, the inner Michael – assuming there is one beneath the courtly and affable veneer – remains as obscure as the wreck of the Erebus these last 150 years. But if the show only skims the surface, this compendium of clips, anecdotes – and a closing Lumberjack Song singalong – is delivered with characteristic humour and good grace. • At the Cambridge Corn Exchange on 9 June. Then touring until 7 July.