The Lionesses’ showpiece World Cup send-off finished with more of a whimper than a roar after Sarah Gregorius’s second-half strike for New Zealand spoiled the party in Brighton. Phil Neville’s side were made to pay for a possession-laden, slick-passing performance that was lacking any kind of cutting edge. Worryingly, this was closer to the forward line the manager would likely start against Scotland on 9 June in Nice. But he was handed a performance that will give him serious selection food for thought. With Jade Moore, Rachel Daly, Demi Stokes and Mary Earps all rested, protecting niggles, Ellie Roebuck and Hannah Blundell, not part of his 23-woman squad for France, made the bench. Meanwhile the usual starters Millie Bright, Jill Scott and Karen Bardsley dropped to the bench. England ground out a 2-0 win against Denmark last weekend after a not altogether convincing performance; at the Amex they had the reverse problem. New Zealand could only fleetingly escape their own half, while England’s crisp passing and high press was a world away from their battle against the Danes. Yet on the south coast they could not make a wealth of possession and chances in the first half count. In the third minute Lucy Bronze raced clear on the right and clipped a ball over the top, just ahead of an incoming Jodie Taylor. It was a sign of things to come. With England’s best play coming through the right-hand side, New Zealand got out the tent pegs and set up camp. Two minutes later Fran Kirby chased down a ball back to New Zealand’s Erin Nayler, the goalkeeper was slow off her line but recovered just enough to blast the ball away from the feet of the Chelsea forward and away for a throw-in. With less than 10 minutes gone England were through again. Taylor tried to dance round Nayler but the keeper clattered into her shins and she fell to the ground. Replays showed it should have been a penalty but, surprisingly, there were no appeals. Taylor then turned provider, releasing Toni Duggan on the left who managed to cut back from the byline but no one was there for the tap-in with Nayler floundering. With Taylor being heavily marked, she slipped a pass to Kirby but enough bodies got back to block her shot. Neville cut a frustrated figure on the edge of his technical area, with Bronze, the closest player to him, bearing the brunt of his barked ordered to stay high: “Lucy stay there, stay there” and “higher, higher, I want you higher!” he urged. In a rare New Zealand break, Bronze drove back and dispossessed a white shirt, pushing the ball to Keira Walsh. The Manchester City midfielder played a perfectly weighted pass over the top to Lucy Staniforth on the right but she could only force a corner. Duggan and Nikita Parris were uncharacteristically quiet, although the latter burst into life on 36 minutes, switching feet quickly on the edge of the box before firing over the bar and clapping her hands in frustration. With almost comical defending keeping the Lionesses out, their lack of any cutting edge was even more pronounced. A short corner from Kirby found Alex Greenwood who swung a ball in, it deflected off a defender to the feet of Parris, who again whipped one in but the ball was hesitantly cleared. With the first half ticking to a close it was England’s turn for some chaotic defending at the back during New Zealand’s first convincing attack. With red shirts blocking three shots, not all intentionally and the first winding Steph Houghton, Carly Telford was forced to pull off an acrobatic save to keep out a Betsy Hassett strike. Five minutes after the restart and England’s profligacy was punished and then some. Rosie White collected Greenwood’s clearance and her shot was parried by Telford into the path of Gregorius who fired in the rebound. With Duggan replaced by Chelsea’s Karen Carney England immediately looked to reply. The winger threaded a pass to Kirby who put in a cross which was deflected behind. Moments later Carney tried again, working her way to the edge of the box before squaring to Walsh whose shot was comfortably saved by Nayler. On 67 minutes domestic teammates Carney and Kirby combined again to great effect. The latter flicked a wonderful pass over the top to the near post but Carney’s shot was saved by a buoyed Nayler. A chipped ball from Carney on to the head of Jill Scott, on for Staniforth, could only be put down and wide by the midfielder. The Lionesses searched desperately for a morale-boosting reply but instead a World Cup warning was fired by the team ranked 19th in the world. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.