An MI5 review after the London Bridge attack said its investigation into the ringleader, Khuram Butt, which failed to uncover the atrocity he was planning, was “well and effectively run”, an inquest has heard. Butt launched the attack with two other terrorists in June 2017, killing eight people and injuring 48, while he was under active investigation by the security service and police. Since 2015, he had been under investigation by MI5 operatives, who believed he may be planning a terrorist attack. On Wednesday, the inquests into the eight victims heard from a senior MI5 chief known only as witness L. The investigation into Butt was twice suspended – in February 2016 and March 2017 – because of the need to move experienced investigators and analysts to higher-priority investigations, witness L said. L, giving evidence from behind a green curtain, was asked by Jonathan Hough QC, the counsel to the inquests, about the conclusions of a post-attack review by MI5. L replied: “The post-attack review took the view that the investigation into Khuram Butt had been well and effectively run.” The security chief also said the temporary halts to actively investigating Butt, the last of which occurred weeks before the attack, were justified. “It took the view that both of the suspensions were logical and proportionate in the circumstances,” L said. L said “refinements” to the way in which MI5 investigates terrorist suspects introduced after June 2017 would not have made a difference had they been in place at the time. The inquest had already heard a claim from a barrister for the bereaved families that MI5 missed “opportunities galore” to halt the London Bridge attack. L told the inquest, sitting at the Old Bailey in London, that MI5 assessed Butt as posing a “medium risk” of staging an attack on his own, and that while he aspired to commit violence, he was thought to have “weak” capability. L said of Butt’s danger: “So it was certainly aspirational. The point made earlier about if capability equates to getting a vehicle or getting a knife, clearly he could have done those things.” But MI5 also assessed that Butt, whom they knew from “extensive” surveillance associated with the extremist preacher Anjem Choudary and who was accessing extremist materials, posed “no risk” of being a “spontaneous violent extremist”. L explained what MI5 meant by a spontaneous violent extremist: “They may mount an attack with very little planning or preparation and with very little evidence that there’s a particular trigger to induce them to mount an attack.” Such judgments were “an art rather than a science”, L said. On 3 June 2017, the day of the attack, Butt rented a van after he had tried and failed to hire a 7.5-tonne lorry. Hours later, the attack started. L also denied any information was kept back from counter-terrorism police and their investigation into Butt. He said a call to the anti-terrorism hotline in September 2015 from Butt’s brother-in-law, warning of increasing extremist behaviour, was not passed to MI5. L described it as “unfortunate”, but said it would have made “no difference” to MI5’s assessment that Butt was an extremist. L said they were aware Butt may possibly have wanted to travel to Syria, where Islamic State held territory, and had put in measures to stop him if he had ever tried. Butt was joined in the attack by Rachid Redouane and Youssef Zaghba. At the time, they all lived in east London. They first ploughed into pedestrians on London Bridge in a van, then ran through Borough Market stabbing people with pink ceramic knives bought from a Lidl supermarket. The assault, which lasted for 10 minutes, only ended when the three attackers charged at armed police officers, who shot them down. Butt is believed to be the first person to have killed on British soil while under active investigation by MI5 and counter-terrorism police. He was an acolyte of Choudary, a long-term target of counter-terrorism investigators who was eventually jailed for urging support of Isis. By 2017, Butt worked at the Ummah fitness centre in east London, where he regularly associated with the other two terrorists before the attack. Those killed by Butt and his accomplices were Chrissy Archibald, 30, from Canada; Sébastien Bélanger, 36, a chef; Kirsty Boden, 28, a nurse from Australia; Ignacio Echeverría Miralles de Imperial, 39, a Spanish national; James McMullan, 32, who was from Brent, north-west London; Alexandre Pigeard, 26, a French restaurant worker; Xavier Thomas, 45, a French national; and Sara Zelenak, 21, an Australian national. The London Bridge attack was one of four terrorist atrocities in the UK between March and June 2017. A review of the attacks for the government by the barrister David Anderson QC said: “The unpalatable lesson of London Bridge is that even priority subjects of interest in respect of whom sound decisions are being made … may retain the ability to conceal their attack planning from the authorities.” The inquest, which is testing those conclusions, continues.