I found it frustrating, writing about Oisin Murphy’s failed breath test on Sunday, that I was unable to report the amount of alcohol recorded by his test. To me, this would seem essential context which in most cases would show that the jockey concerned had very little alcohol in his system at the time. After all, the threshold for a positive test from a jockey is low, at 17 micrograms per 100ml of breath, compared to 35mg for drivers. Racing is a risk sport and it’s right that we should apply such low levels, because we don’t want jockeys to be taking risks with their degree of alertness. But my personal view is that a jockey with 17mg of alcohol in his system has done very little wrong and this is reflected in the sentencing of disciplinary panels; I know of three jockeys who got mere cautions last year after failing breath tests. The British Horseracing Authority refuses to disclose the alcohol reading when a jockey fails a breath test. They take the view that the fact of the failed test is the only thing they can disclose; everything else is part of the evidence-gathering process to be discussed and possibly argued over at the eventual disciplinary hearing in two, three or four weeks’ time. They make the point that the jockey might want to argue that the reading was wrong for some reason and there is some precedent for that. I’ve suggested to the BHA that jockeys who fail a breath test be asked if they consent to the test reading being published. In most cases, the reading is going to provide substantial mitigation. Since yesterday, my Twitter mentions have been full of people arguing over how serious Oisin Murphy’s offence might be; the sport should be quelling that kind of speculation with facts, if facts are available. There’s still some 2-1 available about today’s nap, Tricky Dicky (2.45) trying to win a sprint handicap at Catterick under a penalty. He went through a fallow spell before leaving his previous yard and did not win on turf from 2016 until May. Roger Fell has since got him to win at Thirsk and Pontefract and their successful tour of Yorkshire tracks may continue today. Even on this mark of 70, Tricky Dicky is 5lb below the peak rating he had two years ago. An hour later, I’ll give one more chance to John Clare (3.45), who put up such an encouraging return at Leicester in April but then regressed when well held in third as the favourite at Yarmouth 18 days ago. He met fast ground both times but may be more comfortable on the spongier surface he will meet here, having won a nursery on good to soft in late October. Pam Sly continues in form and Conor McGovern is a useful claimer. Ben Sanderson is one of the more experienced apprentices taking part in Catterick’s closer and he may be able to make the most of Rockley Point (5.15), a 4-1 shot. One of two course and distance winners in the field, he’s back down to his last winning mark and ran with some promise last time. Pick of the Carlisle card could be Dream House (3.00), a promising fifth on his handicap debut recently despite stepping down to five furlongs and being weak in the market. He’s back up to six furlongs today and Tim Easterby is getting plenty of winners, though I detect no great support as yet for this one, an 8-1 shot. We’ll be running our usual tipping competitions on each day of Royal Ascot, Tuesday to Friday this week. Ladbrokes Coral are offering a £50 bet to our winner each day, so do join us tomorrow when the great race-meeting begins. Carlisle2.00 Space Ace 2.30 Diamond Shower 3.00 Dream House (nb) 3.30 Chinese Spirit 4.00 Praxidice 4.30 Rosin Box 5.00 Matewan 5.30 Brutalab Catterick2.15 Miss Lucy 2.45 Tricky Dicky (nap) 3.15 Grand Inquisitor 3.45 John Clare 4.15 Champagne Marengo 4.45 Morning Duel 5.15 Rockley Point Windsor5.40 Kaylen’s Mischief 6.10 Passing Nod 6.40 Raahy 7.10 Grapevine 7.40 Danzan 8.10 Hamish 8.40 Oydis Nottingham5.50 Bredenbury 6.20 Lady Calcaria 6.50 Hawaam 7.20 Tangramm 7.50 Chance Of Glory 8.20 Fitzrovia 8.50 Battle Of Issus