Two years ago the United Nations released the findings of a secret inquiry into state-level violations of the human rights of disabled people. Its conclusion was that a “human catastrophe” was under way. In every sphere, including employment, housing, education and social security, disabled people are hugely disadvantaged. Shamefully, that country is Britain. In Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled People, Frances Ryan, a fine journalist, broadcaster and campaigner for disability rights, robustly stacks up the evidence that ought to put politicians – especially chancellors – in the dock. There, they could be tried and found guilty of the destruction of the rights, dignity, independence and mental health of too many of Britain’s 14 million disabled citizens. Ryan argues cogently that in order to distract from the extent of the impact of these inhuman measures, to reduce the allegedly “bloated welfare bill”, disabled people have been demonised as “not really disabled”. Meanwhile, the welfare state has become an instrument of punishment. The Centre for Welfare Reform calculated in 2013 that disabled people have endured nine times the average burden of austerity cuts. The figure rises to 19 times for the most severely disabled. Last year, 4 million disabled people were living below the breadline. The gains in the 1990s, such as the Disability Living Allowance, which covered the extra cost of care and mobility needs, have been replaced by brutal changes to benefits, including the bedroom tax, universal credit and the notorious “fit for work” tests. In 2013-14, Ryan reports, sanctions against disabled people and the chronically ill rose 580%. Last year, 70% of disabled people judged “fit for work” successfully overturned that decision on appeal. Something is wrong. In example after example, Ryan illustrates how wrong. Rachel, 44, in a wheelchair, suffers from fibromyalgia, Crohn’s disease and lupus. All her social care has been axed (between 2010-17, £6bn was cut from adult social care). For five days a week she can’t shower, get dressed or cook. She has malnutrition. Peter, 31, has cerebral palsy and scoliosis. For eight years he lived in his own flat and had carers 12 hours a day. That support has gone. Now, he lives in an older persons’ care home. Robert, 34, has been trapped in an attic flat with no lift for six years. He is paralysed and has severe vitamin D deficiency from the lack of sunlight. Vindictive? Carla, 27, has autism and multiple mental health problems, as well as scoliosis. Her daughter Harmony, 6, has ADHD, epilepsy and a learning disorder. Carla has repeatedly asked for support. But as Ryan writes, “disabled women are not supported with their needs and then blamed for not parenting properly”. The fear is that children will be taken into care. By 2021, people like Carla will have lost a third of their already meagre income because of a decade of cuts. Crippled is an admirably comprehensive charge sheet of the scale of state abuse. “I’m treading water – or at least delaying my drowning,” one woman says. Austerity has been a political choice, Ryan says. Since 2010, social security benefits will have been cut by £35bn a year by the early 2020s. Tax cuts will cost the Treasury £47bn per year by 2021-2; lucky rich. She calls for a new kind of “solidarity politics”. Disabled people are entitled to better lives in a more humane, compassionate society than that which we currently have. As Ryan says: “How things are – is not how they need to be.” • Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled People by Frances Ryan is published by Verso (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99