Watching the five-part documentary series Thatcher: A Very British Revolution (BBC Two), marking 40 years since the UK’s first female prime minister came to power, I realised how little I heard her speak at the time. My dad worked in the arts and my mum was an NHS doctor in a fairly deprived area of south-east London and it is safe to say they were not fans. Whenever she appeared on our TV screens or those strange, effortfully strangulated tones started emanating from the radio, my parents would throw themselves at the off-switch, determined not to let her pollute our home, even if there was little they could do – apart from send money to the miners and vote against her at every opportunity – to stop her poisoning every aspect of life outside. But for the past five weeks, we have been given a leisured, measured portrait of the woman in what seemed at least like her entirety, put together with a light editorial hand that did away with spoonfeeding and placed a pleasing amount of faith in the viewer’s understanding of those crazy 80s days. It began by sketching her pre-election ascendancy and went on through contemporaneous footage of her greatest hits interleaved with commentary from some of the surviving greatest sh … Well, never mind. This is a family newspaper. There are those, such as Michael Heseltine, who are almost dribbling with glee at having lived long enough to get to present their version of history without the interfering old bag getting in their way and others, such as Chris Patten, whose eyes slide sideways, away from the camera whenever he oozes his way towards a verdict, not wanting, even now, to be held to anything. Members of her personal staff added humanising detail – her penchant for dusting, her considerateness to them. Then there was Bernard Ingham, who I would say was straddling the divide. “I have no reason to suppose she was never, ever concerned about unemployment,” he said of the years in which the dole queues were more or less joining up between offices. “But, by Jove, she had difficulty showing it.” Mmm. Didn’t she, though? I am, of course, falling into the editorialising trap that the programme laudably avoided. The previous four episodes did a marvellous job of deconstructing the construction of the Iron Lady and, at this distance (and given the current political landscape in which we so unwillingly stand), it is impossible not to marvel at least at the sheer … adultness of it all. To boggle at the sight of actual grownups making actual grownup decisions in an actual grownup way. To have a vision – however right- or wrongheaded you believe it to be, however brilliant or repellent you find it – of how a country should be run, and the courage to pursue your convictions. It all feels deeply weird. Where is the naked venality? The endless jockeying for immediate individual position and reward? How have we come to a place where Thatcher and her cabinet are taking on the sheen of heroes? The closing episode concentrated on Thatcher’s downfall. “You need to know,” said Patten, looking down and away, “when to leave the stage while they are still clapping.” “Four years waiting for her to go,” said Heseltine, recalling his resignation after the Westland row. “Awful waste of my life.” I realised at this point that, for five weeks of watching, I had been hearing the Twitter staple running through my head like a persistent drumbeat – when people show you what they are like, believe them. Anyway. The poll tax riots. The bridling colleagues. The lost byelections. The unpopularity in the polls. Her increasing autocratic tendency. Her aggressive Euroscepticism. The defenestration of Geoffrey Howe. Eventually the cabinet got what it wanted and deposed her in what she called “an act of bile and treachery”. Impossible, still, to feel sorry for her if you were not already on her side, but thanks to the makers’ careful, comprehensive coverage and the even-handedness throughout, it was possible to detach yourself – at least a little – from the high emotion of the time and view her with a dispassionate interest that befits the subject. It enabled consideration in the round, which is surely more valuable to us than the simple hatred with which many Guardian readers will remember being raised (and which I do not resile from, even as I’m willing to complicate it). Can we admire, for example, the fortitude of the hardworking woman riding roughshod over the complacent dilettantism of the men she found in post, even as we continue to condemn the ends to which it was put? I don’t know. The voice, however, remains unendurable. And I still think, overall, it was better when there was such a thing as society.