Johanna Konta continued her run at the French Open by beating Donna Vekic to reach the quarter-finals of a grand slam for the fourth time. Konta was already the first British woman through to the fourth round at Roland Garros since 1983 and she is now one win away from matching Jo Durie’s achievement of making the semi-finals that year. This performance was her best yet given the calibre of her opponent – Vekic is at a career-high mark of 24 in the world rankings and has been having a very good year. Konta took control of the match from the start and did not allow Vekic to impose herself in a 6-2, 6-4 victory. The British No 1 will play either last year’s runner-up, Sloane Stephens, or the 2016 champion Garbiñe Muguruza. Konta had produced a display of fierce but controlled hitting to swat aside Viktoria Kuzmova in the third round and began in the same fashion here, leaving Vekic staring at the lines as she cleaned the clay off several of them to break in the first game. There were three breaks of serve to start the match but Konta was serving better, too, drawing Vekic out wide or pushing her back and then punishing the short ball. Konta had lost their past two encounters but she has been a player rejuvenated since getting on to clay, previously her worst surface. After breaking the Vekic serve for a third time, Konta saved three break points at 5-2 with winners before clinching the set with an ace. The beginning of the second set was tighter but Konta was playing with complete conviction, something that has been lacking since her run to the semi-finals of Wimbledon two summers ago. Since then she has dipped nearly outside the top 50 in the rankings from a high of No 4 but this win could see her climb back inside 20, and there is no doubt she is playing tennis worthy of that and higher. She put her first foot wrong by failing to hold serve for 5-3 in the second set after breaking Vekic. But another break of the Croat’s serve, clinching with a precision drop shot, left her serving for the match and she served it out to love. (Kevin Mitchell’s report to follow)