The teenagers in the audience are all squirms and giggles. On stage, Oedipus and Jocasta have found themselves alone and unable to resist a quickie on the conference-room floor. Lusty and impulsive, they’re all over each other. When their daughter Antigone walks in on them, she has the same look of embarrassed disgust as the younger members of the audience. Eww, parents! Pretty sure none of this was in the Sophocles, but it is characteristic of Robert Icke’s high-definition production – staged at the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam and coming to the Edinburgh festival – that what lies latent in the ancient Greek becomes visceral and explicit here. “This Oedipus is so compelling,” says Marieke Heebink, relishing an expanded presence as Jocasta in Icke’s rewritten version of the play. “It has a thriller element – you know what’s going to happen but still you are hoping it won’t. Even in the moment I am playing it, I think, ‘No! No!’” Oedipus is a guy with vision. Does it matter what he does in his personal life? In Icke’s 21st-century reworking, Heebink assumes the role of first lady as she and Oedipus, the hopeful candidate, take refuge in the campaign HQ on the night of an election. Played by Hans Kesting, her husband is a bright and engaging alpha male with an admirable desire to do the right thing. His supporters carry placards with his face rendered in the separated colours of Shepard Fairey’s famous Obama poster. His grown-up children gather for a pre-victory dinner. He even brings his mother along to enjoy the occasion. You can imagine yourself voting for him. “Oedipus is a guy with vision – he’s the guy you want,” says Icke about the man who inadvertently murders his father and sleeps with his mother. “If he’s the best person for the job, do you care who they go to bed with? Does it matter what he does in his personal life? Is it of any relevance? We assume now that it does matter in a very primary way, but I wanted to interrogate that.” For those who’ve been following the dazzling career of the 32-year-old Icke, his collaboration with the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam seems like the fulfilment of a promise. Previously known as Toneelgroep Amsterdam, this is the artistic home of Ivo van Hove, the director to whom Icke has most commonly been compared. In his Hamlet with Andrew Scott, Mary Stuart with Lia Williams and Juliet Stevenson, and an Oresteia set in a modern-day kitchen, Icke has demonstrated a similar drive for textual clarity and an equal disdain for tradition. “The way they perform is so free,” Icke says of the ensemble. “It’s without hierarchy and without that strange poshness that seems to creep into British theatre and makes it feel museum-like and deadening. They are incredible actors. If Hans Kesting and Marieke Heebink acted in English, they would be massive stars.” Kesting returns the compliment: “It was for him very scary because it was his first production outside Britain, with foreign actors who are used to Ivo and other big directors. But from day one, he clicked with everyone.” Painstakingly translating from the original Greek, Icke wrote his version with the actors in mind. “The challenge was to provide for an audience today the impact and immediacy of the original before we all knew its twists and turns,” he says. That means a production that bristles with modern-day talking points, from politicians who go off-message to the implication that Oedipus was the product of an abusive relationship (just do the maths on the ages). Throw in the campaign T-shirts, pizza boxes and political spin, and this Oedipus feels like a play for today. There will, of course, be those who question the need for a rewrite when the Sophocles version has proved durable for more than two millennia, but it’s not an argument he buys. “Telling any story is a process of self-discovery,” Icke says. “The pretence that there’s a neutral version of a play, that you could do what Sophocles intended, is so obviously ridiculous. It’s exactly the same impulse that has brought us to Brexit. There’s a poisonous nostalgia that says you’re committing an act of vandalism if you don’t do the Sophocles as Sophocles would have wanted it. To do that, I’d have to do it in ancient Greek. You’re not asking for the original, you’re asking for a safe, culturally mandated version that has no deep relationship to the original, just to a performance tradition.” He continues: “There’s a horrendous possibility for exclusion in the way we talk about theatre. Theatre in Britain is so often pompous, thinking of itself as church, and I don’t think that delivers a real experience to an audience. You can have a balance between a deep respect for an old text and, at the same time, an acknowledgement we’re alive now and we’re all in the room now.” • Oedipus is at the King’s Theatre, Edinburgh, 14–17 August, as part of the Edinburgh international festival.