“There aren’t any jobs for writers in Bradford,” a teacher tells Andrea Dunbar in Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile. Boo! After school Dunbar worked in a local mill – but she also went on to write plays, most famously Rita, Sue and Bob Too, inspired by her own experience and produced at the Royal Court in 1982. Freedom Studios’ drama is several steps away from documentary, being an adaptation by Lisa Holdsworth of the novel that Adelle Stripe based on Dunbar’s life. But it is vibrant and unsentimental, a shining example of site-specific work. Stripe’s novel opens in Dunbar’s local, the Beacon, in 1990, where the dramatist is taken ill: she died from a brain tumour at the age of 29. Holdsworth’s play is staged, with an all-female cast, in a pub near the town centre. Outside, buses go to Baildon Moor, where Rita and Sue had their sex sessions with Bob; inside, there is dim light, swabbed-down tables and the sort of dingy comforting fug it is hard to find these days. Emily Spowage is impressive as the adult Dunbar: rackety and sceptical in, judging by the photos of the dramatist, a very authentic white jersey. Lucy Hird is vivid as her younger self, face bursting with eager promise. They appear side by side: hope, flickering fulfilment and disappointment are intertwined. In a narrow space, the cast of five, directed by Kash Arshad, drive through events crisply but without seeming merely to canter. Schoolgirl scorn at lessons devoted to fairy cakes, teenage pregnancy, a violent lover, spare time spent jotting down dialogue (Spowage’s exercise book is marked “Composition”), a visit from the Royal Court’s Max Stafford-Clark, theatrical success, writer’s block, vodka and beer. By 27, she had three children and was living with her parents. That made her feel a failure, though nowadays it’s quite hard to find a 27-year-old not living with their parents. Dunbar’s children have objected to the play – and Stripe’s novel – for concentrating on “salacious” episodes in their mother’s life at the expense of her work. I found it not at all gloatingly lewd and think the stoicism and sharpness of the central character likely to enhance her reputation. Yet it is not hard to sympathise with their life/work point. Dunbar’s life has attracted considerable high-grade attention: not only from Stripe and Holdsworth but in film, from Clio Barnard. She is a rarity. So mesmerised is England – and the English theatre – by class, and so entrenched in its limited idea of what constitutes intelligence, that the term “working class” is put before the word “writer” as if it was telling us something. I’ve yet to find an occasion in which “public school” was considered a revealing adjective about an author’s work. Things are getting better but they start from a very low point. You can get a whiff of this by watching the fluting horror visited on Shelagh (A Taste of Honey) Delaney in an ITN interview on YouTube. And in a beautiful short film made in 1960 by Ken Russell, Delaney spoke powerfully about the rubbishing of the future of a large proportion of schoolchildren. Here’s the theme behind Education, Education, Education, a bright and biting show devised by the Bristol-based group the Wardrobe Ensemble. First seen in Edinburgh two years ago, this at first looks like a fringe lark, as nine ultra-animated actors, mugging it up as pupils and teachers, shove tables and doors around the stage to make a perilous, on-the-slide classroom landscape. Gradually, it becomes searching, nimble and affecting. About high hopes and blasted hopes. Set in a comprehensive school immediately after the 1997 general election, the show floats buoyantly on a 1990s soundtrack and jokes about Take That. One earnest teacher gets herself up as Geri Halliwell in union jack glitter dress and ginger wig; the entire staff break into the Macarena. And, in a tiny but ultra-sharp episode, a confiscated Tamagotchi becomes a fought-over pet in the staff room. The period details patter down perfectly, cheesy and innocent. A plot involving a headstrong student neatly puts on display the varieties of teacher: liberal, disciplinarian, bully and a dope in shorts. And though a kind heart beats at the centre, there is a fine dash of asperity in the shape of a German teacher, wonderfully deadpanned by James Newton, who patrols the action watching things fall apart and niceness hit on the head. Still, the real surprise for me was in a less obvious part of the time capsule. Watching the staff erupt in whoops at Tony Blair’s victory, convinced that his “education, education, education” pledge would transform schools for ever, reminded me of a time when I too thought he was a good thing. Okwui Okpokwasili, Brooklyn-based writer, performer and sound designer, has described Bronx Gothic as showing “what happens when we don’t educate and take care of young women”: when girls are left to learn about becoming sexual beings from predators; when they live under laws designed to discipline and shame their bodies. Okpokwasili, who last performed the work in 2014, at first resisted the idea of recreating it at the Young Vic. She was won over by artistic director Kwame Kwei-Armah’s assertion that this imagining of unseen lives, told partly in dance, would signal the direction in which his theatre was moving. On stage, she is a one-woman tumult of talent. Ferocious rather than cogent; by turns rigorous and untrammelled. In an arresting but overlong opening sequence, which she has described as “twerking gone wrong”, she stands with her back to the audience: her arms writhing, her legs jittering. It is as if she were caught in a wind machine made of her own flesh. Twisting around, she seems to slough off an old skin. She speaks in two voices: those of young girls, who confide in each other by swapping notes. They talk about sex: “You don’t know what come is?” growls one; “A verb?” pipes her innocent companion. The shadowy figure of a man, a gothic haunter, prowls around their chat about orgasm and dick-sucking. They talk about waking dreams and about seeing into other people’s minds. At times, in a broken narrative involving disappearance and a blood-soaked discovery, they seem to become each other. And Okpokwasili, who spasms and drops to the ground, eyeballs the audience as if she were about to lamp them. Or fierily enlist them. Star ratings (out of five)Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile ★★★★Education Education Education ★★★Bronx Gothic ★★★ • Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile is touring; Education Education Education is at Trafalgar Studios until 29 June; Bronx Gothic is at the Young Vic until 29 June