A thirsty traveller is suing Emirates airlines, claiming she collapsed after being denied adequate water on a long-haul flight. Lina Di Falco, 54, has told Victoria’s supreme court she suffers constant ankle pain from an injury on the March 2015 flight from Melbourne to Dubai, after repeated requests for water. Di Falco said she was given just one glass with her meal more than an hour after the plane took off, but that wasn’t enough. Barrister John Ribbands, representing Emirates, told the court on Tuesday the plane had a water fountain available for passengers’ use but Di Falco said she did not see it. The passenger said she had asked for water four times before going to the bathroom, feeling dizzy and like she was going to vomit. She fainted and hurt her ankle on the way, and described the pain as nearly 10 out of 10. After returning to Australia from her holiday, the Moonee Valley city council employee was told her ankle was broken. She underwent surgery and did not go back to work for more than two months. Di Falco is suing Emirates for damages, with her barrister, Ron Meldrum QC, saying she had been an “adventurous” traveller who loved dancing and skiing before the incident. “It’s always aching ... since the accident,” Di Falco said, adding she could no longer do the things she loved, such as gardening and exercise. She also said she had withdrawn from friends and her marriage had broken down because of the injury. “Because of the accident, I couldn’t be ... the wife that he married,” Di Falco said, referring to her frustration at being unable to keep up with domestic duties. Di Falco said she had been a happy person before the accident but “the confidence I had for myself, it’s all gone”. Meldrum said his client had always needed to drink “an awful lot of water”, consuming one litre during the day before taking another litre to bed. She had a bottle of water at the airport before the 15 March flight but was not allowed to board with it. After collapsing, Di Falco said airline staff gave her a large water bottle for the rest of the 14-hour flight. Di Falco complained to Emirates that passengers had not been offered enough refreshments and her Middle Eastern holiday was wasted because of her injured ankle. The trial is expected to continue before Justice Jacinta Forbes on Wednesday.