Eoin Morgan hailed the fire in Jonny Bairstow’s belly after the opener’s bristling century helped England sweep aside India and put their World Cup campaign back on track. The 31-run victory at Edgbaston, in which Bairstow’s bat did the talking with 111 from 109 balls, has put England within touching distance of a semi-final spot, something they can sew up by beating New Zealand at Chester-le-Street on Wednesday. And Morgan fancies the nature of the performance – posting 337 for seven from 50 overs, before squeezing India to 306 for five in the chase – has sent confidence soaring through the dressing room as they eye the knockout stages and, ultimately, the main prize. Morgan, whose side have now reclaimed their No 1 ranking with the win, said: “I’m delighted. The manner in which we played today was outstanding and resonates with everyone in the dressing room. It’s come at a good time against a really good team. Having played how we did today is very encouraging for us. The closer we get to playing our A-game, the more chance we have of going all the way. If we were scraping along I wouldn’t be as confident.” Bairstow’s eighth one-day international century meant a challenging week for the Yorkshireman ended with a smile, having become embroiled in something of a media storm after saying: “People have been waiting for us to fail,” in response to the criticism that followed back-to-back losses. It was rather typical of Bairstow to use this as motivation to deliver, with Morgan saying: “He does tend to get fired up and that suits him, regardless of what’s happened in the week. He likes a bit of fire in his belly and I don’t mind that when he comes out and plays like that. We’re delighted for him.” As well as Bairstow crashing 10 fours and six sixes, the game marked a fine return for Jason Roy. The opener, who is still overcoming a torn hamstring, struck a 57-ball 66 to underline his importance to the side once again. Though Roy was unable to field after being struck on the arm – a bruise that conveniently allowed him to rest up during the second innings – Morgan played down the severity of the fresh injury amid praise for the right-hander’s belligerence. Morgan said: “Having him back is a big confidence-booster – he’s very intimidating, hard to bowl to and he’s a gun player. He and Jonny complement each other. Their partnership ebbed and flowed as the two of them looked to take the game to India.” England’s final total owed much to Ben Stokes striking 79 from 54 balls to continue a strong World Cup for the all-rounder, with Morgan praising his “adaptability” and skill, before adding that the dressing room was “bouncing for him” at the end. From there it was over to the bowlers, with Chris Woakes removing the opener KL Rahul for a duck and sending down three maidens up front amid figures of two for 58, and Liam Plunkett, back in the side for the demoted Moeen Ali, claiming three for 55. On Woakes, who removed Rohit Sharma for 102 and held a superb diving catch in the deep off Rishabh Pant, Morgan said: “He is a guy who goes unnoticed but he’s an extremely valuable player for us and a great asset in the first 10 overs. The pitches haven’t been that rewarding so far but he’s been rewarded today.” Plunkett was Morgan’s go-to man in the middle overs once again, and never more so than when the Yorkshireman claimed the prized scalp of Virat Kohli for 66 that broke a stand of 138 for the second Indian wicket. Morgan said: “We’ve haven’t necessarily missed him but we haven’t bowled as well [without him]. “The wicket suited him and he bowled beautifully. It’s one thing saying a pitch will suit a guy but another to come off the bench after missing some games and delivering. It was an outstanding effort from a very experienced player.”