Late-night hosts joked about the 2020 presidential campaign trail and the strategies that Donald Trump and his Democratic opponents have been using. Seth Meyers took a closer look at Donald Trump’s Iowa campaigning and his strategy. He pointed out the president might not be welcome in the state. “Iowa’s a really awkward place for Trump to be right now because there are a lot of farmers out there who have been hurt by his trade war in China, although really, any place is an awkward place to be for Trump just in general. He’s the only person I’ve seen who looks out of place, every place.” In 2016, Trump said he loved Iowa so much he could move there and build a farm. Meyers joked: “The closest he’s ever come is the farmer’s tan he has under his eyes.” Meyers even assessed his strange language and inflection when Trump said he loved Iowa. “No, seriously, how did we end up with a president that sounds like Jar Jar Binks?” asked the host, even using clips to compare the two. After a brief explanation of how Trump is trying to ignore polls, Meyers turned back to his interview with CNBC, where he rambled about how the tariffs would work in favor of the farmers and ended up talking about French wine import taxes. Meyers expressed confusion, even providing subtitles to show just how ludicrous his explanation was. “What are you talking about? How did you go from China to senators to India to French wine? Did you drink some French wine?” But Meyers did concede one point:“The nicest thing that you could say about Trump is that he always makes it obvious when he’s lying. In fact, if you’re ever wondering how insane a Trump answer is, just imagine it as a response on Final Jeopardy!” As the Democratic candidates and Trump were all campaigning in Iowa, Stephen Colbert saw this as the start of election season and opened his show accordingly: “Happy New Election Year! My resolution is to never learn who John Hickenlooper is.” Colbert discussed the escalating exchange of blows from Trump and former vice-president Joe Biden, telling his audience: “It was like high school, which for these two guys involved learning to read off slate tablets between harvests.” In his speech about Trump, Biden discussed how Trump compared to former president Barack Obama. While Biden reportedly mentioned Trump 76 times in the speech, Colbert pointed out Biden was not above name-dropping another president’s name. “In fact, the only president Biden seemed to mention more than Donald Trump was Barack Obama,” he said. Biden continued to mention his personal relationship with Biden, to which Colbert sighed and said: “We get it. You know Barack Obama. At this point, you should change your slogan to Biden 2020: Obama 2012.” Biden also promised he would cure cancer if he becomes president. “But please, if you could cure cancer, could you maybe just do that now? President or no president, people might vote for a candidate who promises to cure cancer, but they would definitely vote for the guy who’s already done it.” The host also presented news of polls which have Biden beating Trump by 13 points: “That is a lead so big, it’s ready for a barmitzvah.” Not only would Biden win, a total of six Democratic candidates  led Trump in the the poll. But Colbert expressed a fair bit of doubt about the accuracy of the polls, saying in an aside: “So the polls look bad for Trump, but I don’t know. Can I trust them? I’ve been hurt before. My psyche is still processing the feelings from election night 2016 and my liver’s still processing the bourbon.” Donald Trump apparently keeps secret documents in his suit pocket, has a pen pal in Pyongyang, and can’t pass up a chance to go after Joe Biden. pic.twitter.com/ZBxYWx3mj0 The Daily Show’s Trevor Noah talked about Trump’s latest claims about a secret deal with Mexico, prefacing his monologue: “This has been a wild week for the Trump presidency, making it the 124th wild presidency week in a row.” After Trump’s destroyed spin of the tariffs on Mexico, he has turned to saying there is a secret deal the public has not yet seen. He took a piece of paper out in front of the press to show he had something. Noah pointed out: “There are two possibilities here, and neither of them are good. Either the president just whipped out a takeout menu and just pretended it was a secret agreement with Mexico, which it could be, or the president is just walking around with secret documents in his pocket.” He continued to joke about the absurdity of carrying important documents in a jacket pocket. “He could get hacked by a gust of wind. Or even worse, a pigeon.” Noah also focused on Trump’s attacks on Biden, where the former businessman called the former vice-president a loser and mentally weak. Noah fired back: “Really, Donald? You want to compete with a mentally competent loser? Well, then maybe you should have a debate with a mirror.”