Our winners elect: Curtis and Amy will triumph this year because they appeal to that most base, British form of classical romantic love: Two People You Went To School With Who Are Your Friends On Facebook Who Just Bought A New-Build. Curtis and Amy pulsate with Sunday-night-on-the-sofa energy: we will see their lives unfold through the Instagram grid, watching as they achieve each milestone – delivery of a large grey sofa, first branded bikini deal, Curtis Announcing He’s A Vlogger, house, marriage, kids – the progress of Curtis and Amy marching ever onwards. An explosion wrapped inside a car crash wrapped inside a black hole. What I am saying is: Tommy and Molly-Mae are doomed, but not doomed in that crap way you and your boyfriend are. No: they are doomed like a Greek myth is doomed, Tommy destined to wreck like a ship on the shores of Molly-Mae. If they inexplicably leave the villa together, they will do everything – engagement, Vegas wedding, pregnancy announcement, catastrophic divorce – within the space of, like, eight days. Like someone strapped a rocket pod to a baffled toddler. From “spicy love triangle” to “doomed couple cursed with paranoia” in three weeks flat, Joe and Lucie are all but over already, but it still feels worthwhile to see how they might exist post-show: Joe gets a five-year Heinz endorsement deal; Lucie gets an ITVBe watersports review show and a Tulisa-esque forearm tattoo that just says ‘BEV’; they pose together in matching tracksuits a lot, like two slightly over-horny kids’ TV presenters; then, eight months later, she leaves him for some tall surfer lad she knew all along. Maura, a living thunderbolt made of the darkest, most chaotic horny energy ever seen on TV, has her eyes set on Tommy the same way a prowling lion might gaze at a wounded gazelle. “I like you, and I want to get to know you,” Tommy keeps sweetly saying, while she licks her lips. Such energy is unsustainable IRL: they wouldn’t be able to make it through a This Morning sofa appearance without her peeling his shirt off and circling his nipples with her tongue. Put them in the hideaway for eight weeks. Then they will be ready enough to do #SponCon here in the real world. The couple of the season. What I need on my TV is this: Curtis & Tommy buddy shows, 24 hours a day. Curtis & Tommy tour Europe, Curtis gently explaining to Tommy where all the countries are. Curtis & Tommy learn to cook (Curtis methodically teaches Tommy how to crack an egg. “Me hands are too large,” Tommy’s saying). Cancel the rest of the show. I just need Curtis – who delights in the presence of women like an eccentric 1950s dandy excitedly unwrapping a scotch egg at a picnic – and Tommy (“What if we taught a puppy how to box?”) on TV for ever.