Lewis Hamilton took pole for the French Grand Prix, continuing what has thus far been a dominant weekend for Mercedes. Valtteri Bottas made it a front-row lockout for the team, their sixth this season from eight meetings. Charles Leclerc was in third for Ferrari but a difficult week for he team was not improved when his teammate Sebastian Vettel could manage only seventh. Max Verstappen was in fourth and Britain’s Lando Norris did superbly to take the highest grid position of his career in fifth, with his McLaren teammate Carols Sainz in sixth. Hamilton put in a piece of controlled, precision driving to secure pole with a clinical lap that was too good for his teammate. He had set the pace with a strong opener on the first hot runs in Q3 with a time of 1min 28.488sec, it was a tenth up on Bottas and both drivers had left Ferrari in their wake with Leclerc half a second down. On their second runs, Hamilton found another level altogether, he was almost half a second up but for losing time at the last corner. He still had enough however and concluded with a time of 1min 28.319sec, a new track record. With Bottas almost three-tenths back Mercedes were in a different class, Leclerc finished sixth tenths down. Vettel had aborted his first quick run after going wide when he missed an upshift and could not string together a good run on the one shot he had and will be hugely disappointed with seventh. Bottas was quickest in Q1 In front of Hamilton. In Q2 the leaders set their fastest times on the medium tyre with which they will start the race and it was Bottas who once again headed the time sheets but Hamilton had the edge on the two crucial laps. Hamilton’s 86th career pole position is his second in a row at the French Grand Prix which returned to the F1 calendar for the first time since 2008 last year. Having taken the top spot here in 2018 he converted it to a win and looks in strong form to do so again. It is his third pole this season, matching Bottas although Hamilton has repeatedly proved to have the advantage on race day. He has five wins to the Finn’s two and holds a dominant lead in the world championship. Hamilton has won the last three races – Spain, Monaco and Canada. He took the latter after finishing second on track to Vettel, who was given a five-second penalty during the race. Ferrari’s request for a review of the steward’s decision was rejected after a meeting in France on Friday. Hamilton now has a 29-point advantage over Bottas and is 62-points clear of Vettel. Returning another win here will represent the British driver stamping his authority on the championship. He is entering the period of the season when, as he comes to understand the car better, his form generally only improves. Mercedes, for whom Juan Manuel Fangio took the team’s first win at the French Grand Prix in Reims in 1954, had brought their first new engine upgrade to Canada and Hamilton was optimistic that it would represent a step forward. With two big straights at Paul Ricard, the Mercedes was making the most of their new power unit and the car’s proven performance in the slow and medium speed corners that dominate the end of the first and third sectors played to their strengths. Hamilton made the most of it when it mattered. Mercedes, have five one-two finishes already this season, and a sixth looks to be on the cards with another front row lockout. Ferrari had brought aero upgrades to France but struggled to make them work and had not been able to match Mercedes for pace all weekend. Hamilton led a Mercedes one-two in first practice and Bottas was ahead of his teammate in the second two sessions. Renault’s Daniel Ricciardo was in eighth, Red Bull’s Pierre Gasly in ninth and Antonio Giovinazzi in the Alfa Romeo was in 10th. Alexander Albon was in 11th for Toro Rosso, with Kimi Räikkönen in 12th for Alfa Romeo in front of the Renault of Nico Hülkenberg, Racing Point’s Sergio Pérez and the Haas of Kevin Magnussen. Daniil Kvyat was in 15th for Toro Rosso in front of the Haas of Romain Grosjean and the Racing Point of Lance Stroll. George Russell and Robert Kubica were in 19th and 20th for Williams. Russell will start form the back of the grid for an ERS change and Kyvat will be in 19 after a penalty for taking a new power unit.