A petition against the London mayor’s tax on car emissions – the ultra low emissions zone (Ulez) – has yet to reach 100,000 signatures, but is not far off, at 91,000. This is not a protest against the tax imposed in April on high-emission vehicles travelling into the West End and the City, inside the existing congestion zone. No, the petition is a howl of pain directed at the zone’s planned extension to the vast expanse between the north and south circular roads. Signatories accuse Sadiq Khan, who announced the project last year, of a “blatant money grab from the motorist,” and “ripping off the normal man”. Due to take effect in October 2021, the Ulez will require drivers to pay a daily charge of £12.50 when they enter this larger zone with an old banger or a gas guzzler that fails the emissions test. Residents inside the zone won’t pay when their high-emission car is parked, but will pay as soon as they drive it. Sadiq Khan has estimated that 100,000 out-of-date cars will be directly affected. That total can probably be multiplied by five if all the cars that travel over the north and south circular boundaries once or twice a month are included. A £12.50 charge quickly adds up to serious money, especially when hard-pressed families must add it to rising council tax charges and escalating fuel bills. Lower emissions are undoubtedly important, but without a robust defence, Khan could find himself characterised much as French president Emmanuel Macron was by the gilets jaunes anti-government protests. That is, as an aloof politician, unaware or unconcerned that hard-working families who rely on a car or van to get around will be financially much poorer. Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, hasn’t dared go down this route for fear of a major backlash. A referendum in 2008 rejected a congestion zone for Manchester by almost 80%. Should Johnson become PM, the former London mayor would relish watching Khan suffering a hail of abuse Even though times have moved on, and the pubic is more sympathetic to green issues, Burnham has excluded private cars from the city’s fresh attempts to reduce emissions. One major obstacle to making life easier for poor families is money, and Khan doesn’t have much to play with. The amount set aside for the private car scrappage scheme (which he has yet to announce) is just £25m, or £250 per car. This is in addition to the £23m he has set aside for commercial vehicles, for which the details are already worked out. Not all households will qualify, and not all will apply. Nevertheless, it’s easy to see why Khan asked the government to boost his £48m package to £515m to ease through the transition. Theresa May and Philip Hammond turned him down, of course. And it won’t be a surprise if Boris Johnson follows suit should he become prime minister. Khan even went to see environment secretary Michael Gove and health minister Matt Hancock to plead his case, only to be sent packing. Should Johnson take over as PM, the former London mayor would relish watching Khan suffering a hail of abuse, especially if the abusers fit into the category of hard-pressed, low-income households. Worse, it could be that when the charge comes into force, London becomes the next capital city to see gilets jaunes-style protesters rampaging down avenues, stopping traffic and smashing shop windows. The Tory mayoral candidate Shaun Bailey has already decided just two policies are all he needs to eject Khan from City Hall next year. More police on the streets and characterising the Ulez as a tax on the poor. Bailey has virtually no hope of ousting Khan. The Tory has little profile in the capital and his party will probably still be at a low ebb next year. However, he could persuade huge numbers of people that the Ulez is unfair. Even the far left, which is riding the Momentum wave to dominate Labour constituencies in London, could take up the banner against Khan when the issue becomes a tax on the poor. Khan is already facing huge pressure from the left in London to ease back on criticism of Corbyn and the Labour leadership. There are moves to deselect Labour GLA members who support Khan. Delegates to the London party organisations are increasingly hostile to him. So Khan will need all the support he can get to push through the Ulez – most importantly in the form of extra money from the Treasury. The Tories should relent and put green initiatives above party-political point scoring. Those on the hard left also need to remember that they support the green new deal. Khan’s green agenda should be their agenda. Progress won’t happen otherwise.