You can find (at least for now) a short video on Woodford Investment Management’s website in which the man himself, back in September 2017, addresses a burning question: “Has Neil Woodford lost it?” Woodford’s answer, naturally, is that he still has “it”, just as he did in 1999 when he sat out the dotcom bubble and was vindicated within a year. But the date on the video is interesting. Questions about Woodford’s rotten run have been around for a while. Supposedly independent outsiders – firms such as Hargreaves Lansdown who collect fat fees by promoting funds – are not obliged to share a manager’s pumped-up self-belief. They are allowed to be sceptical. And too few were. Woodford’s unconvincing answer to another anonymous video inquiry in 2017 should have sounded alarm bells at Hargreaves. “Unless you believe you are the master of the universe, what makes a life-long equity income investor believe they can spot early-stage technology companies?” asked the questioner. Well, quite. Woodford made his name as a stock-picker in the world of big companies with big dividends – pharmaceuticals, energy and tobacco were favoured themes for 20-odd years – plus the FTSE 250 sector. It’s true, as Woodford argued, that small companies and early-stage businesses were always part of his investment “universe” but his enthusiasm for that world went up by several notches in recent years – as did the accompanying liquidity risk. Large stakes in small companies, especially unquoted companies, cannot easily be turned into cash overnight. If you’re running an open-ended fund that offers a daily-dealing facility, you have a problem if there is a rush of redemption requests. The danger in Woodford’s case was compounded by the presence of 20%-plus stakes in so many mid-sized quoted companies – the likes of Provident Financial, the AA and Kier Group. They, too, are hard to liquidate in a hurry at a fair price. The liquidity issue eventually crystallised on Monday when Woodford suspended redemptions on his flagship Equity Income Fund. But since this risk was always in the open, what did the likes of Hargreaves Lansdown, the UK’s biggest investment platform, do to warn their own clients? Not much. Hargreaves seems to have had some role in chivvying Woodford to commit to abandon over time his obsession with unquoted stocks, but the pledge was made only six weeks ago – far too late in the day. Through it all, Hargreaves remained slavishly loyal to Woodford until Monday afternoon when it dumped the equity income fund from its pretentious “Wealth 50” list. Billed as “a shortlist of our experts’ favourite funds”, the Wealth 50 is not independent research as commonly understood. It’s more akin to a marketing exercise to feed the myth of the superstar fund manager. As such, it attracts a lot of money but the methodology, to put it mildly, is hopelessly opaque. Mind you, the Financial Conduct Authority has questions to answer itself. In recent months, it has seemingly been happy to see Woodford dance around rules designed to cap his exposure to unquoted stocks by listing some stakes in private companies on the Guernsey stock exchange, a place not normally regarded as a hothouse of active trading. If the regulator protested, it squeaked behind closed doors. It should now have to explain what it did, and when. The deeper moral of the Woodford’s fall, though, is old as the hills: don’t believe the hype. Investment genius, even it exists, rarely lasts. Warren Buffett is the exception who proves the rule. The Pensions Regulator wanted the Topshop tycoon to put an extra £50m into the pension fund at Arcadia Group. Instead, a settlement has been agreed at £25m. These deals are always a negotiation, we will inevitably be told, but it’s not obvious the regulator was even remotely in the correct ballpark with its £50m demand. Given the size of the deficit in the Arcadia scheme – up to £750m on the strictest accounting basis – a strong case could have been made for an up-front payment of as much as £250m. Such a sum could have been on top of the £100m that Green, in his restructuring plan for Arcadia, proposes that his wife finds for the pension scheme over the next three years. It’s time for Frank Field MP to leap into action again and summon the regulator to explain its workings. Did the regulator even ask Green, if he’s short of hard cash, to try selling one of his yachts?