Cameroon and Ghana, two of the most successful teams in Africa Cup of Nations history with nine titles between them, cancelled each other out in a forgettable 0-0 draw on a day of three stalemates. Ghana nearly snatched the points in the 88th minute when Kwabena Owusu intercepted a dreadful Jean Armel Kana Biyik pass, charged forward and fired a ferocious shot against the bar. But that would have been an unfittingly generous end to a match which featured too many misplaced passes, poor first touches and wayward finishing on another searing evening at the Ismailia stadium - while there were some unusual decisions from the referee. Holders Cameroon top the group with four points from two games while Ghana have two points after drawing both their matches. “It may not have been good for the fans, but speaking as a coach, knowing what I have seen, I have seen two very organised teams who created enough to win,” said Cameroon coach Clarence Seedorf. “We never start a match to draw, we start to win There are ways and ways to win a match. I am satisfied with a point.” Angola and Mauritania drew 0-0 in Group E, leaving both sides facing a battle to advance to the knockout stages. It was a second draw for Angola, while Mauritania, making their tournament debut, picked up their first point. Mali top the group with four points from two games while Tunisia, who meet Mauritania next, have two. After 21 matches of the tournament in Egypt, the game was the first without any goals although both teams went close. Angola had an effort cleared off the line just after the 20-minute mark by Khassa Camara after striker Fredy rounded the goalkeeper but was forced to shoot from a tight angle. Almost 20 minutes into the second half, there was an even more clear-cut opportunity, as Gelson Dala passed across the face of the Mauritania goal, but substitute Wilson Eduardo steered wide. Mauritania were much-improved after a 4-1 drubbing by Mali in their debut game at the tournament but did not create any clear chances. Angola take on Mali in their last game on Tuesday at the same time as Mauritania meet Tunisia.Benin and Guinea Bissau completed a hat-trick of goalless draws with a stalemate that left both teams waiting for their first-ever win at the competition. The teams rarely looked like breaking the sequence of blanks in a scrappy match short of clear chances. Benin have two points from two games, level with Ghana, while Guinea-Bissau have one and face Ghana in their final game.