For the past decade it has been no great secret that Warrington’s significant spending power has played a major role in transforming them into contenders on a near-annual basis. But this was an afternoon when homegrown players reinforced the fact that the future is very bright at the Wolves. This had all the makings of a dangerous day’s work for Steve Price’s side, with defeat here opening the door for third-placed Catalans to mount a serious challenge on the top two. However, not only did the Wolves strengthen their grip on second with victory – opening up a six-point gap over the Dragons and fourth-placed Hull in the process – but they did so with a number of positives to boot. Seven of the team came through their own junior system. The 17-year-old full-back, Josh Thewlis, made his professional debut with an assured display. A year ago, he had just finished sitting his GCSEs, and was playing junior rugby with his amateur club in Oldham. On Saturday he outperformed his opposite number Tony Gigot, man-of-the-match in last year’s Challenge Cup final, and underlined that while Warrington continue to spend at will on big-name imports that philosophy will be supported by fine junior talents in the years ahead. “I wouldn’t have put him in if I didn’t think he was ready,” Price said. “He’s got a bright future. I’m big on giving opportunities to the local community kids and that’s our system going forward. Hopefully, there’s a few more to come.” Thewlis was given the standing ovation his performance merited when he was replaced with seven minutes remaining. The game was arguably still in the balance going into the final quarter. Catalans had taken the lead in the first half thanks to Fouad Yaha’s try, but two tries in the final nine minutes of that half, from Blake Austin and the outstanding Daryl Clark, pushed Warrington 12-4 ahead at half-time. The scoreline was perhaps harsh on the Dragons at that stage. The effects of a draining few weeks began to show on Catalans thereafter. They have spent the past month on the road, with games at the Nou Camp, Anfield and, most recently, Hull in the Challenge Cup last week. That the Wolves scored 22 unanswered points during the second half is no surprise given that arduous schedule. “We’ll get back to France now and regroup,” said the Catalans coach, Steve McNamara. “It’s been difficult lately and you’ve seen that in our last couple of second-half performances.” Shortly after the hour mark, Bryson Goodwin and Sitaleki Akauola crossed for tries to break Catalans’ wilting resistance and from there, it was clear there would only be one winner. Catalans, by this point ravaged by injuries and players succumbing to concussion, barely mustered a resistance in the final quarter and it was no surprise when Josh Charnley seized on an error to score Warrington’s fifth try.