Three candidates including Andrea Leadsom and Esther McVey have been eliminated from the race to be Britain’s next prime minister after the first round of voting among Conservative MPs. The former foreign secretary Boris Johnson comfortably topped the poll as expected, securing the support of 114 of his Tory colleagues – well above the 105 he would need to guarantee a place in the final two. Leadsom promised “decisive and compassionate leadership” at her launch this week, and McVey said she would make the Tory party more representative of working-class voters. Both women hoped their reputation as staunch Brexiters would help to win over their colleagues, but they were swept away by the carefully planned “Back Boris” campaign. The former chief whip Mark Harper was also eliminated. He launched his campaign this week offering to create “a party where everyone is invited”. Seven men remain in the race. McVey said: “I am pleased to have had a platform to make the case for blue-collar Conservatism, a clean break from the EU and the need to invest money into schools, policing and a proper pay rise for our public sector workers.” Some of those who are entitled to go through to the next round, including Dominic Raab, Matt Hancock and Sajid Javid, are likely to come under pressure to withdraw and throw their weight behind one of the frontrunners. But there was little sign of wavering after the results were announced. Raab, who secured 27 votes, said: “I’m proud and honoured to have the support of so many brilliant colleagues today. This campaign is just getting started and we’ve got a good base to build on.” Robert Halfon, the MP for Harlow, who is supporting Javid, said the home secretary had come in a “strong fifth place”. “It’s all to play for,” he said after the vote. “The public figures were 17 to 19 votes, and Sajid got 23. The momentum’s building up. We’ve got Ruth Davidson on our side, so we’re really happy.” Amber Rudd, who is backing Jeremy Hunt, denied that it was disappointing to see him so far behind Johnson. “Not at all,” she told the BBC. “He came a good second, he got more than Matt and Saj combined, and that’s what we were after – a clear lead in second place. It’s only the first round, there’s a few more rounds to go. I’m delighted.” Conservative MPs, including Theresa May and the 10 leadership candidates, were given a two-hour window to cast their votes in a House of Commons committee room. The prime minister declined to say who she had voted for. Leadsom, McVey and another underdog, Rory Stewart, stationed themselves in the corridor in the hope of winning over waverers. The contenders who failed to reach the threshold of 17 MPs were automatically eliminated, under newly introduced rules aimed at preventing a drawn-out contest. Stewart just made the cut with 19 supporters. Afterwards he insisted: “We can win this. Realism, action, unity, trust.” THANK YOU - to all my colleagues who voted for me. We can win this. Realism, action, unity, trust. Thank you #RoryWalksOn Brexit has dominated the campaign, with Johnson promising to take Britain out of the EU on 31 October, “deal or no deal”. He has won over many of the party’s leavers, including the Eurosceptic stalwarts Steve Baker, Iain Duncan Smith and Mark Francois. Outside the vote on Thursday, another Brexiter, John Redwood, said he was also supporting Johnson. “He’s rightly said that the surrender document, or withdrawal treaty, is dead and that if necessary we will leave without an agreement on the 31 October,” he said. Another ballot will now be held next Tuesday, with further rounds to follow on Wednesday and possibly Thursday, until the field is narrowed to two. Their names will then be presented to Conservative members in a postal ballot, with the winner due to be announced in the week of 21 July. The new prime minister will have just three months to prepare for Brexit by the Halloween deadline set by EU27 leaders. Johnson’s progress into the final round now appears unstoppable unless he makes a significant misstep, and the fiercest battle is between Hunt, Michael Gove and Javid for the second place on the ballot. Hunt was narrowly ahead with 43 votes in the first round, against Gove’s 37 and Javid’s 23, and the candidates’ focus will now turn to winning the second preferences of their eliminated rivals. Rudd, who is supporting Hunt, said once the race was down to a final two it would “start again” in hustings to members, in which “anything can happen”. May will remain in 10 Downing Street until her successor is chosen, at which point her three-year tenure as prime minister will come to an end. The contest was triggered after her final compromise offer on Brexit – including the promise of a House of Commons vote on a second referendum – infuriated Tory colleagues.