Tehran has sped up the countdown to its breach of the nuclear deal with the announcement that it will exceed its uranium stockpile limit in the next 10 days, raising heightened tensions in the region even further. The country’s atomic agency also said Tehran might also start the process of enriching uranium up to 20%, closer to weapons-grade, from 7 July. The announcement by Behrouz Kamalvandi, the spokesman for the Iranian Atomic Energy Authority, puts more pressure on Europe to come up with new terms for the 2015 nuclear deal with Iran. The initial response from European leaders was negative. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, urged Iran to be patient and responsible and the German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, said: “We will certainly not accept a unilateral reduction of obligations.” The US was more forthright. A National Security Council spokesman accused Iran of nuclear blackmail. The EU agreed an unpublished timetable of its own with Tehran last week to help ease trade between Iran and European nations, but it is not clear whether the measures will come quickly enough or be sufficient to persuade Iran to rethink its strategy of chipping away at the nuclear deal. Iran says it is acting after Donald Trump pulled the US out of the deal unilaterally a year ago. The EU has since proved itself incapable of protecting its private-sector firms from the threat of US secondary sanctions if they try to trade with Iran. US sanctions have brought down Iran oil exports to 400,000 barrels a day, well below the levels needed to fund government spending. Washington and the UK have blamed attacks on oil tankers in the Gulf of Oman last week on Iran. Tehran has denied any involvement and described them as a false flag operation. The EU has yet to apportion blame. Iran’s army chief, Maj Gen Mohammad Hossein Baqeri, said on Monday that if Iran ever decided to block the export of oil from the Gulf, it would do so openly, without resorting to deception or covert operations, unlike the “terrorist and deceptive” US. Under the terms of the nuclear agreement, Iran can keep a stockpile of no more than 300kg (660lbs) of low-enriched uranium. In a briefing on Monday, Kamalvandi said that given Iran’s recent decision to quadruple its production of low-enriched uranium, it would pass the limit on 27 June. Tensions between the US and Iran have soared, with Washington dispatching warships to the Gulf, and Tehran threatening to resume higher uranium enrichment. John Bolton announces the deployment of the USS Abraham Lincoln carrier strike group and a bomber task force in response to 'a number of troubling and escalatory indications and warnings'. Iran vows to enrich its uranium stockpile closer to weapons-grade levels if world powers fail to negotiate new terms for its nuclear deal. The US responds by imposing sanctions on Iran's metals industry. The EU urges Iran to respect the nuclear deal and says it plans to continue trading with the country despite US sanctions. The US says it will move a Patriot missile battery into the Middle East to counter threats from Iran. The UAE says four commercial ships off its eastern coast 'were subjected to sabotage operations'. Yemen's Houthi rebels launch a drone attack on Saudi Arabia, striking a major oil pipeline and taking it out of service. The US embassy in Baghdad orders all non-essential government staff to leave Iraq immediately. Saudi Arabia blames Iran for the drone attack on its pipeline. A rocket lands near the US embassy in the Iraqi capital, Baghdad, without harming anyone. It's not clear who is behind the attack, but after the initial reports, Donald Trump tweets: 'If Iran wants to fight, that will be the official end of Iran. Never threaten the United States again!' Semi-official media in Iran report it has quadrupled production of the low-enriched uranium used for civilian applications. Iran is allowed to enrich uranium, but increased production could lead it to exceed the stockpile limits in the nuclear deal. Senior Pentagon officer Vice-admiral Michael Gilday says the US has a high degree of confidence that Iran's Revolutionary Guards were responsible for the explosions on the four tankers in the Gulf of Oman. Saudi Arabia's King Salman hosts high-level summits in Mecca. He calls on the international community to use all means to confront Iran and accuses them of being behind 'terrorist operations' that targeted Saudi oil interests. Saudi Arabia says 26 people were wounded in an attack by Yemen's Houthi rebels on an airport in the kingdom's south-western town of Abha. Two oil tankers near the strategic strait of Hormuz were reportedly attacked in an assault that left one ablaze and adrift as 44 sailors were evacuated from both vessels and the US navy assisted. The UN’s nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, said last month that Iran’s stockpile of enriched uranium was 174.1kg in late May. Iran said the breach was likely partly because the US had placed sanctions on Iranian exports of uranium. Iran also announced water supplies at the Arak water reactor would exceed a 130-tonne limit within the next two and a half months if the country did not find a client to buy heavy water byproducts. Kamalvandi said Iran needed 5% enrichment for its nuclear power plant in the southern Iranian port of Bushehr and 20% enrichment for a Tehran research reactor. His formulation did not amount to a firm commitment to reach 20% levels. The nuclear deal had limited Iran to enriching uranium only to 3.67%, which is enough for power plants and peaceful purposes. Tehran first set the 7 July deadline, after which it might boost enrichment, six weeks ago. Kamalvandi reiterated that stance, saying Tehran would increase uranium enrichment levels “based on the country’s needs”. Enriching a supply of uranium means boosting its concentration of the isotope U-235, which can power a nuclear reaction. It also involves stripping away atoms of another isotope, U-238. When uranium is mined it typically has about 140 atoms of U-238 for every atom of U-235. Refining it to a purity of 3.67% means using centrifuges to remove 114 unwanted atoms of U-238 for every atom of U-235. Boosting its purity to 20% means removing 22 more unwanted atoms of U-238 per atom of U-235, while going from there to weapons-grade material means removing just four more per atom of U-235. Ninety percent is considered weapons-grade. In an attempt to dramatise Iran’s decision, Kamalvandi spoke to Iranian journalists in a news conference at the country’s Arak heavy water nuclear reactor. Such reactors produce plutonium that can be used in nuclear weapons. Under the nuclear deal, Iran had reconfigured the facility to address western concerns on that issue. Kamalvandi said the country could rebuild the facility with Chinese help to make it produce plutonium. He also said Iran would continue to allow the UN to inspect its nuclear facilities.