9.15pm, BBC One The wickedly addictive thriller has us on tenterhooks as, after her improvised flight from Paris, Villanelle finds herself deposited in leafy Basildon. Innocent enough, you may think, but watch what happens when a good Samaritan invites her into his lair. Be ready for an almighty surprise. Julian Barratt adds menace. Mike Bradley 7.30pm, ITV More shrieking goonery with the good doctor Hill. Literally popping up and dropping in this week are former Blue Peter host Konnie Huq, Lewis star Kevin Whately, and Corrie’s Georgia Taylor and Bill Roache (who at one point will do something ghastly to a cuddly toy). Plus, cameos from Joe Fagin and a former home secretary. Ali Catterall 8pm, Channel 4 The most dramatic episodes in the history of Canterbury occurred during the Plantagenet era (1154-1485) and they form the focus of Alice Roberts’s profile of the Kentish stronghold. The cathedral, famous for the murder of Thomas Becket, the legacy of the Black Death and the city’s status as a place of pilgrimage all feature. MB 8.30pm, BBC Two This look at preparations for the world’s largest open-submission exhibition (on until 12 August) talks to both emerging talent and celebrity contributors Bob & Roberta Smith, Polly Morgan and Jeremy Deller, as it explores the curation and hanging of the show. Plus there is footage from the opening-night party at which singer-songwriter James Bay (pictured) performed live. Kirsty Wark and Brenda Emmanus are handed hosting duties. MB 9pm, Channel 5 A clip-driven bio that copes well with the problem of it being pricey to buy in clips of boxing bouts: pugilism experts capture the narrative of Tyson Fury becoming an unlikely champion, then mounting an even more unlikely comeback. His burst of awful public statements in 2015 is not soft-soaped. Jack Seale 10pm, 5Star There is much canteen teasing, pinning of inmates up against the wall and fantasising about the hot psychologist in the usual tongue-in-cheek plotlines this week. Liz is working through her bucket list and there’s a shock appointment at the prison. Meanwhile, Rita and Kaz team up against Marie, with dark consequences. Hannah Verdier Kajaki 11pm, BBC Two This nerve-shredding thriller tells the true-life story of an incident during the Afghan war in 2006, when British paratroopers in Helmand blundered into a minefield left by the long-evacuated Soviet army. It’s not about traditional war-movie heroics; just a tense and realistic account of desperate men in a nightmarish predicament. Paul Howlett Women’s World Cup Football: Netherlands v Cameroon, 1.45pm, BBC One A Group E fixture, taking place in Valenciennes. Motor Racing: Le Mans 24 Hours, 1.45pm, Eurosport 1 The 87th staging of the famous endurance race. Golf: US Open, 7pm, Sky Sports Golf Day three’s play from Pebble Beach Golf Links in California.