For one weekend every year, the small town of Porthcawl in south Wales is chock full of Elvises. “Every single space you go into has got an Elvis tribute artist performing,” says choreographer Claire Cunningham. “All degrees of Elvis, from the big professional shows in the pavilion to the guy singing in the corner of a bar. The whole town is taken over by everyone having a go. It’s extraordinary and it’s brilliant.” Cunningham found herself in the middle of Europe’s largest Elvis festival in the name of research for her latest show, Thank You Very Much, a dance-theatre piece that examines the idea of identity through the prism of the tribute artist. Cunningham had been fascinated by Elvis since she was a child listening to Can’t Help Falling in Love on her mum’s record player. As an adult, and an award-winning performer and choreographer, she came back to Elvis from a different angle. “I became really fascinated by how he danced, how he moved,” she says. Cunningham wanted to learn how to dance like Elvis, and rather than copying a video, she wanted to learn from an expert. And where better to get an education in Elvis’s snake hips than in a town full of impersonators? Amid the wall-to-wall Love Me Tenders and Jailhouse Rocks in Porthcawl, Cunningham began to be fascinated by what makes a “good” tribute act. “I’m somebody who just can’t watch TV competition shows,” she says. “I hate things that compare one person with another. But as soon as I sat in that room I was already deciding why somebody was better than somebody else. That intrigued me.” She found herself weighing up whether it was more important to look like The King, or sound like him, or whether being a good performer and showman (they were all men, incidentally) was more important than both of those things. From the guy who’d just stuck on some comedy sideburns to the pro who’d spent thousands on a rhinestone jumpsuit, they were all chasing this almost mythical Elvis-shaped ideal, and surprisingly that was something that chimed with Cunningham’s own life. Having been born with osteoporosis, Cunningham, 42, has used crutches since she was a teenager and incorporates them into her often autobiographical work on stage. Being held up to a physical ideal is a familiar feeling for Cunningham. “[There are] these parallels of people having ideas about who you are and how your body should be that require no investment in actually getting to know that person,” she says. She realised the Elvis tribute was a way into talking about her own experience of identity and disability, and that of her fellow performers (Dan Daw, Tanja Erhart and Vicky Malin) trying to live up to society’s idea of what a body should be, just like the Porthcawl impersonators were attempting to live up to “the elephant in the room that everybody is being compared to”. Thank You Very Much is not – repeat not – an Elvis tribute show, even though it takes place in a social club, the natural home of the tribute act, and there will be singing, and most likely moves Cunningham learned from impersonators she met (including ’50s legs, the “lasso” and the “machine gun”). But this is no faithful rehash of the ’68 Comeback Special. “We’re not trying to create that illusion,” she says. “It’s much more about the parallel with this shared experience of ‘who are we all trying to be like?’” Something else Cunningham realised from talking to the Porthcawl fans was just how revolutionary Presley had been when he arrived on the scene. “For somebody of my generation, it’s hard to understand how shocking Elvis was when he first appeared, how provocative,” she says. “And that’s something I really related to, in the lived experience of disability – being seen as a disturbance to what is normal or acceptable,” she says. “I recognise that in the treatment of me and many of my friends who, when we arrive into spaces, are a spectacle. We might as well be walking around in 70s jumpsuits. You are performing all the time, every time you walk through a door, or wheel through a door,” she says. “Or for some people, every time they try to communicate, the way they speak becomes a spectacle, or a disturbance.” These are serious, personal, meaty matters to deal with in dance and their treatment could be earnest or preachy. But Cunningham’s route into the subject makes that unlikely. “These parallels are the things I’m interested in playing with in the show,” she says. “But being able to do it through this very fun lens, it’s been such a beautiful thing to research.” What Cunningham loved most about her visit to Porthcawl was the commitment of the fans and the tribute artists she met. “This desire to share the love of the thing they love – as an artist I really relate to that. That’s often at the core of what I do, trying to share something or communicate with people.” One thing she now wants to share is the idea of the “self-tribute”. In other words, how you let go of trying to be like somebody else and love who you are. “It sounds very cheesy,” she says, “but how can we help each other get to a place where you can pay tribute to who you are right now? Where the way that you move is the ideal. The way that you talk.” Where you might appreciate, as Elvis would say, the wonder of you? • Thank You Very Much is at the Ukrainian Cultural Centre, 31 Smedley Lane, Manchester M8 8XB, 17-20 July • The Guardian is a media partner of Manchester international festival.