The descriptions – “legendary”, “historic” – of the US president’s latest encounter with Kim Jong-un were typically Trumpian, but it was the first daughter who gave the most candid assessment of their brief trip into the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. “Surreal,” came the reply from Ivanka Trump after a journalist asked: “How was North Korea?” as she emerged from talks between her father and the North Korean leader inside the Korean peninsula’s demilitarised zone (DMZ) on Sunday. Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner, who are both official advisers to the president, had joined him for a conversation inside a building straddling the line between the two Korean states. She had earlier said she would cross the border into North Korea, if invited. Ivanka Trump says she will “absolutely” step over border at DMZ into North Korea today, “if I was invited.”“We need to continue that dialogue to work in good faith to realize that goal (of denuclearization). Today is another step in that direction,” she told me. pic.twitter.com/JSjwd1glfi The president’s daughter, who had travelled with him after being by his side during the G20 summit in Japan, was also in the spotlight after the release of footage showing her awkwardly attempting to join in a conversation between Theresa May, Emmanuel Macron and Christine Lagarde. The video, released by Macron’s office on Instagram, prompted ridicule from political opponents and others, with many picking up on the look on Lagarde’s face when Trump tried to enter the conversation. Ivanka Trump appears to be trying to get involved in a talk among Macron, May, Trudeau and Lagarde (IMF head). The video is released by French Presidential palace. pic.twitter.com/TJ0LULCzyQ The New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez tweeted: “It may be shocking to some, but being someone’s daughter actually isn’t a career qualification. “It hurts our diplomatic standing when the president phones it in and the world moves on. The US needs our president working the G20. Bringing a qualified diplomat couldn’t hurt either.” Some commentators remarked on the extent of the role played by Ivanka Trump at the G20, where she spoke to the media after her father’s meetings with the Indian and Japanese leaders and also appeared prominently in official leaders’ photographs.