Khartoum is bracing itself for a mass protest against Sudan’s ruling generals, as calls mount for restraint to prevent a new military crackdown on demonstrators. The planned “million man” march is seen as a test for protest organisers who were hit by a 3 June attack on a sit-in in the Sudanese capital and a subsequent internet blackout that limited their ability to mobilise support. Dozens of demonstrators were killed and hundreds wounded when armed men in military fatigues stormed the sit-in outside army headquarters, shooting and beating protesters who had camped there since 6 April. The new protest comes at a time when Ethiopia and the African Union (AU) are jointly mediating between the protesters and generals. A top general, Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, warned on Saturday that no vandalism would be tolerated. “There are vandals, there are people who have an agenda, a hidden agenda. We don’t want problems,” said Dagalo, the ruling military council’s deputy head and chief of the feared paramilitary Rapid Support Forces (RSF). Protesters have voiced fears of new violence. “I expect large numbers ... and it’s very possible that security forces will use force against protesters,” said Mustafa, 25, who gave only his first name for security reasons, as he planned to participate. Another protester, Talal, 29, was looking forward to Sunday’s rally, the first since the crackdown. “Even if only a few rallies take place in Khartoum, they will break the barrier of fear and more people will take to the streets in following days,” he said. The umbrella protest movement, the Alliance for Freedom and Change, said demonstrators would launch rallies from several areas in Khartoum and its twin city of Omdurman, and march to the homes of some protesters killed in the 3 June raid. About 130 people have been killed since the crackdown, the majority of them on that day, according to doctors close to the alliance. The health ministry says 61 people died across the country on that day. The ruling military council insists it did not order the dispersal, but acknowledged “excesses” after orders were given to purge a nearby area notorious for drug peddling. The council has warned it will hold the alliance responsible for any fresh violence. “The country is going through a serious crisis, and we will hold the Alliance for Freedom and Change entirely responsible if any soul is lost in the march,” it said. An RSF unit prevented protest leaders from holding a press conference to unveil plans for Sunday’s rally. Tension remains high between the two sides since the 3 June attack, which followed the collapse of talks over who should lead a new governing body – a civilian or a soldier. Ethiopia and the AU have now proposed a blueprint for a civilian-majority body, which the generals say could be a basis for resuming talks. Protesters had initially gathered at the military headquarters to seek the army’s support in ousting the longtime ruler Omar al-Bashir. They kept up their sit-in to demand civilian rule after the generals seized power. The European Union, several western nations and rights groups have called on the generals to avoid any violence on Sunday. Mobilising protesters has become a challenge since the raid, with military rulers imposing a widespread internet blackout. In the lead-up to Bashir’s fall, tens of thousands of protesters were organised through social media, but now protest leaders have to resort to neighbourhood campaigns to keep the movement alive.