Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s French fans tuned into Canal+ (the France-only subscription channel) on Monday for the first season of Mouche, AKA French Fleabag. A contemporary TV remake is a curious thing, the original show’s shine – its oomph, its raison d’être – so often dulled. This one, though, looks to be in safe hands. So did it sing? Camille Cottin (Call My Agent’s Andrea) stars as the titular Mouche or “Fly”. As with Fleabag, though, you never actually hear her called by either her name or this nickname (Cottin’s own when she was little). The film-maker and screenwriter Jeanne Herry has transposed her story from London to Paris with such poise and textual accuracy that you forget, for the most part, that you are watching a redo. And it is entirely to Waller-Bridge’s credit that her writing – so emphatically British – stands up to this cultural reworking. In fact, it glows, albeit with a different, more acerbic polish. Mouche lives in a typical Parisian apartment with a narrow front door and a parquet floor. From the RATP bus to the vaulted gallery to the silent retreat in a 19th-century chateau, the original story is seamlessly inserted into French metropolitan life. Mouche’s sex life is in disarray, her family teeters on the edge of a cliff; guilt and grief threaten everything. There are a few notable shifts. In a knowing nod to the show’s British roots, she and best friend Nini open not a cafe but a concept salon de thé – called Thé Thé – where everything on the menu features tea in some way. This doesn’t stop Mouche, true to form, from serving up tuna baguettes and attempting to pass off a cornershop risotto as her own. Crucially, instead of the series opening with that breathy front-door booty-call of a monologue (“You know that feeling when a guy you like sends you a text at 2 o’clock on a Tuesday night …”), you first encounter her in the underground scene – on the métro. The whole carriage repeatedly doubles over in pain in time with a more drawn-out beat than the original. As Mouche tells you her period is coming, you note right off the bat that this show might just dwell longer on the emotion of it all. Cottin plays Mouche with a characteristic blend of coyness, verve and muscular fury. She is seven years older than Waller-Bridge, which takes the character from rosy-cheeked ingénue to someone who doesn’t so much look her age but has just lived more life. As an actor, Cottin has immense control, delivering a devastating line with not so much as a wrinkle and turning on almost apoplectic rage in a blink of those grass-green eyes. Which is to say, Cottin is just not that goofy. And Fleabag, well, she kinda is. Where the latter sometimes visibly struggles to find words, Mouche, it seems, is muzzled by the script. You get the sense that given half the chance, she would pretty much always know exactly what to say. The men in the show are that bit older, too: the father (frailer, taller and with whiter hair than Bill Paterson); the creepy brother-in-law; the tortured boyfriend who finally leaves; the preposterous lover (here a blue-eyed hunk with a full-on greying beard) who doesn’t stay. And the show’s women – and their shoes – make for some telling cross-Channel dialogue about cultural tropes. In Mouche, all the women are as glam as Fleabag’s sister was, even Nini. Anne Dorval, so often the director Xavier Dolan’s leading lady, plays the artist stepmom with all of the venom Olivia Colman so perfectly instilled in her, but less of the freewheeling hippy chic. Dorval is just plain chic. And where Fleabag, while out shopping for shoes for her sister, tells her brother-in-law that chic is boring ,“but don’t tell the French”, Mouche, obviously, leaves out the second bit. (It brings to mind that moment in Call My Agent where Cottin’s character describes a dowdy, matronly English casting director as “bein, une Anglaise, quoi” – that is, as an English woman. I wonder how a writer’s room would rework that insult in a UK remake.) Mouche didn’t come about because of general demand by the French public. In fact, as Cottin recently told Le Monde, when she was asked to take part even actors reading for parts on the show hadn’t heard of Fleabag. Herry approached the whole thing like a theatre director tackling someone else’s play, and duly went with predominantly stage actors for their ability to perform a script with surgical precision. But as impeccably wrought as this remake is, about halfway through the first episode you realise you have just not laughed as much as you did the first time round with Fleabag. It makes you smile, and it will make you cry, but that cerebral British distance, the show’s way of holding awful leaden things so lightly, has got somewhat lost in translation. Season one of Mouche is now available online on MyCanal in France, with a UK broadcaster still to be announced