Among the rows of stark white headstones marking a generation of doomed youth, those who survived gathered to pay tribute to those who did not. Hundreds of Normandy veterans, blue-blazered, chest-bars weighted with medals, sat before the Cross of Sacrifice at Bayeux military cemetery for a service of remembrance attended by the Prince of Wales and the prime minister, Theresa May, on the 75th anniversary of D-day. Their numbers are fewer now. Age is defeating them. But as Royal British Legion standards dipped in respect, and the buglers’ last post heralded a two-minute silence broken only by birdsong, they stood, or sat, as straight as their advanced years permitted. Bayeux, the first city to be liberated, is the last resting place of more than 4,100 Commonwealth servicemen. Hundreds of people made clear their gratitude, lining the city’s cobbled streets as veterans made their way to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemetery. It was a day that saw May, in one of her final engagements as Conservative party leader, pay tribute to the “raw courage” of all who stormed the beaches and fought in the villages, towns and copses during the Battle of Normandy. It was also a day that saw the French president, Emmanuel Macron, at a ceremony to inaugurate a memorial to the British fallen, highlight the ties binding France and the UK. “Nothing will break them. Nothing can ever break ties that have been bound in bloodshed and shared values. The debates taking place today cannot affect the strength of our joint history and our shared future,” he said. A tri-service guard of honour and fanfare greeted Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall, as they arrived at the cemetery with May and her husband, Philip. Frank Baugh, 95, from Doncaster, gave powerful testimony of arriving at Sword beach at H-hour, his words resonating with so many others there. As a Royal Navy signalman with the Landing Craft Infantry, his task was to ferry in 200 troops from Newhaven, he said in an address at the service. As they approached the beach, they took a direct hit which caused a fire and holed the craft below the waterline. Many were injured. The others had to make for the beach. “My most abiding memory is seeing the boys we had been talking to a minute before cut down by machine gun fire. They fell into water, floating face down. We couldn’t get them out. We couldn’t help them. And that is my most abiding memory that I can’t forget,” he said. In a pre-recorded interview with the BBC, Prince Charles paid tribute to those who had fallen. “This country lost countless special people and we owe it to them and their families to go on commemorating this,” he said. Of the veterans, he said: “They always remember their comrades and their friends and the people they had to leave behind.” The 75th anniversary was particularly poignant. “It’s probably the last chance to pay everlasting respect to these remarkable people who wanted above all to do their duty,” he added. Before the cemetery commemorations, more than 1,000 people attended a Royal British Legion remembrance service at Bayeux Cathedral, including the defence secretary, Penny Mordaunt, and the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who described the service as “beautiful and inclusive”. Earlier, May and Macron attended the launch of construction work for the new British Normandy memorial, overlooking Gold beach at Ver-sur-Mer, which will record the names of all 22,442 members of the British armed forces who died in the landings and ensuing battle. “Standing here, as the waves wash quietly on to the shore, it is almost impossible to grasp the raw courage that it must have taken that day to leap out from landing craft and into the surf – despite the fury of the battle,” May said, addressing invited guests. It was “truly humbling” to stand looking across the beaches “with the men who were there on that day”, she added. “If one day can be said to have determined the fate of generations to come – in France, in Britain, in Europe and the world – that day was June 6 1944.” Wreaths were laid at the foundation stone of the memorial, including one by Sir Winston Churchill’s great-great grandson, John Churchill. Depicting three British soldiers storming the beaches, the memorial is expected to be completed within a year. Macron said: “The British people have long dreamed of this memorial.” He also appeared to pay tribute to May in the last gasps of her premiership. “Leaders may come and go but their achievements remain. The force of our friendship will outlast current events,” he said.