The most electric of matches at Headingley was marred by crowd disturbances as Pakistan crept over the line by three wickets with two balls to spare to keep their World Cup alive. With a handful of overs to go, tension that had been building between small pockets of spectators all day, with fights outside the gate and disruptive fans being bundled out of the ground, bubbled over. A plastic chair was sent flying, plastic bottles and drinks thrown and mass gesturing between two groups of opposing supporters in the Western and Trueman stands. As the winning runs were hit, 20 pitch invaders sprinted on to the square with a hotchpotch squad of security personnel in fluorescent jackets unable to stop them. In the mêlée Mohammad Nabi was mistakenly decked by a security guard as flares went off and plastic bottles continued to be thrown. The International Cricket Council announced early in the day that it was investigating “scuffles among a minority of fans” and the governing body is expected to issue further statements. Violence may have been triggered by the growing links between Afghanistan cricket and the Board of Control for Cricket in India, despite most of the Afghanistan side having learnt their cricket in Pakistan and an aeroplane flying over the ground towing the message “Justice for Balochistan”. Gulbadin Naib, Afghanistan’s saddened captain, said: “We want a friendship and we were excited to play this kind of tournament and this kind of match with anyone. This is only a cricket game, just watch like a cricket game. It’s a sport. I’m just playing for my country, cricket and nothing else. I request to all watching matches, please just watch like a sport.” The victory takes Pakistan up to fourth in the table and ratchets up the pressure on England, though the hosts have a game in hand. They play it in a now crucial game against India at Edgbaston on Sunday. The match had less ebbed and flowed than splashed about desperately in all directions as Pakistan attempted to chase 228 but stumbled and self-destructed against intelligent Afghan bowling until Imad Wasim seized the game with a thrilling 49 not out. Their pursuit had a flaky start. They lost their review without a run on the board when Fakhar Zaman thrust his pads at Majeeb Ur Rahman and decided to send the lbw decision upstairs. But the gloriously in-form Babar Azam was off the mark with a dreamy cover drive and he and Imam-ul-Haq dealt in sweet boundaries and quick singles. When Afghanistan likewise wasted their review, the equation seemed simple. But this was Pakistan. After a partnership of 72 with Babar, Imam-ul-Haq failed in a desperate dive back to his crease and was stumped. When Babar followed, trying to sweep the second ball of Nabi’s fourth over, Pakistan had lost two wickets in nine balls. Mohammad Hafeez and Haris Sohail had to rebuild as Afghanistan applied the pressure. The Pakistan hundred came up with the first boundary for eight overs. Hafeez sliced Mujeeb Ur Rahman loosely to point on 19 and when Haris Sohail was lbw to Rashid Khan after a partnership of 21 with Sarfaraz Ahmed, the equation was 86 off 15 overs with all the best batsmen back in the pavilion. With nerves came silence for the first time in the game – more loaded than any noise. Sarfaraz was run out and it was up to Imad, who grabbed his chance in the 46th over, with 46 needed. He sent a full toss from Gulbadin scurrying for four. When Asghar Afghan somehow failed to pick up a swirler at mid-off from the next ball, losing it in the sky and the tension, his fellow fielders fell to their knees. Imad crashed two more boundaries and leant on his bat as if he was taking in a particularly nice sunrise. Eighteen had come off the over and Pakistan were nearly home. But for the loss of Afghanistan’s review, the outcome could have been different; Imad was given not out on one when pinned on the pad by Rashid and, had Afghanistan not spurned their review earlier, the decision would have been overturned. The flat faces of the red terraces had earlier seemed impervious as the Afghans walked out to bat. The horns, the shouts, the drums and the chants circumnavigating Headingley, the ball-bearing endlessly circulating the cone as Leeds sweltered under a heat haze. Shaheen Afridi, just 19, and the man who broke the back of the New Zealand middle order, was Pakistan’s crack bowler, leaking runs but storming in from the Football Stand End at up to 90mph, his double-armed wrist bands and fertile mane of hair a magnificent sight as he sent down cutters, yorkers and slower balls in his crucial four for 47. Gulbadin and Rahmat Shah had resisted the momentum of Mohammad Amir, cheered to the shaking bones of the stadium as he glided in from the Kirkstall Lane End and Sarfaraz whistled for Shaheen. Gulbadin pancaked him twice for four but drove at his next ball and snicked behind – the umpire turned it down but Shaheen was insistent that Sarfaraz review. He was right. Next ball Hashmatullah Shahidi nudged a leading edge into Imad Wasim’s hands and Pakistan were on their way.