Ryan Giggs insists he has no concerns about his Wales players being targets for racist abuse during their Euro 2020 qualifier against Hungary on Tuesday evening. The game at Budapest’s 22,000-capacity Groupama Arena will see 3,000 seats shut off after Hungary were fined over £20,000 by Uefa following their game with Slovakia on 21 March. The governing body’s original charge against Hungary was for racist behaviour of fans, vandalism, the setting off of fireworks and the throwing of objects. The charge of throwing of objects was closed following an appeal from Hungary, but the rest were upheld. “There will be less fans in the stadium, but I understand it’s a very good atmosphere,” said Giggs. “I’ve talked before about sanctions on racism not being strong enough. They need to be stronger, but for me it’s all about concentrating on the game. “I’ve got enough to worry about with winning this game. We hope all the fans behave as always.” Last month, Giggs called for stadium bans, points deductions and bigger fines if teams and their supporters were found guilty of racism. Hungary have been forced to display a Uefa banner behind one of the Groupama Arena’s goal with the slogan #EqualGame to cover the 3,000 seats. Wales’ focus is on the field with Giggs calling on his team to bounce back from Saturday’s 2-1 defeat to Croatia in Osijek. As ever, Gareth Bale will be an important figure. The forward has been hidden away from press duties by Wales so he can avoid being questioned about his uncertain future at Real Madrid and despite him being captain of the side. “I was happy with Gareth’s performance in Croatia,” Giggs said. “He grew into the game and that might be because of not playing for six weeks which is understandable. “Hopefully he is saving it for Tuesday. Any team that plays against a team with Gareth in it will mark him up as a danger man. A lot of teams will stop him any way they can, it is up to us and Gareth to find a way around that. He is used to that both at club and international level.” Wales can still qualify for next year’s European Championship if they lose to Hungary but defeat would leave them up against it. Giggs will make changes from the Croatia game, with Bournemouth’s David Brooks and Ethan Ampadu of Chelsea both expected to come in to start. The experienced Chris Gunter could also replace Connor Roberts at right back. “It’s important we get something from the game, but there are 15 points to be won after that as well,” Giggs said. “I realise after the impact they made in Croatia a lot of fans are asking why I didn’t start Ethan and David. Ethan hasn’t started a game for six months and Brooks didn’t end the season.” Hungary are top of Group E, level on points with Croatia, with Wales three points adrift. In addition to the seating ban, Hungary have also seen manager Marco Rossi banned from the dugout after he was sent off in Saturday’s win over Azerbaijan.