You’ll have noticed a few red-faced Englishmen getting very angry when Callum Wilson’s goal against Switzerland was disallowed by VAR on Sunday. No surprise there, to be fair to the lads, given they must have been itching to get away from the stadium and back to the boozer, ready to resume charming the locals with some educational songs about mid-20th century European history. Every minute matters when people are waiting to hear about what did happen to those 10 German bombers in the air, so it was no wonder that some England fans could be heard chanting “[Eff] VAR” when Wilson’s elation at breaking the Swiss resistance proved short-lived. Weirdly VAR remained un-effed, however, and that meant Gareth Southgate’s team had to go through the stress of a penalty shootout in order to win the ultimate gong: third place in the Intertoto Cup (that is what that competition’s called, isn’t it?). Eek! While it was a bit annoying that the earliest pre-season friendly in history had to go on a bit longer than necessary, it’s important to remember that we would have been denied the spectacle of Jordan Pickford, powered by the Vimto running through his veins, traction-engining his penalty into the net if the game had been settled in normal time. It was probably the most thunderous spot-kick since Julian D1cks almost took Peter Schmeichel’s head off at a stadium called Upton Park (look it up, kids) and from that point there was no doubt Pickford would come up with the save that confirmed England are even better at football than Switzerland. Take that, Roger Federer. Bronze, though. Shiny bronze! Look at England, envy of All Europe, ready to conquer all-comers at Euro 2020. Assuming we ignore the fact that it was Portugal, who went and actually won the Nations League, that is, beating the Netherlands thanks to a strike from Valencia forward Gonçalo Guedes. It was further evidence of Portugal’s tournament prowess, though judging by Cristiano Ronaldo’s contained celebrations this paled in comparison to their success at Euro 2016. Nothing to get too excited about, then, unlike England’s finest achievement since winning Le Tournoi in 1997. Speaking of which, there’s another tournament going on in France at the moment – and, presumably now the Nations League is done, $exually Repressed Morris Dancing Fiver, our stereotypical English cousin, and all the other stag-doers will be heading to Le Havre to back the Lionesses when they face Argentina on Friday. Summer’s not over yet. There are plenty more town squares to conquer. March! Join Jacob Steinberg from 5pm BST for hot MBM coverage of Argentina 0-4 Japan, while Ben Fisher will be on hand at 8pm for Canada 3-1 Cameroon. “I’m so upset. More for the style in which we played the second half. If you think as a coach you can come in and change your philosophy and change the style within five matches … we have just been crucified, not once but twice” – Matildas legend Heather Garriock sticks the flamin’ boot into manager Ante Milicic after his side approached their World Cup opener, a shock 2-1 defeat by Italy, playing a defensive line almost as high as Everest. “Is Gareth Southgate The Fiver? To simultaneously speak of fatigue, presumably from too many matches, and lack of match sharpness, presumably from too few, he shows all the inherent contradictions we expect from our daily tea-timely email. Or maybe he just picked the wrong team” – James Cahill. “I’m perplexed by the unrealistic expectations placed on the English men’s team by fans and media. In the Nations League, England, stocked (understandably) with Englishmen, and playing a game that their forefathers invented, have once again underwhelmed in a major tournament. Yet only last week we were celebrating the end of an English club season that saw four English teams, stocked mostly with non-Englishmen, contest the two major European club finals. Meanwhile, across the Atlantic, the Toronto Raptors, a Canadian basketball team, stocked with nary a Canadian but playing a game invented by a Canadian, are one win from being crowned NBA champions, the most important club basketball title in the world. Should Canadian basketball fans now expect Olympic gold medals and world championships from their national hoops team? For what it’s worth, ‘Basketball’s Coming Home’ is a catchy slogan” – R Reisman. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … James Cahill. Tributes continue to be paid to Leyton Orient manager Justin Edinburgh, who died on Saturday aged 49 after suffering a cardiac arrest. “Football aside, Justin was a hugely positive man, loved his family,” said Jobi McAnuff, Orient’s captain. “Every day he came in he had that lust for life, a real zest about him, a real willingness to enjoy himself. I think he would want us to carry that on.” Suspended Afghanistan Football Federation president, Keramuudin Karim, has been banned for life from all football-related activity and fined a million Swiss francs by Fifa following an investigation finding him guilty of “having abused his position and sexually abused various female players, in violation of the Fifa code of ethics”. Steph Houghton reckons other teams should be frightened of England, given they saw off Scotland 2-1 despite being a bit bobbins. “It’s quite scary that we know we can play quite a bit better,” she roared. Meanwhile, the match was the UK’s most-watched women’s game of all time, drawing a peak of 6.1m viewers. Ryan Giggs wants his Wales players to stay focused amid concerns they may be subjected to abuse in Hungary, where there will be a partial closure of the stadium in Tuesday’s Euro 2020 qualifier. “For me it’s all about concentrating on the game,” said Giggs. “We hope all the fans behave as always.” Fresh and funky Turkish officials have had a pop at Iceland after the national team were kept waiting for three hours at passport control in Reykjavik before Tuesday’s Euro 2020 qualifier. “The disrespect shown to our national team is unacceptable and what is necessary will be done,” fumed Ibrahim Kalin, spokesman to president Tayyip Erdogan. “Our national team will give the best response on the field.” Salomón Rondón shed salty tears of joy after his two goals in the 3-0 gubbing of USA! USA!! USA!!! made him Venezuela’s all-time leading scorer. “As a kid, I had many dreams,” he sobbed. “I dreamed of playing for Venezuela and, once I achieved that, my goal was to beat Juan Arango’s record.” And Crystal Palace have said “pah!” to Manchester United’s opening offer of 40 million big ones for Aaron Wan-Bissaka. Hope Solo joins Marta, Zico, Marcel Desailly, Thomas Hitzlsperger and, er, David James on the list of colleagues yet to invite The Fiver out for post-work Tin. Here’s her first column. How Zinedine Zidane spent the best part of a decade giving Eden Hazard the glad eye, by Sid Lowe. Max Rushden on the perils of not bringing a packed lunch to work. Philip Patrick reveals how Japan went from winning the 2011 Women’s World Cup to struggling for an audience at all. And keep up with every in and every out in this summer’s transfer window, painstakingly updated by Big Website drones more dedicated than The Fiver. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!