Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct has fired off a legal challenge against the Debenhams rescue restructure, which was approved by creditors last month. The legal challenge is being backed by at least one other landlord while a third, M&G, is understood to have launched its own legal action. The cases are likely to be heard together in early July. Sports Direct’s legal action is the latest blow by Ashley in his battle with the department store, which was taken over by a syndicate of banks and hedge funds it owed money. The deal thwarted an attempt by the Sports Direct boss to take control and wiped out the group’s stake in Debenhams which had cost at least £150m to build up. Sports Direct took part in the CVA vote as the retail group, which also owns the House of Fraser department store chain as well as a string of sports and fashion stores, was owed more than £500,000 by Debenhams at the time the CVA was tabled. Debenhams plans to close at least 22 of its 166 UK stores in January and force through rent cuts on many others under the restructure. Landlords and other creditors, such as clothing suppliers, approved the closures, which form part of two company voluntary arrangement (CVA) deals that Debenhams’ new owners have said are necessary to prevent the business collapsing. Debenhams received 95% support for one plan and 97% for the other CVA – an insolvency procedure that only affects certain classes of creditor. Terry Duddy, the Debenhams executive chairman, said: “We believe the challenges to the CVAs to be without merit and will vigorously defend them. Given the overwhelming support for the proposals from creditors, including over 80% of landlords, this is an unnecessary distraction as we implement our restructuring plans.” A spokesperson for Celine UK NewCo 1 Ltd, Debenhams’ new owners, said: “We note the spurious challenges to Debenhams’ CVA proposals, which were approved by the vast majority of landlords and more than 90% of all creditors. We will move forward with our debt restructuring process as expected. The CVA provides a platform to deliver a turnaround in the business for which the lending group has committed £200m of new funding and remains supportive.” The basis of Sports Direct’s challenge of the Debenhams CVA is not clear. But in a review of the process published last month, the sports group raised concerns about a sale process run by Debenhams’ new owners which was concluded shortly before the CVA vote. It said the sale process had been run on an “incredibly short and unrealistic” timescale and had closed only hours before the CVA vote. The note also criticised Debenhams’ plan to exit its distribution centre in Sherburn, near Leeds, next year, a move that would leave the company with just one distribution centre serving more than 100 stores.