Northern Ireland is arguably as polarised as at any time since the IRA hunger strikes of 1981. It has been without a Stormont government since the beginning of 2017 due to divisions over matters such as the Irish language, Brexit and the legacy of the 30-year Troubles. Yet at the same time, the cross-community Alliance party recently had its biggest ever share of the vote, at 18.5%, in the European elections. And last week research suggested that more people than ever in the province, 50%, say they are “neither unionist nor nationalist”. The Northern Ireland Life and Times survey finds that half the population does not identify with the two main tribal groups who want to see sovereignty lie with either London or Dublin. At the same time the censuses have found a gradual rise in the number of people who consider themselves Northern Irish (as opposed to Irish or British) – people such as the golfer Rory McIlroy (born in 1989), whose background is Catholic but who attended a non-Catholic school and said he felt more of a connection to the UK than Ireland. It is not easy to reconcile these contrasting realities of deep division and a growing repudiation of sectarian labels. In the recent European elections, the combined centre vote (including Greens) rose to 21% – easily the highest achieved by nonaligned parties since the 1960s. But almost 80% still vote unionist or nationalist. One explanation for the discrepancy is that the 50% who eschew tribal labels are people who are far less likely to vote in elections than those who care about which nation has ultimate charge of Northern Ireland. Apolitical people in affluent societies often do not vote, such as in US presidential elections where turnout is around half of the electorate. Northern Ireland’s turnout is traditionally lowest in the wealthiest constituency, North Down. But there has always been a degree of indifference towards religious groupings in Northern Ireland, despite it having higher rates of allegiance to the Christian churches than Great Britain. Professed religious faith is more akin to that seen in the US than in secular England, yet as far back as 1968, the year the Troubles erupted, weekly church attendance among Anglicans and Presbyterians in Northern Ireland was below 50% (it was much higher among Catholics, at over 90%). Those numbers have been in relentless decline over the last half century, particularly among Ulster Catholics. Shunning the political divisions that accompany religious ones (Protestants overwhelmingly favour the UK link, while Catholics mostly long for Irish unity) has been a slow process, yet there were always people who did that. Prior to last month’s European election victory, Alliance’s greatest success came at the height of the violence, winning 14% of the vote in the 1973 and 1977 local elections. The loyalist and republican “extremes” were rejected by a majority of voters throughout the most bitter decades. By the 1980s, these two poles were represented by the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) and Sinn Féin, which in most elections won only a combined third of the vote and were comfortably outpolled by the more moderate Ulster Unionist party (UUP) and the Social Democratic and Labour party (SDLP). It was only after the 1998 Good Friday agreement that the hardline parties began to eclipse their milder rivals. And it was only after the 2006 St Andrews agreement, when the fundamentalist Rev Ian Paisley and the veteran republican Gerry Adams appeared to defy political gravity by sharing power, that the DUP and Sinn Féin consolidated their positions at the top. Much of the vote that now goes to those parties, which between them often win more than half the vote, does so precisely because they are no longer seen as extreme. One simplistic way to look at Northern Ireland’s voting allegiances is to think in terms of thirds: a third feel strongly unionist, a third feel strongly nationalist, and a third feel less strongly either. This poses a huge challenge for unionists because that middle third tends to be anti-Brexit, and now holds the balance of power – despite the DUP holding the whip hand in Westminster. But it is a challenge for nationalists too, because the old assumption that demographic change (a long-term rise in the Catholic population) would lead to Irish unity is not borne out by the trends in voting and identity. The future could be neither. • Ben Lowry is deputy editor of the Belfast News Letter