Both fighters talked of this world-title fight as their destiny. “It is written,” said Abdul Bari-Awad, also known as Kid Galahad. Warrington spoke of the fear of “going back to square one” after his unheralded journey to the top of the featherweight division. But after 12 rounds of ferocious boxing, Josh Warrington heard the words he wanted to hear: “And still…” The scorecard read 116-112 and 116-113 in favour of Warrington, and 115-113 in favour of Galahad. The fight was perilously close, given by the judges as a split-decision. Kid Galahad has a right to feel he was robbed of the chance to be the IBF’s undisputed champion. At Leeds’ First Direct Arena, which was transformed into something more akin to a bear pit by Warrington’s delirious fans, the two Yorkshiremen traded blows with an intensity that quickly left both fighters bloody and exhausted. Warrington, 28, with a record of 28-0, the local lad and a father of baby twin girls, was forced to continue his day-job as a dental technician for his first four years as a professional. The memories of fighting for his family while the chairs were packed away is still fresh in his mind. Galahad, 29, with a record of 26-0, was fighting for the memory of the late Brendan Ingle, the boxing coach who saved him from a life of crime on the streets of Sheffield. Galahad has spoken of sacrificing everything for boxing. This, he said, would be his only opportunity to gain a world title. Sheffield to Leeds is a short hop but Galahad might as well have landed on a different planet, and a hostile one at that. At the weigh in, Galahad had to stand naked on the scales to make weight, his modesty only just maintained by a T-shirt held about him by his coach, Brendan’s son Dominic. Before the fighters faced off, Galahad was then hit by a bottle thrown from the crowd. He had odds of 1/10 for a KO win going into the fight, but found a way to dominate the early rounds and frustrate Warrington’s vocal followers. “He talks about knocking me out, but I have been hit by the very best, clean,” Warrington said before the fight. Warrington’s abilities as a pressure fighter, a featherweight Gennady Golovkin who is happy to take punishment as long as he can also give it, are well known – just ask Carl Frampton. But Galahad refused to play ball. After a cagey and often scrappy opening four rounds, Galahad had succeeded in quietening the crowd. Warrington was starting to get frustrated. By the fifth round, his nose was bleeding. Warrington rallied in the sixth, landing shots without finding a way to wrest control of the fight. Had he under-estimated the skills of Kid Galahad? Here was an exhibition of pure Ingle skill, an icy-veined and versatile performance. The comparisons between Galahad and his fellow Sheffielder of Yemeni heritage, Prince Naseem Hamed, who was ringside on Saturday night, are justified. Galahad stalked Warrington while switching between southpaw and orthodox, encouraging the more aggressive boxer to over-commit and then, with elastic speed, picking him off with straight rights before rolling away. Galahad was either out of range or too close. He was happy to hold, and got warned by the referee for doing so illegally in round six. Warrington was struggling to land cleanly and looked short of ideas, even if flurries found their target in the sixth and seventh. Warrington’s remarkable levels of fitness allowed him to up the tempo in the final rounds. With the crowd roaring, he landed in flurries in the 11th and 12th as Galahad tired and tried to spoil. It may have just won him the balance on the judge’s scorecards, although ringside onlookers were almost unanimously surprised by the their decision. Warrington will now angle for a money-making, profile-raising, transatlantic fight against one of the big Mexican names of the featherweight division – Óscar Valdez or Léo Santa Cruz. He will go into the fight as the underdog. But don’t bet against such a determined and wilful fighter. And spare a thought for the vanquished fighter who, if there is any justice in the world of boxing, surely deserves a rematch.