How much has San Francisco changed since the 60s? This is the question posed to Anna Madrigal – ANNA MADRIGAL! – in the opening frames of Netflix’s Tales of the City reboot. “Hmmm,” replies the original house mother, straight to camera, in that fabulously bone-dry, bone-loving slooooow tone that only Olympia Dukakis – OLYMPIA DUKAKIS! – can pull off. “Not much actually. We’re still people aren’t we? Flawed, narcissistic and doing our best.” As for Lauren Morelli’s respectful reimagining of Tales of the City, executive produced by Armistead Maupin and the result of an all-queer writers’ room, it’s … flawed, narcissistic and doing its best. Sometimes it’s doing its best a bit too hard, which I guess is to be expected when the stakes are this high and the original – both books and mini-series – this fiercely loved. After all, Tales of the City remains the first proper home of generations of LGBT+ people. Our very own 28 Barbary Lane located in the spacious, open-aspected, radical mind of Maupin. This matters. Happily, lots of it feels right. It’s 20 years on and we’re back at Barbary Lane, which according to the consumer law of sequels is considerably bigger (Escher levels of decking, stairs and, erm, fairy lights), more aspirational and less fabulous than the original. It’s Anna’s 90th birthday party and Mary Ann Singleton (Laura Linney), the prodigal straight, anally retentive daughter, returns to San Francisco older, sadder, no wiser and just as square as ever. “I tried Googling what to wear to a 90-year-old’s birthday party in San Francisco and pictures of Cher kept coming up,” she wails, pitching up in a Next-level tea dress to the queer shindig of the century. Which is also too self-consciously hip and moneyed. She comes with a dodgy conventional husband in tow, a barely closeted homophobe who by the end of the first episode is daring her to go off “frolicking with the freaks”. He declares he will never understand “those people”. To which Mary Ann, one of literature’s great innocents, softly replies: “Those people are my family.” Some of the things that simply should happen do happen, such as Mary Ann and Anna locking tearful gazes across the party and then disappearing upstairs to get high. “Reality is overrated,” Anna declares, exhaling deeply. Or Mouse, keeping well on his antiretrovirals and newly in love, chiding Mary Ann for her earnestness because “who’s earnest any more”? Or Anna’s laconic speech about what life at 90 looks like: “You don’t wish for what’s to come. You revel in what’s already here.” Which, by the way, is also sage advice on how to approach the new Tales of the City. The new generation of Mrs Madrigal’s children – “I call them my children … because they are,” she says, appley cheeks ablaze with love – are harder work (with the caveat that I might just be a moany old bi). This is where TotC veers into try-hard territory. For instance, the young droll lesbian making a documentary about “queer community and its disillusion as a result of strangling grip that capitalism has on San Francisco”. A line that lands with an I’ve-just-swallowed-the-little-dictionary-of-Judith-Butler-sized clunk, and extraordinarily is also intended as a come-on. To be fair the response, by the equally droll queer cool cat Shawna (Ellen Page), who is the adopted daughter of Mary Ann and her ex-husband Brian and is basically Shane from The L Word dispatched from LA to San Fran, is: “Do you always talk like that?” Spoiler: she does. And it works. They end up shagging in an alleyway. Elsewhere, a previously lesbian and now queer couple are negotiating their way through one person’s transition with too much telling, not showing: “You’re excited Jake – you’re passing [as straight] and you’re excited!” And some twins have turned their bodies into live art for an Instagram account called Twintertainment1. There’s a sense that it’s trying to be all things to all people and generations. An understandable attempt to please that unfortunately results in a dilution of the original’s radicalism, mischief and warmth. Nevertheless, even in this world where the once solo-existing chronicle of queer life now jostles for space alongside everything from Pose to Queer Eye, we need Tales of the City as much, if not more, than ever. So as Mouse says, arms outstretched on the (much bigger) lawn at 28 Barbary Lane, “welcome home, babycakes”.