The race and equalities activist Simon Woolley, the head of the campaigning organisation Operation Black Vote (OBV), has received a knighthood in the Queen’s birthday honours list. The campaigner, who chairs the government’s race disparity audit advisory group, has been ennobled for his 23 years leading OBV, the non-governmental, non-partisan organisation that has sought to increase black representation in politics and to increase the participation of black communities in the political process. The elevation is remarkable because Woolley has also been a driving force in often controversial, high-profile grassroots campaigns highlighting racial discrimination, race attacks and police accountability, working alongside major figures such as Bernie Grant, the US civil rights leader Rev Al Sharpton and the former US presidential candidate Rev Jesse Jackson. Woolley said accepting the honour, extending a journey from outside the establishment to deep within, required a deal of soul searching. “To be singled out for this award is truly humbling. I hope the title will open more opportunities to allow me to work more effectively. I also hope it inspires other working-class people, black and white, to see what is possible for them if they make a positive contribution.” The acceptance of honours is a contentious issue among some minorities. The historian and broadcaster David Olusoga accepted an OBE but said its links to Britain’s imperial past made it a difficult decision. Citing empire, the poet, writer and musician Benjamin Zephaniah turned down an OBE. “Many black or minority ethnic individuals have to think hard about whether to take an award or not, particularly those offered an award with empire in its title,” said Woolley. “It’s a difficult choice and whatever decision they make I fully support them. In the case of the knighthood, I didn’t have to make that exact call. It has more to do with medieval times and the 13th century than empire.” But he added: “The truth is, for many of us there is nothing positive about the history of the empire. I hope sooner rather than later we can modernise the system to remove the empire connotation.” Woolley left school in Leicester without A-levels and began his career with a mechanical apprenticeship. He moved to London to work as a salesman but decided to extend his education and studied Spanish and Politics at Middlesex University. He became involved in the pressure group Charter 88 before embarking on a research project that first highlighted how the then little-acknowledged “black vote” could influence electoral outcomes, particularly in marginal seats. Those findings, seized upon by Labour and Conservative officials, became the launch pad for the formation of Operation Black Vote. Within Whitehall, Woolley’s race disparity unit has sought to address issues arising from Theresa May’s promise to tackle “burning injustices”, securing £90m of funding to get disadvantaged young men and women into work. Though Woolley, 57, does not know who submitted his name for consideration, he knows references were sought from the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, Lord Ouseley and Ken Olisa, the first black lord lieutenant of Greater London. The driver, he said, was OBV’s role in improving minority representation. “When we started there were four black and minority ethnic MPs. Now there are over 50 of them; three of them have been recently vying for the job of Conservative party leader; the Labour party frontbench has never been more diverse; 10% of the black and minority ethnic MPs have come through our shadowing scheme. “Three city leaders and over 100 magistrates have been part of work at OBV. The award is as much for those who have worked for and with OBV as for me. The challenge now is to see how useful it can be to what I am trying to do.” “ The knighthood was welcomed by Sharpton: “Simon is well deserving,” he said. “I have worked with him and witnessed his unbreakable belief in establishing justice.”