Greeted ardently by Brisbane audiences in 2013 following a 19-year absence from Australia, the Bolshoi Ballet – the world’s biggest ballet company – is back again, bringing more than 100 company members to Queensland in 2019. And it’s not just in numbers that the Bolshoi reflects the definition of its name: the ballet is big in style, confidence, energy and passion too. The dual program for QPAC pairs the Brisbane premieres of two complete productions: the legendary spectacle, Yuri Grigorovich’s epic showcase Spartacus; and George Balanchine’s neoclassical Jewels, which makes its Australian debut by the company on Saturday night. Both are from the 1960s, and both are signature pieces from their choreographers. Spartacus’ story of a do-or-die gladiatorial rebellion against enslavement has a universal appeal – and for 51 years, the Bolshoi interpretation has been considered the definitive one. My introduction to it was in 1985, when I saw a single act in Brisbane danced by Irek Mukhamedov – and the power, dynamism and intensity of Mukhamedov and the male ranks made a lasting impression. On the current season’s opening night on Thursday, Igor Tsvirko gives us another memorable Spartacus, with soaring leaps, fierce attack and strong partnering delivered with a commanding presence and robust virility – requisites for the role. Renowned for featuring male strength, Spartacus contrasts two opposing worlds. Stone edifices, imperial insignias and militaristic troop formations depict an austere and oppressive Roman landscape; while the lack of embellishment in the slaves’ costuming and setting concentrates on their humanity. Despite a dramatic opening, its energy is somewhat contained and takes a while to build. Given the length of the ballet (nearly three hours), bursts of virtuosic dancing are strategically spaced rather than constant, and come mostly from the leads rather than the group movement – which does become slightly repetitive at times. With a touring cast of 90, Spartacus still registers as an impressive spectacle, but it’s not always as viscerally exciting as one might hope. While much of the work in the solos and pas de deux is timeless, parts of other sections remain rooted firmly, and somewhat jarringly, in 1960s balletic conventions. On one hand there are busy expressionistic responses to Aram Khachaturyan’s stirring music (performed by Queensland Symphony Orchestra; conducted by the Bolshoi’s Pavel Sorokin); and on the other, merely suggestive symbolism in the orgy scene – both of which sit outside today’s preference for organic realism. But the musical motifs in Khachaturyan’s score given to the four leads are effective and expressive, with the refrain accompanying Spartacus’ wife Phrygia most recognisable (to my generation as the theme from The Onedin Line). First soloist Margarita Shrayner is lovely in this role, projecting a pliant openness and yearning in divine pas de deux (not surprisingly, she and Tsvirko are a real-life couple). The planes and shapes of the lifts are artistically beautiful with a technical wow-factor – especially the famous single-arm overhead press. Played by principals Alexander Volchkov and Olga Smirnova, Roman leader Crassus and his courtesan Aegina are a diabolical double. It is the even more scheming Aegina who emerges as Spartacus’ dramatic match, in a mesmerising performance by Smirnova. Her nuanced interpretation is as exquisite as her perfect ballerina physique, her imperious bearing, flickering facial expressions and utter physical command oozing ruthless calculated sensuality. Jewels, which opens on Saturday, was inspired by the gemstones glittering from the windows of New York designers Van Cleef and Arpels, and represents them in three distinct acts: Emeralds, Rubies and Diamonds. Staged as the inside of a jewellery box, the patterns of the corps de ballet represent the shapes of its contents – and for those new to ballet, or preferring abstract dance, the performance should provide a striking overview of the artform. Emeralds is famous for evoking the essence of French romantic ballet, delicate and demure in Degas greens echoing Faure’s dreamy concert suites. In Rubies, the dancers represent the notes and rhythms of Stravinsky’s jazz-age Capriccio for Piano and Orchestra; it’s an expression of New York razzamatazz: sassy, showy, playful and lightning-fast. With a symphonic Tchaikovsky score, Diamonds pays homage to imperial Russian heritage with regal elegance and dazzling purity and precision, culminating in a stunning display of unison by its 34 dancers. Whatever you take away from the works themselves, the calibre of the artists in conjunction with the collective weight of the company’s illustrious history are what make the Bolshoi worth seeing. It’s a synergetic experience, bigger (yet again) than the mere instruments allowing them to shine. • The Bolshoi Ballet is at the Lyric Theatre, Queensland Performing Arts Centre, Brisbane, until 7 July; the season includes a free Queensland regional simulcast of Spartacus on 6 July