When Francesca Segal’s identical twin girls were born 10 weeks prematurely she found herself in a place far removed from the imagined, idealised early weeks of parenthood. Instead of bonding as a family at home, she and her husband took up almost permanent residence in the neonatal intensive care unit, watching and waiting to see if their daughters would survive. Segal’s diary of those first 56 days of her daughters’ lives creates a compelling and emotionally taut exploration of what it means to be a parent in unexpected and challenging circumstances. From the opening pages, when Segal describes her feelings about the psychological aftermath of her C-section and the immediate removal of her babies to intensive care, we know we are in unflinching territory: “Taking my unready daughters from within me felt not like a birth but an evisceration. They were elsewhere and in need of me and needing more than I could give them.” Similarly, when she first meets her babies, a day later, the description is both visceral and heartrending: “I can trace their circulation, the fine leaf-veining of tributaries clearly beneath their backs’ translucent skin. The exquisite transgression of their forming selves, caught in the act of becoming.” Segal, who won the Costa first novel award for her highly acclaimed debut, The Innocents, brings a novelist’s stylistic sensibility, a keen eye and a devastating honesty to events as they unfold. There is the moment when one of her daughters, at three days old, requires a canula and Segal cannot understand why there are so many medical staff present until the doctor explains that there is no pain relief given for the procedure and the staff are there to pin her baby down. There are infections that threaten not to be cured, intravenous lines that need to be taken out and readministered repeatedly and the discovery of holes in the babies’ hearts. There is the quiet desolation of not being the first person to have dressed her babies and the suppression of pain from her C-section wound as she treks to and from the hospital. And there is the trauma of having to entrust the care of her children to others: “Leaving my children each night is an amputation, over and over.” This room is nicknamed “the milking shed” and here she meets a group of women whose support becomes invaluable And yet, amid the bleakness and despair, there is both light and warmth. In order to provide breast milk for their premature babies, a room is set aside in neonatal intensive care for the mothers to express milk that will then be administered to their sons and daughters in tiny, painstaking quantities. This room, Segal tells us, is nicknamed “the milking shed” and here she meets a group of women whose support and guidance become invaluable. There is Sophie who “will spur me on like a sergeant. She will lift me up like an angel.” There is Kemisha, a mother in her early 20s, who is the “pack leader… vivid, with a furious, and furiously channelled, confidence”. There is intense camaraderie between these women, the kind of fierce mutual support that stems from people who find themselves in adverse – often terrifying – circumstances. And sometimes there is laughter too: “I wonder what they will make of this full-throated, indecent, intemperate laughter. Our greatest gift to one another is this… we are drawn back into the folds of the unremarkable.” The pages of Mother Ship are filled with love, anguish, despair and hope in the face of adversity. As a memoir, it is both insightful and moving; as a diary of 56 days in neonatal care, it is an exquisitely written paean to motherhood. • Mother Ship by Francesca Segal is published by Vintage (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99