Ashleigh Barty has moved to within one victory of becoming only the fifth Australian world No 1 after beating Czech Barbora Strýcová 6-4, 6-4 to reach the final of the Birmingham Classic. The 23-year-old Australian, fresh from her maiden grand slam triumph at the French Open, fired 11 aces and 24 winners to dispatch world No 51 Strycova in 84 minutes and stay in the hunt for her third title of the season. If she succeeds, the French Open champion will emulate the feats of Evonne Goolagong Cawley, John Newcombe, Pat Rafter and Lleyton Hewitt who are the only four Australians to have topped the tennis world since rankings were introduced in 1973. “I felt I had really good rhythm on my serve today,” said Barty, who is aiming to displace Japan’s Naomi Osaka at the top of the rankings. “It was important for me today to try and almost make it a boring match, and make it a little bit kind of serve and first shot and dominate on my part. “I served really well in the second set to keep in touch and knew I needed to take my chance when I got one. On grass, she is very effective and it was important for me to get on top on my rallies and use my forehand as much as I could,” Barty added. Barty, who could become the first Australian woman to top the rankings in more than 40 years, faces her doubles partner, Germany’s Julia Goerges, in the title clash on Sunday. World No 19 Goerges, who is seeking her second title of the season, dominated Petra Martic in the other semi-final to win 6-4, 6-3. Barty and Goerges have a 1-1 head-to-head record but the Australian won their previous clash en route to claiming the Zhuhai crown last year. “I have to prepare and do the best that I can tomorrow and try and play a good tennis match,” said Barty,” whose last defeat came on 16 May against Kristina Mladenovic at the Italian Open in Rome. “If I win, it’s a bonus. There are all things that come with it, but those things are not what I’m worried about.” Should Barty lift the title, she will usurp Australian Open champion Osaka and become only the 27th woman in 49 years to hold the No 1 ranking and head to Wimbledon as the top-seeded player.