Garlic is wonderful at this time of year: sweet and succulent, with none of the bitterness of its winter counterpart. It is brought to the foreground in this light and velvety stew, which I would happily eat all through the summer. The texture of the beans is everything in this recipe, so make sure you soak them overnight. Prep 30 minSoak OvernightCook 1 hr 15 minServes 4-6 200g dried butter beans, soaked in water overnight8 garlic cloves1-2 fresh bay leavesSalt and pepper100ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus 2-3 tbsp extra6 courgettes, sliced into 15-20mm chunks100ml vermouth or white wine2-3 strips lemon rind, plus 1-2 tbsp juice1 small handful thyme leaves, chopped2 big handful mint leaves, roughly chopped, plus a few small leaves to serve4-6 slices toast200g goat’s curd, to serve Drain the beans, put in a large pan and cover with plenty of fresh cold water. Smash the garlic cloves once with the flat of a knife, to peel easily, and add four cloves to the beans along with the bay leaves. Bring to a simmer and simmer gently for 45-55 minutes, until the beans are tender but still holding their shape, skimming the surface of any froth. (If the beans boil vigorously, their skins tend to break and they lose shape.) Take off the heat and add enough salt to make the cooking liquid taste good. Leave the beans to cool in the liquid. Slice three of the remaining garlic cloves. Warm the oil in a wide, deep pan over a medium-high heat and, once hot, add the sliced garlic and courgettes. Fry for five to seven minutes, until the courgettes begin to turn golden. Turn the heat down to medium-low, season with a little salt and cook for a further 10 minutes, until tender. Drain the beans, discarding the bay and garlic, and stir into the courgettes with the wine, lemon rind, thyme and a few tablespoons of water. Cook for five minutes, to allow the flavours to bond, then taste and adjust the seasoning with salt, pepper and lemon juice. Take off the heat and stir in the mint. Rub the hot toast with the last garlic clove and drizzle with a little olive oil. Put in shallow bowls and spoon over the stew. Top with a large dessertspoon of goat’s curd and scatter generously with more mint leaves and an extra drizzle of olive oil to serve. Cook an extra 500g butter beans as above, blitz to a smooth puree with garlic and olive oil, and serve alongside grilled chicken thighs, roast chicken or lamb. Alternatively, freeze the cooked beans for a fast weeknight soup; use a good stock, and flavour with rosemary and chilli oil. Any leftover goat’s curd will be delicious paired with a grilled vegetable salad.