Moeen Ali will resume England training on Thursday following the birth of his second child, with the all-rounder pushing to return for Friday’s game against West Indies in Southampton at the expense of a seam bowler. After sitting out the win over Bangladesh for tactical reasons – Cardiff’s ground dimensions meant Adil Rashid was the sole spinner – Moeen missed Wednesday’s rain-affected practice as his wife, Firuza, gave birth to a girl, Haadiya. But with all well on that front, and Eoin Morgan’s normal preference being for two spinners, Moeen could well return to an XI who should also include Jos Buttler after his recovery from a bruised hip. Trevor Bayliss spoke of hitting West Indies with the pace of Jofra Archer and Mark Wood, meaning the final spot could well come down to a choice between the new-ball specialist Chris Woakes and Liam Plunkett, whose threat comes in the middle overs. The inclusion of Moeen, which may hinge on the condition of the pitch, would be a boost for his close friend Rashid, too. The leg-spinner has picked up only two wickets at 71 apiece in the World Cup as he continues to overcome an early-season shoulder injury that required painkilling injections. Bayliss said: “They’re obviously very close. Mo’s very good for Rash and the other way round. As the two spinners they talk like Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson do in a Test throughout a one-day game – nonstop chatter. It’s obviously not impossible to play just one of them but they are good for one another.” The England coach feels Archer and Wood’s extra pace now allows England to go “tit for tat” against a potent West Indies attack that bounced out Pakistan for their opening win, and then wiped out Australia’s top order (only to lose that Trent Bridge encounter owing to some ill-judged batting in the chase). Jason Holder’s side, who suffered a washout against South Africa on Monday, are clearly dangerous. They took two games off England during a drawn series in the winter, most alarmingly through the 113 all out in St Lucia when the brawny Oshane Thomas – expected to play here – exploited a bouncy track. As well as an extraordinary display of six-hitting from Chris Gayle, another feature of that Caribbean series was Sheldon Cottrell’s left-arm angle, not least when taking five wickets as England failed to chase down 290 in Barbados. Cottrell’s strikes are always followed by a march and salute that offers a nod to his former colleagues in the Jamaica defence force, something Buttler cheekily returned in kind en route to a career-best 150 in Grenada. Asked if the salute gets under the skin of England’s players, Bayliss, with tongue slightly in cheek, replied: “It probably pisses me off more than anyone else. If you’re older than about 40 years old, it pisses you off. “But every team has their way of celebrating and I’m sure other teams might not like the way we celebrate. In the end, it’s a young man’s game. It’s all entertainment. If it gets a bit of a laugh or a smile on people’s faces, so be it.” Bayliss may take a curmudgeonly view of Cottrell’s celebration but one only needs to watch a recent video of the Jamaican teaching schoolchildren in Nottingham how to perform the salute to see another side to it. Nevertheless, England, fresh from becoming the first ODI team to score seven successive totals in excess of 300 when scoring 386 for six against Bangladesh in Cardiff, will be hoping not to see it too often on Friday.