While some people may be happy cycling in painted lanes (Millions wasted painting ‘gesture’ cycle lanes, 17 June; Letters, 19 June), research suggests that most people don’t think they are safe. We need to design cycling infrastructure that works for everyone, not just the 3% of the population who cycle already. Subjective safety is as important, if not more important, than objective safety, which is why countries like the Netherlands build protected cycle lanes on main roads and reduce speeds and volumes of traffic in residential areas. I would not let my eight- and 11-year-olds cycle in a painted lane on a main road and I doubt many others would either. Cycling is a social justice issue and transport infrastructure needs to be inclusive. Let’s build protected lanes to give everyone the option of cycling.Sally WatsonChair, Newcastle Cycling Campaign • Our experience of cycling in two contrasting cities in the US is that it takes a combination of measures, not just painted lanes, to encourage more people to use bicycles for their urban journeys. In Washington DC and Fort Collins, Colorado, we have individually witnessed the successful impact of cycle trails, protected bike lanes (eg Pennsylvania Avenue, DC), painted lanes, secure bike parking for commuters – especially those within a building where showers are available – racks on the front of all buses for two bikes (no extra charge for passengers and no increase in accidents), plus excellent signage of bicycle routes. Research shows these measures work. CityLab states that “Nearly 17,000 cyclists rode their bikes to work in Washington DC in 2016” and adds “That’s nearly triple the mode share it had in 2006”. As well as infrastructure, one feature that can’t be overlooked is the discipline and courtesy of all road and pavement users. Generally, we noticed that pedestrians and runners keep to the right on trails, cyclists use their bells or shout “on your left” when passing those on foot, and motorists give way to trail users when they cross highways. This discipline is a striking feature of cycling in the US compared with the UK. Courtesy to other road users is, after all, the cheapest way to avoid conflict. In that respect, it is important to emphasise that we are not cyclists, motorists or pedestrians but rather people who sometimes cycle, or drive, or walk.John Kirkwood and Simon GellerSustrans volunteers • I visited London for seven sunny days (yes, the whole summer) for the first time last year. I also bought a well-known brand of London-made, fold-up bicycle, to ride around the streets. While the bike lanes are far from perfect, I can tell you they are far better than the lack of infrastructure and the war on cyclists that is conducted by those in power in my home town. The attitude of Londoners, motorised or otherwise, is also far better. Sure, there is room for improvement but cycling around London made my holiday. It’s the fastest, cheapest and most rewarding way to take in the sites or to commute into the town. London is heading in the right direction. It’s not Copenhagen yet but it’s a lesson to us all and something the inhabitants can be justly proud of.Matt CaineNewport Beach, Sydney, Australia • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition