They were playing Taylor Swift as the crowds meandered from the backstreets into the ground. “So it’s gonna be forever,” she sang to the gathering spectators, “or it’s gonna go down in flames. You can tell me when it’s over, if the high was worth the pain…” Swift has been a sane voice for England fans at this tournament, appearing on the PA in the middle of unanticipated defeats and urging them to Shake it Off. Sunday’s rendition of Blank Space shone a profound and mystical light on Eoin Morgan’s team. England: young, reckless, capable of leaving you breathless. Or, indeed, with a nasty scar. Having spent the past few days table-watching, England fans now had to watch their team, and there was no guarantee it would be any more pleasant than a bout of abstract mathematics. The teams followed out those giant lollipop balloons with customary obedience – does it make anyone else think of The Prisoner? – and assembled for their anthems. England stood in their school-photo pose, arms tucked scout-style behind their backs. The Indian players’ limber limbs fell more relaxedly by their side, as they reached for the final, fortissimo high notes of Jana Gana Mana. Jason Roy closed his eyes during God Save The Queen, although that may have been the glare of the sun rather than the emotion of the moment. Joy had abandoned England of late; the team that scored runs for fun in the build-up to this World Cup had exchanged the emotion for an intensity that looked, in their game against Australia, as if it might pop a vein whenever they took a wicket. India, meanwhile, have resembled a family on a holiday they will talk about forever. Virat Kohli, whose eyes can emit forked fire, now finishes games against the West Indies with special Chris Gayle handshakes so cool they should come with a label warning not to try them at home. The same leader who once gave fans the finger is now a crowd whisperer, conducting their celebrations from the field like a musical director, reasoning with them like a trained arbitrator. He has even developed a perfect, Clooneyesque smile: bathed in nonchalance but never self-satisfied. Maybe England had observed all this – perhaps they had adopted a tactical happiness. Smile for the cameras. Fake it till you make it. If you’re happy and you know it, tonk Yuzvendra Chahal into the Eric Hollies stand. The sun shone for them, too, although this was not Saturday’s scorching heat. A muggy night, and the week of claustrophobic anxiety that had preceded it, had broken into a fresher dawn; and the day seemed to promise something new – even if it was just a pitch that finally favoured England’s much-preferred batting style. In fact, for most of England’s innings, the past 10 days – the losses to Sri Lanka and Australia, the slow motion implosion of a campaign four years in the making – seemed a fever dream. Here they were, Roy and Jonny Bairstow, opening the batting as if they had never been separated, lofting perfectly timed sixes as if all that had occurred after Roy’s sudden departure belonged to a different team, a different story. It was obvious what had happened: England had stumbled into the darkest timeline. And Roy’s long-awaited second coming had dragged them back to the original one. At the end of the first powerplay they had not lost a wicket, a feat they have managed only once previously this tournament, against West Indies. Even when innings did end – Morgan’s in a short, sharp shock, Joe Root’s in what was almost a mercy – the exhibition continued. Where in previous games the ball had cannoned high in the air – and back down to patient fielders – it now sailed through the sky in giant, comforting arcs. In the stands this was not a game about England at all. If their Trent Bridge game against Pakistan had given England a sense of being the visiting team, the Edgbaston effect made them look like a touring one. As part of the OneDay4Children campaign, the cricketeers encouraged visitors to wear Unicef colours and “turn the ground blue!” It was a redundant command: the ground was already blue, the blue of 20,000 Indian shirts. England fans blended quietly, invisibly, into the background. Only a solo trumpet rendition of Jerusalem – and a Ben Stokes six into their section of the Raglan stand – identified them. England wickets brought roars. Rohit fours brought more. As India chased – smoothly, stylishly – they rose to their feet for every boundary. India’s confidence never left them, despite the large target. When they had left the field, needing 338, they had walked off slowly, smilingly, Chahal’s arm wrapped around Ravi Jadeja’s shoulders, Kuldeep Yadav clapping Jasprit Bumrah on the back. Out in the middle, the captain scored 50 and swapped his helmet for a cap. The target was large, but gettable. As the advertising boundary boards announced the imminent start of the Pro Kabaddi League in Mumbai, it was the England fans at home who were holding their breath, waiting for wickets they could not be sure would come. India’s confidence never left them, until, incomprehensibly, it did. As they relaxed too far, and gave up the chase, England grasped their redemption narrative – even James Vince, as Roy’s fielding substitute, caught Kohli and Hardik Pandya on the boundary, lightening the shadow of his own darkest timeline. Trajectories reasserted themselves; the path to the final realigned. As for the blank space on that trophy – perhaps Taylor could still have the last word.