In the early hours, a neighbour hears shouting and a woman yelling “get off me” followed by the sound of breakages (Police sent to Johnson’s home after altercation, 22 June). The neighbour knocks on the woman’s door to check she is all right and, as there is no reply, phones the police. One would think this was a commendable response. However, as the man involved in the domestic row was Boris Johnson, the moral response from much of the Tory media is to turn normal standards upside down. The neighbour is condemned for becoming involved. Cameron’s idea of a “big society” is conveniently forgotten. Allison Pearson, on the Today programme, even compared the neighbour to the Stasi. Yet again with Johnson, it’s not what you do but who you are.Dr Chris MorrisKidderminster, Worcestershire • Although in this case the police were given assurances that both individuals were safe, it would be salutary for more so-called nosy neighbours to intervene or dial 999 when they are concerned about what they hear through closed doors.Val CollierManchester • There can be few people who have not heard neighbours having loud words, but we have enough discretion just to raise eyebrows and leave them be, maybe avoiding them for a while after. Making a recording of them through a party wall and sending it to a newspaper is un-neighbourly.Sue DoughtyTwyford, Berkshire • So Boris Johnson and his partner had a row. Nothing more. Where’s the story? I have no respect for the man as a politician and tremble at the thought of what he will become. But he is allowed to have a private life and all that it brings. Surely that is also what the Guardian of all newspapers believes? Tim MenahLittleport, Cambridgeshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition