Tory leadership candidates have been making their formal pitches, with the first round of voting to take place this Thursday. The foreign secretary launched his campaign on a high after winning the backing of Penny Mordaunt, the defence secretary and a key Brexit supporter. This was his second coup of the week after gaining the support of Amber Rudd, the work and pensions secretary and leading Tory moderate . He made the case that he was the most serious and experienced would-be leader, in an apparent rebuke to his main rival, Boris Johnson. Hunt, who is becoming the bookies’ second favourite in the race, gave a speech in London, with his wife, Lucia, numerous MPs and other supporters in the audience. Hunt’s pitch was that he would deliver Brexit before allowing a general election, saying the failure to leave the EU had “put our country and our party in grave peril”. “Without a deal, any prime minister who promised to leave by a certain date would have to call a general election to change the parliamentary arithmetic. And that is an election we would lose badly,” he said. “If we fight an election before delivering Brexit we will be annihilated.” The health secretary said he wanted his campaign to be about a “front story” not a backstory and said the Conservative party was in danger of allowing its obsession with Brexit to stop it focusing on the future. In front of an audience of young entrepreneurs and artists, and standing in front of a window that made him look like a talking silhouette, he likened the Tory leadership contest to politics in the 1840s. “Most politicians were still banging on about the Corn Laws, while the industrial revolution was fundamentally changing the lives of every person in this country,” he said. Hancock, one of the outsider candidates, suggested those who would take the UK out of the EU with no deal were not confronting the political reality and berated his rivals for suggesting proroguing parliament was an option, saying it was an affront to D-day veterans. “That goes against everything those men who fought their way up those beaches died for,” he said. He also said the next Tory leader had to be certain of their beliefs, in another coded hit at Boris Johnson. “The only way you can do the job is if you know your heart. If you’re honest to yourself and know what you stand for.” Hancock said he was in favour of low taxes and hinted he could cut corporation tax but said his priority was to raise the national living wage to two-thirds of average incomes, over £10 an hour, by 2022. He also previewed measures that may be in the government’s social care green paper – insurance for people to protect their homes if they need long-term social care. The former Brexit secretary has had a rocky start to his campaign after telling broadcasters he was not a feminist and missing out on a slew of endorsements from the Brexiter right of the party, which instead went to Boris Johnson over the weekend. In his speech on Monday morning, Raab offered a take-no-prisoners approach to the Brexit negotiations, promising a tough new stance with Brussels but refusing to rule out proroguing parliament in order to deliver a no-deal Brexit in October, should no new concessions be found. “We’ve been humiliated as a country in these talks with the EU,” he said. “We’re divided at home, and demeaned abroad.” He said he still believed the UK could have got a different deal to the backstop if the team had been united. In a dig at his closest rival, Johnson, as well as cabinet members who have resisted leaving with no deal, Raab said Brexit would not be delivered with “bluff and bluster” and said he would only pick a cabinet that was unanimously prepared to deliver no deal. Quoting the Institute for Government, he said it would be “near impossible for MPs to stop a prime minister who is determined to leave in this way”. He said he would lead “a buccaneering approach to global free trade” – a phrase that raised eyebrows – and said the Conservatives’ priority should be the low paid, in contrast to Johnson, who has offered sweeping tax cuts to the well-off. The former work and pensions secretary held what her camp billed as an official launch event, a speech to the ultra-Brexit Bruges Group in Westminster. McVey has also refused to rule out seeking to prorogue parliament to ensure the UK leaves the EU without a deal on 31 October. She also said she could ensure this by not allowing MPs any votes on the departure process ahead of the deadline. During a Q&A after the speech, she said remain-minded MPs had sought to frustrate the UK’s departure under Theresa May: “But that only happened because the prime minister kept bringing back motions to the floor of the house. So really we need to stop bringing things to the floor of the house, and the default position is to leave through article 50.” McVey added: “What has happened is that people who have wanted to deny the will of the people, they have done absolutely everything to do so. What I am now seeking to do is make sure, as a public servant, we deliver what the public were offered.” Her speech was briefly interrupted when a man took to the podium to yell about the event being “fake news”. He eventually left, and it was not immediately clear what he was angry about. The address contained few new commitments. Most of her main policy ideas, notably a plan to raid the foreign aid budget for £6bn a year to spend on schools and the police, were revealed last month, when she launched her self-styled “blue-collar Conservatism” movement.