Curtis Flowers, a Mississippi man whose imprisonment and death sentence for murder formed the basis of the second season of investigative journalism podcast In the Dark, has had his conviction overturned after the US Supreme court ruled that the prosecutor on Flowers’ trial had sought to keep African Americans off the jury. Prosecutor Doug Evans, who has previously tried Flowers on six occasions for the same crime, had shown a “relentless, determined effort to rid the jury of black individuals”, Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote. Sacked BBC DJ Danny Baker has announced that he will relaunch his axed Radio 5 show as a podcast. Baker, who left the BBC following a tweet that depicted the royal baby as a chimpanzee, said that the show would feature “subjects bizarre” and begin in the new year. The Next Episode This “Jon Ronson for millennials” pod is hosted by BBC journalists Linda Adey and Ben Zand, and kicked off last month with an episode on the sex abuse allegations against R Kelly – a topic Zand previously explored in a searing BBC Three doc. So far, its bite-sized instalments have focused on everything from being blackmailed on the dark web, to the rise of pornographic deepfakes, to #MeToo in music, recently breaking the disturbing story of an alleged assault on AlunaGeorge singer Aluna Francis. Hannah J Davies The Thread This innovative podcast links historical moments, previously racing through the events leading up to #MeToo and examining Martin Luther King’s nonviolence movement. Now it’s the turn of women’s football, starting in 1999 with the US team’s World Cup victory when Brandi Chastain ripped her shirt off for a victory celebration. Going back to the 70s, women playing at Yale didn’t even get showers so they stripped in protest to secure their post-match rights. It is a timely reminder of how far women’s football has come. Hannah Verdier Podcast producers will tell you that one of our favourite things to do is find connections that others might not. This week’s Books podcast – which draws parallels between two seemingly disconnected stories – is an excellent testament to that. The first half of the show features the infectiously buoyant Bernardine Evaristo, who details her polyphonic novel of black womanhood, Girl, Woman, Other. And in the second, we hear about a shockingly intimate study of a single “honour” killing, as seen by both survivor and perpetrator. Max Sanderson Chosen by Ekaterina Ochagavia (video producer) The Cricket World Cup is in full swing and it turns out the Guardian’s own cricket podcast – The Spin – isn’t the only one out there ... Tailenders is an effervescent podcast that loosely aims to demystify the sometimes ridiculous world of cricket. And despite being someone with close to zero understanding of how cricket works, I’m hooked! The podcast-come-live show on BBC Radio 5 Live is a silly, joyful and inclusive introduction to cricket with BBC Radio 1 host Greg James, England’s “greatest ever fast bowler” Jimmy Anderson and Felix White of The Maccabees as the hosts. Peppered with musical interludes by White, who – full disclosure – I know from school, the show is a delightful mishmash of banter, music, cricket history and even a bit of actual analysis. My favourite segment is “general cricketing sadness”, where the presenters’ use their own love-hate relationship with a game that is “booby trapped for constant humiliation” to help listeners come to peace with cricket woes past and present. Keep your eyes peeled for Project Mobilisation, too; their attempt to get a banner into every game of the Cricket World Cup and Ashes #tailendersoftheworlduniteandtakeover.