The Milwaukee Bucks fell two games short of the NBA finals, but they won big at the NBA Awards. A tearful Giannis Antetokounmpo earned Most Valuable Player honors, Mike Budenholzer won Coach of the Year, and Jon Horst took Executive of the Year on Monday night in Santa Monica. Antetokounmpo beat out Paul George of Oklahoma City and last year’s MVP, James Harden of Houston. Antetokounmpo was a resounding winner. He received 941 points and 78 first-place votes in the balloting 165 points more than Harden. Harden finished second with 776 points and 23 first-place votes. The show had a global feel, with three international players besides Greece’s Antetokounmpo winning. Antetokounmpo averaged 27.7 points and 12.5 rebounds while earning All-NBA first-team honors this season, his sixth with the Bucks. He led the franchise to the best record in the regular season and the Bucks reached the Eastern Conference finals. Tears rolled down his cheeks as Antetokounmpo thanked his mother Veronica and brothers in the audience. He credited his late father for pushing him toward his goals and his teammates and coaching staff for their help. “We started from nothing as a family,” he said, “and we are going to be in every stage that we can be as a family.” "This is just the beginning. My goal is to win a championship. I'm going to do whatever it takes to make that happen." pic.twitter.com/L0Q3WD0cl2 Luka Doncic of the Dallas Mavericks easily won Rookie of the Year. The 20-year-old small forward from Slovenia accepted his trophy from RJ Barrett, who went to the New York Knicks as the No3 pick in the NBA draft last week. Doncic was the No3 pick last year. The other finalists were Deandre Ayton of Phoenix and Trae Young of Atlanta. Budenholzer also got choked up while thanking his family after his second coaching honor. He earned the trophy for the first time with Atlanta in 2015. He guided the Bucks to a 60-22 record in the regular season in his first year with the franchise, leading them to the Eastern Conference finals, where they lost to eventual NBA champion Toronto. “What they did on the court this year, including the playoffs, was special,” Budenholzer said backstage. “We weren’t good enough in the end, but we certainly feel like we have enough talent, we have enough character to be a team that’s playing in the finals and winning a championship.” Lou Williams was voted the Sixth Man of the Year for the second season in a row and third time in his career, tying former Los Angeles Clipper guard Jamal Crawford. The guard won for the first time in 2015 with Toronto. Rudy Gobert of the Utah Jazz won Defensive Player of the Year for the second straight season. The 26-year-old center from France beat out Antetokounmpo and George. “I never thought I would be able to do that when I started basketball playing in France,” Gobert said backstage. “I didn’t know an NBA player, I didn’t know nothing about basketball. I was just having fun.”