Six years ago it was David de Gea, Álvaro Morata and Isco gallivanting round the pitch with the European Under-21 Championship trophy but Spain now has a classy new generation of winners. As blue confetti rained down on a jubilant victory parade in Udine, swaying from one side to another, singing along to Queen after obtaining revenge in a repeat of this competition’s previous final, Germany trudged off, beaten. The purring Fabián Ruiz, who also earned the player of the tournament award, was again more than merely an architect; scoring a beautiful opener before Dani Olmo seized on Alexander Nübel’s error, with Nadiem Amiri’s late strike little consolation. For Stefan Kuntz, a Euro 96 winner whose side came into this final on a 16-match unbeaten run, having not lost since October 2017 – and only twice since winning this competition two years ago – defeat and indeed picking up silver medals is a foreign feeling. The planned afterparty in Fagagna, 20 miles away, was cancelled, while Joachim Löw was among those watching on under this renovated stadium’s striking concrete arch. Spain always had the upper hand, though were perhaps fortunate that the VAR decided their captain, Jesus Vallejo, did not deserve a red card for a crude tackle on the Germany striker Luca Waldschmidt. Kuntz’s post-match press conference began with a bizarre appraisal of the strides his side have apparently made over the past two weeks but Waldschmidt, who won the golden boot award, did not conceal the mood. “We played a good tournament until the final but to lose hurts a lot,” he said. For Spain this was a fitting reward for a talented group that fell short at the final hurdle last time around. The Real Madrid playmaker Dani Ceballos was one of seven players here who formed part of that team in Poland, but Ruiz set the tone from the start. “It is an important victory because we have worked very hard in the past few years,” said the Spain coach, Luis de la Fuente. “This generation of players is simply brilliant and now we look forward to the Olympic Games. I believe this is important for Spain because the players finally get the recognition they deserve at a European level and at an international level; they deserve it.” Asked if the talented crop of midfielders on show in Italy and San Marino over the past fortnight have the potential to shine – and dominate – for the Spanish senior side, as Andres Iniesta and Xavi did in previous eras, De la Fuente’s response was effusive. “This is a moment of pride. I certainly believe they have an opportunity to show if they are up to the task. A victory in a Euro U21 tournament is the right opportunity for this to happen. They are very close with each other, they have value and I believe they have all of the characteristics any team needs to be successful at the highest level.” Every Germany player, except the captain, Jonathan Tah, who attempted to console his teammates, crashed to the floor at the final whistle as those in the Spanish dugout poured on to the pitch to join the celebrations after recording a record-equalling fifth title at this level. Andrea Pirlo, who captained Italy to victory in this tournament in 2000, presented the trophy. Germany were ultimately punished for sloppy defending but there was no doubt over the moment of the match. When Ruiz seized possession 40 yards from goal, where Timo Baumgartl was lured horribly out of position towards Mikel Oyarzabal, there seemed a shared acceptance that the ball would nestle in the back of the net, so impressive has the Spaniard been throughout this tournament. Ruiz roamed forward unchallenged, encouraged to shoot by the exposed Tah, who nervously retreated, allowing the midfielder to pick his spot. “It was an important goal to reach. We started badly against Italy and it only got harder, because we had to win with a three-goal margin against Poland, but the team was focused and here we are now,” Ruiz said.