Sudan’s Transitional Military Council (TMC) has called for snap elections and said it had cancelled all previous agreements with the main opposition coalition. Tuesday’s announcement follows deadly violence in the capital, Khartoum, in which more than 35 people are believed to have died when security forces moved to disperse a main protest camp outside the defence ministry. Talks between the ruling Transitional Military Council (TMC) and the Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces (DFCF) alliance have come to a standstill despite weeks of negotiations. Despite settling on a three-year transition before elections and the composition of a legislative body, talks over whether civilians or the military will have the upper hand in a sovereign body to lead the country during a three-year transition to democracy were deadlocked. In his address, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan said that the coalition was equally responsible for the delay in coming to a final agreement. Burhan said elections would be held within nine months. On Monday morning, heavily armed paramilitaries attacked the site of a sit-in in the capital that has been the centre of a campaign to bring democratic reform, firing teargas and live ammunition. Witnesses reported that the security personnel belonged to the feared Rapid Support Forces (RSF), a paramilitary force that was heavily armed by Omar al-Bashir, the former president. The RSF have been accused of systematic human rights abuses. They are led by Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, known as Hemedti, who also serves as deputy head of the transitional military council, the country’s governing committee. Bashir’s repressive 30-year rule ended in April when he was ousted by the army following months of massive pro-democracy demonstrations in Khartoum and elsewhere. Opposition-linked medics said more than 35 people were killed in what is the worst violence since the overthrow of Bashir in April. Burhan promised an investigation into the deadly events. Hospitals in central Khartoum struggled to cope with the numbers of injured and appealed for surgeons to volunteer to help. “Wounded people are lying on the ground in the reception area as there are not enough beds,” sad Azza al-Amel, a doctor at the Royal Care hospital. Reuters contributed to this report