Eddie Hearn has a problem: how to repackage a beaten champion. When Anthony Joshua was led away from his disastrous US debut at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night minus his world championship belts, he slipped out of the informal cartel that included Deontay Wilder and Tyson Fury – temporarily, perhaps – into a lesser arrangement with the fat man who lives five miles from Tijuana and who had just knocked him down four times in seven rounds, Andy Ruiz Jr. Andy is now Anthony’s best friend. The only way Joshua can insert himself into the Wilder‑Fury narrative again is if he beats the first Mexican-American to win the world heavyweight title in their contracted rematch (which was unknown to him), probably in Cardiff in September or November – and convincingly enough to persuade a swathe of stunned (and fickle) British fans that he still deserves their support. One defeat should not signal the end of a fighter’s career. But Joshua is more than just a fighter. He is a commodity. He has made himself and a lot of people very rich. And it is in the commercial interests of his promoter and his Matchroom team, along with Sky Sports and Hearn’s American streaming partner, DAZN, to keep the Joshua story going. Is he damaged goods? Of course, although not beyond repair. One punch could make him a marketable hero again. Joe Markowski, the British businessmen who is executive vice-president of DAZN’s north American operation, tells the Guardian that boxing was always a key part of their strategy to, “break the States”, as they used to say in the days of the Beatles and Stones invasions. However, he will have woken up on Sunday morning in the knowledge that, like the music industry, nothing goes smoothly in the fight game, from the ring to the boardroom. “There are obvious benefits being in the United States,” Markowski says. “It’s the world’s largest economy. It’s the world’s largest sports media market. We want to be the world’s biggest sports broadcaster, full stop. You can’t say that legitimately without having a successful business in the United States.” What they didn’t have a lot of until Joshua came along was knockout “product”. The big man from Watford with the street back-story and the winning smile owned what was once the most prized possession in sport: the world heavyweight title, or three acknowledged versions of it. He also brought a promoter with a supporting stable. Just over a year ago, DAZN and Matchroom signed an eight-year deal they said was worth $1bn. Markowski continued: “It became clear a very feasible entry point to the United States was boxing, Unlike other sports – NFL, MLS, NBA – boxing doesn’t traditionally tie itself into long-term relationships. Every day there is a constant churn of new fighters on the block, new promotional stories of interest, often leading to fighters with huge followings.” It is in the interests of Wilder and Fury to have Joshua in their script as well. Rehabilitated, he can still make them more money than fights with Ruiz ever could, which is unfair on the new champion, who already has had to endure the jibes about his corpulent frame. Yet he is an amiable man, by all accounts, and he can hit. At least for as long as his stamina lasts, which went untested on Saturday night. Joshua has rarely boxed with such naivety or lack of zest. He squandered an eight-inch reach advantage by stubbornly remaining in front of his rock-solid if flabby challenger and after putting him down with a left hook-uppercut assumed victory was his. Ruiz replied the only way he knows, thrashing his strong, short arms at his opponent’s head and he connected. He simultaneously disconnected the champion from his status and aura. It was similar to, although not a direct parallel of, Buster Douglas’s dismantling of the Mike Tyson myth. Oliver McCall and Hasim Rahman did the same to Lennox Lewis. Tyson and Lewis survived and in their different ways, regrouped. Joshua, for now, has the confidence of the Matchroom machine and DAZN. However, Markowski says: “Boxing presents more challenges than other sports. You make a rights deal in boxing, it is the start of the hard work; you make a rights deal in soccer, you are guaranteed content. Boxing is not like any other sport in that way. No other sport has its primary talent spread across multiple different broadcast networks.” Markowski says he can work with Showtime’s Stephen Espinoza, who has been in a few combative exchanges with Hearn over a Wilder-Joshua fight. That, now, might not be so easy. Espinoza is one tough negotiator. Interestingly, Markowski adds, “It is not a long-term plan to be a fight-based broadcaster in the United States. We want to replicate the multi-sport portfolio we have internationally. That will come in time.” Time is what Joshua, 29, does not have as much of as he did before losing on Saturday. He has to rebuild his reputation and, possibly, his boxing. There is no reason he cannot do that against Ruiz. Whether he will be able to beat either Wilder or Fury, however, has been thrown into serious doubt.