Germany and Spain will meet in the Euro Under-21 final after both teams came from behind to win semi-finals against Romania and France respectively. Sunday’s final in Udine will be a repeat of the 2017 decider, which Germany won 1-0. Luca Waldschmidt and Nadiem Amiri both scored in stoppage time as Germany left it late to beat Romania 4-2 in Bologna, having been 2-1 down at half-time. Amiri gave Germany the lead with a fine solo effort but a penalty and header from George Puscas gave the underdogs the lead at the break. Romania were chasing another upset after humbling England in the group stages but Germany were quick to respond in the second half, with Freiburg forward Waldschmidt scoring from the spot after Ianis Hagi had pulled Mahmoud Dahoud’s shirt in the penalty area. With the match heading for extra time, Germany won a free-kick on the edge of the area. Amiri backheeled the ball into Waldschmidt’s path and he fired low into the bottom corner to take his tournament goal tally to seven. Romania poured forward but left gaps at the back, and Lukas Nmecha was hauled down by Alex Pascanu. The Romanian defender was sent off, before Hoffenheim’s Amiri sealed victory from another free kick. In Reggio Emilia, Spain bounced back from an early setback to ease past France and into their fourth Euro Under-21 final in the last decade. Jean-Philippe Mateta gave France the lead in the 16th minute, scoring from the penalty spot after Betis full-back Junior Firpo had fouled former Arsenal midfielder Jeff Reine-Adélaïde. Spain were level within the half-hour when Marc Roca tapped in the rebound after his initial header had been saved by Paul Bernardoni. The game turned in Spain’s favour on the stroke of half time, when Mikel Oyarzabal was brought down by Ibrahima Konaté in the box moments before half-time. The Real Sociedad winger stepped up to put Spain ahead from 12 yards. Dani Olmo finished from Fabián Ruiz’s reverse pass soon after the restart to put Spain in control, and they dominated the second half, with Real Madrid’s Borja Mayoral adding a fourth from a tight angle after coming off the bench.