Late-night hosts discussed the first round of Democratic debates and the newest sexual assault allegation against Donald Trump from E Jean Carroll. “Thank you for tuning into my show instead of watching the Democratic debate and getting swept away by John Delaney fever,” opened Full Frontal’s Samantha Bee sarcastically. She used her show to discuss advice columnist’s E Jean Carroll’s rape allegation against Donald Trump. “This is the 22nd accusation of sexual misconduct against Donald Trump. Twenty-two! If I had a dollar for every person Trump allegedly sexually harassed or assaulted, I would be doing better than any of his businesses,” joked the host. Despite her claims, Trump denies knowing the writer. “So naturally, there’s a photo of them together. Remember if Trump says something isn’t, it definitely is,” noted Bee. He also said she wasn’t his type in his denial, something to which Bee expressed distress. “Don’t say you have a rape type! You weren’t her type either, which is the whole fucking problem!” Later on The View, Meghan McCain said she wanted to be honest and say she doesn’t know if she did believe the author and claimed she was putting herself on the line by saying this. Bee responded to this passionately: “It’s not people who defend accused rapists who put something on the line, it’s the women who decide to speak up, who, as Carroll puts it, receive death threats, are driven from their homes, dismissed and dragged through the mud, only to see Trump turn it around, deny, threaten and attack them. Which is exactly what he did again. To subject yourself to that is not a book promotion. It’s courage.” Later in an interview, Chuck Todd didn’t mention Trump’s accusers in an interview with him. Bee was not pleased with this and admonished the journalist for it. “No one should ever sit down with President Predator without asking about these 22 women … It matters. It will never stop mattering. You wouldn’t interview Jeffrey Dahmer and only ask him about spice blends. If you’re not going to hold Trump accountable, you’re not a journalist. Go do Sunday morning segments about fucking lasagna. Otherwise, do your job please.” The Late Show with Stephen Colbert was a live show as the host recapped the Democratic debate from earlier in the night. “I’m going to tell you all about it if Bill de Blasio doesn’t interrupt me,” he said. Beto O’Rourke tried to differentiate himself from the others by speaking Spanish but Colbert said he did not understand the impulse behind this action: “Not entirely sure why he felt he had to do that,” Colbert said. “He’s either trying to lock up the Hispanic vote or he’s running for embarrassing dad at a Mexican restaurant.” Colbert then continued, discussing the back and forth between Tim Ryan and Tulsi Gabbard on the issue of national security. “Tulsi! Tim! Please, don’t fight! You’re both not going to be president,” he pleaded, looking into the camera. Long shot John Delaney also didn’t know he was closing and asked the moderators: “Oh, closing now?” Colbert mocked his delayed response, and capped it off with a joke about the sadness of Delaney’s response. “It’s not easy to be hilarious and heartbreaking at the same time. Bravo, sir.” Colbert ended with Julián Castro, who ended his closing statement: “And on 20 January 2021, we’ll say adios to Donald Trump.” The host joked: “I gotta say, a very powerful statement. If only Beto O’Rourke would translate what that means.” Beto habla español, Klobuchar can’t land a zinger, and de Blasio bulldozes his way through #DemDebate night one. #Votegasm2020 pic.twitter.com/u9ymYamuWc The Daily Show with Trevor Noah was also live and concentrated on the Democratic debate. Senator Elizabeth Warren was a frontrunner among her peers in the debate and gave clear and concise answers about policies. “It was very standard Elizabeth Warren. It’s as normal as seeing a man walking a chicken in Brooklyn – it’s everyday,” said the host. O’Rourke spoke Spanish. “To hear my answer in English, press one,” cracked Noah in response to this. He then pointed out Cory Booker’s shock at O’Rourke’s Spanish. “Have you ever walked into an exam in school, and then, you sit down and then another student puts down a protractor on the desk and you’re like :‘What, we need a protractor?’ That’s what that face was: panic. Absolute panic.” He continued, expressing how impressed he was with O’Rourke’s Spanish. “You’ve got to admit, it would be cool for America to have a president who is fluent in two languages, right? It would be cool. I mean, it would be cool to have a president who’s fluent in one language, you know?” Noah did note one person who went above and beyond to be noticed. “You have to push your way into a crowded field. And if there’s one person who knows how to do that, it’s the 7ft giant from New York,” referring to New York City’s mayor, Bill de Blasio. De Blasio interrupted some of the other candidates but, in doing so, he stood out from the others. Noah also thought this debate improved his chances: “Yo, Bill de Blasio. Guy came in polling at 1%. But after this, I’m sure he blew it up all the way to, like, three at least.”