At communications regulator Ofcom Sharon White had the tenacity to take on the might of BT and the Murdoch dynasty, but will the first female chairman of the John Lewis Partnership be brave enough to do what no man has dared in nearly a century – and axe the “never knowingly undersold” price promise that is killing middle England’s favourite retailer? Probably the best-known price pledge in British retailing has been at the heart of the employee-owned group since 1925, but what was once a virtue has become a handicap in an Amazon age where shoppers bypass the high street to seek out the cheapest deals online. Announcing White’s appointment, John Lewis’s outgoing chairman, Charlie Mayfield, admitted that the economist – who has no retail experience – was not the conventional choice. Then he added: “But these are not conventional retail times, nor is the Partnership a conventional company.” They certainly are not. The high street is in crisis as empires fall due to the huge changes in shopping behaviour now powering the rise of online behemoths such as Amazon. Sir Philip Green, once lauded as the “king of the high street”, is currently fighting to save his struggling Arcadia empire. John Lewis’s finances are not pretty either. Last year, profits at the group, which also includes the Waitrose supermarket chain, tumbled more than 45% to £160m. As a result of Never Knowingly Undersold, the chain was forced to match prices against troubled rivals Debenhams and House of Fraser – as a result the department store chain’s profit margins were battered. As a consequence the staff bonus sank to its lowest level since the 1950s . The workforce, known as partners, received a payout of just 3% of annual salary, down from 18% in 2011. The retailer has also ditched the last remnants of its gold-plated pension plan to save £80m annually, removing another important perk for staff toiling on the shop floor and in warehouses. “The key thing is getting rid of Never Knowingly Undersold,” said one John Lewis watcher who suggested that as an external appointment White might not regard the pledge as the “Holy Grail”. “Lovely as it may be, John Lewis can’t go on matching prices in this day and age. Its high street competitors have virtually disappeared and people know they can go online if they want the cheapest price. John Lewis is beloved and there’s no reason why it couldn’t be more profitable if it was a level playing field.” Without question White presented the internal selection panel with a stellar CV. The 52-year-old has had a successful four-year reign at Ofcom. Before that she was at the Treasury, where she was the first black person to be a permanent secretary. She has also worked as an economist at the World Bank and the British embassy in Washington, as well as in Tony Blair’s policy unit at No 10. Despite White’s credentials some retail analysts had hoped that a candidate like former WH Smith boss Kate Swann, with her track record of financial success at the helm of big companies, would land what is one of the biggest jobs in British retail. At Ofcom, White had 900 staff – today John Lewis employs close to 84,000. Independent retail analyst Nick Bubb described White as the “left-field choice to end all left-field choices”. “She has a brilliant CV and as an economist she must be highly rational, but is she commercial? Is she decisive and persuasive?” When White joins next year she will have to decide whether the company should focus on profitability rather than sales growth, he adds. White, whose parents were members of the Windrush generation, will stand out in male-dominated retail boardrooms. She is only the sixth chair of John Lewis’s partnership board and the first woman to hold the role. “From the perspective of female representation in business, it’s fantastic to see such an accomplished individual at the helm of a well-recognised UK brand,” said Brenda Trenowden, global co-chair of 30% Club which campaigns to get more women in top boardroom jobs. “When women occupy jobs of the highest profile, it sends a message to other women out there that these positions are attainable.” White grew up in Leyton, east London, and after excelling at school would meet her economist husband, Robert Chote, who chairs the Treasury’s independent forecaster, the Office of Budget Responsibility, at Cambridge. A career in public service means she is well versed in the corridors of power and by now could easily have bagged a lucrative City job if she had wanted one. After overseeing the 5G spectrum auction and separation of BT’s Openreach broadband operation from its main business few think White will struggle to grasp the mechanics of buying and selling goods for a profit. In reality though the John Lewis top job is more akin to being a chief executive and White is tasked with improving its financial performance while setting the tone at what is the UK’s biggest employee-owned company. Someone who knows White well describes her as “fearless” and willing to take on David and Goliath battles: “She could have gone off and worked for a global bank years ago but she has dedicated her career to civil and public service. That’s why this job is perfect because it’s about profits with a purpose.” “Some people might mistake her personable nature to mean she is not ruthless but she’s tough,” adds the friend. “Sharon will bring a fresh pair of eyes to John Lewis. She combines an incredible intellect with a warm personality and authenticity. That’s quite rare in a leader.” Independent MP Frank Field, who worked with White when he was minister for welfare reform in the Blair government, predicted she would eventually return to a top civil service job but in the meantime said she was a “great catch” for John Lewis. “She will make sure John Lewis survives with its ethics in tact. If I was working for John Lewis my spirits would be lifted by hearing that she is going to be the new leader.”