Kate Tempest’s reimagining of a Greek classic and an adaptation of a short film created by the Guardian are two of the standout productions in the National Theatre’s upcoming season, which features more female than male playwrights after criticism of the institution’s gender balance. Tempest, a poet, rapper and actor, will present Paradise, a reimagining of Sophocles’ Philoctetes, as part of a season in which eight of the 15 productions are written by women. Clint Dyer will become the first black British artist to have written, directed and starred in National Theatre productions when Death of England, created as a microplay for the Guardian and the Royal Court, opens in February 2020. The play focuses on a working-class man coming to terms with the death of his father, and touches on ideas of race, sport and identity. Rafe Spall starred in the original play and will reprise his role for the new production, which is a 90-minute one-man show. “What we’re exploring is identity, a sense of powerlessness, of the guilt and shame that we have as a nation, especially about our inertia,” Dyer said in 2014. “The play highlights our anger at not feeling good enough about ourselves and the blame we apportion to other people for our own inabilities.” On Thursday Dyer told the Guardian that in a post-Brexit world the issues brought up in the original microplay resonated more. “At the time there were people saying ‘Oh God, the football stadiums are different now, why are you always going on about racism?’ Now they understand. In the stadiums we still feel it, in the job market we still feel it, in the world we still feel it.” Dyer said becoming the first black British artist to have written, starred in and directed at the National Theatre was a huge achievement. “It’s a wonderful thing. I suppose within that it isn’t the usual question of ‘why’s it not happened before?’ I can’t think of anyone else apart from Simon Burney and Harold Pinter. It’s a very exclusive club and I’m very proud of it as an artist, regardless of colour. It’s a brilliant achievement and really unusual.” The US playwright Annie Baker will premiere her play The Antipodes and is one of six women who will direct during the season. Katy Rudd directs an adaptation of the Neil Gaiman novel The Ocean at the End of the Lane; Fiona Buffini directs her sister Moiras play Manor; Melly Still directs My Brilliant Friend; Nadia Fall directs Three Sisters; and Chloe Lamford co-directs The Antipodes with Baker. “With My Brilliant Friend, Paradise and Manor we’re seeing the major stages dominated by female artists for the first time in the theatre’s history,” said the National’s co-chief executive Rufus Norris. “Adaptations of classics are a theme and it’s fantastic to have Kate Tempest make her debut.” After it unveiled its previous season in March the theatre was heavily criticised as all six plays were written by men and only one was directed by a woman. “What’s changed is us putting our hands up and saying we got it wrong,” said Lisa Burger, the other co-chief executive. “We should have been better prepared to talk about balance in the announcement we were making. We’ve got much better at representation and this season shows that.” April De Angelis’s adaptation of Elena Ferrante’s My Brilliant Friend, which was made for television in 2018, will come to the Olivier theatre. Fall, who is Theatre Royal Stratford East’s artistic director, will direct Inua Ellams’ adaptation of Chekhov’s Three Sisters, which will be relocated to Nigeria, and her play Welcome to Iran will come to the National in May 2020. Burger said: “This season shows that British theatre is thriving and well. I’m really proud of the range of the work that we’ve got here, with big themes.” Tony Kushner’s adaptation of Friedrich Dürrenmatt’s The Visit will star Lesley Manville, and Maxine Peake will star in Lucy Kirkwood’s The Welkin alongside Cecilia Noble. Another playwright making her National Theatre debut is Francesca Martinez with All of Us, which she also stars in and which is directed by Ian Rickson. The lineup is completed by Richard Bean and Oliver Chris’s new play Absolute Flies Again; Alexander Zeldin’s Faith, Hope and Charity; Chris Bush’s adaptation of Brecht’s The Caucasian Chalk Circle; and Robert Lepage directs a new edition of Ex Machina’s epic The Seven Streams of the River Ota. Burger and Norris also announced the National Theatre Collection, which will give libraries, schools and universities access to some of the 10 years’ worth of NT Live productions that were originally shown in cinemas around the UK. The service will go live in September and feature Simon Godwin’s version of Twelfth Night, starring Tamsin Greig, Danny Boyle’s Frankenstein and 13 other plays.