Johanna Konta, playing the best tennis of her career, is two wins away from being the first British champion at the French Open since Sue Barker 43 years ago but she is determined to stick to the low-key attitude that has transformed her season – and possibly her career. On day 10 of the championships, she destroyed the world No 7 and 2018 Paris finalist Sloane Stephens 6-1, 6-4 in 71 minutes on a hot and dusty Court Philippe Chatrier to reach the semi-finals, where she will face the young Czech Marketa Vondrousova. She later downplayed a performance that the seven-times Roland Garros champion Chris Evert described as “one of the best clay-court matches ever”. Konta said when asked if this was her best ever win: “I had a good quarter-final against Simona [Halep] at Wimbledon. It’s difficult to compare. There are so many things I want to experience this fortnight that are individual to this tournament. I am very pleased with the level I played. “We have seen plenty of first-time semi-finalists go on and win grand slams. I will look to use the experience I have [of previous semi-finals, at Wimbledon and Melbourne] to deal with the challenges. I have never doubted myself, but I also have accepted I might never get back to the top 10. “I did a lot of things well today. More than anything, I thought it was a consistent performance. Sloane is a great player. I am proud and happy with how I am rolling and keeping the pressure on. I don’t believe in perfect tennis or perfect matches. I made plenty of mistakes. Some of the enjoyment is to keep trying and play the game.” Asked about comparisons being made with Barker and Jo Durie, the last female British players to go this far in the French Open, she said: “This is my third time in a grand slam semi-final. I’d like to go one and two steps further, though. “It’s always nice to be in great company and to be among great players. Other than that, tennis is a global sport. There is a great sense of pride to be alongside my compatriots from years before. Sloane is a great player, one of the best in the world. She made the final last year. “She raises her level, and I was pleased I could get my foot down early on and maintain that throughout the match.” As for her transformation from never having won in Paris to grand-slam threat, she said: “There hasn’t been a major click; it’s always a process and progression of work. I am enjoying the work – and that translates on the surfaces. I am pleased I am reaping the rewards on clay. Hopefully I will be here until the end.”