A new initiative in Bradford is hoping women will take up more literal and figurative space in the UK. Through the Pioneering Bradford Lasses campaign, more streets and public spaces in the city will be named after women in order to correct the gender imbalance of the figures whose achievements are publicly honoured. Bradford will kick off by naming a new street – Lillian Armitage Close – after a local suffragette who campaigned for women’s right to vote. I am under no illusion that more brown faces on bank notes, more women’s names on blue plaques or the toppling of the statues of colonialists we continue to celebrate will actually see minorities getting better-paid jobs, an increase in women climbing the ranks or somehow end white supremacy. I do, however, think that these can be brilliant and necessary moves. It is important that a city, town or country acknowledges not just the existence but the contributions of those who helped make it great. The historical achievements of women, minorities and particularly minority women have been too easily and intentionally erased. Some campaigners have taken matters into their own hands and put up their own blue plaques. This has been met with ire and hostility in some quarters. One piece in the Spectator, for example, feared “a tide of over-commemorated celebs who don’t deserve ceramic or even metallic immortality” if a spate of “fake plaques” continued. The expectation seems to be that those who have been written out of history should patiently wait for the process to stop, rather than take action. But this gatekeeping doesn’t preserve history – it actually makes it more ahistorical. In Norwich, handmade signs were created and mounted to pay tribute to the work of influential local women. An organisation called Rosie’s Plaques claimed responsibility, tweeting that, out of the 300 plaques celebrating places, people and events in Norwich, only 25 are for women. “Our fine city deserves better.” It is not just Norwich. Only 14% of English Heritage’s blue plaques in London celebrate women, which is unsurprising given how many roads are named after politicians, writers or poets. These are all roles that were once closed to women – or to all but a few. Even more streets are named after nobles, landlords, property developers and owners. Married women were not even able own property in England until 1882. I would argue that Amy Winehouse has done more for the current culture of Camden Town than Henry Doughty of Doughty Street, the landlord of the area when the eponymous street was built in the 18th century. We could do with an Olive Morris Street in Brixton, named after the activist and co-founder of the Brixton Black Women’s Group, who died aged 27. A Kate Moss Close in Croydon and Naomi Campbell Mews in Streatham have a certain ring to them, too. None of these changes solve racism or sexism, of course, but they don’t need to solve everything to be necessary.