Tyson Fury put on a show in and out of the ring on Saturday in a smashing Las Vegas debut, but afterward the conversation at the MGM Grand Garden Arena quickly turned to the future and the Mancunian’s much-anticipated rematch with Deontay Wilder. After brushing aside the little-known Tom Schwarz inside two rounds, the Gypsy King celebrated the successful first step of his US takeover by belting out Aerosmith’s I Don’t Want to Miss a Thing at the end of his in-ring interview with ESPN. “I wanted to show a few things to the American public to introduce myself properly,” Fury said. “Tonight I showed a little bit of speed, boxing skill, my ability to slip and slide out of the way of punches, and also the ability to finish, which is important.” The 30-year-old former heavyweight champion was back in action for the first time since December, when he pushed Wilder to the limit in a quest to regain the championship he had won from Wladimir Klitschko and never lost in the ring. He outboxed the American on the night, but was made to settle for a controversial split draw after suffering a pair of late knockdowns. Now the plan, which Fury said would “for the foreseeable future” take place in America, involves another tune-up fight on 21 September or 5 October against an opponent to be determined, possibly in New York. Then a replay with Wilder in the first quarter of 2020, presuming the American gets through his fall rematch with Cuba’s Luis Ortiz. “What we want for Tyson is justice,” said Frank Warren, Fury’s promoter. “He got robbed, no doubt about that. And what he’s looking for is justice. A fair shake on a level playing field and he will cement his legacy of being the best of his generation.” Fury, who parlayed his heroic performance against Wilder into a nine-figure joint promotional contract with Top Rank and ESPN, said the heavy-handed Alabaman could expect an even stiffer challenge in the rematch. “Deontay Wilder is coming,” he said. “This fight is going to happen. There was three horses in the heavyweight division. And then there was two,” he said, referring to Anthony Joshua’s surprise defeat by Andy Ruiz Jr. “And I already beat him [Wilder] once, so I’ll beat him again and again and again. And he ain’t gonna fight 50% Tyson Fury anymore. He’s gonna get a fully match-fit, back-active, back-sharp Tyson Fury.” Top Rank’s CEO, Bob Arum, predicted a second instalment between Fury and Wilder could generate more than 400 million pay-per-view buys and threaten the overall revenue marks set by Floyd Mayweather’s showdown with Manny Pacquiao in 2015, an optimistic assessment that Fury echoed. “It’s the biggest fight in world boxing, barring none,” Fury said. “Deontay Wilder, Tyson Fury, the rematch. It’s the biggest fight were going to see in the next few years. I don’t see anybody else coming up who can be as big. You’ve got two undefeated heavyweight champions, the lineal champion and the WBC champion, fighting in their prime. It doesn’t get any bigger.” He added: “It’s heavyweight boxing and anything can happen at any given moment. But the way I box and my style, it think it’s Kryptonite for anybody. They’ve got to keep me down. Provided they don’t do that, then I’ll keep winning.” Arum said the rematch, which will require a rare joint promotion between the bitter rivals Top Rank and Premier Boxing Champions, would likely take place in Las Vegas. “If it’s a massive fight, it belongs in Las Vegas because the casinos bring in the biggest punters and therefore the prices are sky high,” the veteran promoter said. “A gate that might do £2m at the O2 in London or do maybe $3m in New York would do 30 million here in Las Vegas. It has the infrastructure to handle a big fight. So without any commitment, I would think Las Vegas would be the likely place.”