Tom Dumoulin will miss next month’s Tour de France over concerns that he might not be in the best shape to compete following a knee injury and a physically challenging run-up to the race. The Team Sunweb rider, 28, suffered a setback during recovery from a knee injury that forced him to abandon the Giro d’Italia last month. “The last month has been extremely difficult overall, and with the setbacks in the knee recovery,” Dumoulin said. “After what happened at the Giro I really wanted to go for it in the Tour, but this week I realised it’s not realistic for my level to be there in time. I’ve tried so hard to get there but I really have to listen to my body and release myself from chasing an unrealistic goal.” The 2017 Giro d’Italia winner was expected to challenge the defending champion Geraint Thomas of Team Ineos at the Tour which begins in Brussels on 6 July. Team Sunweb physician Anko Boelens said it was simply “not possible” for Dumoulin to compete in the Tour. “We trusted in the process of rest, recuperation and a gradual return to racing but like in any recovery, there have been setbacks,” Boelens said. “Time isn’t on our side anymore to cater for setbacks so to give Tom the time he needs to get back to complete fitness can only be the right decision. Despite his strong will and ambition to race… it’s better to let this goal go this year in favour of optimum recovery.” Chris Froome has left hospital to start his recovery from extensive injuries suffered in a crash during the Critérium du Dauphiné last week. Froome’s bike hit a wall at almost 35 miles per hour during a reconnaissance ride for the fourth stage in France. The Team Ineos racer had been treated at the University Hospital of St Etienne, where he underwent a six-hour operation to repair a fractured right femur, broken hip, fractured elbow and fractured ribs. It was also reported Froome, 34, had fractured his neck. The four-times Tour de France champion posted an update on Thursday afternoon as he prepared to begin the long road to recovery. “As my time at ChuSaintEtienne has come to an end, I’d like to take the opportunity to thank the doctors & nurses for the exceptional care provided to me,” Froome said on Twitter. “It’s been a rough week but I appreciate you having made it as comfortable as possible for me.” Froome’s team-mate Thomas suffered an injury scare in a crash which forced him to withdraw from the Tour de Suisse earlier this week. However, the 33-year-old Welshman remains optimistic about his chances of defending his Tour de France title.