Get ready to hear from Neil Woodford. Four weeks have passed since dealings were suspended in his Equity Income Fund and the arrival of the 28-day mark obliges the manager to say something. The suspension must be formally reviewed and investors must be told if they will soon have access to their cash. Here’s a spoiler: the chances of the gates being released on Monday are close to zero. The fund had roughly £3.5bn of assets at suspension and too few holdings have been liquidated in the past month to meet the anticipated level of redemption requests. Add up Woodford’s public disclosures of sales of stakes in quoted companies and they come to about £300m, a figure inflated in the past week thanks to a chunky holding in BCA Marketplace, the car auction firm on the receiving end of a takeover bid. Stakes in unquoted companies – the source of most of Woodford’s woes – are harder to shift and only a handful seem to have been sold in recent weeks. So the bald arithmetic makes a quick release of the gates almost impossible: ready cash of £300m-ish is unlikely to be enough to meet the demand from investors to get out of the fund. Kent county council alone wants its £250m and Hargreaves Lansdown is reviewing the £600m it has invested via multi-manager funds. The intentions of the many thousands of private investors are harder to read but Link Asset Services, as authorised corporate director, is obliged to err on the side of caution when assessing whether there is enough liquidity to remove the gates. Woodford’s fund does not remotely look to be near that point yet. Interest on Monday, therefore, will centre on what Woodford says about the debacle. On day one, he said he was “extremely sorry” that trading had to be suspended, but the questions in his Q&A session via YouTube were all set by himself. If Woodford wants to retain a morsel of credibility, he has to address the hard issues. Three stand out. • Does he accept that he broke the spirit of the rules when he listed some unquoted holdings on Guernsey’s stock exchange to stay with the 10% cap on illiquid assets in an open-ended equity portfolio? “Listing something on an exchange where trading does not actually happen, as far as I can see, does not actually count as liquidity,” said Andrew Bailey, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority, in testimony to MPs. Does Woodford concede that such “regulatory arbitrage”, as Bailey called it, was underhand? • Why didn’t Woodford tell Hargreaves Lansdown, his biggest cheerleader, that he had breached the 10% level on two occasions in 2018? The investment platform had concerns over liquidity as early as 2017 and had asked to be told of any breaches; it says it only got the news via Bailey’s revelations a fortnight ago. • How can Woodford possibly justify charging management fees, estimated to be £60,000 a day, while dealings in the Equity Income Fund are suspended? The thin argument so far is that the fees cover “the infrastructure and resource costs associated with managing an actively managed fund”. But Bailey, Hargreaves and Nicky Morgan, chair of the Treasury select committee, have called on Woodford to waive the charges and the moral case to do so is overwhelming: Woodford Capital, the company 65% owned by Woodford and 35% by his business partner, has received £97m since the fund management venture set out in 2014. If Woodford merely offers another soft-soap video on Monday, he will burn any remaining goodwill. It’s time for some answers. Did you enjoy the ride at Merlin Entertainments? City advisers did. They grabbed one big payday when they ushered the owner of Alton Towers and Legoland to the stock market in 2013; now there’ll be another fee bonanza as Merlin returns to private ownership via a £6bn takeover. The buyer is a consortium comprising the wealthy Danish family that controls Lego, private equity titan Blackstone plus a Canadian pension fund. Since the Danes already owned 30% of Merlin, and will now bump themselves up to 50%, there’s not much point in other shareholders protesting. Friday’s takeover offer looks as good as done. Outside investors can, though, feel short-changed by a buyout price of 455p a share. Merlin traded at those levels as recently as summer 2017 and there is nothing fundamentally wrong with the business. Yes, the short-term capital investment demands are heavy as new attractions are built. Yes, there was a jolt to the tourist trade in the UK after 2017’s terror attacks. And, yes, Brexit breezes may have infected the stock market’s mood. But for long-term investors who are happy to hold quality stocks for years, Merlin still looked attractive. The directors can defend submission by pointing to a 37% premium versus the share price on the day before a cheeky US hedge fund lobbied for takeover action. But they would surely have backed themselves to get to 455p under their own steam within two or three years. This takeover, then, is really a triumph for the Lego family, who know the business better than anyone since they inserted the Legoland parks into Merlin in 2005 and have been significant investors ever since. But Danish opportunism leaves a bad taste. If you bring a company to the stock market, give it a proper chance to prosper. That means more than six years. Bitcoin is back and asking the question again – can cryptocurrencies supplant central bank money or even sit alongside it as a legitimate alternative? When the crypto bubble burst at the end of 2017, prompting bitcoin’s price to plunge almost 80% from its peak of more than $19,000, the answer was definitely no. A rollercoaster currency was never going to provide the bedrock for trade, or even the basis for consumers to buy goods. And last week was no different. The price might be back at around $13,500, giving the currency some semblance of its previous value, but this has come as a result of another giddying increase from around $3,400 in January. And as if to emphasise how unstable bitcoin is, crypto traders took stock at the end of the week to send it tumbling back to below $12,000. There have been mutterings inside central banks that they should step in to provide a solid alternative based on the blockchain technology at the heart of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, which allows financial transactions to bypass traditional banks. This option has been vetoed by the Bank of England, which would prefer to regulate private-sector initiatives with a decent pedigree. Back in the good years, this might have signalled to bitcoin and rivals including Litecoin and Ethereum that they stood a chance of gaining a central bank’s approval. Not any more. That baton has passed to Facebook and its new Libra cryptocurrency, which stands a much better chance after the US social media giant tied the product to a basket of existing currencies, making it more stable. Yet even Libra may have a limited impact. Officials in G20 nations intend to set a high bar of approval for it, not least to prevent it becoming a money-launderer’s best friend. The limited availability of bitcoin will probably mean its price will rise again, but stability will remain elusive.