The dating app Tinder announced earlier this year that it was adding a festival mode. “Trust us on this one,” it said, “if you haven’t done the festival scene with Tinder before, you’ll never even think about doing it without us again.” The slightly defensive tone of the press release seemed to pre-empt an obvious question: who needs a dating app to hook up at a festival? Well, we tried three of the most popular to find out. The full festival experience may well include “nocturnal activities”, but it seems meeting up for a pre-arranged date isn’t one of them. Although it is promising its festival mode for Lovebox and British Summer Time festivals in London, Tinder hasn’t yet extended its service to the best-known festival of all. Nonetheless, it returns a bevvy of matches, who presumably regret it soon after, because my “journalistic inquiries” are ignored. I was ghosted in Glastonbury. Maybe it is best to have fun the old-fashioned way. Ammar Kalia Bumble at Glastonbury is buzzing with the promise of romantic dates, potential friends and networking opportunities within a mile. Swiping through the smiling faces, a whole other festival experience opens up before me: a man who went to the same New Zealand university as me, many more defined by their interest in “banter” and – over on Bumble Bizz – a life coach who specialises in childhood trauma (and also does hair for weddings). I am inundated with matches, but my mobile internet is too patchy to support any kind of back-and-forth, let alone arrange a spot at which to meet in the endless expanse of Worthy Farm. Plus, Bumble’s defining feature – the woman makes the first move – means I am not prompted by messages from the men I have matched with to reply to them. “Couldn’t get laid at a festival” may sound suspiciously like “couldn’t organise a piss-up in a brewery” – but trying to do it through an app manages to make it labour-intensive and fraught with difficulty. Better just to operate within a radius of five metres. Elle Hunt Aside from “the dark room” at Glastonbury’s gay nightclub, NYC Downlow, Grindr is probably the most efficient way to initiating a late-night festival rendezvous. What it lacks in spontaneity it makes up for in convenience: there is enough hiking across the site as it is – why not conserve energy by meeting someone eight tents away? Stefan, a 30-year-old visitor from the Netherlands, chatting via the app, says it is “an easy and fun way to meet like-minded boys, without drama or difficulties”. He has been pleased to find festivalgoers keener to meet in person than those at home. “It’s a nice change. At festivals, there seems to be no fakes around. No chit-chat, but actual meets.” Sam, 23, says that Grindr can function as a dating site, a means to “connect like-minded folks to just hang out”, and as “a highway to the next casual hook-up” – but, “at Glasto, it’s obviously much more the latter”, he says. He has not met anyone yet, but intends to – he has been positively bombarded with messages. But using Grindr at Glastonbury isn’t without its drawbacks – not least the speed with which it drains phone battery. “It’s a smaller world here,” says Sam. “I had a couple of awkward moments bumping into someone at NYC Downlow who mere hours ago I had blocked.” Yikes. Chris Godfrey