Novak Djokovic reached the last of his nine French Open semi-finals in 2016 but the world No 1 could hardly have announced his return to the concluding weekend of the tournament more emphatically than he did on Thursday in thrashing the No 5 seed, Alexander Zverev, in straight sets. Since losing in the quarter-finals last year against Marco Cecchinato Djokovic has won 26 grand slam tournament matches in a row. If the reigning Wimbledon, US Open and Australian champion can win another two here, he will hold all four majors concurrently for a second time. If he can extend that run to Wimbledon and New York, he will complete the first calendar slam since Rod Laver in 1969. It is some ask but he seems to have the enthusiasm and energy for it – and the fitness. If and when the rain lifts over Roland Garros on Friday, Djokovic will face a stiffer test in Dominic Thiem than he did in Zverev, who looked drained of imagination and spirit as the Serb cruised to what was an embarrassingly comfortable 7-5, 6-2, 6-2 win in just over two hours on Court Philippe Chatrier. In the other quarter-final Thiem made mincemeat of the inconsistent but dangerous Russian Karen Khachanov 6-2, 6-4, 6-2 in an hour and 47 minutes. They were two disappointing preludes to what will surely be a dramatic day 13. The old order is getting back together again: not only have the four top seeds proved the rankings right for the first time since the 2012 Australian Open but this is the first time since the French Open seven years ago that Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer (who meet in the other semi‑final) have been in the same final four of a major. It is a curious and revealing statistic, maybe. In one regard it says they are going nowhere just yet; it also shouts that there have been incursions into their hegemony but not in a lasting way. “It’s a different time for us now than it was five years ago,” Djokovic said. “We’re a bit older but we have still been enjoying some of our best tennis in the biggest events. Dominic is deservedly where he is, one of the top four guys, especially on clay. He’s got that tremendous power with forehand and serve. His backhand also has improved a lot in the last couple of years.” Zverev never properly recovered from blowing his early chance, when he broke for 5-4 and served for the first set. Djokovic, who has hit another pitch here after a mixed run on clay, sensed the German faltering and took his chance. From that point on he had the mental edge as Zverev struggled. The end was limp, Zverev planting a backhand long. It looked as if he had been released from prison. “I had a few 15-40s, a lot of breakpoints,” he said. “I thought the first set should have gone my way. Then I played three really bad games. Once he’s in control he’s very tough to beat. He’s world No 1 for a reason.” For all his obvious talent Zverev has not delivered consistently enough outside the Masters to frighten his peers towards the end of a major. He admitted: “I feel like I’m at a stage where, quarter-finals, something like that, I could go further.” Thiem clearly loves the Parisian clay, a semi-finalist for the fourth year in a row and armed with the invaluable knowledge of a final against Nadal. He has struck a consistently high level throughout this tournament, and he hit flat and hard to leave Khachanov flat-footed. “I think every match I got better and better,” Thiem said. “I’m happy with the way I’m playing. It’s incredibly difficult to win a slam, especially for us players who don’t have one yet. “If everything is normal, we have to beat two players with 15 or more slams. I think everybody can imagine how difficult this is. But I will step on the court tomorrow, try everything and, of course, give everything.”