Jeremy Hunt has said he would willingly tell businesses that go bust because of a no-deal Brexit that their sacrifice was a necessary one, and that he will actively pursue such a course if a new departure plan looks impossible at the start of October. In a marked escalation of his rhetoric over Brexit, the foreign secretary said that while he did not seek no deal, or believe it would happen if he became prime minister, he would push for it if required to guarantee a timely departure. “At the beginning of October, if there is no prospect of a deal that can get through parliament, then I will leave at the end of October because that is our democratic promise to the British people,” Hunt told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show. Asked whether, under such a policy, he would be willing to look the owners of family businesses in the eye and say they should be prepared to see their companies go bust to ensure a no-deal Brexit, Hunt said: “I would do so but I’d do it with a heavy heart precisely because of the risks.” Asked how he would explain this rationale, Hunt said he would tell business owners that a no-deal Brexit was necessary to maintain the UK’s image abroad as “a country where politicians do what the people tell them to do”. He added: “So if, in order to do what the people tell us to do, we have to leave without a deal, I would do that. But I would find support for those companies to help them weather the storms.” Hunt has faced criticism from Boris Johnson, his rival for the Conservative leadership, over his insistence that if a deal was very close by 31 October he might briefly extend the deadline to finalise it. He told Marr that this was actually more likely to make Brexit happen. “If we got to the end of October and we’ve got a deal and we’re trying to get it through parliament but we need a few more parliamentary days, I’m not going to rip up that deal. Boris is,” he said. “I believe we’ll leave sooner with me than with Boris or anyone else because I am the person most likely to negotiate a deal – and that is the quickest way to leave. “What you’re saying is something that is a dilemma. Parliament is trying to stop a no-deal Brexit. They succeeded before, they may succeed again – that is an issue that will face any prime minister, whatever they’ve said about 31 October. “The quickest way to leave the EU is to choose a prime minister who can actually get us a deal that can get through parliament, and if you want a deal done ask a business person.” Hunt, who has spoken at length about his overriding wish to safeguard the union of the UK, conceded that no deal “would not be popular in Scotland”, but said he was the candidate best able to secure a deal. After Johnson said he was prepared to increase borrowing to fund his tax and spending commitments, Hunt said some of his spending plans “would have to wait” in a no-deal departure, as some money would need to be diverted to support businesses. His style is notably technocratic, with few rhetorical flourishes and an emphasis on his consensual approach and long record as a minister, notably during more than five years as health secretary, a traditional graveyard of ministerial careers. Hunt’s attempts to talk up a backstory as an 'underestimated' entrepreneur can fall flat given he is also the son of an admiral and was head boy at Charterhouse. Overall, Hunt’s approach can seem uninspiring and hard to pin down in terms of core beliefs, hence the 'Theresa in trousers' nickname among some Tory MPs. His campaign team have decided to take the fight directly to rival Boris Johnson though, with Hunt taking part in a Twitter Q&A session as a direct response to Johnson's refusal to appear on a Sky TV head-to-head debate. The hashtag: #BoJoNoShow. He says a new deal with the EU is possible by 31 October and he would send a cross-party negotiating team to Brussels, including members of the DUP. He would countenance leaving the EU without a deal but is notably more wary than rival Boris Johnson. Has been fairly silent on this, beyond a proposal to cut corporation tax from 19% to 12.5%, which according to the IFS would cost an estimated £13bn a year. Even at 19%, the UK rate is well below European and global averages. Before the campaign began he called for a doubling of defence spending, but he has since pulled back slightly, saying only that it should increase. He has argued that cuts to social care budgets had gone too far. Hunt backs the 2050 target for zero net carbon emissions and has called for 'sensible tax incentives' to encourage green initiatives, but very little beyond this. A likely strength for him, as he has been seen as a solid foreign secretary, an impression burnished by taking over from the chaotic Johnson. This has been a key part of his pitch. Peter Walker Political correspondent He said: “I wouldn’t drop them because I think we can make a success of no deal. They would take longer because you wouldn’t have that money at your fingertips straight away.” However, Hunt said he would not delay his plan to reduce the rate of corporation tax to 12.5%, matching Ireland as the lowest of any major economy, something estimated to cost £13bn a year. “It’s not the tax cut people are talking about on the doorstep when you meet them but it is one that would fire up the economy in a way that would be helpful in a no-deal context because we would have economic bumpiness and we need to support businesses,” Hunt said. “Putting money in the pockets of businessmen at that moment would, I think, be the right thing to do.”