There’s a new lead writer on Killing Eve, the irksomely talented Emerald Fennell. Our own shy writer Luke Jennings, who wrote the source novels, first passed the baton to Phoebe Waller-Bridge, who has now taken a back seat in order to allow mere mortals to have a snatch at the grapes. Whatever: the second series thunders on with brio and all its fizzing synonyms, astonishingly better than before. Last night’s opener to the second series gave more prominence to the ever-fabulous Fiona Shaw (joined in a cameo by old favourite Barbara Flynn), while Sandra Oh reeled from last season’s denouement and struggled to relate any part of her new life to kind, dull hubby Niko. Yet it’s as ever Jodie Comer, as Villanelle, who fascinates and magnetises with every appearance on screen: ever wicked, and ever charming, but now an itty bit vulnerable: you can see the little-girl-lost beneath the skull of the psychopath. Again, it blends grand humour with tragedy. Her exchanges with Gabriel, the crash victim in hospital, who asks: – Do I look scary?– Your face? Uh … yeah!– Will it get better?– (dancily sing-song) No! are a delight. Until they’re not. The stakes are, if anything, even higher now, with a rocky marriage, intriguing sexualities and, we’re told, a wholly new psycho killer on the loose. It’s a new stage on to which Villanelle now not so much strides as limps: the image of her scuttling through wetly dirty Paris suburbs in a set of kiddies’ rocket-ship pyjamas will linger long… Another year of waiting, another hugely welcome Black Mirror, although some fans may feel short-changed as there are only three episodes. They aren’t being bilked or chiselled at all in fact: at least two of these are among the finest yet produced. Writer Charlie Brooker has, I think, dialled it back on the finer outlying madness and surreal explorations/loopiness of some earlier shows, and the whole benefits: while there’s still a trademark obsidian-black wit, not just surviving but thriving from the leap, back in 2016, to high-end Netflix, there’s altogether a more human, scaled, relatable aspect to this outing, conjoining real emotions with now quite imaginable tech innovations. Acting, always, helps. Smithereens is essentially a one-man one-act play for Andrew Scott, who kidnaps a hapless new-media intern just to talk – just to talk, for three stuttered minutes, make a couple of small points – to the god figure behind the algorithms that drive fatal phone addictions. Hugely effective, and affecting, it ends much worse for Scott than did any episode of Fleabag. Monica Dolan excels too, as elsewhere does Anthony Mackie, but the real surprise is Miley Cyrus in Rachel, Jack and Ashley Too, a wonderfully witty parable about the perils of fame with a chucklingly good villainess of the old school (think Scooby-Doo or Murder She Wrote). I don’t mean to damn with faint praise the third episode, Striking Vipers, but the ending was a little American rom-compromise for my taste. Taken together, an utter treat, although real life is surely moving faster than even Black Mirror’s vaulting imagination can keep pace with. 7 Up and Me, which aired as a start to the 63 Up week, was an unexpected delight. Featuring some celebs chatting about what the 1964 series had meant to them, I’d mentally sighed at the presumptuous solipsism. Yet, with the likes of Richard E Grant and Michael Sheen – “the older they get,” said the latter, “the more we just connect with the sweep of what it is to be a human being” – it was truly insightful for its parallels, the slings and arrows that beset the best and worst of us. The 63 Up series that followed was, of course, lovely; remarkable to see again the shy or gauche or cheeky seven-year-olds morphing into the (always truculent) 14-year-olds (“that age is just an excruciation,” said Mr Grant), and then to 21, 28, then fully formed, and now, by and large, leading wholly rounded lives, full of humour and mistakes, and yet somehow recognisable as the toddlers they once were. In a field too crowded with false contenders, Michael Apted’s series truly has the right to call itself groundbreaking. This last week we caught up with naughty Tony, now Essexed in every sense, and with Yorkshire’s scientific prodigy and farmer’s son Nick, now rich, with a loving family and semi-American – and, weirdly, because we always felt he’d survive, with cancer (beatable, throat) – and Andrew, Sue and others. Andrew was the kid filmed all those years ago singing Waltzing Matilda. In Latin. Unsurprisingly, Stanley – Boris-dad – Johnson loved this segment: Richard E Grant loathed it with viscera. The 1964 experiment that began into how much class backgrounds affect our lives, moved swiftly on into a much wider sweep of social documentary. I wonder, in 2019, whether Apted rather regrets not having pursued his original class-exploring intention: whatever, I salute him. We’ve already lost one of the participants, one of 14 distinct souls remarkable for their very ordinariness: I earnestly hope not too many more by the time of 70 Up. Tales of the City returned after 18 years, but I’m not sure precisely why. It feels oddly dated, and not just because Laura Linney’s back as the ever-needy Mary Ann Singleton; there’s something indefinably 90s about the staging and the shooting. Mary Ann’s back in Frisco, reunited with Michael for Anna Madrigal’s 90th, still needy, still looking for happiness. But it’s immensely valuable nonetheless, if only to remind us not just of the quality of Armistead Maupin’s writing – I read and empathised avidly with all the books 20-whatever years ago, though I was hardly the most likely among my peers (some may disagree) to up sticks to San Fran and headline a drag act – but also that transitioning, gender and identity were being wisely explored as long ago as pre-Aids days. In these intolerant times, it’s a welcome championing of value-battles long thought (wrongly thought, it turns out) won. A month ago I hailed Chernobyl as the “best television I’ve seen this year” and see no reason to vary that verdict: if anything, it became more immensely, magisterially ghastly with every hour. The last episode, which aired this week, and when we thought all was over bar the shouting, was possibly the finest of all (though the dog-shootings still haunt, bizarrely). A court case, complex yet graspable exposition and, as ever, fine, fine under-the-top acting. It also adds a little weight to Angold’s Law (don’t Google it yet: I’ve just invented it after a friend who combines fascinating TV trivia with an irritating propensity to unveil it loudly and repeatedly): namely, that an unusual number of episodes to a series equates directly to its quality. That is, the producers have made exactly the number of episodes it takes to best tell the story rather than bending to neat six- or 10-parters to last a set autumn season or whatever: Tinker Tailor, seven episodes; Brideshead, 11; A Very British Coup a mere perfect three. Chernobyl is now abed after only five, but five of such searing quality, a difficult tale truthfully told and an utter shunning of any Hollywood whiz-bangery (and, not incidentally, a haunting shadowy score that never intruded) that, despite the grim subject matter, this was sublime. I’ll hugely miss it, and Jared Harris’s company. The official death toll is still listed at 31, which tells you much of what you might wish to know about the ongoing Russian lie-machine.