The authors who raised concerns about the impact of Babylon GP at Hand (Letters, 31 May) have neglected to mention many key facts. NHS England says if patients move then their funding moves with them – while Hammersmith and Fulham clinical commissioning group (CCG) says it is being paid and patients would “not be disadvantaged”. Anyone who reads the full independent report, rather than cherrypicking facts, will see it explicitly states that GP at Hand “patients were previously registered at a large number of CCGs and other practices. This indicates the impact on any singular practice or CCG would be minimal.” This same report shows that 50,000 people are with GP at Hand because they cannot get the care they need elsewhere, and being with us meant nearly 2,000 fewer A&E visits in just six months compared with new patients at other London practices. GP at Hand does not take money from other practices by having younger patients. All NHS GP clinics are paid according to the Carr-Hill formula. It weights payments by patient age, gender and other factors. The amount varies from below £35 per 15- to 44-year-old man to over £190 for each person over the age of 85. Our digital-first approach will save the NHS money because fast access every hour of every day means people don’t face delays to diagnosis and treatment. And we provide this continuous care despite being paid for only a third of these hours. That’s why University Hospitals Birmingham approached us to help reduce the unsustainable pressure it’s facing from A&E and outpatient appointments. Administrative systems shouldn’t stand in the way of patient care. We need a modern financial system that works for people who choose digital-first care. This is key to ensuring that the NHS remains accessible to all.Dr Kultar Garcha Clinical lead, Babylon GP at Hand, and a GP in west LondonDr Matthew NobleUK medical director, Babylon GP at Hand, and a GP at an inner-city practice • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition