The day before the prime minister announced her forthcoming resignation, the Independent published this clue by Tyrus … 1d So we’re hurting ourselves with May still in charge (briefly) – chaos developing (15)[ wordplay: anagram (“developing”) of MAY STILL IC (“in charge briefly”) CHAOS ][ definition: so we’re hurting ourselves ] … for MASOCHISTICALLY. But the clue has not become obsolete; nor have any of the others. Highly recommended. Elsewhere, Europe has been popping up in clues that read as if they could have bled in from the news and comment pages, such as these from the Telegraph … 1ac Means of settling European collection of laws (4)[ wordplay: abbrev. for “cash on delivery” (“means of settling”) + abbrev. for “European”][ COD + E ][ definition: collection of laws ] 10ac Every other change hit back by European (9) [ wordplay: synonym for “change” + reversal of (“back”) synonym for “hit” + abbrev. for “European”][ ALTER + reversal of TAN + E ][ definition: “every other”] … for CODE and ALTERNATE respectively. Goodbye, then, to the prime minister most useful to crossword solvers. Most PMs are hopeless, having names that mean nothing but names. Sure, you might be able to get some ambiguity out of Major or Brown – at a pinch, Canning or Thatcher – but these have nothing on a name that is also a modal auxiliary. What about her nicknames? In 2017, Quentin Letts tried out Glumbucket, a variant of a term once applied to Lloyd George. It didn’t stick. Nor did Teflon Theresa, from the period when various Home Office horrors were failing to do damage to May while she was home secretary; the Economist’s Theresa Maybe (a bit obvious, lads) and Theresa the Appeaser (though surely not because of an excess of politesse in politics). Strenuously ignoring – for how can we not? – her MPs’ sobriquet of Mummy, the one that did stick is the one clued with peculiar tact by Paul in a prize puzzle for which the annotated solution is now available: 22ac Political machine cruelly rejecting part of manifesto by a majority (6)[ wordplay: hidden (“part of”) backwards (“rejecting”) in MANIFESTOBYAMAJORITY ][ definition: political machine cruelly ] The term MAYBOT was coined in these very pages: Guardian parliamentary sketch writer John Crace dropped it into a piece in November 2016. In the Q&A below from last year, he explains how MAYBOT didn’t catch on at first, because the rightwing press was in 2016 portraying May as strong and, it can’t be denied, stable (at 17m41s): Not long after the “strong and stable” election campaign, though, the nickname took hold, spreading to other papers, This Week and beyond. Incidentally, if youare feeling brave, skip to 28min 40sec, where even the unromantic Crace gives May until “the middle of 2019, by which stage we will have … some kind of transitional deal”. Our next challenge concerns another prime-ministerial moniker. We are looking, not at the greatest of all nicknames (The Turf Macaroni, because of Grafton’s love of hanging around at horse races), but at one given to Asquith for a habit celebrated in a music-hall song … Mr Asquith says in a manner sweet and calm: Another little drink won’t do us any harm … reader: how would you clue SQUIFFY? Thanks for your clues for CANADA PLUS and of course I adored Chameleonxwords’ “Alan C uploads puzzles, wanting blog insiders’ improbable solution to conundrum?” The runners-up are Peshwari’s not-implausible “Poland invading North American countries is one possible outcome of trade talks” and PeterMooreFuller’s sly “Davis’s aim snookered by Thorburn’s home advantage”; the winner is Encota’s ingenious “Trade deal may result in peculiar tax bands, following crazy Brexit withdrawal”. Talking of ingenuity, the audacity award does not seem enough for Porcia’s “MPs mull a spurious unicorns agenda, cake eaten and not, staggeringly, to leave European Single Market and Customs Union with a deal” which, frankly, I think I have checked. How can you describe something like this? The French doubtless have a word, but I’m stuck. Any help? Kludos to Encota; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. At the end of a typically impeccable puzzle, Arachne is devious in her definition … 29d Donald, president of America, wearing turtleneck inside out (4)[ wordplay: abbrev. for “America” inside (“wearing”) TURTLENECK losing all of its internal letters (“inside out”) ][ US inside TK ][ definition: Donald, president ] … which strongly suggests one president called Donald, an impression that is strongly supported by the rest of the clue, even though this president is Donald TUSK.