When I check my bank account, I see your name. It’s not my son’s father paying the £7 weekly child maintenance contribution, it’s you. Like me, you have two children so you know about raising babies on a shoestring. You have resolved our ongoing battle (I will share his terms in calling it a battle). It has been horrific and the long-term effects are yet to present themselves. Yet, 15 years too late, you take on this token gesture. It’s an olive branch. A knowing half smile from you to me. Almost the cost of a school bus ticket. Almost the cost of a week’s sandwiches. Nearly the cost of a haircut. Where is his dad in all this? Don’t get me wrong. I’m pleased he’s gone away, metaphorically speaking. There are no more locks to double-check at night and I can switch on my phone without a churning pit of dread. Remember when my son and I phoned you after he was in trouble with the police? I thought it right to inform his dad; to seek his counsel and insight as a role model. And to avoid being reprimanded for not informing him of my latest failing. You were so real on the phone while you were holding the fort for your own family. “I don’t know where he is,” you said. “I can’t get hold of him. I don’t know when he’ll be home. He’s abroad somewhere.” That was our last attempt to communicate with him. It reminded me of being a teenager in the same boat, seeking my dad’s help. In tears, I eventually got hold of my uncle, who said he was away, working, he presumed. I didn’t try again. It’s not that we don’t want to ask for help. It’s that we want to avoid the hurt of disappointment. I’m sorry this payment has fallen on you. I know my ex doesn’t have a bank account, which he says isn’t his fault – just like losing his driving licence or another family home were not his fault. So thank you for the standing order and giving your stepson what you can afford. They say he should pay £10, but the £7 is great. If nothing else, seeing your name on my bank statement reassures me of the power of motherhood, the honour, the sacrifice. Ultimately the love for our families is greater than any battle won or lost. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.