Investment funds of the sort run by Neil Woodford need closer scrutiny to lessen the risk that fire sales of assets trigger a market-disrupting feedback loop, the governor of the Bank of England has said. Mark Carney used a speech in Tokyo to reveal that Threadneedle Street is to stress test investment funds in order to reduce the threat of a system-wide financial crisis. The governor did not mention Woodford – who earlier this week blocked investors from taking cash from his flagship £3.7bn Equity Income Fund – by name, but made it clear by a reference to “niche managers” that the Bank saw the need to expand the scope of its oversight. “Over half of investment funds have a structural mismatch between the frequency with which they offer redemptions and the time it would take them to liquidate their assets. “Under stress they may need to fire sell assets, magnifying market adjustments and triggering further redemptions – a vicious feedback loop that can ultimately disrupt market functioning.” Nicky Morgan, chair of the House of Commons Treasury select committee, said the suspension of Woodford’s fund was a “troubling episode” that the committee would raise at evidence sessions with the Bank of England and the City watchdog, the Financial Conduct Authority. “Investors in the Woodford fund have been locked out of accessing their cash. Yet it has been reported that Mr Woodford is taking in nearly £100,000 in management fees a day,” Morgan said. “The suspension of trading has provided Mr Woodford with some breathing room to fix his fund; he should afford his investors the same space and waive the fund’s fees while the fund is suspended.” Carney said banks were now a lot safer as a result of the tightening up of supervision that followed the financial crash of 2008, but said recent years had seen an increase from $50tn to $80tn in assets under management, with most of the growth coming from investment funds. The Bank governor said two-thirds of investment funds with structural mismatches were domiciled in the US and Europe. It was important, he added, to ensure – as with banks – that funds were not taking excessive risks. “System-wide stress simulations are currently being developed, including at the Bank of England, to assess these risks.” The authorities were beginning to consider policy tools to guard against the build-up of systemic risks in financial institutions other than banks. Speaking to the Institute of International Finance, Carney said investment flows to emerging markets – where both returns and risks are higher – had increased over the past decade. “These flows are particularly flighty, reflecting the fact that more than $30tn of global assets are held in investment funds that promise daily liquidity to investors despite investing in potentially illiquid underlying assets, such as emerging market economy (EME) debt. “We have recently seen analogous situations in the UK within some niche managers and smaller markets, such as open-ended property funds investing in commercial real estate. The complications would be much greater if a major asset class like EME debt were to freeze up.”