Players from both teams have taken part in a much-discussed boycott of Australia’s national anthem before Wednesday’s State of Origin opener. Indigenous players Cody Walker, Josh Addo-Carr and Will Chambers had all spoken in the build-up to the match at Suncorp Stadium that they would not be singing Advance Australia Fair. Of the 34 players to take the field for Queensland and NSW, 11 players appeared not to sing during the pre-match ceremony. The players linked arms with teammates on the pitch but remained tight-lipped as Advance Australia Fair was sung by the majority of players and fans massed in the stands. The rendition of the anthem was immediately followed by a welcome to country delivered by Johnathan Thurston, the retired Queensland great. The issue has prompted a national debate over the singing of the anthem and how Indigenous people feel about the song, particularly the lyrics declaring Australians are “young and free”. South Sydney’s Walker was the first to confirm he would remain silent while it played, insisting that it “does not represent me or my family”, but also that he did not want to invite controversy. “We aren’t young and free,” he told Channel 7 last week. “We’re the longest-living culture in the world. I guess just for those words to be in that, it just contradicts the whole anthem for us singing it.” The debate has polarised opinions in some parts of the rugby league community, but within the Origin camps, the players have found support. Walker and Addo-Carr were joined in silence by NSW teammates Payne Haas and Latrell Mitchell while for Queensland Chambers, Josh Papalii, Dane Gagai, Dylan Napa, Kalyn Ponga and debutants Joe Ofahengaue and David Fifita appeared not to be singing. A number of those players are of New Zealand or Pacific Island heritage. Walker brought the issue to light last week, saying he did not believe the anthem represented him or his family. Chambers and Addo-Carr both echoed those statements while Thurston said it was time for a referendum on the issue. “Australia needs to be educated about its history,” said Thurston. “We have come a long way from where we were but we have a long way to go.” Thurston backed Walker’s stance and called for a referendum on the continued use of the anthem, while Maroons captain Daly Cherry-Evans and NSW coach Brad Fittler both said they respected the boycott. Cherry-Evans, captaining the Maroons for the first time on Wednesday night, said he hoped the debate would spark a broader discussion around the issue. NSW captain Boyd Cordner and Blues teammates Jake Trbojevic and Damien Cook “had no problem” with the boycott, although they would sing the anthem “loud and proud”.