What’s going for it? If you want to see why so many people voted (and would still vote) for Brexit, these are the perfect places to start. These conjoined twins have been in a death spiral for decades. The story is depressingly familiar: the sudden removal of a place’s main reason for being, various feeble attempts at sticking-plaster “regeneration” and decades of underinvestment. Today, Grimsby and Cleethorpes need big thinking. There are a few, much-feted, green shoots: the wind-farm industry, for instance (Grimsby has more of its energy demands met by renewables than anywhere else in the country); or the turning of Grimsby’s evocative, 19th-century dockside Kasbah district into a conservation area. Whether these green shoots will grow, though, is a moot point. The area faces formidable challenges. On the plus side, the towns can be truly beautiful, with handsome 19th-century homes, delightful parks and silky sand on the beach. Its community is battered, but of a strength most places would envy. Nobody could wish these places anything but better fortune, love and, most importantly, a whole lot of cash. The case against Where to begin. The full gamut of economic and social problems. Grimsby, in particular, was heavily damaged by redevelopment in the 70s. Well connected? Out on a limb, but not as isolated as many say, especially by car. Trains: not the finest service; hourly to Doncaster and the east coast mainline (65 minutes), 55 minutes to Lincoln (every two or three hours) and 42 minutes to Barton-upon-Humber (every two hours). Driving: an hour to Doncaster and the A1(M), 50 minutes to Hull; you can be up in the Wolds in 15 minutes. Schools Primaries: Old Clee, St Mary’s Catholic, Lisle Marsden, Ormiston South Parade, Yarborough, Grange, Western, Fairfield, William Barcroft, Littlecoates and Scartho are all “good”, says Ofsted, with Elliston “outstanding”. Secondaries: Havelock and Oasis Wintringham are both “good”. Hang out at… Papa’s Fish & Chips at the end of Cleethorpes Pier. Save the scraps for me. Great nearby country pubs: the New Inn in Great Limber and the Ship in Barnoldby-Le-Beck. Where to buy Both towns have some especially fine late-Victorian and Edwardian homes. In Grimsby: the neighbourhood around People’s Park, Park Drive especially, to Bargate, up to Abbey Road and south to Weelsby Road. In Cleethorpes: the avenues on and off Queens Parade. Decent terraces around Hainton Avenue. Suburbans around Waltham Road, Louth Road, south to Scartho and around Cleethorpes Country Park. Large detacheds and townhouses, £250,000-£600,000. Detacheds and smaller townhouses, £130,000-£250,000. Semis, £60,000-£340,000. Terraces and cottages, £25,000-£150,000. Flats, £25,000-£250,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £280-£580pcm; a three-bedroom house, £350-£750pcm. Bargain of the week A wonderful, listed, detached three-bedroom home, needing full modernisation, £115,000, with jacksongreenpreston.co.uk. Becky Barnes “The green spaces, such as People’s Park and Weelsby Woods are beautiful, and there’s an emerging local business scene with great places to shop and eat. I love Riverhead Coffee and Tredici.” Jenny Chamberlain “Thriving independent businesses. Lovely being so close to the beach (in Cleethorpes), and you can’t beat Grimsby fish and chips.” • Do you live in Grimsby or Cleethorpes? Join the debate below. Do you live in Bermondsey, south-east London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 25 June.