I’m surprised I’m not dead. The music industry was a hedonistic place in the noughties. It was all about having fun and getting fucked up. People who indulge don’t generally come out the other side. Having children triggered responsibilities. Donating my breast milk to Hammersmith hospital was an amazing thing to do. It became obvious my daughter wasn’t going to take it. I pumped it into freezer bags and then it was sterilised and given to premature babies, because their mothers’ milk hadn’t come in yet. Spending three months in a psychiatric ward wasn’t a positive experience at the time, but I came out of it slightly healthier than when I went it. I’d been trying to harm myself so I was under close supervision. One thing I learned while there was about the formative years and attachment parenting. Both my parents were busy when I was young and so I try to make myself less busy for my children now. I’m not embarrassed about having a vagina. That’s why I retweeted those knickerless pictures of me on stage. They were taken with the sole purpose of trying to embarrass and shame me and I didn’t like it. So I took ownership of them. Piers Morgan won’t be getting a Christmas card from me, because a) I don’t have his address and b) I don’t wish him well. I haven’t fallen out with him. I just don’t like him. I think he likes to go for women, and I think he just uses me for headlines. A detective got in contact to say that reading about the experience of my stalker completely changed her. It’s hard not to shut down and isolate. Other people don’t take you seriously if the police don’t confirm what has happened. If other people don’t take you seriously, you start to question yourself. I worry about Instagram for my daughters, because it makes young, impressionable girls feel their whole value is based on their looks. When the surefire way to increase your followers and likes is by taking your clothes off and piling on makeup, that’s what you’ll do because you want validation, just like every teenager. Sex can still be an addiction. I chose sex over heroin. I didn’t realise at the time. Addiction can manifest itself in all manners of ways. You use substances or sex to put a plaster over something else, like pain or fear. There are all manner of destructive things you can get up to. I hope the other Lily Allen in a parallel dimension is doing well. I think she lives in Cornwall, works as a florist supplying flowers to boutique shops in London, and lives in a lovely house with her children. Lily Allen plays the Port Eliot festival in Cornwall, 25-28 July (porteliotfestival.com)