The imam who questioned Conservative leadership candidates about Islamophobia during Tuesday’s TV debate has called responses from the MPs “disappointing and deluded”. Abdullah Patel, who is also deputy head of a primary school in Gloucester, asked a question via videolink from Bristol about the impact of Islamophobia, saying: “Do you accept words have consequences?” Patel wrote on Twitter that he had asked the question because of “numerous reports of blatant racism against members of my community”, saying he “wanted the candidates to admit that they’ve played a role in peddling this hate, and that things would change.” Patel wrote he was unimpressed by the responses of all the candidates, except Sajid Javid, who used his answer to call for an investigation into Islamophobia in the Conservative party. “What I got as a response was nothing short of disappointing and deluded,” wrote Patel. Patel particularly criticised Boris Johnson, who forgot Patel’s name while answering his question, writing on Twitter: “my name is Abdullah, not Tina … ‘our friend from Bristol’” and linking to a video of Johnson’s answer to him, saying it showed “Boris at his best (or worst)”. Have to thank @MuslimCouncil and @MatesJacob because it was their detailed document which gave me the backing to ask the Q on #BBCOurNextPMMy name is Abdullah btw @BorisJohnson pic.twitter.com/08eFuwo5Ku Patel also criticised Michael Gove for using the question as an opportunity to have a “dig” at Jeremy Corbyn and Jeremy Hunt who “used the chance to speak about how he can’t be racist because he has an immigrant wife”, and Rory Stewart, whom Patel said “forgot that this is also OUR country”. “The only positive from the debate was Sajid Javid making them all commit to an independent investigation into Islamophobia in the Conservatives,” wrote Patel. Though Patel’s question was not directed at a particular candidate, moderator Emily Maitlis singled out Johnson in her follow-up question, saying: “You are frequently careless with your language, do you worry that you may do more harm than good? I’m going to raise the issue of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe.” 5/@Jeremy_Hunt used the chance to speak about how he can't be racist because he has an immigrant wife, and @RoryStewartUK forgot that this is also OUR country. The only positive from the debate was @sajidjavid making them all commit to an independent investigation into... Zaghari-Ratcliffe is an Iranian-British woman who is in prison in Iran on spying charges. In 2017, while foreign secretary, Johnson made comments that she was training journalists in Iran at the time of her arrest, something the Iranian authorities pointed to as evidence that she was involved in working to undermine the regime. Her family and employer denys she was training journalists and say she was in the country on a holiday visiting family. In Tuesday night’s debate, Johnson said that in that case his words did not have consequences, saying the Iranian regime was responsible for what happened to Zaghari-Ratcliffe.