Diego Maradona was the world’s greatest footballer. A millionaire many times over, when he signed for Napoli FC the city celebrated for five days. The Pope requested an audience. But the shanty-town kid from Buenos Aires never lost his taste for the underworld. He has become embroiled in a Neapolitan saga of call girls and cocaine, big money and bad blood. He has given up football. And now he’s been betrayed by the godfathers of the gutter In the early hours of January 7 this year, the telephone rang in a dingy, gas-heated house in the old, labyrinthine Spanish Quarter of Naples. A rugged 46-year-old woman answered, woken by the call. ‘Diego gave me this number .. for two women,’ said a man’s voice.‘Yes,’ said the woman. ‘Good women, mind you. We want to meet in the Via Manzoni, by the Airone (a piano bar).’ ‘Is Diego there?’ ‘You want to speak to him?’ ‘I want to speak to Maradona.’ ‘You can ring him at Vincenzo’s’ What is said to be the voice of the world’s greatest footballer came on the line at 3.38am - a call to the woman’s house. ‘Do you know who they are?,’ said the woman. ‘They’re the ones from yesterday.’ ‘I get it, yes,’ says Maradona. ‘I was up at Italo’s this morning.’ (That’s Italo Iovine, manager of one of Maradona’s favourite night clubs, now under arrest for his part in a major intercontinental cocaine and prostitution racket). ‘Listen, I’ll give you the address,’ said the woman. ‘Look, I’m at the Airone.’ ‘Will around four o’clock be OK?’ ‘OK. Have you got two girls?’ ‘Yes. Wait, I want you to say hello to my little boy.’ A child called Cristino comes on the line, to salute his footballing idol. Unknown to both parties, this call was telephone tap number 1428 on ‘controlled telephone’ number 394. The woman was Carmela Cinquegrana, ‘Grande Maitresse’ of the Spanish Quarter, now under arrest for her part in the same cocaine ring as ‘Italo’ - it was an ambitious business run by another of those arrested, Mario Lo Russo, a ‘Capo’ of the Neapolitan Camorra (the gangsters who run organised crime in the city) who is accused of importing cocaine from South America for refinery in Naples and sale along the French Riviera. Testimonies in the case say that Maradona asked for more than women from ‘Donna Carmela’: ‘The famous footballer Diego Maradona,’ said the police report, ‘on a number of occasions asked Signora Cinquegrana for ‘gear’ in no small quantities. By this we understand cocaine.’ Italo Iovine, Donna Carmela, her husband Mario Falcone, Mario Lo Russo and four others were charged in February. As a result of the evidence assembled, the judges also put out a very separate warrant for the arrest of Diego Armando Maradona on the charge of possession and distribution of cocaine; it was the first in a series of sudden calamities for the prince and darling of the Vesuvian city. Last Monday night, Maradona slipped through the vigil outside his home and flew, in tears, from Italy to his native Argentina, banned from playing after traces of cocaine were found following a doping test, his flamboyant and brilliant career in ruins, either as the result of a filthy frame-up, or else of Maradona’s inability to live with his own genius. Maradona had fallen, as the Italians say, ‘dalle stelle alle stalle’ - from the stars to the stables. Naples without Maradona: it is like a deck of cards stripped of both its joker and its aces, a besieged court robbed of its king and jester. The fans gathered at the Campo Paradiso training ground as though at some sort of wake. During the night, the fallen idol had left the city, fleeing the leaden weight of secrets that now eclipsed his genius, secrets which had driven the world’s most uncannily brilliant footballer into exile from the game. On Easter Saturday, Napoli earned an estimable draw in the embittered poor-South vs rich-North contest against Inter Milan under a sky as blue as the team’s shirts, but there was no Maradona. Among the fans on the usually explosive ‘Curva B’ there was a strange, funereal restraint. ‘I am going for my daughter’s birthday,’ Maradona had said before boarding the plane, but everybody knew that he would now only return, if necessary, to face the web of legal action and judicial investigation that was closing in around him. ‘I shall miss the Italian match days,’ he said, ‘the greatest fun I have ever had. But I am tired of struggling; I want to control my life.’ The story of the fall of Diego Maradona is the modern-day version of those sour fairy tales of the genius who rose from dire poverty, unable to control the consequences of talent, people like Lester Young, like Billie Holliday; those unable to resist the liggers who called themselves friends; those unable to make sense of their riches or to control their fortune; those whose genius denies them maturity. ‘He is the most extraordinary man,’ says Maradona’s lawyer, Vincenzo Siniscalchi, ‘who has had only one thing in his life since he was 15 - football. Since he gave himself to his game, he simply stopped growing. My client has the mind of a 15-year-old.’ But it is also the story of what has happened to football. Contrasts and comparisons with the great Pele are inevitable: these two were the most resplendent footballers of all time; Maradona in many ways the more strangely talented, despite his stocky frame (as opposed to Pele’s lithe elegance). English fans remember the ‘Hand of God’ cheating in the World Cup quarter final of 1986, and then the breathtaking second goal that somehow vindicated its outrageous cheek. But the Neapolitans recall plenty more besides: week after week, they de lighted and revelled in Maradona’s balletic play - his weaving around defenders with the ball apparently tied to his feet; his passes that sent other players breaking towards goal with an unearthly precision; free kicks guided at lightning speed by some voodooistic radar to shake the goal netting while his opponents stared, spellbound. The same might be said of Pele, but as a sports writer who came to know Maradona well says, ‘What happened to Maradona could not have happened to Pele. It is a symptom of the absurdity of the money that has come into the game, of turning players into pop stars. Maradona was offered Dollars 600,000 by Coca Cola when he was only 16, and it never stopped: here, he was offered as much as he wanted - he just named a figure. And of course he always said yes. It brought out his weakness and his loneliness, it caused his fall.’ Maradona’s twilight is also a story about the proud, beautiful but battered city of Naples, where life is ‘agrodolce’, bittersweet; a city which craved a Messiah, and found one in Maradona. There is no Italian word for ‘privacy’, and in Naples there is no privacy. There is instead a strange dichotomy: much of the life of the urban sprawl under the volcano is lived in the shadows, but there is no hiding place. The poor quarters that Maradona made his own, the Spanish Quarter, the Forcella, the Sanita and the ‘Spaccanapoli’ - where his painted portrait adorns the gable ends and where a generation of children have been christened Diego Armando - are a warren of little alleyways, steps and courtyards from which the great domes and facades of tatty baroque churches rise like cloudcaps and cliffs out of the miasma of old stone propped up by scaffolding. ‘Everyone sees everything here,’ muses Adele, who keeps a magic shop in the Sanita quarter. Naples is the last great pagan city, a city of dolls, puppets, cards, magic and the significance of numbers (with which the Neapolitans interpret dreams). Along and off the Spaccanapoli, wart-faced marionettes hang from their strings; devils and pulcinella harlequins stare impiously from the shop windows, alongside the Holy Virgins with their halos of neon. Naples has a bright face, but it lives under the volcano and on top of a fault line; the city is ridden with an apocalyptic cult of death. When Maradona’s Napoli won their first-ever championship in 1987, someone wrote on the walls of the cemetery: ‘You don’t know what you missed.’ A day later came the reply: ‘Don’t be so sure we missed it.’ Maradona first arrived in the Stadio San Paolo by helicopter on June 1984, not to play, but simply to be shown to 80,000 fans who had gathered for a glimpse. Maradona was 23 years old, born in 1960 in the wretched suburb of Lanus, on the edge of Buenos Aires, one of six children of strict Catholic parents who had wandered in from the countryside in search of work and the crumbs of a living. At the age of 10, ‘Dieguito’ was signed up by the Argentinos Juniors football team, which he took to the first division during his first full season in 1976; he was aged 16. He was called ‘Fiorito’ - literally, ‘in bloom.’ A year later, Maradona was picked for the Argentine national squad; after five seasons with the Juniors, he went to CF Boca, who immediately won the championship, and on the eve of the 1982 World Cup, Maradona came to Europe, to Barcelona. Success had evaded Napoli FC during its 60-year-life; the team had only one Italian Cup trophy in the boardroom, and had never won the league. Like the Neapolitans, the team was hated and ridiculed across the rest of Italy. this is the song the Milan supporters sang when the side went North: ‘My, what a stench! Even the dogs are fleeing Here come the Neapolitans Cholera-ridden and earthquaked Who don’t know what soap is The shame of all Italy.’ The Napoli Club was a major institution in the city as well as being the temple of its poor; Napoli’s president, the businessman Achille Lauro, had died in 1982 and his place taken by a canny construction giant called Corrado Ferlaino, who had made himself Lauro’s heir in business and in soccer by buying shares in his financially troubled club and by establishing his own construction empire in such a way as would not challenge his patron and mentor. Ferlaino now needed a coup de grace, and he found it by offering Diego Maradona almost an unlimited freedom to pursue his commercial and personal interests that Napoli’s rivals for his signature, the disciplinarian Juventus, would not accommodate. Maradona made the city’s dream come true. Two years later, when Napoli won the championship, the tumultuous street party lasted five days, with hundreds of thousands on the streets. Maradona had thrown himself into the city’s life with gusto. He appeared at public functions, private banquets and among fans, journalists and businessmen alike. He was the guest of kings (literally: Juan Carlos of Spain) and of the Pope; he was declared an ambassador for Unicef. His social circle was at first the ‘Maradona Clan’ he had brought with him from Argentina,but he quickly collected a jungle of admirers and hangers-on. Everywhere he went, he was mobbed by a doting throng. He amassed a fleet of luxury cars, a boat and a taste for champagne, but he was a shanty town boy, and, for all his riches, he had not lost his taste for what the Neapolitans call the ‘seconda societa’ - the second, the underground society. After the Napoli championship and Argentina’s victory in the 1986 World Cup, Maradona’s career was at its zenith. But those that were fond of him noticed that he was changing; he was rarely going out by day except to train. ‘This is a great city,’ he said, ‘but I can hardly breathe. I want to be free to walk around. I’m a lad, like any other.’ One of his friends at the time, known as Pepe, recalls: ‘He had achieved everything, but he wasn’t really happy. He became introspective; he wanted to flee from those gathered around him. He always said, ‘I’m not a saint, I’m a football player’. Football has been his whole life, but now he seemed to be looking for another man inside himself and outside football, and to look for new friends. These people were the lowest of the low - and Maradona, weak and lonely, couldn’t say no.’ Jose Alberto, a genial Argentinian who worked as Maradona’s first interpreter - still devoted to Diego but now distanced from him - says: ‘Suddenly, he felt used by everybody. A lot of false friends were at his side, to nourish themselves on his fame and riches, and to spend his name like money at some opportune moment. And Diego responded with his usual manner - provocative but willing. He lost control of the situation - unable to distinguish between his friends and the profiteers.’ Meanwhile, the spectre of scandal was creeping into view. Cristina Sinagra, a 25-year-old Neapolitan, filed a paternity writ against him. The star, she said, was father to her child Diego Armando junior. The legal papers said that Sinagra had enjoyed a ‘long and serious relationship’ with Maradona, at the time around the birth of his second child Dalma Nerea, by his childhood sweetheart and later wife, Claudia Villafranca. Maradona has refused a DNA test in response to the writ, and a judgment is expected soon. The episode was an ill omen; Maradona, like many of his followers, is a Catholic; he crosses himself before every match, he is a frequent pilgrim to Lourdes. By night Maradona had found his social liberty from the suffocating embrace of Naples. His BMW would be seen parked outside the clubs: the Stangata in the Forcella, the Bella di Notte, the Chalet Park. Usually Maradona would drink alone - whisky and coke, one after the other. But sometimes he would dance and drink with his new friends and with the eager girls who gathered round. ‘He thought he could own this world,’ says his friend Pepe, ‘he felt impregnable.’ But inescapably Maradona drifted into the perilous nether world of the Camorra. The first contact had been in the early years, over the copious and profitable Maradona merchandising business. His then manager was contacted by members of the notorious Giuliano clan from the Forcella and it was explained that it wasn’t a good idea in Naples for a promotion company to operate without discussing business with the defenders of the poor, as they called themselves. Maradona appeared to open the door to the Giuliano approach with the announcement: ‘I am perfectly happy if businesses in Naples can survive because of my face.’ In January 1986, two men arrived at the training ground. They were emissaries of the Giuliano clan and they said, ‘The Giulianos want to get to know you better.’ Within months, Maradona was the family’s guest at baptisms, parties and family banquets. Some months later, police working on a heroin haul at the house of two women associated with the Giulianos, raided the home of the young, mop-headed Carmine Giuliano, the gang’s boss, and unearthed a photo album containing 71 snaps of the gangsters posing with Maradona. There he was, sitting on the family’s shell-shaped bath and raising a glass on a sofa, or joking with Carmine’s sister Ermina. In March 1989, Maradona graced the family with his presence at a big Giulano wedding. Maradona was becoming a Camorra mascot - a symbol of legitimisation. ‘Yes, I’ve met these people,’ he has told the judges, ‘but I have no idea what they do. Somebody else asked me to go to their house and, as I often do, I accepted.’ Maradona also made less physically hazardous friends, but ones who would bring about his downfall. He met people like the leader of the Napoli Ultras gang, Gennaro Montuori, known as ‘Palumella’, and through Montuori, Piero Pugliese, a security guard who is now a chief witness against Maradona, claiming to have acted as his cocaine courier from Argentina. Above all, he was lured into the uncharmed circle of Donna Carmela Cinquegrana and the periphery of the clan of Mario Lo Russo, a young, chisel-jawed man with piercing eyes known as ‘The Captain’, and financier of the cocaine and call-girl network on which the Nucleo Napoli 1 (flying squad) pounced last February, after listening to 10,000 hours of tapped telephone calls. Maradona’s name or voice features on 11 of them. Through his sister’s new husband Gabriel Esposito, himself an underworld figure, Maradona met the owner of the Chalet Park club, the burly and gruff Italo Iovine - nephew of the boss of the Camorra clan in Caserta, and with his own record of drug-dealing. It was Iovine who first sent Maradona to Donna Carmela, and it is on Italo’s telephone that Maradona’s voice appears; it is Italo who asks Carmela for ‘women and gear for Diego and me.’ He met people like Felice Pizza, or ‘Geppino’, a worker on the underground railway, bombastic rogue and creature of the night, who lived next door to the Stangata club and became a sort of social secretary to Maradona. Pizza would organise events in Maradona’s honour. ‘First we chatted a bit,’ he says, ‘then spent a couple of evenings together and then became pretty good friends.’ Pizza was also a procurer of women and cocaine, aquainted with the Lo Russo clan. He would call Cinquegrana to make the rendezvous - almost always outside a club - and then Maradona would go to the four-star Hotel Paradiso in Posillipo for the ensuing recreation. The appointments supposedly became more regular, with high prices paid to the girls - some Pounds 400 a night. Since the arrest of the Lo Russo gang, a thicket of whispers and testimonies against Maradona has sprung up, with their dubious carriers as anxious to get in on the act of crucifying Maradona as the Neapolitans were to exalt him in the old days. But it was not sex with the girls that interested the judges, it was what they said happened during the love-making at the Hotel Paradiso. Four girls in particular came forward, three Brazilians and a German, who said they had spent the night with Maradona as two pairs, in April and December 1990, and that Maradona had offered them cocaine. They were not prostitutes, but girls ‘infatuated’ (said the police) with Maradona. The morning after the December rendezvous, Maradona failed to appear for training. That afternoon, his then manager, Mario Franchi, said that he intended to leave Naples before the end of his contract in 1993. The following Saturday, he was dropped from the team. But the legacy of that night bore more bitter fruit on February 16 this year, when a warrant was issued for the arrest of Maradona and Pizza on charges of possession and distribution of drugs. Maradona denied the charge with a mix of cheek and ferocity. He would sue all the witnesses against him, he said, ‘and give the proceeds to the poor little children of the streets of Naples.’ But other girls followed - a harem, singing to the judges about sex and cocaine with the superstar, like the Brazilian dancer ‘Susy’ from Manaus, who does her turn at the 21 Club, a striking, giggly and unconvincing girl who tells her story with relish: ‘He gave me 800,000 lire for one night. He said I was beautiful, the most beautiful.’ There were three nights, according to Susy; ‘He kissed my lips, he wasn’t particularly doting, but he knew what to do. I recall that he particularly liked to suck my big toe.’ On March 5, two men arrived without an appointment in the anti-drugs office at the Palace of Justice, demanding to see the judge in charge of Maradona’s case. They were a lawyer and former councillor for the neo-fascist MSI party, Angelo Cerbone, and his new client, Maradona’s ‘friend’, the security guard Piero Pugliese. Cerbone, a learned and mysterious figure, had written a book chastising corruption among the judiciary, in which a chapter deals with Pugliese’s claims. He wanted, he said, ‘to make every useful element available to the inquiries.’ Pugliese said he had been invited to Maradona’s wedding in Argentina; there he had met and fallen in love with a woman called Alessandra. On the night before leaving, he said, he was approached by Maradona’s manager, Guillermo Coppola, and asked to carry a package to deliver to Maradona back in Italy - and to carry it as hand baggage. It contained newspapers, said Coppola, but for the favour he would be paid a fee of 25 million lire. Cerbone produced tapes he had recorded of a phone call made by Pugliese to Maradona in which the former feigns concern about ‘chaos’ at the bank, and the interest of the police in the affair. On the tape, Maradona says very little other than that Pugliese should come over and see him at home. Pugliese told the judge he had been worried that Coppola (who has now left Maradona’s service) was trying to bring Alessandra in on a drugs ring. And so the judges called ‘Dieguito’ in again - this time for a three-hour session on March 22, to answer to the more serious matter of drug trafficking. Maradona emerged buoyantly from the hearing, dressed in jeans and baseball boots, to say that, yes, he did know Pugliese (‘though he is certainly not a friend’), that he did go to his wedding, that there was a package and that they opened it together, and that it contained newspapers. So far, there has been no warrant for trafficking. Maradona’s sorties had begun to affect his team. Training schedules were changed to accommodate the fact that he failed to appear until the afternoon. In 1987-8, Napoli let slip a comfortable lead at the top of the table, and with it the championship, to the reviled AC Milan. Two summers ago, Maradona spent longer than usual in Argentina, returning late and appearing for matches at the last minute, leaving alone. His appearances at training then became sporadic; the club issued a civil action against him for breach of contract, which is still outstanding. This season, during training before a match at Pisa, Maradona’s team mates reported that he was crying to himself on the field. But Maradona’s wizardry showed no sign of abating. Napoli won the championship again in 1990. The team started the present season, in the steaming pyrexia of a thunderstorm, with a dazzling 5-1 victory against Juventus in the final of the ‘Supercup’, Maradona commanding the field with remarkable and bewildering marksmanship. Earlier that summer, however, the ‘Blue Prince’ had committed an unforgivable crime in the eyes of the big interests that steer Italian football. On the eve of the World Cup semi-final between Italy and Argentina in Naples, the Argentinian captain, proclaimed ‘Napoli non e Italia’ - Naples is not Italy, and he berated ‘decades of racism against this city,’ appealing to the Napoli fans to back his Argentinian team instead. Many did just that; Argentina won the match, thereby wrecking Italy’s soccer beanfeast. ‘Since then, I have had no peace,’ said Maradona. ‘There is a campaign against me. I repeat, I am going.’ Maradona’s legal submissions have protested about ‘a vendetta on somebody’s part, on account of matches I was not supposed to win,’ and references to ‘footballing interests’ mounting it. This forms the bedrock of his defence against any imminent trial. Maradona and his family have received death threats, and his car was attacked. But some of these incidents preceded the World Cup rumpus, which makes them all the more intriguing. Even if there is no plot, the sudden convergence of flimsy testimonies against Maradona is too much to ascribe to chance. Sources at the Palace of Justice, as well as the bush telegraph, offer the following theory: that Maradona was afforded a certain protection while he was captain of the team on which the city’s morale depended. But this protection was lifted when things began to go sour. Corrado Ferlaino is a formidable figure, against whose wishes the authorities would be reluctant to proceed. During Maradona’s seven years, Napoli have taken 200 billion lire in profits; Maradona cost 13 billion. But now Maradona is expendable; he has no one to defend him and so, the theory goes, the protection was lifted. But there is another, murkier, trail to complicate the Maradona saga: Maradonna has said that the ill-wishers who threatened him come from the Camorra, and it is possible that the ‘matches I was not supposed to win’ were not limited to Argentina-Italy, but to Napoli as well. Another curious memo of 1986 from the leader of the flying squad referred to ‘The strange presence of Maradona in the company of those convicted or under inquiry for association with the Camorra - but also a curious relationship of some kind with those convicted with the organisation of underground football pools, the primary funds of the Camorra organisation.’ In 1986, judges in Turin had begun investigations into Italy’s hefty black market football pools (the official Totocalcio pools are state run), and were quickly on the tail of the Lo Russo and Giuliano Camorra gangs, which operate tax-free pools worth millions of dollars every weekend. The 1989-90 season was a bad one for the Camorra. After the disappointment of the previous year’s performance, the black market odds against Napoli winning the league were set at 4-1. Loyal Neapolitans chanced their luck with billions of lire nevertheless, and as the season drew to a close, with Napoli top of the table, the gangs were set to lose a fortune. It was at that time that the intimidation of Maradona began, and at that time that the Lo Russo gang started to bandy his name about on tapped phone lines. ‘It is not a theory we would want to ignore,’ said a magistrate at the Palace of Justice. ‘In fact, we are not ignoring it at all.’ The truth no doubt lies somewhere between the frame-up and Maradona’s now rather hollow protestations of innocence. ‘Yes,’ said Maradona last year, ‘in some ways I’ve bungled, like all men. But my vices are the vices of industrialists and not a few presidents, whom you leave alone. If someone has to pay for all this, then I’ll pay - but not Naples, not this wonderful city. In five years time, Naples will see that I have not betrayed her.’ The fans are divided between their anger and their sorrow. ‘If I saw Maradona trying to climb out of a well,’ said a newspaper seller, ‘I’d kick him down it.’ But at Sunday lunch over Easter, the entertaimment is hour upon hour of Maradona videos, played with a lachrymose relish. On a wall in the tumbledown Forcella is painted the graffiti: Diego, facci ancora sognare - ‘Diego, make us dream again’.