Leading rugby nations face a deadline of Friday to back or reject World Rugby’s Nations Championship plan. The governing body has confirmed the Six Nations and Rugby Championship unions must respond to the radical proposals by the end of this working week. World Rugby needs unanimous support from the 10 unions that make up Europe’s Six Nations and the southern hemisphere Rugby Championship to progress its Nations Championship blueprint. The proposed format would launch in 2022, with the Six Nations winners facing off with the top team from an expanded, six-team Rugby Championship. Final competition proposals would eventually face a vote before the full World Rugby council, but not without full support from the top-10 European and southern hemisphere nations. The proposals include creating two-tier tournaments for both the Six Nations and Rugby Championship, including promotion and relegation. The Six Nations unions have previously shown resistance to promotion and relegation, while leading players criticised World Rugby’s lack of engagement over the issue in March. Pacific Islands campaigners fear any shake-up would reduce opportunities for Fiji, Samoa and Tonga given the November internationals would be redrawn. The November-scheduled Nations Championship finals could cut down the regular chances for Pacific Islands to take on the world’s top teams. The Rugby Football Union’s new chief executive, Bill Sweeney, last week admitted there are still issues to be ironed out. “We support the concept,” he said. “We think it makes sense. It’s good for the global growth of the game. From a financial point of view, the numbers are good to enable us to reinvest back into the game. “It is such a complex proposal. There are a number of issues around governance, around competition structure, around player welfare that we need to see a bit more detail on before we sign on the dotted line and I think that is the same with some of the other nations, so we are right in the middle of that process right now.” Mathieu Bastareaud has been left out of a 31-man France squad to prepare for the World Cup. The powerful Toulon centre, who has captained Les Bleus three times during his 54-Test career, missed out in a group announced by the head coach Jacques Brunel. The squad, together with six named reserves, will work towards the tournament in Japan before a final squad is confirmed on 2 September. Bastareaud, 30, will move to Major League Rugby in the US later this year, joining Rugby United New York. The Toulouse centre Sofiane Guitoune looks likely to prosper from Bastareaud’s absence, while Brunel has included uncapped players in Guitoune’s club-mate Peato Mauvaka and the Toulon prop Emerick Setiano. Bastareaud apart, other notable absentees include the wing Teddy Thomas, the scrum-half Morgan Parra and the prop Uini Atonio. “We have followed Guitoune all year,” Brunel told L’Equipe. “He performed very well. We did not know if he would produce the [form]. He did it all year long. The group is rejuvenated with many players who are 25 years and under, but there are still players with experience with [Yoann] Huget, [Wesley] Fofana and [Maxime] Médard.” France are in the same World Cup pool as England, Argentina, USA and Tonga. Their opening game is against Argentina in Tokyo on 21 September. G Alldritt (La Rochelle), D Bamba (Brive), Y Camara (Montpellier), C Chat (Racing 92), G Doumayrou (La Rochelle), A Dupont (Toulouse), G Fickou (Stade Français), W Fofana (Clermont Auvergne), P Gabrillagues (Stade Français), G Guirado (Toulon), S Guitoune (Toulouse), Y Huget (Toulouse), A Uturria (Clermont Auvergne), F Lambey (Lyon), W Lauret (Racing 92), B Le Roux (Racing 92), C Lopez (Clermont Auvergne), M Machenaud (Racing 92), P Mauvaka (Toulouse), M Médard (Toulouse), R Ntamack (Toulouse), D Penaud (Clermont Auvergne), L Picamoles (Montpellier), J Poirot (Bordeaux-Bègles), D Priso (La Rochelle), A Raka (Clermont Auvergne), T Ramos (Toulouse), B Serin (Bordeaux-Bègles), E Setiano (Toulon), R Slimani (Clermont Auvergne), S Vahaamahina (Clermont Auvergne). Reserves: A Belleau (Toulon), F Cros (Toulouse), E Falgoux (Clermont Auvergne), C Ollivon (Toulon), V Rattez (La Rochelle), P Willemse (Montpellier).