Under the watchful eye of their expectant home fans, Brazil looked nervous in their first two matches of the tournament. However, with the pressure somewhat alleviated before their final group game against Peru, Tite’s side put in the most convincing performance of the tournament so far. The hosts aren’t the only big hitters to have had problems, but that thumping 5-0 win over decent opponents reasserted their status as favourites. The Seleção have been the most dominant team at the tournament so far. They have averaged 64.9% possession – 11% more than any other team; their pass completion rate of 90% is higher than any side in the tournament; they have had the most shots – 19.3 per game; and they have scored the most goals. Paraguay, on the other hand, struggled in all of these categories in the group stage. They didn’t win a game, only scored three goals in three matches, and finished third in their group with a negative goal difference. They are seriously short of star quality. West Ham centre-back Fabián Balbuena lost his place in the team after they drew their opening game 2-2 with Qatar, but Newcastle midfielder Miguel Almirón is still playing a pivotal role. This should be the most one-sided of the quarter-finals. Neymar’s absence has given other Brazil players the chance to step up and become the star man. Grêmio winger Everton Soares has done just that, enhancing his reputation at home and abroad. The 23-year-old scored his first international goal in the opening game of the tournament against Bolivia and then shone again against Peru with another goal and assist. Despite playing just 117 minutes in the group stages, the livewire completed 10 dribbles. While both of these teams qualified as runners-up from their groups, Venezuela did so with far more credit. Rafael Dudamel’s side were handed a tough draw but remained unbeaten in their group. After holding Peru and Brazil to goalless draws, they beat Bolivia 3-1 to secure their place in the quarter-finals. They have every reason to be confident of upsetting the odds again. After all, it’s been the same old story for Argentina, who remain significantly weaker than the sum of their parts. Lionel Messi has once again cut a frustrated figure on the international stage, with just one goal to his name so far – and that came from the penalty spot. Manager Lionel Scaloni started 16 players across Argentina’s three group games and still doesn’t seem to know his strongest team. The rookie coach went with an attacking lineup in the must-win match against Qatar last time out, with Sergio Agüero and Lautaro Martínez starting alongside Messi. Scaloni may opt for similar tactics to break down a well organised Venezuela team, but picking so many attacking players puts a lot of pressure on Leandro Paredes to shield an unconvincing defence. As far as Venezuela are concerned, defending has been their strong suit and the last line of their defence – their 21-year-old goalkeeper Wuilker Faríñez – is apparently on Barcelona’s radar. At the opposite end of the pitch, they have two dangerous options to call upon in Salomón Rondón and Josef Martínez. They are a handful in very different ways, with Martínez’s pace a real threat from the bench once the tireless Rondón has worn down defences. This is the toughest of the quarter-finals to call. Colombia, who are now under the guidance of Carlos Queiroz, were the only team to win all three of their matches in the group stage – and they did so without conceding a goal – so they were unfortunate to draw the holders in the quarter-finals. Despite winning the previous two editions of the Copa América, Chile did not qualify for the World Cup last summer and came into this tournament in poor form. They have performed well though, picking up six points in the group by hammering an admittedly experimental Japan team 4-0 and beating Ecuador 2-1. Reinaldo Rueda’s side were perhaps the better team in their 1-0 defeat to Uruguay too, even though they rested Arturo Vidal. The Barcelona midfielder has formed a very strong midfield trio with Bayer Leverkusen’s Charles Aránguiz and Bologna’s Erick Pulgar and, up front, Alexis Sánchez has been up to his usual tricks at international level with two goals and an assist. Colombia face a selection dilemma when it comes to their strikers. Radamel Falcao is the ageing superstar without a goal in the tournament so far, while the in-form Duván Zapata has scored two in 123 minutes off the back of a sensational season in Serie A with Atalanta. With world class talent at both ends of the pitch, Uruguay are a good bet to regain the crown they last won in 2011. A very functional side out of possession, they are willing to sit deep and counter against strong opponents. They had the worst pass accuracy during the group stages (76.3%) but were second only to Brazil when it came to getting shots off (17.7 per game) and scoring goals (seven). Óscar Tabárez knows his team lacks creativity in the middle third so is more than happy to bypass that area of the pitch and get the ball to star strikers Luis Suárez and Edinson Cavani as quickly as possible. Both have scored twice in the tournament so far. Rodrigo Bentancur is equally vital to Uruguay’s hopes this summer. He breaks up play superbly and made more tackles in the group stage (12) than any other player. Uruguay face an interesting task against Peru, who are also more than happy to sit back and hit teams on the break. Both sides are very physical but Ricardo Gareca’s side do not have Uruguay’s star quality. What they do have is pace down the flanks and an attacking midfielder in the form of Christian Cueva who can pick out a pass. Peru are the underdogs but, with their outstanding support giving them an advantage off the field, they will hope to pull off an upset on it. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter