On Monday at Wimbledon, a teenage hopeful will take centre stage against one of the greats of the game, dreaming of one day emulating their achievements. It is something that countless players have done in the past, only for most of them to fall by the wayside. But American Cori Gauff is no ordinary 15-year-old. Nicknamed “Coco”, Gauff is the youngest player ever to qualify for the main draw at Wimbledon, having come through three matches in qualifying without losing a set. She won the junior French Open title in 2018 at the age of 14, her agent is part of Roger Federer’s management group and, according to Forbes, she is predicted to earn more than $1m (£790,000) off the court in 2019 thanks to a burgeoning group of sponsors. As Gauff is a young, tall, black American, with a huge serve, strong all-court game and athletic physique, there have been inevitable comparisons with Serena Williams, the 23-time grand slam champion, a woman Gauff describes as her hero. On Monday, though, she will take on Venus Williams, the five-times champion, in the first round. Gauff told the BBC that playing against Venus was a “dream” for her. “I’m excited to see how I do.” The match is garnering huge attention, with everyone from Serena and Federer also keen to see how she gets on. “I’m super happy for her,” Federer said. “I think it’s a great storyline. I hope they put them on a big court. I think that would be a great, wonderful experience for Coco and Venus anyway. It’s a great story. Coco is a nice girl, works really hard. I think she’s obviously got a wonderful future ahead of herself.” Serena Williams, who is chasing history herself as she tries to equal the all-time grand slam record of 24 titles, held by Margaret Court, rarely watches Venus play but said she might make an exception this time. “It’s interesting, because Cori is such an exciting young player,” Williams said “She’s so cool. She’s a great girl. I love her dad. They’re just really cool people. “It’s a great moment for her and for Venus. It’s going to be a big moment for Venus, as well. She actually reminds me of Venus, kind of, her body and everything. She’s such a fantastic young lady. She works very hard. Every time I see her out there working, training, her and her dad. It reminds me of the time where I was out there with my dad. I can’t help but look inside of myself and be proud and be happy for her. It’s really nice to see.” Born in Atlanta, Georgia, Gauff now lives in Delray Beach, Florida. Her father, Corey, played basketball at Georgia State University and her mother, Candi, ran track at Florida State University. Her natural athleticism is obvious but her mental strength and her character are equally impressive, helping her to handle the pressure of being considered “the next big thing”. Patrick Mouratoglou, Serena Williams’s coach, has worked with Gauff for the past few years and believes she is well-equipped to cope with whatever expectations are placed on her shoulders. “She is one of the players that experienced incredible pressure at an early age,” Mouratoglou said. “You don’t see that often, because it’s very rare to see someone under the spotlight that early, and usually even players who are 15, 16, 17 when they start to have that pressure, most of them don’t do well with that. “That’s one of the reasons she’s so amazing, because since she’s 12 she’s made history. She was the youngest at 12 to win an under-18 event in the US, the youngest to play the final of the US Open in juniors [she was 13 when she lost in the 2017 final] in the Open era and again now. I can feel the pressure that she has. It’s not that she doesn’t care about it, she feels it but you can see that she finds a way to deal with it. The top players, the top, top ones, they’re in exactly the same situation, they feel it but they deal with it. It’s heavy but most of the time it’s not too heavy for them and she finds a way, which is really amazing.” Home-schooled by her mother, Gauff seems remarkably grounded, despite the predictions of stardom and the lucrative sponsorship contracts, including New Balance, Head and the Italian pasta group Barilla, which also just happens to sponsor Federer. Gauff has the world at her feet but the big danger is that the expectations will be too great, too soon. “You know that if she plays a good match, everybody’s going to tweet she’s the next No 1, she’s going to win several grand slams,” Mouratoglou said, citing the French player Caroline Garcia, who was tipped at 16, by, among others, Andy Murray, as a future world No 1. “She’s so far from there,” Mouratoglou said. “Of course she has the potential but we should let her make her way.” How she handles the occasion against Venus Williams will be a good indication of her future progress. She could rise to the occasion, or she could freeze. Mouratoglou expects the former. “I feel she’s going to be more enthusiastic and happy than tight because I see the way she is. I saw how she reacted when she realised she was going to play Venus, so I feel like she’s going to take it as something incredibly positive,” he said. “I feel like she’s going to feel like it’s the best day of her life and play according to that.” Win or lose, it would seem Gauff is a name to remember. Martina Hingis, 1995, aged 14 The Swiss made her Wimbledon debut in 1995 and lost in round one. One year later, she became the youngest grand slam champion in history when she won the doubles title, aged 15 and nine months. In 1997, she won the singles at Wimbledon for the first time and won five grand slam singles titles in all. Later in her career, she came out of retirement to be the world No 1 in doubles. Jennifer Capriati (USA), 1990, aged 14 The American had earned $1m before she even played a competitive match. She reached the last 16 in 1990, losing to Steffi Graf. Capriati’s career famously went off the rails, including an arrest for shoplifting and possessing marijuana, but she came back to the tour many years later to win three grand slam titles and become world No 1. Kathy Rinaldi (USA), 1981, aged 14 Another American, Rinaldi won a match at Wimbledon as a 14-year-old in 1981 and was labelled the next Chris Evert. She made the semi-finals at Wimbledon in 1985 and was ranked as high as No 7 the following year but never made it further. She is currently the captain of the US Fed Cup team. Tracy Austin (USA), 1977, aged 14 Austin reached the third round on what was her grand slam debut in 1977, losing to Chris Evert. The American went on to win the US Open as a 16-year-old and again two years later but back injuries affected her badly. A near-fatal car accident in 1989 ended any hopes of a successful comeback. She works at Wimbledon as a BBC pundit. Andrea Jaeger (USA), 1980, aged 15 Jaeger shot to fame when she reached the quarter-finals as a 15-year-old in 1980 and went even better in 1983 when she made the final, losing to Martina Navratilova. She was ranked as high as No 2 but shoulder injuries forced her to quit in 1985. She later reportedly became a nun.