A man has been arrested on suspicion of murder after a woman who was about eight months pregnant was stabbed to death on Saturday. Paramedics delivered the 26-year-old woman’s baby as she was dying, after they found her at a residential address in Croydon, south London. The child was taken to hospital and the Metropolitan police said it remained in a “critical condition”. A 37-year-old man was arrested and is being held in custody while officers from of the Met’s Homicide and Serious Crime Command launched an investigation. DCI Mick Norman, who is leading the inquiries, said: “This is a horrific incident in which a young mother has lost her life and her child is critically ill. Our sympathies go out to her devastated family; they are being supported by specially trained officers following this awful event, and I would ask that they are left alone at this time as they come to terms with the enormity of what has happened. “A large crime scene is in place, and is likely to be in place for some time. Residents should be aware that if they have any concerns, or information they would like to share with us, that they can speak to any of the officers there, or call our incident room. “At the forefront of our enquiries is understanding what exactly has lead to these tragic circumstances, and we are doing everything we can to establish the facts.” London mayor Sadiq Khan reacted to the murder on Twitter, saying: “Violence against women is endemic in society and devastating murders in the home, like this one, show the scale of the problem we face. “My prayers are with this innocent child, and with the mother it has so tragically lost.” Police and the London ambulance service were called at 3.30am on Saturday to an address in Raymead Avenue in Thornton Heath, a residential street lined with houses and flats, after reports that a woman was having a cardiac arrest. Officers and paramedics arrived to discover the woman was suffering from stab injuries. A London ambulance service spokesman said: “We sent an incident response officer, two ambulance crews, two medics in response cars and an advanced paramedic to the scene. We also dispatched London’s Air Ambulance. “We took one person to hospital as a priority. Sadly, despite the extensive efforts of medics, another person died at the scene.” The Met said officers were “keeping an open mind” as to what might have motivated the attack. The woman’s next of kin have been informed although she has yet to be formally identified. Police said a postmortem examination will take place in due course. Neighbours said that three woman, one of whom was pregnant, lived at the house and they had a small dog. One said that she had got up at about 3.30am to perform her prayers when she heard a dog barking at the house, which is two doors down.