At least four men are dead and a woman is injured after a suspected member of a motorcycle gang recently released from prison allegedly went on a shooting spree in Darwin’s city centre. NT police have arrested the suspected shooter, described as a Caucasian man about 45-years-old, wearing high-vis workwear. He was in hospital under police guard on Tuesday night. Active crime scenes on Tuesday included the Buff Club, Gardens Hill Crescent, the Peter McAulay Centre and the Palms Motel. Police commissioner Reece Kershaw said the alleged gunman was “well known to police” and confirmed the man had been released on parole in January. A shotgun was used, the exact type is not yet known. Kershaw confirmed the suspect was wearing an electronic monitoring bracelet at the time. “We’re still trying to establish the intent and the motivation behind this,” Kershaw told reporters. He said the incident was not terrorism related. Asked if the man was a member of the Rebels motorcycle gang Kershaw said he may have associated with them. Kershaw said the man may have been trying to hand himself in to police. Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner said thoughts are with the families and friends of the victims. “This is not the Darwin we know,” he told reporters. More than 100 police are involved in maintaining the multiple crime scenes. Kershaw urged members of the public who had information or video footage to contact police. Witnesses told the ABC that the man walked into the Palms Motel and opened fire with a pump-action shotgun just before 6pm on Tuesday. Northern Territory police duty superintendent Lee Morgan told the Guardian shortly after the incident there were “four deceased and a number of other people who have been shot”. Reports an active shooter in Darwin CBD with up to 20 shots fired and people injured ... confusing scenes with tree on fire and roads blocked. pic.twitter.com/4WY2hVE2b3 Morgan said police first received calls about shots being fired at 5.50pm local time. Witness Leah Potter said the gunman was armed with a pump-action shotgun and shot a woman through her hotel room door. “I was in the car park [of a neighbouring hotel] when I heard what I thought were fireworks going off, really loud cracking, banging fireworks,” she told the ABC. Another witness said a man with a neck tattoo appeared to be searching the apartment block for someone. The gunman was then reported to have fled the scene, until being arrested by NT police without incident at 6.45pm. Officers expect to lay charges against him on Wednesday. Dramatic arrest if possible shooter in Darwin CBD pic.twitter.com/0fis1UQHW9 John Rose told the ABC he saw the gunman walk into the motel with “a sawn-off shotgun”. “He shot up all the rooms and he went to every room looking for somebody and he shot them all up, then we saw him rush out, jump into his Toyota pick-up, and rush off.” He said the gunman was calm as he shot up the hotel. “Once he left we went in and found one gentleman, he’s over there, we pulled him out,” Rose said. “This lady turned up and started screaming, and we didn’t realise there was another person in there … apparently he’s dead, he’s been shot.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been in touch with the NT chief minister. “This is a terrible act of violence,” he told reporters in London. “I just want to extend my deep condolences and sympathies to all the people in the Territory, particularly in Darwin. This is a very tight community and I know they will be rocked by these events.” Royal Darwin Hospital spokeswoman Sally Edwards said the emergency department was treating an injured person who is in a stable condition. The woman has leg wounds.