On Monday night, NBA fans around the world tuned in to what should have been a story of triumph. Here’s how it might have played out: 3-1 down in the NBA finals and facing elimination, Kevin Durant battles through injury with superhuman perseverance to propel the Golden State Warriors to victory. It goes down as one of the greatest performances in NBA finals history. People love this type of storyline. Isiah Thomas scoring 25 points in the third quarter of Game 6 of the 1988 NBA finals while hobbling on one foot for the Detroit Pistons. Or Willis Reed walking out of the tunnel for the New York Knicks on his bum ankle in Game 7 in 1970. The wounded hero persevering through pain. Everything was aligned for Durant to be added to that list. High school, college and professional coaches across the country were salivating at the thought of using Durant to show their players that “pain is weakness leaving your body”. They would have used KD as an example to young athletes that the game, not your health, is what matters most. I’ve seen it all before. Throughout my playing career, I saw teammates told to play through pain or discomfort only to go down with more severe injuries shortly afterwards. Jarvis Hayes told me the medical team said he simply had a case of tendinitis in his knee. Turned out he had a broken kneecap that ruined his entire career. Kwame Brown told me they said he was told to play through the discomfort in his leg to show everyone he was worthy of being the No 1 overall pick in the 2000 draft. Turned out it was a torn hamstring. I saw Richard Hamilton go off on the training staff after he learned he’d been playing through a torn groin only disclosed to him after the team was out of playoff contention. Deshawn Stevenson told me a trainer said there was nothing seriously wrong with his back that ice and stim couldn’t fix. After the season, it was discovered he in fact had an inflamed L5 nerve that was stuck underneath a disc, requiring not one but two back surgeries to repair. None of this is hearsay, but instances I witnessed first-hand and verified with my former teammates over the past week. My point in bringing it up now is not to put the medical staff on blast, but illustrate a worrying fact: This happens all the time in professional sports. Why? Because team doctors and trainers have a conflict of interest: they are hired by the teams and are in essence employees of the organization rather than the players. By definition they are looking out for what benefits the team rather than the welfare of the individual athlete. The Warriors’ medical staff appears to have RG3’d Durant, who now faces a lengthy recovery after undergoing surgery on Wednesday for a torn achilles. He should not have been playing, period. Thomas and Reed shouldn’t have been playing, either. The risks outweighed the rewards, even from a team standpoint. Durant is a franchise player. A player with the capability of single-handedly turning an entire NBA finals around. A player the Warriors should do everything in their power to convince they are worth re-signing with. Instead, they showed the exact opposite. It doesn’t matter if Durant insisted on playing, the team should have had the medical integrity to tell him no. But the Warriors are not the only guilty party here. Other teams do similar things all the time. I hope all young players see what happened with Durant and learn that no matter what the circumstances or how big the game is, health always comes first. Athletes should always get a second opinion from their own doctors, ones who are unaffiliated with their teams. If Durant – and other athletes – want an example of how to handle injuries, they only need to look at a man who has dominated this year’s playoffs: Kawhi Leonard. Leonard weathered unfair criticism from pundits, coaches, teammates and fans last season when he was with the San Antonio Spurs because he chose to sit out most of the season with an ankle injury. The Spurs’ team doctors said he was fine. But Leonard got a second opinion from his own medical staff, did what was in his best interest and recovered to flourish with Toronto this season. His teammate Danny Green reportedly played through a torn groin last year under the watch of the same doctors that misdiagnosed Kawhi. And bear in mind the Spurs are one of the most respected organizations in the NBA, with one of the league’s most respected coaches. The bottom line is that any team will throw an injured player into action if they feel it is best for the organization. Teams will publicly criticize athletes if they don’t play. And if they do play and re-injure themselves, or just don’t play up to expectations, they can be expect to be brushed aside quickly. I remember watching Grant Hill during the late 1990s as he was poised to take over the league, averaging 21.6 points per game during his first six seasons with the Detroit Pistons and drawing comparisons to Michael Jordan. When he suffered an ankle injury a week before the 2000 playoffs, he was called out for not playing through it. People openly questioned how serious it was and accused him of being soft, just like they were saying about Durant in these playoffs. Hill rushed back from injury and was never the same player, years later saying the Pistons’ medical staff derailed his entire career. Another example is the young Isaiah Thomas, who claims the Boston Celtics’ team doctors gave him misleading information regarding a hip injury suffered ahead of the 2017 playoffs. He played in the postseason despite the injury (and the death of his sister), but wound up reaggravating the injury during the Eastern Conference finals. The Celtics traded him during the summer because, it appears, they knew about his injury and knew he needed surgery. The mismanagement, which played out as he entered a contract year, likely cost Thomas a nine-figure deal. Last year Kyrie Irving was told he needed surgery after getting a second opinion on his injured left knee. The Celtics’ team doctors told him that he didn’t. Irving held strong despite the external pressures, had his surgery and came back the next year in top form. There is a recurring theme here. I coach my son’s AAU team, the FBCG Dynamic Disciples, and the first thing I did yesterday was message them to make sure they learned a lesson from what happened to Durant. Athletes are competitive by nature: they will always want to play. That’s how we are built. But it shouldn’t be up to them. A solution to this league-wide issue was suggested to me by a lawyer named Marlon Amprey. He proposed that the National Basketball Players Association assemble a group of independent doctors and specialists, with no connection to the teams whatsoever, who can provide second and third opinions on injuries, giving players detailed reports on their health and risk of injury. All doctors’ reports issued by teams that drastically differ from the independent assessment should go under review with repercussions for team doctors and trainers who medically clear players who shouldn’t be out there. When it comes down to it, you have to make the decision that is best for you. Hopefully what’s happened to Durant, who’s admired by so many young athletes as one of the best players in the game today, will be a lesson they won’t forget.