Sniffing strangers’ trainers for a living sounds like a bad job, but standing at his work station Matt Miller is inhaling a Nike Air Jordan shoe with the enthusiasm of a sommelier. Mercifully, the shoe has never been worn. Miller is getting notes of leather and suede but can probably smell money too. The sought-after Nike Jordan 1s – designed by the rapper Travis Scott - are among the most coveted on StockX, a fast-growing stock exchange-style trading platform for “sneakerheads”, who collect or trade trainers and are willing to pay in excess of £1,000 for a pair. “I blindfold test all the time,” says Miller, who is one of the site’s London-based staff tasked with weeding out fakes in the global trainer (or sneaker, for the Americans) resale market, which is now estimated to be worth as much as $7bn (£5.5bn) a year. “You look for general quality of sneaker, the stitching, the smell. I tell my best authenticators to close their eyes and tell me what shoe it is. Every sneaker has a unique smell.” At a time when many traditional fashion retailers are struggling to appeal to fickle young shoppers, the major sports brands have struck gold by teaming up with tastemakers such as Pharrell Williams and Kanye West to release limited-edition footwear collections. West’s latest Yeezy shoes are so sought after that British shoppers were queuing in the early hours of Friday to get their hands on the latest iteration, which cost £180. With demand outstripping supply for these highly prized products, StockX bills itself as a “stock market for things”, enabling individuals to speculate on the most sought after shoes – and hoodies too – as if they are shares in a quoted company. The site’s users, who are predominantly male and in their teens and twenties, have traded $1bn worth of unworn gear in the past year. The UK market is worth £200m. “A stock market is the most efficient way to create a market price for any asset,” says Josh Luber, a former IBM consultant who co-founded StockX with US billionaire Dan Gilbert four years ago. “We have brought the efficiency and transparency [of that model] to make it easier to buy products where supply and demand is constrained.” The sneakerhead scene used to be a subculture but the internet and sites such as Instagram have forced it into the mainstream as the fashion and music worlds collide with huge social media audiences online. At the same time there has been a shift towards casual dressing across generations, with the athleisure trend last week helping to propel JD Sports Fashion into the FTSE 100 index of top UK companies. “The growth that we see today is down to the arrival of Instagram,” says Luber. “All sneakerheads ever wanted to do was show off their shoes and see what other people are wearing. Brands are bringing in fashion designers and artists to make shoes: Kaws [the American artist and designer Brian Donnelly] does shoes with Nike so it crosses many different parts of culture.” There are no profit warnings on StockX but market forces still apply as celebrity stock rises and fall. Justin Timberlake gave the price of Air Jordan 3s a boost when he wore them to the Superbowl but the personal travails of footballer Cristiano Ronaldo made his Nikes hard to shift for a while. Detroit-based StockX’s financial backers include Gilbert, owner of the Cleveland Cavaliers basketball team, and GV, the venture capital arm of Google owner Alphabet. It also has a string of celebrity investors including Marshall Mathers, better-known as Eminem, Mark Wahlberg and the supermodel Karlie Kloss. So far it has raked in $50m to fund expansion – Luber says more fundraising rounds will follow. StockX is currently focused on expansion in Europe; it recently opened an office in London as well as the region’s first authentication centre, to ensure the products being sold are genuine, on a west London industrial estate. “London is the centre of the European sneaker world … as a marketplace we have to make it a local experience and get the product to people fast,” says Luber, who with his combat trousers and orange-soled trainers looks dressed for a rap battle rather than meetings with City suits. The 41-year-old owns 400 pairs of trainers but says it is a tally that in the “pantheon of big sneaker collections doesn’t even register”. The London depot – another site four times its size will open soon in Eindhoven, in the Netherlands – is the focal point for trade in the region. Each day several lorry loads of shoes and clothing are dropped at the back door for staff to vet, with the mountain of stock gradually sifted through the hands of an expert such as Miller before it can be okayed and sent on to the buyer. The average seller is a sole trader – literally – who has queued for new shoe releases or taken a punt on styles they think will increase in value. Sales attract a 3% payment processing charge and a transaction fee of 9.5%. But the shopper base is increasingly mainstream. “It started with core sneakerheads,” says Luber. “But now it’s about people who may have just bought their last pair of shoes at JD Sports or Footlocker but would never wade through eBay listings. The retail and resale market has started to blur together.” In the London depot there are boxes of trainers piled to the ceiling but the reality is few of the trainers will ever be worn, as traders speculate that their value will increase. Miller, a collector with hundreds of pairs, confesses he has bought eight pairs of the Travis Scott Nikes – which stand out thanks to the reversal of Nike’s famous swoosh on the side – but he wouldn’t even contemplate trying them on. “I’m saving them for when they go up in price. I wear cheap sneakers myself, $200 max. For me to put $1,000 sneakers on my feet – I can’t do it.” Jordan 1 Retro High Travis Scott One of the most hyped and anticipated releases of the year. Travis released around 5,000 early pairs in to the market on the day of the Super Bowl and a similar amount on his birthday. Early pairs spiked at almost £2,100 on StockX because they weren’t released to the general public, making them extremely sought after. The market has now settled down with smaller sizes reaching around £900-£1,300 with bigger sizes from £550-£800. Nike LD Waffle Sacai Blue Multi Sacai, a luxury Japanese fashion brand, collaborated with Nike to release the Waffle. Early pairs traded for £800-£1,500 on StockX, which people were prepared to pay because they loved the shoe and weren’t sure if it was ever going to be released more widely. The sneaker has now settled in price from £240 to £350 depending on size as they were eventually released in quantity. Adidas Yeezy Boost 350 v2 TRFRM Kanye West has been a huge influence in the sneaker industry for a long time now and his Yeezy True Form was particularly sought after as it was an EU only release – driving demand for them in Asia and North America. On release day the Yeezy 350 true form traded for around £250-300 on StockX but climbed to around £400 for some sizes in the days after the release. The market has been very steady now for a while and £300-£400 will be enough to secure a pair in your size, but smaller size Yeezys (UK 3.5-6.5) command a higher resell because there were fewer produced.