Hi, Nicole! What can you tell us about your episode of Black Mirror, Striking Vipers? That’s what’s so tricky! I don’t think I can tell you anything. What the heck are we going to talk about? I play the wife of Anthony Mackie. The episode is largely about navigating coupledom, and how technology might hinder a relationship in the Black Mirror world. Is filming an episode of Black Mirror as surprising as watching one? It was honestly the most fun I’ve had. We shot it in São Paulo in Brazil, which was amazing. It definitely didn’t feel like any other experience I’ve had before. How did you get involved? Or when Charlie Brooker comes a-calling, do you just say yes? Are you serious? Black Mirror is literally one of my favourite television shows on the planet. I look forward to it. I’m disappointed when it’s over. I binge it. I was just honoured to be asked. Do you Americans think all us Brits are as utterly bonkers as Charlie Brooker? We only had a big conference call between the table reads, so I still haven’t met Charlie face-to-face. My mother is Jamaican and I grew up in east London so I have a ton of family in the UK. So I know for a fact that you are all just as crazy! What one Black Mirror-style thing do you hope comes true/definitely doesn’t come true? Oh my goodness. There’s so many things I really hope don’t happen. Every episode I’m like, “Holy shit, please don’t let this happen”. In Nosedive, where everyone is being rated and you lose your housing and your job because you’re unpopular … I feel we’re moving in that direction and it’s extremely scary. I like the idea of having a timer for dating, like in Hang the DJ, where every time you meet someone, you find out how long that relationship is actually going to last. I kind of like that. What would happen in a Sleepy Hollow/Black Mirror crossover? Sleepy Hollow had so many storylines, I’ve really no idea what would happen if you added technology. The fans from both worlds are super smart and super loyal. It would be great to have something super-juicy, scary and mind bending to share with the fans. You’re only 5ft 2in. How do you reach the top shelf in the supermarket? I would say 5ft 3in on a good day! How do I reach the top shelf? I’m going to beat you up when and if I see you! You know, there’s some jumping, and some leaning and some climbing. Sometimes I require a little bit of assistance. I don’t pick a lot of things off the top to be honest. • Black Mirror season 5 launches on Netflix on 5 June.