An England scout at Cardiff taking notes on Afghanistan’s latest match – their defeat to South Africa – would have some difficulty filling up the column entitled “Strengths”. In reality any analyst providing a dossier before England’s next World Cup fixture was probably glued to a television screen rather than hovering mysteriously next to the sightscreen in dark glasses (a giveaway in the current climate). But in the 21st century not much is left to chance. So far Afghanistan’s weaknesses mightily outweigh their strengths in this tournament. When batting first against Australia, New Zealand and South Africa they have been defeated by seven wickets two times and by nine on Saturday. Against Sri Lanka, the next most fragile side in the tournament, they were beaten by 34 runs. So far their longest innings has lasted 41 overs - against New Zealand. Just two players, Hasmutullah Shahidi and Najibullah Zadran, who was dropped for their last game, have posted half-centuries. So it is painfully obvious where Afghanistan’s problems lie on the field – and there seem to be a few beyond the boundary as well. Their batting is currently very fragile; it can implode as rapidly as a pricked balloon. There are extenuating circumstances. Afghanistan have been accompanied by rainclouds wherever they go. None of their matches have been abandoned but three of them have been interrupted. The air has always been moist, the pitches green, unwelcome, alien territory for their batsmen. They have been uncomfortable against the world’s best pacemen, which is hardly a shock, but they were also exposed by the wrist spin of Imran Tahir at Cardiff, which was more surprising. Tahir’s googly was as unrecognisable as some of those faces eager to become our new prime minister. So our analyst will have noted. “They may struggle to pick Adil [Rashid]”. Their most diverting batsman so far has been Hazratullah Zazai not for the volume of his runs, but the ferocity of his intent. Zazai, a sturdy left-hander, hero-worships Chris Gayle and he tries to bat like him, aiming for monster hits over the leg side. Currently he lacks Gayle’s guile and judgment. He has reached 20 three times in the tournament but has never advanced beyond 34. In addition to these frailties are the limitations of Afghanistan in the field. They have some venerable cricketers and others who are not naturally athletic. Nor is their catching flawless. However there is something to be written in the “Strengths” column. They can bowl. In fact their two spinners, Rashid Khan and Mohammad Nabi, are potentially as good as any in the world. So far they have been hampered by a chronic lack of runs and unhelpful pitches. As a consequence Rashid, in particular, has been seeking miracles. It may be that the surface at Old Trafford might finally offer this pair some encouragement. The pace attack is also combative. Hamid Hassan has been playing for Afghanistan for a decade. His headband and his glare make him look bellicose; he is also brisk and accurate. At Cardiff Aftab Alam bustled in with purpose against South Africa in a manner that would have been lauded by his senior partner. But too often those bowlers have been left with an impossible task. So England should prevail without much trouble, a situation that poses peculiar challenges for captains and coaches prior to the game. They must balance realism with respect. If ever there was a good time for England to be beset with an injury crisis it is at this point in the tournament when they are confronted by the two weakest sides, Afghanistan on Tuesday and Sri Lanka at Headingley on Friday. For the moment they do not wish to permanently replace Jason Roy, who is going to miss those matches, since they cannot reverse that decision. The outlook for Eoin Morgan is rosier; he had a net at Old Trafford on Monday. Even if both players miss the Afghanistan game, James Vince and Moeen Ali , recalibrated – yet again – as a batting all-rounder, can deputise up the order. This means the captain almost has an embarrassment of bowling options. In that department everyone seems to be fit and most of them are firing. Chris Woakes enjoyed his last outing against West Indies but the biggest bonus has been the excellence of the pace twins, Jofra Archer and Mark Wood. They share 16 wickets between them in the tournament and both of them have an economy rate under five per over. No doubt England would prefer to stick with what they consider their best attack in the hope that they can rest the odd bowler once they have qualified. So Tom Curran may have to put the bib on again.