It is always instructive to hear from turbocapitalist fanny-steamer magnate Gwyneth Paltrow, whether it be about the desirability of $956 bog roll or the dream of a zero-carb economy. But next week promises to be a particularly special time for the UK, as madam’s wellness summit comes to London. The event is called In Goop Health, but is specifically billed as a summit. Cost? £1,000 for a day ticket, or £4,500 for the weekend, which includes a two-night hotel stay. I don’t think your wallet would ever have felt cleaner. Or, indeed, more rinsed. If I had to pick the summit the Goop summit seems most like, I would probably go for Munich 1938. One party – the customer – is going to come away imagining they’ve got something worthwhile out of it, while the other party – a madly revanchist would-be empire – is going to be laughing all the way to the central bank. “Did you have a good time, Neville?” “Yes! I hold in my hand a £27 Psychic Vampire Repellent. It says here that you simply ‘spray around the aura to protect from psychic attack and emotional harm’.” There aren’t a huge number of Nevilles at In Goop Health, of course, “wellness” being something that more easily parts women from their money. We know this because the event has recently been held in New York, giving us ready access to the weapons-grade bollocks that has already been written about it, and a guide to what to expect for any Londoner planning to attend. It is extremely hard to choose a favourite among these reports, but for me, the Teen Vogue one probably edges it. A kind of prose colonic, this science-free quasi-press release gives everything about the summit the slavish credence it doesn’t deserve. Sample text includes: “It became clear that radical self-acceptance is a core tenet of Goop’s evolving wellness code.” Mmm. It’s not that radical, is it, if you dropped at least a grand to be there, and someone’s trying to flog you an ear-seeder while telling you it’ll balance your nervous system? Speaking of which, one of the summit’s events is a financial workshop described as “entering a realm of vulnerability”. Well, quite. I hope nobody mentions the elephant in the room: namely, that everyone in it has parted with a grand or a lot more to submit to the “ultimate retail experience”, where you can pick up something called sex dust within touching distance of a stall selling restored farm tables. A juxtaposition that reminds me of a Victoria Wood line: “Why, when you go into a department store, no matter which door you choose, is it always the leotard and handbag department? Why do they put them together? It’s not like you’ve ever bought a leotard and thought: ‘Ooh, now I must get a handbag to go with it.’” RIP to a comic genius who made women feel a billion times better about their lives than – hang on, let me get my readers on – a 24-carat gold face-sculpting bar or 10-day extreme cleanse. Sorry, where were we? Ah yes. As far as that financial workshop goes, I imagine it takes a really long time to train as the sort of person who could hold such an important event at the Goop summit, but I kind of feel I could wing it with nothing but a raised eyebrow and the words: “Duh, you need to stop spending money on THIS bullshit. Is your boss – probably a man – here this weekend? Is he twatting about with crystals and $300 hair oil and pretending he can feel the effects of a selenite wand being passed over his chakra? No? Then WAKE UP AND GET OUT OF HERE WHILE YOU STILL CAN. (Actually, just before you do, can you get me one of the overnight peels, because my friend says they’re amazing? Pay you back.)” As always, the villain of this piece is not the consumer, but rather the various entities preying upon them. I don’t think we should have a lot of time for Gwyneth’s on-site “Optimism Doctor”, who has actually trademarked this particular trade description. Ditto for the teacher offering an “intuition workshop”. Isn’t the thing about intuition that you can’t … but no. Which of us has the strength? And ditto-issimo for the Teen Vogue claim that “several trends emerged throughout the day on what a post-mainstream wellness world might hold”. I feel like it’s reasonable to posit that Goop left the mainstream a few galaxies ago, maybe around the time of pushing a $46,000 mah jong set and solid-gold dumbbells ($125,000). Still, if you’re planning to drop £1,000 or even £4,500 on attending next weekend – and I sense a lot of readers might be – I can only wish you well with all the wellness. And also warn you that all the drinks on offer sound like a come-and-get-us plea to the Bolsheviks. Would you like a glass of “Piña Chlor-adas infused with Elle Macpherson’s WelleCo elixir”? What about “matcha lattes dusted with Moon Juice and laced with collagen and pearl”? If those don’t tempt, then I’m afraid there’s only one smart decision: Goopglow. According to a report, Gwyneth’s signature beverage Goopglow “tastes like Kool-aid”. Feels a little on the nose, but there you go. Fresh from the Spice Girls tour, this week found Geri Halliwell on the cruise ships. One cruise ship, to be precise – belonging to Richard Branson. The Scarlet Lady is part of Branson’s new cruise ship line, Virgin Voyages, and Geri’s job was to promote the new Mega RockStar Suites on board. “Virgin Voyages’ RockStar Suites are the perfect blend of luxury, glamour and a little bit of rock’n’roll opulence,” Geri told reporters obligingly. “Exactly the way I like to enjoy my holidays.” Yes, she likes to enjoy her holidays in the way of those words. But I think we can assume she won’t be enjoying her holidays on this actual ship. As for Branson, he said: “I just love the idea of RockStar Suites. They celebrate Virgin’s musical heritage and how I got my start in the music industry.” I wonder if there are nods to Richard’s record company past in the bits of the NHS he runs – or in the expensive litigation he is given to dragging the health service through. Either way, good old Branson. Still there. Even if he is one of those guys of a certain age in public life whose reappearance in the 2019 news prompts you to wonder vaguely: “Wasn’t there … a thing? About 18 months ago? I’m sure there was, you know, a thing.” Please don’t worry. I’ve checked the archives and the official response to the thing was: “Richard has no recollection of this matter. Neither do his family and friends who were with him at the time.” So there you go. For so many of us, Richard will always be too big to fail, and we wish him bon voyage in this latest venture.