With a good Oscar Wilde aphorism, you can’t tell whether the playwright is being serious or throwaway, but there’s at least one Lady Bracknell remark that rings true. “We live, I regret to say, in an age of surfaces,” says Sarah Ball, suitably imperious in the iconic role, as the younger generation preen, pose and pretend to be people they are not. It’s an observation director Suba Das has taken to heart in this Octagon theatre off-site production by making the connection between the age of Wilde and the dawn of photography. Jack Hardwick’s suitably brittle Algernon conducts several conversations from the other side of a camera and, at choice moments, the actors are captured in freeze-frame. It’s all about looking the part. It is a bonus that the painted studio backdrops of David Woodhead’s set provide an efficient way of changing scene on the Albert Halls stage. The ornate ceiling and grand organ also contribute to the air of Victorian grandeur, although the production is done no favours by the high stage and unforgiving acoustics. Largely for this reason, Wilde’s dazzling script gets almost no laughs. Despite the hard work of the cast, the audience has to strain to keep up with the banter. But it’s also because of a production that tries too hard to be funny. The photography theme, like the triumphal music that accompanies Bracknell every time she enters, and like the actors’ exaggerated gestures, is more decorative than revelatory and often just another distraction. At its worst, the production works actively against the play’s comic rhythms; where the humour should be in the cool restraint of characters for whom politeness is an art, we get explosions of anger and demonstrations of lewd intent, leaving no subtextual ambiguity – and nothing to laugh at. This is especially the case in an ill-advised early scene in which Gwendolen (Elizabeth Twells) rips off her dress to pose for erotic pictures before a bemused Jack Worthing (Dean Fagan). Any gain you might have got from her assertion of female sexuality is undermined by dialogue that is rendered meaningless. To show what the characters are really thinking defeats the point of the play. At the Albert Halls, Bolton, until 15 June.