Weak regulation of private renting has left hundreds of thousands of tenants living in mouldy or dangerous homes, Citizens Advice has warned. A survey of English landlords and tenants conducted on behalf of the charity found that half of landlords do not know or understand their legal obligations. Meanwhile, renters aren’t aware of their rights or don’t feel able to enforce them. The result, it said, is that many tenants end up living in homes with health-affecting hazards such as mould, or dangerous problems such as missing or inoperative smoke and carbon monoxide alarms, it said. Citizens Advice on Wednesday called for a national housing body for private renting to set standards. This could include creating a home “MOT”, or the setting a “fit-and-proper person” test for landlords and standardising rental contracts, it said. Last year the Guardian revealed that 90% of local authorities had failed to use new powers to fine rogue landlords over the previous year, suggesting tenants are being failed by a lax enforcement regime. Convicted landlords who had been ruled unfit to rent out their properties were continuing to operate by exploiting loopholes in the law. Three-quarters of landlords questioned for the survey said they would be happy with a single national housing body responsible for setting standards, as it would make their job easier. The report, titled Getting the House in Order, found that landlords are not meeting obligations to make the repairs for which they are responsible. A quarter of tenants questioned by Comres said their landlord failed to carry out an annual gas safety check, or make sure smoke and carbon monoxide alarms were working. About 60% of tenants had reported a problem in their home in the past two years that had not been fixed by the landlord as it should have been. Gillian Guy, the Citizens Advice chief executive, said: “Too many private renters live in hazardous homes – often with potentially fatal flaws. The government must establish a national housing body to ensure landlords let property that meet legal standards, and gives renters the support they need when they don’t.” A third of landlords questioned said they found it difficult to keep up with rules and regulations. Half (49%) did not know the potential penalty (a fine of up to £5,000) for not checking that smoke and carbon monoxide alarms were in working order on the first day of the tenancy. Citizens Advice helped almost 60,000 people with issues related to private renting last year. One in four (24%) had issues getting repairs completed, and more than 2,500 were being harassed by their landlord. The minister for housing and homelessness, Heather Wheeler, said: “This government is committed to cracking down on the small minority of landlords who are not giving tenants safe and secure places to live. “We have given councils strong powers to make sure that when a property contains potentially serious health and safety risks, landlords must take immediate action.”  