Eoin Morgan expects Friday’s World Cup encounter between England and West Indies will reaffirm Jofra Archer’s decision to switch sides, having himself experienced the “different” feeling of meeting former teammates on the global stage. Archer, 24, played three times for West Indies Under-19s in 2013 before moving to England and – following a change in regulations that required just three years of residency to qualify for selection – breaking into the senior side this summer. The Barbados-born fast bowler, who has only ever held a British passport, described the fixture in Southampton as “just another game” following this three-wicket burst against Bangladesh last Saturday. But for all this talk, Morgan has acknowledged that it will indeed have additional meaning. “I think it is a moment where you reaffirm your decision,” said Morgan, who turned out 23 times for Ireland before switching nationality in 2009 and then returning to Clontarf for a one-dayer a few years later. “The difference is the feel. When you play against guys that you’ve played with at age-group level, it felt like a club game against your mates you’ve known for a long time, compared to playing against strangers – that’s the different feel. “Jofra won’t know how it will feel until he plays the game. I think being in that position myself, it does feel different the first time you play against a side that either you could have potentially played for or played against. But I’m sure he will handle it like he’s handled everything else so far.” Jason Holder, the West Indies captain, said Archer’s impressive start to life in an England shirt comes as no surprise, having watched his progress at club level in Barbados. He described his decision to play for England as “unfortunate” but when asked if he would make the current West Indies, the all-rounder looked to shoulder arms. Holder replied: “He’s English. It is something I can’t control. So I’m not going to worry about it. I’m not going to get flustered over it. Our role in this World Cup is to play against England in this game and our role is to beat England.” He hopes it will be England who are flustered come match day, not least if Chris Gayle can repeat the six-hitting spree witnessed during the winter when, during a 2-2 series draw, he cleared the ropes two more times than the opponents combined with 39 such blows. Morgan is not the type to betray any on-field concern, of course, with the England captain explaining his method. “In the West Indies Gayle played extremely well but for a long part of his innings he didn’t go at more than a run a ball. When guys are doing that, it’s not necessarily hurting you as a team. “When he hits three sixes in a row it might not feel like that, with the crowd going bananas. But you look at the scoreboard and think, does it reflect the game? Having a scoreboard with lots of detail is an advantage.” Morgan could be without one of his trump cards in Mark Wood, the fast bowler facing a fitness test after some bruising to an ankle that is seemingly not serious. With much of the focus on England’s pace of late, the England captain was keen that other members of the attack get their dues. He added: “The previous two years Chris Woakes has been the best seam bowler in the world in the first 10 overs and no one has mentioned that. It’s unbelievable, his control with the new ball. I hope it continues. “Liam Plunkett is the same, in the middle overs he’s the leading wicket-taker and if that was a spinner you’d be shouting from the rooftops. The key is knowing their roles and feeling valued by the whole dressing room.”