England will return to the pitch on which they have posted two world record ODI totals when they meet Pakistan at Trent Bridge on Monday. Eoin Morgan’s side have been handed the exact same strip on which they plundered Pakistan for 444 for three in 2016, before surpassing this with a monstrous 481 for six during last year’s 5-0 whitewash of Australia. Victory in Thursday’s World Cup opener against South Africa was built on a first-innings total of 311 for eight, which overcame the 10.30am start, the loss of Jonny Bairstow to the second ball of the innings and a slightly sticky surface. They will be without Alex Hales, a centurion during both record totals in Nottingham, but a return to their happiest hunting ground has created a buzz among the batsmen as they look to make it two wins from two. At training, the batting coach, Graham Thorpe, said: “It’s been a good ground to play at over the years and it has generally always been a good pitch, so we are looking forward to it. If we get into a good position, we’ll try to score as many as we can. But if it doesn’t happen, you’ve got to put a competitive score on the board to put the opposition under pressure.” A lot of pre-tournament chat surrounded the possibility of the 500 barrier being broken, with Trent Bridge seen as a likely venue. But Pakistan’s blow-out against West Indies there on Friday, amid a start to the tournament that has seen bowlers slightly on top, serves as a reminder there are no givens. Pace and bounce did for Safraraz Ahmed’s side when – two pitches across from Monday’s match – they were bowled out for 105 in 21.4 overs. England are now considering a return for Mark Wood to add a second 90mph man alongside Jofra Archer. Thorpe added: “West Indies bowled very well, they looked like they roughed Pakistan up as well. It was interesting viewing. [Archer and Wood] will be discussed. The captain will probably make a call on it. I am sure he will think about it with Trevor Bayliss and a couple of senior players and then come up with a plan.” Caution over Wood’s fitness led to Liam Plunkett being preferred for the win over South Africa and the 34-year-old typically delivered in the second powerplay, following up Archer’s initial incisions with figures of for 37 from seven overs, including the wicket of Quinton de Kock, South Africa’s top scorer. Chris Woakes is expected be rotated during the tournament as he manages a longstanding knee problem and so could also be a candidate to make way. He went wicketless at the Oval but had Morgan not removed the slip so early, De Kock might well have been his.