After the death of his wife of 66 years, the zoologist Desmond Morris is getting rid of all his stuff. Thousands of books, artworks and antiques have to go. The objects apparently stand as too-painful reminders of lives lived together, offering no comfort in the face of his wife’s distressing absence. Who cares about shared knick-knacks when all you want is to ask a question, have a chat? So Morris has reduced his possessions to the bare essentials in order to begin a new life. This might be considered drastic for a 91-year-old, but he seems adamant. “If I don’t I will sit here suffering,” he says. While some people might draw comfort from the memories lodged in material possessions, Morris has chosen to set himself free. Mourning involves processing both tangible and intangible losses. You lose not only a physical presence but also an external memory bank and additional vantage point on to your own life. It can even feel a bit like losing your mind; if your mind has been tangled up in the other person’s thoughts, feelings and memories for any extended period the sudden change can seem like a mental amputation. How can you think straight when such a big cluster of your psychic coordinates has just disappeared? Perhaps losing a load of objects can help to make a loss feel more physical, and therefore processable. There’s an exemplary grief-purge in the Netflix show Tidying Up With Marie Kondo. A wife lets go of her larger-than-life husband’s clothes and collectibles. Rather than it feeling like a betrayal, it seems like a gesture of love. Now she can cohabit in peace with his memory, rather than being persecuted by his morbid clutter. When someone you love disappears or dies it can take a while to register exactly what you’ve lost. There’s the missing body but, more than that, there’s the missing relationship. The loss is both tangible and intangible, and there’s no fail-safe guide as to how to go about recovering. The five stages of grief (denial, anger, bargaining, depression and acceptance) offer a loose model for progress, but you can’t expect your feelings to go by the book. Mourning takes ages, is messy, and there’s no guarantee of the outcome. It can feel like you’re doomed to be sad for ever. You could say that for a 91-year-old for ever isn’t such a long time. Why not just bide your time in melancholic nostalgia? What kind of new life can you build at such a late stage in the game? While Morris’s radical liquidation might seem a little shocking, it also suggests an incredible optimism. Faced with a choice between a limp towards the finish line and running a whole new race, Morris has perhaps opted to speed-grieve in the hope he’ll be granted a surge in the last lap. If to an onlooker it seems a little rough to dismantle a home so uncompromisingly, perhaps it’s because of the unpalatable idea that there must surely be anger in it. Isn’t it disrespectful to dissolve the traces of your shared lives? Still, it is an undisputed fact that nobody’s perfect. In any long marriage there will have been problems, frustrations, misunderstandings. One of the hardest parts of the grieving process is letting go of the aspects of the person that you ostensibly don’t miss – the things about them that really pissed you off. Especially the things you held against them unjustly, some of which might even have been unconscious. How can you work through a feeling you can hardly bear to acknowledge to yourself? This is the scummier side of mourning, and notoriously the one that lurks around the longest. Perhaps by venting some aggression on your shared objects you can get the job done a little faster, leaving you freer to remember the good bits about the person rather than their stuff. Another obstacle to thinking well of a speed-griever might be the suspicion that they want to abolish all traces of the person in order to make way for a new love. Mightn’t this seem a little merciless after a lifetime spent together? Almost like an infidelity after the event? I might think this if it weren’t for a 95-year-old I met at a dinner party a few years ago. He fell asleep before pudding but not before telling me about the woman he’d fallen in love with five years earlier. (She was at a family dinner that night, and he was missing her horribly.) She was a little younger but had been wheelchair-bound since he’d known her. Still, he said, the feelings of desperate love were even worse than they had been when he was a teenager. It was only after two years that he could even begin to settle into the relationship. The idea that one could be lovestruck so late in life was a revelation to me. The idea still makes me smile. If Desmond Morris thinks there’s more to later life than moping, I can’t think of any reason not to cheer him on. • Anouchka Grose is a psychoanalyst and author of No More Silly Love Songs, a realist’s guide to romance