There are some lovely things in Jenny Stevinson’s home – paintings, ceramics, mid-20th-century pieces, not to mention the cracking architecture itself – but she admits to no longer paying much attention to them as she is so smitten with the views outside. “I find myself constantly drawn to the trees and the plants; the vegetation is very powerful,” she says. The setting is indeed impressive. Nestled in a five-acre plot within the South Downs National Park in Hampshire, the house is surrounded by majestic woodland, juxtaposed with contemporary landscaping. As you move through the building, the greenery outside is a constant presence, thanks to abundant glazing. “I like to sit in different places according to the time of day,” says Stevinson. Connecting the house to its surrounds was crucial when Stevinson, a retired lawyer, finally made the decision to replace the 1950s bungalow that had previously stood here. “The house was inherited by my husband, Guy, from his parents and it was his passion,” she recounts. “When our three children were growing up, we would decamp to it from our home in London most weekends. It was pretty ramshackle, and the garden was overrun with deer and rabbits.” The couple had mooted the idea of replacing the structure but when Guy died suddenly, in 2001, the project was put on the back burner. “It was only after I retired, in 2010, that I revisited the idea,” Stevinson explains. One of Guy’s best friends, Geoff Wigfall, is an architect and he had previously drawn up some designs for a new house but, by this point, he had also retired. His son, Tristan, however, had followed in his father’s footsteps, co-founding the London-based practice Alma-nac. “Tristan had been coming here since he was a child; I felt that I’d be in good hands,” Stevinson says. Key to the brief was that the building should sit on the original footprint so that it had resonance with the previous structure. As a result, it hunkers into the sloping site, appearing from the front as a modest bungalow and rising up to a two-storey structure on the more private, west-facing elevation. The choice of materials – soft grey bricks, timber and slate – help to ground the house within its surroundings. Inside, the connection with nature is equally successful, thanks to vast glazed doors that open up the living areas to generous outdoor terraces. Large picture windows capture more views, some of them unexpected, such as a spectacular treetop canopy vista, framed by glazing in the kitchen’s vaulted ceiling. “There is something different to look at everywhere you turn,” Stevinson says. The kitchen flows into the main living space but the room doesn’t feel cavernous, thanks to a large fireplace that divides the two areas. There is also a glazed sitting area that juts out into the garden. “I had never lived open-plan before,” says Stevinson, whose Victorian home of 35 years was similar in size to this house. “The arrangement was much more vertical and by the time the children had all left home I was using two, maximum three, of the rooms. Here, I use every bit of the living space, but I never feel that I’m rattling around.” To further mitigate this scenario, the architects placed the three guest bedrooms in the north wing of the house, which can be shut off with a sliding partition when they are not in use. The idea is that when friends, or her children and grandchildren, are staying, Stevinson has her own sanctuary, a master suite on the level above. Next to this is a fourth guest bedroom which she uses as an artist’s studio. “I like to dabble,” she says, “but I am by no means a great painter.” Her love of art is witnessed in the bold canvases that hang on the walls, a number of which are by northern landscape artist Peter M Hicks. Also key to the decoration is a painterly floral fabric that was used for the curtains and pops up again on cushions and a window seat, as well as the sofa in the master bedroom. “The flowers seem to work with all the vegetation outside,” observes Stevinson, who picked out the different hues in the print in order to create a punchy feature wall in each space. “I was careful to limit the colour to small areas – I didn’t want the interiors to compete with the views.” Only a few select antiques made it in from Stevinson’s former home, and instead she has favoured modern seating by Italian brand Natuzzi, 20th-century classics purchased at the Midcentury Modern show at Dulwich College and bespoke designs crafted in sycamore and burr walnut. “A friend of mine lives in Yorkshire and she took me to some wonderful furniture workshops up there; one of the companies ended up making my kitchen,” she adds. For Stevinson, though, her favourite project has been the challenge of taming the once-wild garden. “I really got into gardening later in life and now I am obsessed with it,” she says. “When I’m away, I really miss it.” alma-nac.com