Coventry will play their home games at Birmingham’s ground next season after failing to reach a deal to stay at the Ricoh Arena. In May, the League One side revealed a provisional groundshare at an unnamed venue had been arranged but that the club’s intention was to stay put. However, Coventry will now play matches 18 miles away at St Andrew’s. “The club has delayed any stadium announcement in the hope that a deal could be agreed with Wasps to play at the Ricoh Arena. The deadline has passed and unfortunately there has been no agreement,” Coventry said in a statement. “To ensure we fulfil our home fixtures and therefore retain our place in the EFL, CCFC will be groundsharing next season. We know full well this is a very sad day for Coventry City, the City of Coventry, Coventrians and most importantly Sky Blues supporters.” The EFL, which had said it wanted Coventry to stay within six miles of the Ricoh Arena, has “reluctantly agreed” to the groundshare. “This situation has placed the EFL in an unenviable position and as a result, it has reluctantly agreed to a groundshare option at Birmingham City for 2019-20,” the EFL said. “This is a decision that has not been taken lightly and it is regrettable that the parties involved have been unable to find a suitable and sensible solution. The EFL board calls on all parties to resolve this matter at the earliest convenience for the benefit of the city, the club and people living in the local community.” Coventry appeared to lay blame for the failure of talks with the stadium’s landlords, Wasps. “What the landlord requested of [the club’s] owners was simply not deliverable. It can be argued the landlord was fully aware of this.” Coventry’s statement continued: “We are incredibly disappointed and extremely frustrated that continuing differences between our owners Sisu and Wasps, and also Coventry city council, could not be set aside to allow for a deal to play the club’s home games at the Ricoh Arena.” “We understand the strength of feeling in regard to a groundshare. We wholeheartedly share your feeling that Coventry City should play in Coventry. This decision was our last resort and was made to ensure the club can fulfil its fixtures next season. “We would like to thank Birmingham City and their staff for their continued support ... [and] want as many fans as possible to come and support the team in Birmingham. However, we recognise that fans will make their own choices – and encourage every fan to respect the decisions of all supporters.” The EFL has said it will carry out quarterly reviews to ensure the club returns to Coventry for the 2020-21 season, and has received an undertaking that the club’s owners, Sisu, will not attempt to permanently relocate the club. Under Sisu’s ownership, the club played home games at Northampton’s Sixfields ground, 70 miles away from Coventry, during the 2013-14 season. Birmingham have also confirmed the arrangement, saying the club “will work closely with Coventry City to ensure the matchday experience at St Andrew’s is as enjoyable and welcoming as possible in the coming season.”