A row recently erupted over workers’ conditions in the restaurant group Wahaca that turned out to be a little more complicated than it looked. Some diners had done a runner; another, law-abiding punter, Sarah Hayward, overheard the ensuing row and took to Twitter to complain: “Ppl next to us left without paying and their server is made to foot the bill from his wages. Apparently company policy. Utterly shameful employment practice.” After some social media to-ing and fro-ing, it turned out the server had been docked £3 on the £40 bill, then reimbursed as it did not amount to “gross negligence”. The company’s founder, Thomasina Miers, concluded: “It is a crazy world where one is hung before even being asked a question … it really saddens me that people are so quick to presume the worst.” It is a bruising experience to be monstered on Twitter; and most people who saw the fight kick off will not hang around to watch its resolution. That’s half the point of the site, the social media director of a fashion brand once explained to me, people buy your stuff on Instagram, talk about it on Facebook and complain on Twitter. Wahaca’s policy, though, is muddy. The staff handbook states: “If through your negligence a customer leaves the restaurant without paying you will be liable to pay the full bill including service to the company or it will be deducted from your wages.” It’s hard to imagine what negligence could possibly make it the waiter’s fault that a customer commits an act of theft. Might they collude with the diner in a complicated scam, someone suggested? Hard to see the profit of such an enterprise when someone other than the waiter has already eaten it. But the killer detail is “including service”; if someone steals a sum from this restaurant that includes an amount specifically meant for the waiter, the waiter still has to reimburse the restaurant. There is no decent response to that beyond: “You what?” It is impossible to imagine such a policy – which is by no means confined to Wahaca – surviving a robust and equitable negotiation between employer and employee. Odd details about workplaces frequently fire up the bystander’s imagination. When an Amazon employee has to wear a tag to monitor their pace, or an AA call centre (going back 15 years) times its workers’ loo breaks, there is this collective, audible unease about what it means. You can see any number of statistics about the division of profit between capital and labour, you can familiarise yourself very well with the extent and reality of the zero-hours contract, but nothing reaches that particular bit of your brain circuitry – let’s call it the perception of justice – quite like a simple, even mundane, human interaction in which one side holds all the cards. Whether it’s hyper-surveillance in the workplace or financial penalties for circumstances beyond your control, these measures speak of a relationship in which the parties are not equal. We’re right to feel disquieted. The presumption of parity – the worker’s time being of comparable value to the employer’s pay, and their voices and interests being, if not always perfectly aligned, at least of equal importance – is the fundamental principle of dignity at work. This is what unions established; and everything that makes gainful employment bearable – from weekends to sick pay – spiralled from it. Whenever we hear a story of the workplace that doesn’t sound fair, the thought should end: “That person should join a union.” Some years ago, Neil Foster, now at the GMB and one of the most inspiring thinkers of the modern trade union movement, had an idea to reinvigorate it. All the large sectoral unions were seeing declining numbers and low engagement; but more to the point, the rise of insecurity at work was having a corrosive effect on union influence. Employees who didn’t know how many shifts they would get from one week to the next simply couldn’t afford the jeopardy of picking a fight. Foster’s idea was a broad-based online union not limited to any particular sector, which anyone could join. It would have the institutional knowledge and skills of a traditional union, but the ease of use and prospect of mass mobilisation you find in modern online campaigning organisations like Avaaz and 38 Degrees. Collective demands could be made that didn’t hang on individual workers whose positions were precarious. While that has yet to happen, there is significant creativity in this field: university lecturers have started pop-up unions to fight on single issues. Unite set up a community union for the unemployed and low-paid to fight the bedroom tax. The GMB, defending three groundsmen who were fired from Brighton football club this month, had a surge of solidarity support. Today everyone from Marxists to Rory Stewart seems broadly to agree that a new world is struggling to be born. These spontaneous explosions at injustice on Twitter suggest something a little more specific and practical is waiting to find its voice: a mass movement, similar in scope and ambition to the earliest days of unionisation, with the wholly new tools of the connected workforce. Online outrage is edging towards online solidarity. Less an echo chamber, more a muster point. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist