In Switzerland, it is illegal to unload a stranger’s dishwasher: it can be months before your vandalism has been made good and everything is where it belongs. No, sorry, that’s wrong: in Switzerland it is illegal to keep one guinea pig without a cagemate. But the dishwasher thing should be illegal. The ordering of a kitchen is idiosyncratic and unguessable. There is no natural taxonomy to tell you where, for example, the grater should go (near the knives, or near the cheese?). There is no universally established list of things a kitchen should have, so that when you are away from home you can spend hours looking for a hand blender only to discover that these are considered, by unnatural people, to be non-essential, or give up after five minutes looking for a pestle and mortar, only to find a magnificent one of industrial size and high-quality stonework, stored on the third shelf behind the Tupperware. It doesn’t usually matter, because you wouldn’t cook in someone else’s kitchen, unless you are related to them. Either that, or you have gone round to help a friend who is injured or has had a nervous breakdown, in which case, boil an egg. Prolonged exposure to a stranger’s kitchen otherwise happens only on holiday, where it joins a constellation of stressors, including other people, and having been drunk since lunchtime. So that’s something to look forward to this summer. British self-catering is the worst in the world. I can’t prove that. But I’ve been everywhere in the UK that is more idyllic than Lambeth – which is all of it, St Keverne to Pitlochry, Hunstanton to Anglesey – and I’ve never met a kitchen knife sharper than David Davis. My friend’s mum travels with a bread knife and an all-round kitchen slicer as a bare minimum, and everyone calls her Villanelle (before Killing Eve, they used to call her Scarface), until they’re trying to make a tomato salad armed only with the art of persuasion. I would also, if I ever remembered, take a peeler: it is more common to find one that works but more troublesome if you don’t. There’s a level of uselessness that is actively insulting: the glass breadboard; the one-person cafetiere. There are items that would be innocuous as part of a well-stocked kitchenucopia – the fondue set, the Chinese basket steamer - which, in a place that doesn’t have a bloody colander, look like a trolling operation. There’s the world turned upside down – the electric hob with a gas oven. Hardly anyone really understands gas marks: they just stick everything on at six, for the very good reason that all gas marks are the same as six, except for eight, which is what you use to check the smoke alarm has batteries, and one, which is for farmers trying to resuscitate a barely-alive lamb. The electric hob, meanwhile – nothing’s happening, no, still nothing, help it’s on fire – is really fit only for boiling water. In a mysterious cupboard that you had assumed was the fusebox, you’ll find everything essential: the corkscrew, the tin opener, the zester. (Ha! Only joking – you’ll never find a zester.) In a large, well-placed cupboard that you would have used for core business – saucepans, sieves etc – you’ll find stacks of bakeware you don’t know how to use: it is not made of metal so you wouldn’t want to use it for roasting or baking; often, it will have a decorative lemon painted on it with a high glaze, which may or may not be heatproof; or it’s crenelated, or it’s made of clay, or glass, and the only thing any of this was designed for is the thing that nobody makes – moussaka. In an eye-height cupboard that the rational world would use for cups and glasses, you’ll find bad herbs: dried basil, powdered onion, Cajun mix. There’s probably a make-your-own-cheese kit at the back. Do not make your own cheese. Looking for silver foil, you will eventually hit the miscellany drawer: honey spoons, sweetcorn stabbers, tiny good-for-nothing skewers, cocktail umbrellas, over-designed bottle openers, melon ballers. Immediately run towards your associates, shouting: “I’ve found cocktail umbrellas!” It’s good to get other people on to alternative tasks, otherwise they’ll be hovering by your elbow the whole time, going: “But why are you so angry?” You’ll never find a user-friendly set of scales, but you may eventually find one of those contraptions with weights labelled in the smallest imaginable writing, and then have to summon a child to ask which one says “200g”. Measuring implements generally – jugs, spoons, cups – will be in very short supply. The subliminal message of the entire self-catering world is: “Who wants to spend their holiday measuring things?” To which the answer is: “People who want to eat things.” I’d like to end on an upbeat note, floating some notion of the incredible resourcefulness embedded deep in all of us, and how you can astonish yourself crushing garlic with the heel of your hand. That is not true. The best thing about a stranger’s kitchen is going back to your own kitchen.