This Pride season, rainbow-washing – where large corporations “come out” with rainbow logos and queer-focused ad campaigns – raises suspicion of opportunist overkill. When big-name sponsors such as Mastercard, Diet Coke and T-Mobile, and even straight-identifying individuals, take up the cause, the line between inclusion and co-option gets blurrier every year. Skirt Club, a members-only social club for bi-curious and bisexual women, will march in the World Pride Parade in New York this weekend – a surprising development considering most members identify as straight but experimenting. Despite facing criticism in years past for being a “lesbian sex party for straight women” that trivializes queer women’s sexuality, Skirt Club is now more explicitly bisexual than ever. According to founder Genevieve LeJeune, members range from decidedly straight to “completely gay,” though most consider themselves “bi-curious” and prefer not to label their sexuality at all. LeJeune always openly identified as bisexual, but when she founded Skirt Club, she wasn’t looking to get political, and neither were most members. Six years later, that’s starting to change. “People are feeling more confident expressing themselves as bisexual,” LeJeune said. She believes bisexual stigma is much less prevalent now than it was when she first launched Skirt Club, thanks in part to increased bisexual media representation. “I mean we’re kind of drowning in it now, aren’t we?” she said. We are – and it’s about time. 2019 has been called the year of the bisexual, or as queer Twitter coined it, #TwentyBiTeen – a fitting descriptor for an extraordinarily bisexual time in pop culture. We are living in an era of bisexual chic – a mainstream embrace of girls who kiss girls under bisexual lighting and wear pastel suits. From a virtual kiss between Bella Hadid and computer-generated influencer Lil Miquela in a Calvin Klein ad, to St Vincent and Dua Lipa’s undeniably sapphic duet at the 2019 Grammys, followed by Ariana Grande’s overtly bisexual hits and accompanying music videos (for Break Up With Your Girlfriend, I’m Bored and Monopoly), the visibility of girl-on-girl culture is peaking. The term “bisexual chic” came to the forefront in the 1990s and early 2000s, with movies such as Basic Instinct and Cruel Intentions that made bisexuality look like an edgy, dangerous, cool-girl identity that signified uninhibited sexuality and sexual availability. As comedian Margaret Cho, who is bisexual, told Out back in 2014: “Ever since Basic Instinct, for women it’s become dipped in chic.” The likes of Angelina Jolie, Drew Barrymore and Megan Fox made bisexuality look sexy and cool, because they were sexy and cool, and this misguided perception later inspired trends of bisexual performance for shock value, like the kiss between Britney Spears and Madonna at the 2003 VMAs and Katy Perry’s hit single I Kissed A Girl. Bisexual chic took on a faddish, attention-seeking connotation that still influences public perceptions of bisexual identity, bisexual media representation, and fuels performative bisexuality. When Grande released Break Up With Your Girlfriend, I’m Bored earlier this year, fans called it a “bisexual anthem”, and called her more recent single Monopoly a “bisexual bop”. The song’s queer overtones – with unmissable lyrics like “I like women and men” and a video that hints at a kiss between Grande and another woman – cemented Grande’s place at the center of this new wave of bisexual chic. But they simultaneously illuminate questions of bisexual erasure and what it really means to claim, or deflect, bisexual identity. Both songs fueled speculation about Grande’s potential bisexual leanings, leading some fans to wonder if either served as a covert coming-out. Grande neither confirmed nor denied the rumors and spoke out against labeling her sexuality. “I haven’t before and still don’t need to now, which is OK,” she tweeted. Grande is right. Neither she nor any vaguely bisexual celebrity should have to define their sexuality to appease fans and defuse rumors. Sexual identity and orientation is deeply personal. And queer or not, Grande doesn’t owe anyone an explanation of where she lands on the Kinsey scale. Even if she is queer-identifying, or even just experimenting, she doesn’t have to define or defend her sex life, because bisexuals don’t have to “pick a side” or disclose the extent of their attraction to any given gender in order to be valid. Though I currently identify as bisexual, the way I express and understand this identity is constantly evolving, something many of my previous romantic partners and even queer friends fail to grasp. My bisexuality isn’t predicated on who I choose to date, and I reject the notion that my attraction to any gender should be quantified as “50-50”, or exists on one side of a queer/straight binary. The dissection of Grande’s queer visuals further fetishizes bisexual women, and also erases the existence of bisexual men, who typically aren’t allowed the same public space to experiment with their sexuality. The media coverage following “troubled singer” Aaron Carter coming out as bisexual carried a starkly different tone than the rumors that followed Grande. Reports of Carter’s subsequent struggles with eating disorders, drugs, and a stint in rehab painted a picture of a confused young man, playing into the stereotype that bisexuality indicates a fragile mental state. Carter later said his heartfelt coming out tweets were “misconstrued”, and they may have been. It’s also possible that the stigma that followed his announcement pushed him back in the closet. It’s difficult to tell if the more recent adoption of bisexual aesthetics and iconography centering on sexual fluidity and woman-loving women isn’t part of a pattern of queerbaiting, a marketing tactic that aims to attract queer fans by hinting at queer romance or identity without ever depicting it explicitly. When queerness is co-opted and performed as an aesthetic, it perpetuates the idea that bisexuality is a temporary phase or performance. Performative bisexuality isn’t representation, and it isn’t queer. Although this particular moment in bisexual pop culture history offers a prime opportunity for a queer-forward rebrand, LeJeune said the decision for Skirt Club to march in World Pride comes from her own desire for community and solidarity with other bisexual women. Whether or not they explicitly identify as bisexual or just think the idea of kissing other women sounds fun (because it is!) isn’t the point. “Why can’t we march and feel free and say, ‘Yes, we enjoy sex with men and women’? I think there’s nothing wrong with that. It’s a proud moment,” LeJeune said. For bisexual fans and audiences craving idols and icons to claim as our own, and that make us feel seen, the rise of bisexual imagery and aesthetics in pop culture can feel like a long-awaited acknowledgement of our unique and varied experiences. Bisexual erasure pervades media and pop culture – as well as both queer and non-queer communities – and seeing any shred of representation, let alone a “bisexual anthem” from a big-name celebrity, can feel deeply validating to a population whose identities are commonly delegitimized, questioned, and stigmatized. It’s time that bisexuality, and bisexuals, had a “moment” to be seen and celebrated on a culture-wide scale by high-profile figures who aren’t afraid to let us claim them as our own. Bisexuality itself is endlessly complex, but possibly even more significantly, being bisexual is fun. In #TwentyBiTeen, it may be chic to be bi, or be bi for the aesthetic. Bisexuality has always been hot, because bisexuals are hot, and we deserve to be seen.