Israel Folau has said he will seek an apology from Rugby Australia and an admission that the code erred in terminating his contract over a social media post. On Friday morning, Folau will attend a hearing at the Fair Work Commission regarding his unlawful termination dispute with Rugby Australia and the NSW Waratahs, arguing his termination amounts to unfair dismissal on religious grounds. The Instagram post in question stated hell awaits “drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists and idolaters”. The post was deemed a high-level breach of RA’s code of conduct after previous warnings from the governing body not to denigrate people on the basis of their sexuality. Folau told Alan Jones and Peta Credlin on Sky News on Thursday night he hoped to receive an apology and an admission that RA had made an error in terminating the contract. “It starts tomorrow with the Commission there. I am hopeful for an apology from them, an admission they were wrong. That is something I’d like to get,” he said. Folau said the words in the post “came from a place of love”. . “It’s not personal,” he said. “Just wanting to share that message of love that God is trying to extend to all people.” “I can certainly see it from both sides. If I had a child that was a drug addict, I would still love that child without anything attached to that. It’s something I am trying to share in love.” Folau alleged that in addition to Rugby Australia asking him to take it down, the sporting body had offered money to remove the post, but he said he couldn’t live with it “as a person convicted by my faith”. Rugby Australia told the Daily Telegraph that any suggestion money was offered is false. Folau was hesitant to say whether he ever saw a return to playing rugby for Australia in his future. “I’m extremely proud to have represented my country, it’s truly an honour but tomorrow is the first step in terms of legal stuff.” The rugby star has raised over $2m through the Australian Christian Lobby as part of his legal fight with Rugby Australia after a similar fundraising campaign was cancelled by GoFundMe on Monday. Jones, who told Sky News viewers that he had been in frequent contact with Folau during the controversy, described the man as a “gentle Polynesian, Christian soul” and said the battle was not about money, but about “principle.” “You or I could be next,” Jones warned, accusing Qantas and chief Alan Joyce of “calling the shots” for Rugby Australia over the contract termination. “This will be a costly battle for all Australians.”