Luke Johnson, the business guru whose reputation crumbled after the implosion of Patisserie Valerie, the cafe chain he chaired, has broken his long silence over an incident he said had left feeling him physically ill. In a self-penned account of the events leading up to the chain’s collapse Johnson said he had been tricked by a fake picture of its financial health and pointed the finger at auditor Grant Thornton. Despite Johnson’s desperate attempts to rescue Patisserie Valerie, including lending it £10m of his own money, it went bust in January after the discovery of a widespread accounting fraud that masked a £94m black hole in its accounts. “The stress made me physically ill – I suffered a series of debilitating infections and was on antibiotics for weeks,” Johnson said. “I had chronic insomnia and felt exhausted and despairing. I rarely ventured out – I had a paranoid sense that people would be staring at me. “If I was arrogant at times before, my ego has taken quite a battering since. A very public disaster such as this shatters your self-belief.” The collapse of Patisserie Valerie, which employed 3,000 people after a breakneck expansion masterminded by Johnson, is one of the biggest stock market upsets of recent years. The company was valued at £450m before it flagged up the potential fraud, and the administration wiped out shareholders, including Johnson, who owned a 37% stake. The fall from grace was particularly acute for Johnson – who made his fortune investing in restaurant chains such as Pizza Express, Giraffe and Strada – as the business unravelled while he wrote a regular column in the Sunday Times dispensing business advice. The column has not appeared since last October when the problems at Patisserie Valerie first became public, but in a mea culpa published at the weekend the entrepreneur said he was returning to the newspaper. “It’s taken me almost nine months to come to terms with what happened,” he wrote. “I know that I was not dishonest. I was unaware of fraud. I received solid weekly numbers, comprehensive monthly management accounts and, of course, annual accounts that were given a clean bill of health by our auditors.” Indeed Johnson points the finger at Grant Thornton. he said: “One of the most astonishing aspects of the entire episode is the way in which it seems such an eminent firm had the wool pulled very comprehensively over its eyes. They never raised any material issues about the quality of our accounts.” Patisserie Valerie’s finance director, Chris Marsh, was arrested and bailed after the accounting scandal. The Serious Fraud Office has opened a criminal investigation but has not commented further. Johnson indicated he might be a witness in a serious criminal investigation. He said he felt betrayed by the perpetrators of the alleged fraud but was also concerned about his own future and becoming a “pariah in the business world”. He said: “I was very depressed and began to think that my career in this country was over – that I should emigrate.” Just over 900 Patisserie Valerie workers lost their jobs when 70 of the cafe group’s near-200 stores and concessions closed as a result of the administration. Its stock exchange-listed parent company, Patisserie Holdings, was broken up, with the cafe chain sold to Irish private equity firm Causeway Capital Partners. However after all he has been through, Johnson sets out the case for his return to business and public life, arguing that if business “failures are honest then the entrepreneurs involved should not be shunned”. He said: “My life will always be influenced by Patisserie Holdings, but does that mean I should give up my 35-year career in business? I don’t think so. I still have a contribution to make.”