Once again this grand-final concept repays. There are still those who grumble about it – and there is no doubt the idea of a nine-month (soon to be longer) slog through the dark English midwinter and out the other side just to establish four top seeds can feel a bit like overkill – but, time and again, the showpiece at Twickenham thrills. Professional club rugby, the mechanism through which any growth of the sport in England must be transmitted, is never better showcased. Another regular grumble is that rugby is somehow not as good as it used to be. Those still clinging to this delusion should look up any of the matches of the amateur era that can be found in their entirety on the internet – and not the highlights, the whole match – and try to maintain that line of argument with a straight face. Then they should watch this. It helps that it featured one of the teams of this or any age. Saracens were not at their best for long periods. Indeed, they looked quite ruffled for large tracts of the second and third quarters as Exeter wound up the power. But they pulled themselves together with a vengeance as all the champion teams do, when the stakes are high and the air at its thinnest. Twenty-one unanswered points in 17 minutes, three tries and rugby of the highest order, the identification of space and its exploitation – the mark of glorious rugby whatever the age. It still happens, people, it still happens. The usual charge levelled at the modern game is the stultifying accent on power. Certainly there are still mind-numbingly boring contests. All sports have them, can’t be avoided. The amateur era was full of them. The power quotient was off the scale here. Allied with the speed of the modern game it brings its own serious problems on the welfare front, which is a phenomenon new to the age, but when executed as expertly as here even the power game thrills in a way the amateur era did not. The drama almost never stopped. Lately, such has been Saracens’ dominance they have given up early leads, including against opponents as formidable as Leinster, and it hasn’t seemed to matter. Almost exactly as against Gloucester in the semi-final the previous weekend, George Kruis let the kick-off slip through his grasp, and, as Gloucester had, Exeter were on to the ball in a flash, Nic White dummying over from close range. “No problem,” is the Saracens attitude in such circumstances, “we will simply concentrate from now on.” That they did and sure enough they had a six-point lead within the first quarter of an hour. Everything felt very familiar at that point. But if Saracens responding to early setbacks has become a familiar phenomenon, so too has the relentless, multi-phase energy of Exeter in possession. The grumblers have singled out their power game as symptomatic of the age, but this season there have been signs of a more imaginative approach, with the elegant midfield of Ollie Devoto and Henry Slade starting to find itself, likewise the prowess in attack of Matt Kvesic. Here, another weapon came to the fore, Jack Nowell absolutely un-put-downable at full-back, as Exeter recovered to take the game back. England may yet consider him the answer at No 15 but the ankle injury that yet again forced him off looked nasty. Six points up at the break, then 11 just shy of the hour following a sublime Slade try that was due to much more than power, Exeter had Saracens in straits as dire as any they have encountered in this run of theirs of seven consecutive winning finals. Up stepped the usual suspects. Owen Farrell was key to the first of the three final-quarter tries, Maro Itoje suddenly rediscovered himself, Richard Wigglesworth, Jamie George and so on. So too the kids, Nick Tompkins, Ralph Adams-Hale. Around the world rugby’s traditional powers are terrified of the club game in England and France. It is easy to see why. Here was freshness and vigour at every turn, a match that had the lot, a stadium that rocked from start to finish with a ferocious energy. The numbers on the balance sheet need serious attention, but if even a fraction of the dynamics on show in this final could be harnessed all else will surely follow.