Late-night hosts discussed recent issues of the Trump administration, including a new allegation of sexual assault against Trump and the crisis at the border. Seth Meyers used a segment he calls “Hey” to illustrate all of the problems with Trump’s denial of E Jean Carroll’s allegation. “Hey, [bleep], if someone asks you, ‘Did you rape that woman?’ and you say ‘No, she’s not my type,’ that’s not a defense. That’s a confession.” Trump said he’s never met the well-known advice columnist, but a picture of the two ran alongside the story. “The problem is, even if you showed this picture to Trump, he wouldn’t change his mind, because he’s such an egomaniac that when he looks at a picture that he’s in, it’s a Being John Malkovich situation.” When Trump was shown the photo, he maintained his defense, saying “Give me a break.” “Hey, no one believes you when you deny this stuff because you already admitted to it. Remember, you were on a bus with Billy Bush, bragging about assaulting women like some sort of Port Authority pervert. Trump’s headshot should not be hanging at the White House. It should be hanging at every Greyhound bus station in the tri-state area. “Hey, man, who do you think is lying to us in this situation? All 22 women, who have nothing to gain by lying and are showing incredible courage in the face of these kinds of attacks, or the known liar who called climate change a Chinese hoax, said 3 million people voted illegally in the last election, and once told Eric Trump ‘I enjoy spending time with you’?” He left Trump with this message: “The media isn’t trying to screw you, because, to borrow a phrase, you’re not their type.” “There is one story about the president that we have to make time for,” said The Daily Show’s Trevor Noah – E Jean Carroll’s sexual assault allegation against the president. (Carroll has declined to describe the incident as rape.) “Yes, for the 22nd time, Donald J Trump has been accused of sexual misconduct. That’s almost one accusation for every Democrat running,” explained Noah. Outrage over Trump's election helped make the #MeToo movement mainstream, but so far he's been immune to its effects. pic.twitter.com/13JuBXrbsK Trump denied the claims, saying she wasn’t his “type” and it never happened, eliciting boos from the audience. Noah found great fault in this denial: “‘She’s not my type?’ What is that supposed to mean? If your denial leaves people thinking there is a type of woman you would rape, that’s not a good denial. “It should just be ‘I didn’t do it,’ and that’s it.” Noah also took issue with Trump’s implication that Carroll wasn’t attractive enough to get such behavior from him. “I don’t understand how we’re still struggling with this in society. A woman’s attractiveness has nothing to do with whether or not they were raped,” said Noah, to cheers from his audience. “But it shows you how out of whack Trump’s priorities are. He’s being accused of rape and his first concern is letting people know what his standards are for women. It’s like you’re accused of murdering someone at a Holiday Inn and your response is, ‘I stay at the Ritz Carlton. No!’ That’s not what we’re focused on!” Stephen Colbert opened his show with the news that the Customs and Border Protection acting commissioner, John Sanders, will step down, with Colbert joking, “You know what they say, when the going gets tough, the tough go ‘Good luck with that, sucks to be you!’” Colbert called Sanders out for running inhumane concentration camps, to which the audience booed. “Wow, his next job interview is going to be rough,” said the host. Trump, when asked about the conditions, said the children had come from poverty. Colbert did an impression of the president: “Which is why, just to make them feel at home, we thoughtfully provide squalor.” Since the conditions of the camps had been publicized, Trump has said it is not his fault, as he ended the family separations that were first instituted under Obama. “Longtime viewers of reality won’t be surprised that Trump is lying there.” The factchecking organization Politifact said family separations were rare under Obama but are systematic under Trump and workers at the border say he is exacerbating the issue through his policies. “Mr President, you’re not fooling anybody. We all remember that you ran on a racist, anti-immigration platform and you’re still running on it today. At this point, the only family separation America wants to see is yours from the White House,” exclaimed Colbert, after which his audience cheered and chanted “Stephen!”