Not even an alien invasion could change the narrative for Italian football. Cristiano Ronaldo was hailed as an extra-terrestrial when he touched down in Turin, a five-time Ballon d’Or winner arriving in a country where no player had got close to the award since Kaká claimed it in 2007. The Portuguese forward was supposed to carry Juventus to European glory. Instead, they won an eighth consecutive Serie A title, and nothing more. Ronaldo, for the most part, delivered. He did not hit those otherworldly heights of his best years in Madrid, but 28 goals and 10 assists are hardly a pittance. His hat-trick bailed the Bianconeri out after a catastrophic first leg against Atlético Madrid in the Champions League last-16, and he struck in both legs of the quarter-final defeat by Ajax. Still, few predicted at the outset that he would finish behind Fabio Quagliarella and Duván Zapata in the scoring charts. The former turned 36 in January. The latter had never gone beyond 11 goals in his previous five seasons in Italy. Look beyond Juventus’s dominance, and this was a season packed with unexpected twists. Atalanta, playing vibrant and ambitious football, finished third – higher than ever before in their 112-year history. They outscored everyone, including Juventus, and ended the Bianconeri’s bid for a fifth-consecutive domestic double with a 3-0 Coppa Italia rout. Inter, tipped as title challengers after adding Radja Nainggolan, Stefan De Vrij and Lautaro Martínez, instead produced a re-enactment of their previous campaign – finishing with the same points and again scraping into fourth with a nerve-shredding final-day win. OK, perhaps that bit was less surprising, but the path the Nerazzurri took was something else. Eight points clear of fifth at the start of 2019, Inter had won the derby, beaten Lazio 3-0 in Rome and earned results at home to Barcelona and Tottenham, too. Then they started the year poorly and alienated their only reliable goalscorer by stripping him of the captaincy. Perhaps that was even the right thing to do. Certainly, it was not ideal for Mauro Icardi’s wife and agent, Wanda, to be taking digs at teammates on TV chat shows. Then again, it was not exactly desirable for him to write an autobiography three years ago in which he triumphantly recalled threatening to bring criminals over from Argentina to murder fans who criticised him, either, and he did not lose the armband then. Icardi is expected to leave, as Antonio Conte builds a team in his image. Milan already offloaded their own ill-fitting Argentinian striker in January. Gonzalo Higuaín was supposed to fire the Rossoneri into the Champions League. Instead his brief loan stay will be remembered for a penalty miss, red card and meltdown against parent club Juventus. Krzysztof Piątek fared better, though his goals dried up, too, after an astonishing start in Serie A. He joined Genoa from CS Cracovia for €4.5m last June, and was sold to Milan for almost eight times that sum half a year later. An astonishing piece of business, and also one that very nearly backfired, as the Rossoblu slid to 17th without him. They avoided relegation only thanks to a head-to-head tie-breaker over Empoli. It was sad to see the Tuscans go: a team that always sought to attack under Aurelio Andreazzoli. Perhaps, if he had not been briefly replaced by Beppe Iachini in the middle of the season, Empoli might have survived, even with the smallest wage bill in the division. Many wealthier clubs delivered less bang for their buck. Fiorentina finished just three points above the relegation zone after an extraordinary collapse. Roma, too, were a disappointment, if not quite on the same scale. Monchi and Eusebio Di Francesco were gone by the middle of March. Now Daniele De Rossi’s journey with his boyhood club has come to an end as well. There were more positive seasons for Lazio, Coppa Italia winners, and Torino, who challenged strongly for a European place, as well as Spal and Sassuolo. Bologna had some of the best results in the league after hiring Sinisa Mihajlovic as manager in January. Parma followed up three consecutive promotions by consolidating their top-flight place. Napoli cruised to second almost as comfortably as Juventus took first. Carlo Ancelotti deserves credit for evolving the team left by Maurizio Sarri, and making better use of his squad’s depth, without slipping down the table – even if the points tally was diminished. This will be another Serie A season, however, remembered for ugly events off the pitch as well. Kalidou Koulibaly was racially abused during Napoli’s defeat at Inter. Moise Kean, a joyful late-season revelation for Juventus, was likewise targeted during a match at Cagliari. The limp reaction of the authorities – who took no action against the Sardinian club – was dispiriting. But the response of Kean’s own team-mate Leonardo Bonucci, who suggested that blame “should be split 50-50” between the teenager and his abusers, was arguably worse. Ronaldo found himself at the centre of a grim story in October, when Las Vegas police confirmed that they were re-opening investigations into a rape accusation made against him in 2009. The player denied the charge and there are conflicting reports about whether the case has been dropped. But Juventus’s response, issuing a pair of tweets that highlighted his professionalism together with the length of time since the alleged incident, was nevertheless horribly misjudged. These stories cannot be swept aside, yet it is right to celebrate the highs of the season as well. So without further ado, here are your 2019 awards … 6) Between injuries, car trouble and a habit for showing up late to training, Radja Nainggolan’s first year at Inter was mostly a disappointment. But he did still score one absolute gem against Juventus. 5) Piatek did not need to look at the goal to know where it was as he ran on to Ricardo Rodriguez’s cross against Atalanta. 4) Who needs Ronaldo, when you have Rolando (Mandragora)? 3) Luis Muriel shades it over Gervinho in the coast-to-coast section. 2) Andrea Belotti had a brilliant overhead kick saved by Andrea Consigli when Torino took on Sassuolo this May. But if at first you don’t succeed … 1) Quagliarella’s backheel volley against Chievo was pretty good. But the one he scored against Napoli was even better. | 🎂 |Fabio Quagliarella turns 36 today! 🎉Just the 16 goals so far this season, including this absolute beauty 😍 pic.twitter.com/bS8rZGxice Nicolò Zaniolo made sure that everyone sat down to watch as he opened his Serie A account against Sassuolo. | GOAL! | Take a bow, Nicolo Zaniolo 👏Chop back, dummy to sit defender and goalkeeper down, dinked finish over the pair of them... 😅Roma lead 3-0! pic.twitter.com/O06rYQAx0t (4-2-3-1) Samir Handanovic; Joao Cancelo, Armando Izzo, Kalidou Koulibaly, Domenico Criscito; Rodrigo, Remo Freuler; Josip Ilicic, Papu Gomez, Cristiano Ronaldo; Fabio Quagliarella Subs: Salvatore Sirigu, Alessio Cragno, Francesco Acerbi, Fabian Ruiz, Joaquin Correa, Rade Krunic, Nicolò Zaniolo, Suso, Stephan El Shaarawy, Dries Mertens, Duván Zapata, Krzysztof Piątek Back when José Mourinho was in charge of Inter, he hailed Gian Piero Gasperini as one of the toughest managers he had coached against. Gasperini was in charge of Genoa back then, but would go on to have his own disastrous stint in charge of the Nerazzurri: fired after just five games in 2011. It took time to bounce back. But what is so impressive about Gasperini is that he continues to evolve, even at 61. For most of his career, his schemes were premised on the idea that a team should keep one defender free to mop up. At Atalanta, there is no such safety net. He has dared his players to engage in one-on-one battles, and reaped incredible rewards. Gasperini has also drawn the best out of individuals by observing qualities that others had missed. Zapata’s muscular frame led many to presume that he was best suited to acting as a target-man who could hold the ball up and bring others into play. This season, he was encouraged to play facing the goal more. He scored 23 times. Giampiero Ventura, out of work since failing to qualify Italy to the 2018 World Cup, returned to management with Chievo in October. He presided over three defeats and a draw before handing in his resignation. He was, as the journalist Giovanni Capuano observed, “only 363 days late”. Ronaldo was supposed to be the signing that allowed Juventus to win the Champions League. Instead, they crashed out against Ajax. The football was often drab, and Massimiliano Allegri lost his job. Still, Ronaldo was the best individual performer in a team that won Serie A at a stroll. If Juventus were able to take 24 wins and three draws from their first 27 league games, it was in part because they had a player who could resolve everything on his own even when they were playing badly. More was hoped for. But only because the bar was set high to begin with. Zapata misses penalty to equalise from 3-0 down against Roma. Scores 45 seconds later anyway. After scoring the only goal in a win over Fiorentina, Frosinone’s Daniel Ciofani lamented leaving himself out of his fantasy team. He was then asked whether his friends had allowed him buy himself cheaply in the preseason auction. “They let me pay [the minimum price] €1m,” confirmed Ciofani. “Not to do me a favour, but because I’m the centre-forward for Frosinone.” Honourable mention: Kevin-Prince Boateng, asked on the eve of the season if he could be Sassuolo’s Ronaldo. “Maybe, yes. But I’m short by 500 goals.” Spal’s supporters went all-out to remind Mattia Destro of the open goal he had missed against them a season before. I tifosi della Spal ricordano il clamoroso errore di Destro l’anno scorso #SpalBologna pic.twitter.com/nDWDemviXE The Inter fan who turned his back on Mauro Icardi in favour of a true club legend. “I hope I stay here for a long time so I can complete a tour of all the different pizza places. Once you eat pizza in Naples, you don’t eat it anywhere else any more. The same goes for the mozzarella” – Carlo Ancelotti tells Radio Kiss Kiss why he won’t be leaving Napoli any time soon. (The feeling between him and the city’s pizza-makers is mutual.) There are not enough words left to me here to do justice to De Rossi. A magnificent midfielder in his prime, he was always more than the hard-tackling caricature implied by the tattoo on his right calf. He will not retire a one-club man like Francesco Totti. Nor did he get the chance to raise a Scudetto for Roma, as his former team-mate did. But De Rossi did get to live that glory in a different way: as fan, as a member of the academy and as a ball-boy. This was always his team, long before he ever got the chance to play in it. It will remain so, when he returns, as promised, to watch games with a sandwich and a beer. His journey as a professional footballer is not finished quite yet, though. Perhaps the 2006 World Cup winner will find there are further trophies to be claimed away from Rome. Before we finish, though, I want to give a mention for Marek Hamsik as well. He spent 11-and-a-half years at Napoli, the last five of those as captain – surpassing Diego Maradona as the club’s all-time leading scorer. His move to China in February marked the end of an era as well; not all heroes need to be homegrown. Grazie di tutto, ragazzi. Here’s hoping the next chapter is every bit as rewarding.