Is your investment cash “imprisoned” in Neil Woodford’s flagship fund? Britain’s best-known fund manager this week dramatically blocked investors from pulling their cash from the Woodford Equity Income Fund, which was launched in a blaze of publicity five years ago. So, if you have got money in it, you can’t get it out for at least 28 days. On Monday, Woodford suspended all trading in the fund “until further notice” after being overwhelmed by customer withdrawals following a series of bad market bets. Woodford’s company said the move was designed to “protect” investors and give him time to sell off assets. Woodford said the fund would reopen “as soon as is practicable after these exceptional circumstances have ceased”. The suspension will be reviewed “at least every 28 days”. Investors won’t be able to access their investments until the suspension is lifted. Woodford will probably need to build up a big pot of cash ready to meet redemptions when the fund reopens – easily several hundred million pounds, experts think. Existing investors will continue to own units in the fund, and they are being reassured that their money is safe. But there’s no certainty at all about what it will be worth. When the fund reopens, its value will depend on the share prices of the fund’s underlying companies. So if the share prices of those companies have risen, your investment will be worth more than it is today. But if the value has fallen, then so will your investment. “No exceptions are envisaged at this stage,” the company says. But if you are facing a real crisis, it’s worth giving the firm a try to see if they might budge for you. Investors who have a direct debit are free to cancel it. Otherwise, most will have their money collected as usual and held in cash. You may want to check with the platform you use, or your IFA. Some investors may be unaware that they have exposure to the Woodford fund. For example, six of Hargreaves Lansdown’s Multi-Manager funds are invested in it. One of the six is the £3bn Multi-Manager Income & Growth fund. As of the end of April, about 13% of this fund was invested in Woodford’s fund. Others may have exposure via their self-invested personal pension “wrapper”. You might want to check what your money is invested in. The fund may be suspended, but it’s still being actively managed. However, on Thursday, Nicky Morgan, chair of the Treasury select committee, asked Woodford to waive the fund’s fees while it was suspended. Hargreaves Lansdown will waive its platform fee for the time being. These are “big, big” questions, says Adrian Lowcock, head of personal investing at investment firm Willis Owen. Clearly there are likely to be people queueing to get their money out when the fund reopens, putting more pressure on Woodford. But, says Lowcock, at the moment “it’s a bit like a 24-hour Twitter storm”, with emotions running high and a lot of criticism flying about. Woodford will now be restructuring the fund’s portfolio, and we need to wait and see how things look once he has done that, he adds. Investors almost need to look beyond all this and ask themselves whether Woodford “is the manager for you”. Lowcock says: “If the answer is no, you need to sell at some point. If he isn’t for you, he shouldn’t be in your portfolio.” When the fund reopens, if a lot of money flows out, this could clearly have an impact on the share prices of the fund’s underlying companies. So, all in all, pulling your money out on day one might not necessarily be the best call – but who knows? Willis Owen has suggested these three: Man GLG UK Income, Threadneedle UK Equity Income, and Troy Asset Management’s Trojan Income. That has not been disclosed, but it’s almost certainly several hundred thousand people. There’s no reason to think this will happen, but ultimately, if you have an investment with a firm that has failed, you might be eligible to claim from the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), which provides cover of up to £85,000 per person per firm. But you would need to show, for example, that you were badly advised – the FSCS says: “We do not cover poor investment performance.” Woodford Investment Management in the first instance. If you are unhappy with its response, you can go to the Financial Ombudsman.