Fabian Delph is looking back on his fourth year at Manchester City and his role within the squad. “In the second half of the season I never played,” he says. “But every time it’s a home game, I’m there and I’m ranting and raving. I’m speaking to people one to one, effing and jeffing, getting the team going. “It’s always difficult when you’re not involved, and I go in with the mindset that I’ll probably take a bit of a back seat, just have a quiet word and then I end up like: ‘Come on then lads!’ It’s just in me, it’s how I’ve always been and it probably won’t change.” Delph is speaking at St George’s Park, as he prepares to travel to Portugal with England for the Nations League finals. He is an intelligent, entertaining man. Anyone who has seen the City documentary series All or Nothing will recognise the midfielder’s description of himself. After City lost the Manchester derby in April 2018, we watch Delph in the dressing room, ripping into his team’s performance and embarking on an industrial-strength tirade about “the basics of football”. Eventually he is placated by his manager, but the point has been made, and forcefully. After earning his place in City’s centurions as an impromptu left‑back, the following season proved trickier for Delph. A two‑month run in the side was brought to an end by a red card in the defeat by Leicester at Christmas. As City went on to complete a domestic treble, the 29-year-old made only five more appearances. The quality Delph could make best use of in that time, therefore, was his presence in the dressing room, his inability to stay quiet. And if he couldn’t play, he wanted his teammates to kick on, including those he already considered to be among the best in the world, such as Raheem Sterling. “He’s an amazing young man,” says Delph of his City and England colleague, who looks set to earn his 50th cap against the Netherlands on Thursday. “I’m older than him, I’ve been around a lot longer even though he’s probably played twice as many games. [I give him] regular pats on the back, motivating him, giving him good advice, telling him to be confident. “People still forget that he’s only 24 years old. When we both signed for City he was 19 [he was actually 20], he looked like a little baby. People questioned what type of player he’d be and whether he would go to that next level. I remember speaking about it a few years back and I was like: ‘This kid has everything – once he finds his path and finds what works for him, you’re going to see something incredible.’ The first semi-final, between hosts Portugal and Switzerland, takes place in Porto on Wednesday 5 June (7.45pm BST). England's semi-final against Netherlands is on Thursday (7.45pm) in Guimaraes. The winners progress to Sunday's final in Porto (7.45pm), and there's also a third-place play-off in Guimaraes on the same day (2pm). All four sides won their groups in League A. England made it with a comeback win over Croatia at Wembley, while Netherlands scored two late goals to draw with Germany and deny France. Portugal topped the group of potential hosts ahead of Italy and Poland, and Switzerland pipped Belgium on head-to-head record with a 5-2 win in Lucerne. The inaugural Nations League winners will receive an elaborate trophy (pictured above), as well as a total prize pot of €10.5m (£9.36m). The winners will not qualify for Euro 2020 automatically, however. “I still believe he’s operating at about 80%. So if he can push himself a bit more, which I know he will because his mindset is very good, I think the sky’s the limit in the next couple of years.” Delph says he has received similar encouragement from Sterling, especially when the pair have gone away with England. “I remember when I played in November for the national team,” Delph says, “he was doing that for me. He was the one who was pumping me up and telling me to express myself and to be more direct. I was like: ‘Wow, OK.’” As he ponders where his club career goes next – minutes elsewhere v medals with City – England has proven a valuable outlet for Delph. He enjoyed a strong World Cup, despite largely being reduced to a substitute’s role. This year he was named as captain by Gareth Southgate against the USA at Wembley. He is also part of the “leadership group” within the England squad. The respect Southgate shows Delph is mutually felt. The player is highly complimentary of his manager and the team around him. “Gareth has a great way about him, [as do] the staff that he’s got,” he says. “They’re really good people and, when you come here, straight away you feel at home. So if they tell you to run through a brick wall, you’re going to run through a brick wall. You’re going to do everything that you can for these people. “Since the World Cup we’ve changed the system, we’ve changed the way we’re playing. What we do at City is pretty incredible but that’s at City. When you come away from that it’s a different ethos and everyone is buying into what Gareth is putting on the training pitch and in the meeting rooms. Everybody is heading in the same direction.” After taking part in the FA Cup final, City’s players were granted leave to arrive late to the camp at St George’s Park. Typically, Delph ignored that dispensation and arrived at St George’s Park a week earlier than he had to. He has also been playing 60 minutes of a practice match on top of training each day to prove his readiness. This mini-tournament in Portugal presents a real chance of silverware for the first time since Le Tournoi in 1997 and Delph’s thoughts on the Nations League are typically straightforward. “I really want to win this competition.”