As Europe braces for a heatwave this week, a Dutchman is swimming the route of the country’s most famed ice skating race, which has not been held for two decades as the climate crisis bites. Instead of skating the 121 miles (195km) of the daunting Elfstedentocht (11 cities race), the Olympic gold marathon swimmer Maarten van der Weijden is ploughing his way through its canals. Van der Weijden passed the 172km mark of the course that criss-crosses northern Friesland province on Monday morning. “I love swimming, helping others and setting goals for myself,” the 38-year-old told the broadcaster EO. Van der Weijden is a cancer survivor who overcame leukaemia to win a gold medal in the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing in the 10km open water race. His attempt is in aid of cancer research. It is Van der Weijden’s second effort to complete the route after he failed last year. He is expected back in the Frisian capital, Leeuwarden, by Monday evening, the public broadcaster NOS said. The swimmer is following the same route as the Elfstedentocht, one of the Netherlands’ most beloved traditions. The previous edition was in 1997, the last time the ice was thick enough to support both skaters and the hundreds of thousands of spectators that the event normally attracts. With meteorologists predicting ever-warmer weather because of global heating, it is uncertain when another Elfstedentocht will be held again on ice. In the meantime, Van der Weijden’s alternative marathon along the course has captured the country’s imagination. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, tweeted that the swimmer was “on course for an incredible performance”, adding: “The whole of the Netherlands is swimming with you!” Completing the skating race is seen as a major achievement. Soldiers who manage to do it are allowed to wear its medal, the Elfstedenkruisje (11 cities cross), on their military uniforms. Participants qualify for the medal after collecting stamps on a card from all the 11 cities around Friesland, with the start and end of the race in Leeuwarden.