Jonathan Woodgate’s managerial debut will be the first match of the 2019-20 EFL season. Middlesbrough installed the 39-year-old former England international defender as their manager last week on a three-year contract. Boro’s first Championship match, away to the League One champions Luton, will get the campaign under way on Friday 2 August. Huddersfield, who finished bottom of the Premier League, start their quest to return to the top flight at home to the beaten play-off finalists Derby on Monday 5 August. Leeds, who lost to Frank Lampard’s Derby in the play-offs, start at Bristol City the previous day. The remaining Championship matches take place on Saturday 3 August. Relegated Cardiff kick off at Wigan, while the other team who lost their top-flight status – Fulham – open at Barnsley, who were promoted from League One. The new Swansea manager, Steve Cooper, starts at home to Hull, while West Brom – who appointed Slaven Bilic as their manager last week – begin at Nottingham Forest. Birmingham, managerless following the sacking of Garry Monk, start at Brentford, while the League One play-off winners Charlton open at Blackburn. Reading host Sheffield Wednesday, Preston are at Millwall and QPR travel to Stoke in the other opening-day matches. The three teams who dropped out of the Championship are away on the opening day in League One. Bolton, who will start with a 12-point deduction as a result of going into administration, open at Wycombe. Rotherham and Ipswich are at AFC Wimbledon and Burton. In contrast, three of the four teams promoted from League Two start at home. Champions Lincoln host Accrington, play-off winners Tranmere face Rochdale and Bury play the other team who came up, MK Dons. The beaten play-off finalists Sunderland begin at home to Oxford, the team their owner, Stewart Donald, supports and once owned a 10% stake in. Newport and Mansfield, who faced each other in the League Two play-off semi-finals, have been paired in the opening round of matches. The Welsh side, who won a shootout but were beaten by Tranmere at Wembley, have home advantage. Leyton Orient – who named Ross Embleton as interim head coach on Wednesday following the death of Justin Edinburgh – start at home to Cheltenham. The EFL newcomers Salford begin at home to Stevenage, a contest scheduled to kick-off at 12.30pm on 3 August. It is the first time the Hertfordshire side have been drawn away on the opening day since 2008.