On Thursday evening, after five ballots in eight days among Conservative MPs, the 10 original would-be successors to Theresa May were finally reduced to two: Boris Johnson and, trailing a distant second, the foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt. The two will now face the Tory membership before one of them emerges next month in a postal ballot as the new party leader. For the first time, a prime minister of the UK will be chosen by party grassroots activists. This means the new leader will largely be the choice of middle-class white men over 55 in the south of England who support the death penalty, oppose income redistribution and back a no-deal Brexit. It is worth reminding ourselves that this wasn’t supposed to happen. For the last decade, the Tory party at Westminster has been keenly alive to the fact that the final say in the next leadership contest would rest with a relatively small and unusually rightwing membership. Tory MPs have spent countless hours over long years in exclusive dining clubs plotting and gaming the options to prevent Mr Johnson, whom many of them loathe personally and oppose politically, from getting into the final two. Yet when the chips were down, this came to precisely nothing. Fear of the Brexit party has combined with the onward march of the Tory right to blow away old orthodoxies about what kind of person might make a suitable national leader, with Mr Hunt just scraping into the final to represent what remains of centrist Toryism. There was a lot of talk during the past two weeks about how Tory MPs are a sophisticated – for which read untrustworthy – electorate, and dark hints about how Mr Johnson’s camp might “lend” votes to other candidates to ensure the elimination of dangerous rivals or the success of others thought more beatable. Some of this may have gone on at the margins, as Michael Gove’s supporters will doubtless believe after Mr Hunt narrowly edged him out in the fifth round. But most of the talk was self-important untruth. The most striking thing about the parliamentary phase that ended on Thursday evening is how consistent the successive ballot results were. Mr Johnson led easily on every round and put on votes each time. He is clearly the favourite to win in the members’ ballot and to succeed Mrs May. From the start, his rivals were fighting for survival or, in Mr Gove’s and Mr Hunt’s case, for second place. The only significant moves during the five ballots were Rory Stewart’s brief flurry in the second round, which was soon extinguished in the third, and Mr Gove’s overtaking of Mr Hunt in Thursday’s fourth ballot as Sajid Javid was eliminated. The overall conclusion is that, in the absence of a more compelling centre-right option, the Tory party has made another significant slide to the hard-Brexit right. Mr Stewart flew the flag of Brexit compromise, and his future career will be worth watching, but his wing of the party was undone by divisions when faced with the right’s unity behind Mr Johnson. The hard Brexiters managed 117 votes against Theresa May in the December no-confidence challenge and 118 against her Brexit deal in January. In the first ballot last week, Mr Johnson got a similar number, 114. But in the later rounds the majority of Tory MPs failed to unite behind the most obvious centre-right candidate, Mr Hunt, while many defected into the Johnson camp to ensure a triumph for the right. These less hardline MPs presumably rallied to Mr Johnson from a combination of ministerial ambition, the belief that he can save their seats and a hope – flippantly endorsed by George Osborne’s Evening Standard on Thursday – that Mr Johnson is not the hard Brexiter he says he is. Many will be disappointed on all three. Mr Johnson is a chancer, not a strategist. He is one gaffe or scandal away from being a liability rather than an asset. He has no clear Brexit plan and, even if he did, he lacks a majority in parliament. He is, though, the reckless architect of the reckless decision to leave the EU. Assuming that he moves into Downing Street, the Brexiters will at last now have to own their own mess instead of always blaming others for it. This may soon cause fresh miseries for the Tory party and – just possibly – the chance of a less deluded and damaging outcome for the country.