A word of warning before we begin: The Raft (BBC Four), a documentary by Marcus Lindeen shown as part of the BBC’s Storyville strand, was so delicious that it just has to be fattening. Please adjust your day’s calorific intake accordingly. In 1973, the Mexican anthropologist Santiago Genovés, who specialised in the study of violence, had the idea of putting a group of men and women aboard a raft and setting them to drift across the Atlantic to, well, to see what happened, really. Or in anthropologist-speak, test the association between human sexuality, aggression and competition for resources. And, because the 1970s were almost as stupid as the 1960s, nobody thought to stop him. He built a raft (the Acali), recruited five men and six women, sardined them on to the motorless vessel with him and set out to sea for three months. Footage shot aboard the Acali shows that they had enough cigarettes for the journey and a sort of blessed innocence on their faces. Guess who did not cope at all well with being trapped for 101 days with 11 other people floating across the Atlantic Ocean, so far from land and civilisation that for most of it they did not even have birds flying overhead? Guess who didn’t respond all that brilliantly to the decision to have a female captain (Maria Björnstam) and a woman diver (Servane Zanotti) being in charge of repairs in order to challenge social conventions on the high seas? Guess who ended up prostrate in the hold having feverish hallucinations about setting up a new experiment in a smaller, glass-bottomed boat just big enough for one person to lie down in and gaze down into the fathomless depths of the ocean for months alone? I will give you a clue. It wasn’t any of the seven surviving recruits whose present-day accounts of their extraordinary adventure, given on the life-size replica raft Lindeen uses as a soundstage, and are interleaved with the Acali footage and contemporary media reports (which quickly reduced what Genovés intended as a revolutionary experiment to commentary on “the sex raft”). And it wasn’t any of the four (including an Angolan Catholic priest and a flirtatious Cambridge restaurateur) who have since shuffled from this mortal coil. That’s right! It was Santiago “Whatever happens, I will study and learn” Genovés. While the rest of the group got on with getting on (and, yes, having a bit of sex, but nothing like the papers back home were salaciously postulating), and filling in the weekly questionnaires Genovés handed round, their camaraderie and “laziness” (as he apparently viewed their disinclination to fight) frustrated him. “I can tell,” he wrote in one of his diaries, “that violence is present deep down in their unconscious, but so far it is resting under the surface.” Their supposedly neutral observer has a brief flurry of hope when one of the men clubs to death a shark they have accidentally caught, but apart from that little fillip, their behaviour remained unrewarding. Genovés kept meticulous records of everyone’s moods, menstrual cycles, dreams, details of the weather, waves, temperature and moon but found no correlations. How was he going to bring about world peace if those people gave him nothing to work with? In what I believe the young people would call a “self-own”, possibly of the “epic” variety, he nearly drowned when he insisted on doing a rudder repair himself, began reading out the private questionnaire replies to provoke the rest of the crew and mutinied against Björnstam, forcing the raft to stay in the path of a hurricane that would surely have meant death for all if the weather system had not swerved at the last moment. As Fé Seymour – an African American engineer whom Genovés urged to sleep with the priest on the grounds that they were the two black people on the boat and must therefore be attracted to each other – noted, the trained anthropologist missed every bit of what was actually happening on Acali. He took no interest in the cooperation that was emerging counter to his theories. He knew nothing of the blissful “visions” Seymour had of her ancestors when she realised she was tracing the slave routes they must have taken. (“They were calling me, sailing over their bodies and their tragedies … my heart beat for them.”) It’s unlikely that he knew one of the women, Mary, had joined in flight from an abusive husband. He certainly didn’t know that a few of them considered doing away with him altogether, such a danger to the group did he represent. Thank God Björnstam took charge again and – as Seymour delicately put it – “reinforced the reality we suspected … she would keep us alive”. It is an extraordinary story, beautifully and vividly told in Lindeen’s film and yet at a pace measured enough for you to feel the ebb and flow of history, sympathy and the ever-swelling current of hubris underneath.