Most of us understand how our physical wellbeing is protected at work – health and safety measures, much maligned by the right, have made sure of that. But what if you’re sexually assaulted? Shockingly, employers currently have no legal duty to prevent harassment – a glaring oversight that a new campaign by an alliance of organisations including Time’s Up, the TUC and Amnesty International is hoping to change. The alliance has also launched a petition, which has reached nearly 8,000 signatures in less than 24 hours. When I told friends I was working on the development of the campaign, their stories came flooding out. Working in bars with colleagues who wouldn’t stop touching them, threats of rape from managers, incessant, inappropriate comments on their appearance or sex lives – everyone I knew had a handful of discomfiting experiences. I had my own tales, too. The job stacking shelves next to a middle-aged shift manager who would constantly ask my colleagues whether or not they’d have sex with me; the ad man who made constant “jokes” about raping clients. Then there was the editor who would send me messages at work about my breasts and handed me unwanted beer after unwanted beer on Friday afternoons – he didn’t unscrew the caps, he told me with a smirk, because he definitely hadn’t spiked them. Underlying it all was the idea that it was all just a bit of banter – that when we’re made to feel unsafe or uncomfortable at work, it’s our own fault for not being able to “take it”. Can’t we just lighten up and have a laugh? Research from previous TUC campaigns bears out the ubiquitousness of this experience. A 2016 report found that 52% of women had experienced some form of sexual harassment at work; this ranged from sexual comments or unwelcome jokes to unwanted touching and advances. Women with irregular or precarious work were more susceptible to this kind of abuse. And for BAME women, the harassment was often tied up with racial abuse too. Earlier this year, polling also found that seven out of 10 LGBT workers had experienced workplace sexual harassment; even more shockingly, one in eight LGBT women had reported being seriously sexually assaulted or raped at work. With four out of five women feeling unable to talk about what’s happened, victimisation and harassment continue to thrive in the workplace. But at present, employers have no legal duty to prevent it. The onus is on victims to complain. But that’s not working. More often than not, abuse is perpetrated by someone who has more power than the victim, and many are working under unstable or nonexistent contracts. Complaining might mean your work is taken away from you entirely, and with it your ability to support yourself. There’s also no consistency. Some workplaces will be brilliant at preventing or dealing with sexual harassment; others will not. Creating consistent, easy to understand guidelines will prevent any cases of harassment from falling through the cracks – and will mean victims don’t have to depend on luck to have their voices heard. Things are changing – just last week, the International Labour Organization adopted a treaty that called for global standards on harassment at work, requiring nations that ratify it to put laws into place to protect workers. Post-#MeToo, there does seem to be a wider awareness of the prevalence of abuse, and perhaps even an increased desire to combat it. But we still need to do more. The alliance behind this campaign is asking for several things: a compulsory code of conduct that will explain to bosses what they need to do to prevent harassment, mandatory training for managers and staff, and consequences for those who don’t comply. This would move the burden of responsibility away from victims, and may even prevent abuse from happening in the first place. With the government’s consultation on workplace harassment coming up, it’s vital we understand just what a difference this duty could make. Workplaces should not accept sexual harassment as a sad inevitability; and they should certainly never perpetuate it. For many of us, being harassed or assaulted at work feels normal; something that just happens. But sexual harassment should never be a fact of working life – and it’s time employers were made to do something about it. • Emily Reynolds is the author of A Beginner’s Guide to Losing Your Mind