Eoin Morgan insisted it was not a case of “panic stations” despite injuries to himself and Jason Roy taking the gloss off England’s comfortable victory over West Indies. The England captain and the opener Roy face a struggle to be fit for Tuesday’s game against Afghanistan at Old Trafford – back and hamstring problems respectively prevented them from batting in the successful chase of 213. Morgan, who was forced by his predicament to stand up during his post-match press conference, said: “It is sore. I have had back spasms before – we think it’s that – and they normally take a few days to settle down. We’ll know more in the next 24 hours. “I don’t know how [Roy] pulled up – he’ll have a scan and it will take 48 hours to get the full results. When any two players go down it’s a worry but we’re not at panic stations. We’ll do a risk assessment before the Afghanistan game.” Roy certainly appeared to be the more troubling of the two, having walked off in the eighth over after turning to run for a miscued pull shot from Chris Gayle that flew over the infield. The opener did not return during the remainder of the West Indies innings, nor feature in England’s subsequent cruise to their target, having been barred from batting higher than No 7 due to time off the field. It is not the first time Roy has suffered the injury. He spent seven weeks on the sidelines this year when suffering a strain to the same hamstring and it will be hoped that this recurrence is not as serious. James Vince, who has one ODI half-century to his name, is the reserve batsman in the squad. Another option, in theory, is Moeen Ali, who opened for England in the last World Cup to useful effect but averages 15 with the bat in the past 12 months, albeit chiefly down the order. When England dropped Alex Hales before the World Cup, following his 21-day ban for recreational drug use, it was said he would not be selected again this summer. Joe Denly, therefore, appears to be next in line for a call-up should Roy be out altogether – something England will do only as a last resort, given replacements are permanent. Morgan, meanwhile, was forced off in the 40th over of the match. Running to the stumps at the bowler’s end when fielding, the England captain pulled up and then appeared in greater discomfort than Roy when hobbling back to the pavilion. The captain’s absence should hopefully be minimal with rest and treatment and his deputy, Jos Buttler, is on standby to lead at Old Trafford on Tuesday should that fixture come too soon for a return. Despite obvious discomfort, Morgan was keen to praise Joe Root’s unbeaten 100 from 94 balls, having been pressed into opening and putting on 95 with Jonny Bairstow, sealing the match through a 104-run stand with the auxiliary No 3, Chris Woakes. “Joe was exceptional,” said Morgan. “He is the glue that holds everything together, and a side of his batting that’s got better over the last two or three years, that people haven’t seen a lot of, is his expansive game. He never seems to go at less than a run a ball. You look up and he’s going at better than a run ball.” It was not all bad news on the fitness front either. Mark Wood, arguably England’s most physically fragile player, passed a fitness test on a bruised left ankle but tore in for figures of three for 18 in 6.4 overs. West Indies, meanwhile, face Bangladesh in Taunton on Monday and will once again go into the match with doubts over the fitness of Andre Russell. The all-rounder, who is managing long-standing knee problems, suffered a wrist injury while batting and then pulled up in the 11th over of England’s chase. It came when falling over after sending down a bouncer that hit Bairstow on the helmet.