Rory McIlroy was narrowly denied only the 11th sub-60 round in US PGA Tour history but one of the most dominant displays of his professional career, in victory at the Canadian Open, may have broader significance with the third major of the year only days away. He will head to Pebble Beach and the US Open having won in Canada by seven shots, at 22-under par. This marked a tournament record. McIlroy had the magic number of 59 firmly on his radar from the start. On a par-70 course in Hamilton, Ontario, he was nine under for his round after holing out from 30 feet at the 14th. A dropped shot at the 16th – his first of the weekend – apparently halted 59 watch but McIlroy was to eagle the penultimate hole. Hopes of joining elite golfing company in the 59 club ended as the 30-year-old missed the 18th green, with a bogey meaning he had to settle for a 61. Understandably, he wasn’t perturbed by that. “I played with so much freedom over the weekend, more than I’ve had for a while,” he said. “That’s exciting not only for winning this tournament but with what’s ahead. “The 59 was definitely in my sights. The bogeys were disappointing but at least I gave myself a chance at it. To get a win going into next week is huge. I feel great. I’m going to enjoy this tonight but I’ll forget about it in the morning and have my sights on something else next week.” Ireland’s Shane Lowry and Webb Simpson of the US shared second place. This was McIlroy’s second win of 2019, after he took the Players Championship in March. The last of his four major triumphs came in 2014 and he won in the week preceding that US PGA Championship. There was also joy for Graeme McDowell, who holed out from 30 feet at the last to secure a spot in the Open at his home course of Royal Portrush in Northern Ireland. His 68 secured the top-10 finish necessary to earn one of the Canadian Open’s three available Open berths. “It is a relief,” said McDowell, winner of the 2010 US Open. “It has been a long journey. I can go and enjoy my golf for the next few weeks and get ready for a special Open. I’m ecstatic. With that weight off my shoulders I can look forward to competing at the US Open. It would have been bittersweet to see the Open go to Portrush and not be in there.”