Germany advanced to the Women’s World Cup quarter-finals for the eighth straight time by beating the African champions, Nigeria, 3-0 in Grenoble. Alexandra Popp, the Germany captain playing in her 100th international, scored the opener in the 20th minute. Sara Däbritz made it 2-0 in the 27th with a penalty and Lea Schüller made the win safe in the 82nd. Germany, whose aggregate scoreline over the tournament is now 9-0, will face the winner of Monday’s match between Sweden and Canada next Saturday, a week-long break that may provide enough time for Dzsenifer Marozsán’s broken toe to heal. The Germans, who won the tournament in 2003 and 2007, have never failed to reach the quarter-finals. Nigeria were in the knockout phase for the second time, the first since 1999. The Super Falcons were playing their biggest game of the tournament with a depleted side, missing the defender Ngozi Ebere and the midfielder Rita Chikwelu, who were both serving suspensions, and the injured Barcelona forward Asisat Oshoala. Popp scored a close-range header when she met Lina Magull’s corner kick to notch her 48th international goal. A VAR review upheld the goal after determining Svenja Huth, who was in an offside position, did not obstruct the view of Chiamaka Nnadozie in the Nigeria goal. Soon afterwards Däbritz fired a low penalty beyond the outstretched left hand of Nnadozie for her third goal of the tournament. Evelyn Nwabuoku had tried to clear the ball as Magull made her way into the box, but followed through and caught the Germany midfielder high with her studs. The spot kick was awarded after another after VAR review. Nigeria had an excellent chance to halve the deficit in the 50th minute when the second-half substitute Rasheedat Ajibade escaped down the flank and played in Desire Oparanozie – but her ball was just ahead of the stretching forward, who could not make contact. Schüller wrapped up the win with her ninth international goal, pouncing on a calamitous pass by Halimatu Ayinde on the edge of her own penalty box to drive a first-time finish clinically home. “That first goal gave us some safety,” said Popp. “But then we allowed Nigeria to get back into the game a little bit. After the break, we were very dominant.”