Turn right by the Chinese restaurant,” she’d said, “and meet me on the foreshore.” I checked Florence Evans’s message again as I approached the restaurant, sandwiched between two modern blocks of flats, because surely she’d made a mistake. It was evening on a quiet east London street, and I was to accompany Evans on a mudlarking expedition, to scour the banks of the Thames at low-tide, searching for small treasures. On her Instagram she posts vivid pictures of the silver spoons, cut-glass bottle stoppers and delicate beads she’s unearthed, the hashtags revealing a mudlarking community that stretches the length of the river. I looked up at the restaurant, perplexed. It was only when I got to the door that the alley to the right was revealed through a heavy, rusted gate. As I started down slippery steps the smell of the river, coppery and green, was suddenly overwhelming. And then I was there, on the beach, and a small figure by the water was waving. Evans is an art historian and has been a devoted mudlarker since before she learned the word. “It’s not a hobby,” she told me, firmly, “it’s an obsession.” Now 39, she grew up by the river in Putney, southwest London, where she’d spend afternoons picking up pieces of colourful pottery and clay pipes. It wasn’t until she saw them displayed at Hampton Court Palace that she learned what they were. Today, she comes to the river after work, or with her five-year-old daughter at weekends. Perhaps it’s because Cecilia’s closer to the ground, Evans suggests, that she finds the best things. A coke can covered in sand was a reminder that the river is still and has long been a dumping ground for Londoners’ rubbish, making it one of the most varied archaeological sites in the world. The 19th-century MP John Burns described the Thames as “liquid history”, a place that excavates itself twice a day with the tides. “Mudlarking in the 18th and 19th centuries was carried out by those desperate to make a living by selling scraps salvaged from the foreshore,” explained Kate Sumnall, curator at the Museum of London, where one of its current exhibitions, Secret Rivers, includes Bronze Age spearheads, medieval weapons and a 19th-century mug found in the gravel of one of London’s most notorious slums, inscribed: “For A Good Girl.” “In modern times, mudlarking is transformed into searching for historic survivals,” she said, “which give clues about the people who lived here.” It’s also evolved into a community that shares its finds online and, in the case of Evans, at weekly meetings of the Thames and Field club in a riverside pub. “We’re a mixed bunch of weirdos, professorial types, builders, oddbods… but we are all obsessed.” Three years ago the Port of London Authority made it illegal to remove anything from the foreshore without a licence, and anything more than 300 years old had to be officially recorded – which meant, if I did find a treasure, I couldn’t pick it up. “Can you see the tide lines?” Evans said, above the gentle roar of the wind. “The river arranges everything by weight. This is the pottery beach – over there is metal.” She pointed west. “Look, even the ground looks ferrous.” We walked slowly, eyes down and within seconds found a shard of blue and white china. This is a shard of a Bellarmine jar. They would put a nail clipping in, a bit of piss, curse the person, then bury it “This was very fashionable in the 17th century, when it was imported from Westerwald in Germany,” she said, and as we continued I saw more – a cobalt blue flash beneath a stone and another by the water, and soon it felt as though she had taught me a new way to look, another layer of sight. We were on the site of the first English Delftware pot houses, so much of the pottery we found was, Evans said, “Victorian trash.” She long ago “graduated” to more rare finds, like the tiny pins she identifies by the shapes of their heads and the button-like object she gasped at, half-submerged in water. “It’s a decorative lead mount with gilding,” she said, quietly excited, “Jacobean, I think, or Tudor.” For Evans the value lies in its remaining details – a flower, a star – though recently a fellow mudlarker found a piece of Tudor silver that was worth hundreds of thousands. Once it has been recorded, he’ll get 50%. Evans is selective about what she takes home to display in her kunstkammer, and regularly replaces pieces, returning old ones to the river at the spot where she found them. Recently, she found half a tin-glazed French Quimper plate, eventually throwing it back because it was too big for her flat – only to see it posted on another mudlarker’s Instagram weeks later. Evans has written a series of children’s stories that teach history through found objects from the river, but for her the joy of mudlarking is as much about the hunt as the treasure. “It’s meditative, isn’t it? I love to be on my own by the water. I love the feeling that it’s bigger than me.” The light was fading, and she looked out towards a pub that’s been there since the mid-1400s, hence the many clay pipes still to be found in the mud beneath its windows. “There’s a seamy side to the river, of course – the slave trade, the hangings, the impoverished early mudlarkers. It’s a privilege to see this cumulative history, all these lost lives. By collecting the pieces I become a part of it.” On a typical evening Evans might find bones from tanneries, roof tiles from the fire of London, clay pipes from the late-1500s, and Caribbean shells used as ballast on a 17th-century ship. I stumbled over the jaw of a horse, teeth intact. “Ah,” she said, inspecting a piece of heavy brown pottery. “This is a shard of a Bellarmine jar. They called them witch bottles and would use them for curses. Put a nail clipping in there, a bit of piss, curse the person, then bury it.” She was calling out this information to me across the rocks. I was not wearing the correct shoes, nor could I take notes in the light rain. She slowed down. “Sorry,” she said, waiting for me to catch up. She wasn’t used to having company. Despite the commuters a street away, we hadn’t seen or heard another person in an hour. “Apart from my daughter, I always say no when friends ask to join me on the foreshore,” she admitted. “Though later I love the camaraderie of sharing our found objects, it’s a solitary pursuit. I believe everyone should try this, try to use the history of the river to understand their homes and cities. Just…” she says apologetically, “not with me.” Evans walked me back to the Chinese restaurant, and I turned just in time to see her disappear again, down the steps back to the shore. Florence Evans curates an exhibition about mudlarking as part of the Totally Thames festival. Foragers on the Foreshore will be at the Bargehouse on South Bank 24-29 September. Her Instagram is Flo_Finds