If Australia’s World Cup team are looking for positives to offset a thrashing by India in London and a mixed weather forecast for their next engagement, at least their upcoming opponents are showing solidarity. Pakistan’s captain, Sarfaraz Ahmed, does not believe Wednesday’s match will see a repeat of the jeering that has been directed at Australia’s former captain Steve Smith and former vice-captain David Warner after their recent return from suspension. “I don’t think Pakistani people will be doing it like that,” Sarfaraz said as his team prepare to take on Australia in Taunton on Wednesday, where wet and cold weather has set in. “Pakistan people love cricket and they love to support it, and they love the players.” While there has been too much attention on when and whether and how much the Australians have been or will be or might be heckled by crowds in England, it has at least given some players the chance to show collegiality. India’s captain, Virat Kohli, took a break while batting last Sunday to gesture to the grandstand for more courtesy for his long-time rival Smith. Australia’s current skipper, Aaron Finch, noted his appreciation for this at Taunton on Tuesday. “It was all class, wasn’t it? He does a lot of great things for the game, Virat, and obviously Steve and Dave have been copping their fair share from the crowd. It was great to see such an influential player standing up for what he believes is right.” But if Sarfaraz has voiced an expectation that his country’s supporters should make life a bit easier for his opponents, Australia’s own selectors have been less helpful. One issue with the initial squad was that Marcus Stoinis was the only all-rounder who could contribute seam bowling to the vital fifth bowler’s quota of overs. Now Stoinis has picked up a side strain and plans are in disarray. Granted, the ICC’s limit of 15 players per squad leaves little room to move, but when the four spare players are made up of three bowlers who have collectively made 126 ODI runs and one batsman who rarely bowls, it does not leave the playing XI flush with options. Stoinis came into the tournament far from his best with the bat but cannot be replaced without weakening the bowling. Now the all-rounder Mitchell Marsh will arrive early before an Australia A tour to act as injury cover for Stoinis. But the decisions here are difficult. Under ICC rules any squad changes are permanent: Stoinis can withdraw but cannot rejoin. His injury is probably short-term but recent results do not demand his retention. And if he stays in the squad while out of action, Australia will be out of options. There are only two other configurations. One is to include Marsh’s older brother, Shaun, as a specialist batsman, and rely on the all-rounder Glenn Maxwell to bowl a full 10 overs of off-spin. The other is to elevate the big-hitting bowler Nathan Coulter-Nile to No 7 to make room down the order for one of Jason Behrendorff, Kane Richardson or Nathan Lyon. “We’re not exactly sure on how many games he’ll miss,” said Finch of Stoinis. “That’s why Mitch is flying over. It’s still being assessed. It’s one of those things we’ll have to weigh up and have a look and a think about and come up with what looks like the best XI to beat Pakistan.” But there lies the rub: it will not be the best XI to beat Pakistan – it will be a make-do XI. And the problem will recur if the injury does, with Australia going in either a bowler light or a batsman light. Either might be preferable to an all-rounder below his best. But replace Stoinis and the lack of flexibility would remain. One escape for Finch might be if rain shortens the Pakistan match so much that the fifth bowler becomes less important – although the forecast for Wednesday is currently fair. He said: “Your team might change if it’s a really delayed start. Everyone has to be prepared to shuffle their roles around and be really adaptable, and that’s one thing we’ve been clear with the players about, that we want everyone to be ready to go in any situation.” As the drizzle and freezing winds keep lashing Taunton one day before the match, he might do well to hope they stay longer than expected.