Comedy is never better than when an audience feels they are eavesdropping on friends making each other laugh. Remember Vic and Bob struggling to control a corpsing fit because Matt Lucas was standing in the middle of the studio shouting “Peanuts”? Or Rik Mayall and Ade Edmondson catching each other’s eye and crumpling, mid-frying pan fight, during a Bottom live show? I always adored Jennifer Saunders pursing her lips and suppressing a snort when her comedy partner Dawn French did a new bit of business she hadn’t done in rehearsals. A new BBC Three sketch show – the only channel that appears to still be making sketch shows; have you bathed in the wonder of Famalam? Please do – manages to capture a delightful portion of that ticklish glee. Ellie and Natasia is the creation of Ellie White and Natasia Demetriou. You may recognise them from sterling work in other people’s shows: White did a brilliant turn as a conniving waitress in Inside No 9 episode The Bill and Demetriou is currently making a splash as a sassy vampire in Taika Waititi’s What We Do in the Shadows. Their sketches rifle through the drawers of modern life, but the two save their pointiest sticks for how women feel they need to behave to be acceptable in – I’m going to have to say it – this western patriarchy of ours. The pair’s Mum’s the Word vloggers are two women of indeterminate age who do lifestyle demonstrations for other mums while wearing padded gilets and rubber gloves. Their mission is to be “as small and as clean as possible” because a “good mum” is one who throws out raw chicken once it has been out of the fridge for more than 20 minutes, and puts each piece of rubbish in a separate bin bag, “uuh koy”? And they remind us to invite other mums around at least once a day for a “girls’ night” that involves said chicken “stuffed with a little bit of chee” (cheese) and (props to the props department) a tray of champagne flutes inexplicably garnished with a piece of lettuce and a prawn. They are not just taking deliberate pot-shots from a grassy knoll – it’s way more fun than that; the gag shrapnel sprays indiscriminately. Internet Nails sees them playing a version of the Sexy American Girls, a European double-act they performed in the equally brilliant BBC Three pilot People Time. White does a very good line in “hostage face” as Demetriou pouts and grimaces at the camera, trying to promote their new beauty business, based in an “executive kitchen” somewhere off London’s North Circular road. They play around with silly accents and unexpected word combinations like two kids freestyling in a big Lego box. It is immense fun watching as their brains will jump in every direction. Playing themselves in a bathroom scene, the pair discuss life and love and how they want to be remembered when they’re dead. Demetriou says she’s going to find love by making herself look like a sexy baby, because that’s what men want really want: a small, hairless creature who will be sexually attractive and helpless at the same time. The closing musical number takes the idea to its conclusion with a comely R&B parody video in which they twerk around a set of giant alphabet blocks in tutus, tight tops and big nappies singing about how they want Daddy to change their nappy “when I brown myself”. It directs a flame-thrower blast to the accepted idea of beauty in a way that is both uncomfortable and brilliantly to the point. There is a strong seam of feminist fury running through some of White and Demetriou’s gags. I don’t think they are positioning themselves as deliberately political, but the anger is there, barely a millimetre beneath the surface. I found it thrilling. So far, all we have is one 18-minute episode that I have already watched several times. Could we have more please? I am worried that the broadcasters won’t bag White and Demetriou quickly enough and they will be off to more glistening pastures.