If the success of Netflix’s Stranger Things has taught us anything, it’s that we’re ravenous for 1980s nostalgia. Luckily for Edinburgh locals, Pizza Geeks is catering to such cravings. In the retro-themed restaurant there are Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle stickers on the till, Star Wars figurines lined up for combat around the walls, while a small plastic Hulk Hogan flexing his pumped biceps sits menacingly on the bar. Pizza Geeks opened last October to oblige the city’s pizza-hungry hordes – and presumably to give its adult owners a legitimate business reason for buying more He-Man and Batman collectibles on eBay. “Yeah, pretty much,” deadpans Finlay Clarkson, the 29-year-old who runs Pizza Geeks with his business partner, Patrick Ward. “We’ve gone pretty overboard with the bad puns as well,” he says, passing me a copy of the menu, which features pizzas such as the Mario or the Luigi, with sides of MacGyver and Cheese or Dalek Bread. Dotted between Ghostbusters posters and Incredible Hulk toys, there are signs around the room saying things such as “Live Long and Pizza” and “May the Sauce Be With You”. Pizza Geeks owner Finlay Clarkson (right) with core team member Ben Barlow There is a grown man playing a Pac-Man video game in the corner, who turns out to be a regular. He is clearly a big fan of the pizza spot, not to mention Pac-Man, and barely lifts his head as he raves about both things. “It’s kind of like a mancave, isn’t it,” says Calum Dunlea, originally from Cork, and now based in Edinburgh. He works around the corner from Pizza Geeks, which is just opposite Haymarket train station, in Malones Irish bar, an old snooker hall. “The nerdy vibe is quite in just now, I guess, isn’t it? It’s popular to be a geek, which is handy. I love coming in here, the boys are very laid-back,” says Dunlea, who goes back to playing his game, waiting for his pizza to come out of the oven. Emma Louise Cavanagh works in Malone’s bar, where Pizza Geeks do a takeover form Thursday to Saturday; fresh basil: a pizza-lover’s favourite; before opening their restaurant Clarkson and Ward had been cooking and selling pizzas at pop-up events around the city; Johnny Lyall had a Braveheart pizza with black pudding and haggis Clarkson goes back to explaining how he and Ward got started. “I was working for a golf company, selling stuff. But I don’t like golf,” he says, laughing. “I met Patrick at a party in January 2016 and by the February we set up the company. We both sold our cars so we could buy a portable wood burning pizza oven. We learned how to make pizza by watching YouTube and sold pizza to our first customer in May that year. That was pretty cool.” Clarkson had heard about a pizzeria in Philadelphia called Rosa’s Fresh Pizza, with the slogan “Helping the homeless one slice at a time”. He liked the idea of supporting Edinburgh’s large homeless community through his business and started linking up with local charities. Pizza Geeks cooks around 70-80 pizzas every month for the Soul Food organisation, which supplies free meals every week to people who are homeless and marginalised. They also drop off hot food to the Cyrenians depot, so it can be redistributed as part of the FareShare network. Novelty pizza socks are for sale behind the counter, too, and for every pair purchased another pair is donated to a homeless person (minus the orange pizza pattern, with extra durable, breathable fabric instead). Pizza Geeks know how to ‘use the sauce’ “There are reasonably big margins in pizza,” says Clarkson, who’s just been showing me the £17,000 pizza oven that he and Ward invested in for the restaurant. “What we’re doing seems to be pretty popular and we’re in a relatively healthy place financially, which allows us to try and do a bit of social good.” Having a physical base for Pizza Geeks is a fairly recent development; up until October, Clarkson and Ward had been cooking and selling pizzas at pop-up events around the city. They also do a Thursday to Saturday takeover in Malones Irish bar. “It’s pretty handy for us,” says Emma Louise Cavanagh, who moved to Edinburgh last year after living in Italy for 20 years and now works in Malones alongside Dunlea. “We get to close our kitchen and they supply the pizzas. The lads normally end up sticking around in our bar on a Saturday night, which is how we got to know them.” Her friend Johnny Lyall, sitting opposite, devouring a Braveheart pizza with black pudding and haggis, met the Pizza Geeks guys at a summer food event on Princes Street, where he was making cocktails and they were making pizza. “You end up seeing the same faces if you work at those kind of events,” says Lyall, “so we ended up coming into their restaurant when it opened.” Moving around venues, Clarkson relied on iZettle Go when they first started taking payments from customers. “It was super handy for us – it meant we could take contactless card payments at outdoor events and use our mobile phones like a till.” Clarkson and Ward have been using iZettle Go since they began the business, taking it on the road with them to events and street food sites Since taking over the shop space on Dalry Road, Clarkson has upgraded to iZettle Pro, which has more advanced features that allow him to manage the stock and staff hours, calculate tax and break down the sales. “I haven’t had time to figure out all the settings yet to be perfectly honest,” he smiles. “Our wifi can be pretty patchy in the shop, which is a bit rubbish, but we use an iPad with 4G for when the signal drops.” The team have got a busy summer ahead, with dates booked in for selling pizza at Edinburgh festival spots including George Square Gardens and the Pleasance, as well as their ongoing Pizza for the People social project. “It’s going to be pretty manic, but it’s pretty good fun, too. Getting our photos taken today was quite cool – all in a day’s work,” he laughs. “I guess that’s what the geek thing is meant to be about – we are nerds, but it’s a positive thing. We’re super passionate about what we do and we are trying to do a bit of good at the same time.” Discover what iZettle could do for your business at izettle.com