Prep 10 minCook 40 min Serves 4 For the rösti3 desirée potatoes (to get 900g cooked flesh)300g feta, crumbled6 egg yolks1 tbsp dried chilli1 tsp dried mint6 tbsp gram flour50g parsley leaves, finely chopped30g chives, chopped fine1 good glug olive oil, for frying1 big knob unsalted butter, for frying1 bunch spring onions, trimmed and chopped1 small bunch coriander, leaves picked1 lemon, cut into wedges, to serve For the sauce150ml soured cream (ie, 1 pot)Cracked black pepperZest of 1 lemon1 tbsp dried chilli1 tbsp chives, chopped Put the unpeeled spuds in a pan of salted water, bring to a boil and simmer for 15 minutes (It iit’s important to use a waxy potato in this dish, or the rösti mix will be too wet.) Drain, leave to cool, then peel. Grate the flesh into a bowl. Fold in the feta, egg yolks, chilli, mint, gram flour, parsley and chives. The mix will keep in the fridge overnightif you want to make it ahead (as long as you have used waxy potatoes). Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Heat the oil and butter in an ovenproof frying pan until foamy. Mould the rösti mix into patties as neatly or as rustically as you like. Cooking them two or three at a time, gently fry the rösti on one side until golden brown – about two to three minutes – then carefully turn over and cook for another minute or so on the other side. Finish them off in the oven for eight to 10 minutes, until cooked through, then lift out of the pan using a fish slice. Meanwhile, spoon the soured cream into a small bowl, season with lots of black pepper and top with the lemon zest, chilli flakes and chopped chives. Arrange the rösti on a platter and garnish with the spring onions, coriander and lemon wedges. Serve with the sauce alongside. To make this the ultimate brunch dish, serve with your choice of crisp bacon, smoked salmon, or poached or fried eggs. Prep 25 minCook 30 minServes 4 For the dressing50g smooth peanut butter40ml coconut milk10ml fresh lime juice (ie from about ½ lime)15ml tamari soy sauce20ml water5ml maple syrup For the garnish100g blanched peanuts1 tsp olive oil1 tsp rock salt1 tsp soft brown sugar1 makrut lime leaves, stripped and finely sliced1 lemongrass, chopped1 tsp chilli flakes For the saladOlive oil1 kohlrabi, peeled and cut into 2½cm dice3 small yellow beetroots¼ iceberg lettuce, roughly tornJuice of ½ lemonSalt and black pepper250g cherry plum tomatoes, halved2 Persian cucumbers, cut at an angle100g edamame beans, blanched1 avocado, stoned and flesh scooped out in chunks¼ small red cabbage, finely shredded1 handful mixed dill, coriander and mint, leaves picked and roughly torn1 lime, cut into wedges, to serve Blend together all the dressing ingredients. Put the peanuts, oil, salt and sugar on an oven tray and roast at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 for six minutes, or until they start to colour. Fold in the lime leaves and lemongrass, and roast for four minutes, until golden. Fold in the chilli flakes , then leave to cool, then gently crush. Heat a little oil in a frying pan and fry the kohlrabi, stirring often, until golden brown all over – this should take only a few minutes. Bring a pot of water to a boil, simmer the beets until tender – about 20-25 minutes – then lift out. Once cool enough to handle, peel the beets and cut into quarters. Put the lettuce in the centre of a deep bowl. In separate bowls, lightly dress each of the remaining salad elements in olive oil and lemon juice, and season to taste. Put the cabbage in a mound on top of the iceberg, to create height, then arrange the other elements in little little piles around it. Pour on the dressing, sprinkle over the nuts, and garnish with herbs and lime wedges. Prep 20 minCook 1 hr Serves 4 For the fish30g fresh turmeric, roughly chopped10 makrut lime leaves, ripped50g ginger, peeled and roughly chopped2 lemongrass, bashed2 red chillies, roughly chopped3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped400ml water400ml coconut milk 500-700g smoked haddock fillet 300g jasmine riceJuice of ½ lime1 tbsp fish sauce For the sauceJuice of ½ lime2 tbsp fish sauce2 red chillies, pith and seeds removed if you want less heat2 garlic cloves, peeled2 tbsp soft brown sugar2 tbsp water2 tbsp tamarind water To finish1 small bunch coriander, roughly chopped3 spring onions, finely sliced1 red chilli, finely sliced1 tbsp crisp shallots1 tsp rock salt1 tsp chilli flakes1 tsp each toasted fennel and coriander seeds3 or 4 soft-boiled (6-minute) eggs, peeled and halved½ lime, cut into wedges Put all the aromatics in a heavy pan or casserole with the water and coconut milk, bring to a gentle boil, then cover and simmer for half an hour. Add the fish and simmer for eight to 10 minutes, or until cooked through. Lift out the fish and remove the skin and any bones, then break into large pieces. Put the rice in a pan, strain in the hot stock, cover with a tight-fitting lid and bake at 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 for 15 minutes. Meanwhile, blitz all the ingredients for the sauce. Toss the fish through the rice, then return it to the oven for five minutes, until the rice is fluffy and the fish warmed through. Pour over the lime juice and fish sauce, and toss to combine. Garnish the rice with the coriander, spring onions, chilli and crisp shallots. Arrange little piles of rock salt and the spices on a plate and serve with the eggs, lime and a ramekin of sauce, so everyone can season their own portion to their own tastes. ⁃ The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. Prep 10 minCook 40 minServes 4 For the falafel3 garlic cloves, peeled1 green chilli100g mixed coriander, parsley and dill leaves1 tsp ground cumin1 tsp ground coriander100g frozen peas, defrosted100g tinned chickpeas50g gram flourVegetable oilSalt For the sauce10g garlic ( (about 2 cloves)50ml olive oilSea salt100g tahini80ml water30ml lemon juice For the salad150g shelled fresh peas (raw or blanched, depending on freshness and sweetness)150g shelled broad beans (raw or blanched, depending on freshness and sweetness)1 glug good olive oilA squeeze of lemon juice1 small bunch mint, leaves picked and ripped1 small bunch dill, leaves picked and rippedZest of ½ lemon1 pinch each sumac and aleppo chilli Blitz the garlic, chilli, herbs and spices with a hand blender. Add the peas and chickpeas, blend to a rough paste, then tip into a bowl and fold in the gram flour. The mix will dry out a little, but still be quite moist. At this stage, it will keep, covered, in the fridge for two days. For the sauce, blend the garlic, oil and a good pinch of salt until smooth. Add the tahini and water, and blend again, until smooth and quite loose. Add the lemon juice and blend in. This should bring the sauce to the right consistency. The sauce will also keep for two days. To cook the falafels, fill a deep pan half full with vegetable oil and heat until it starts to shimmer, but is not smoking. Drop in a pinch of falafel mix to test to test – it should sizzle immediately. When the (if you have a probe, the oil needs to be about 170C). Spoon rough dollops of the chickpea mix into the hot oil, and fry in batches, turning until golden brown all over – three or four minutes – then drain on kitchen roll and season with salt. To serve, spoon the sauce into a wide dish and arrange the falafels on top. Dress the peas and broad beans lightly with olive oil and lemon juice, and season to taste. Spoon the salad over the falafels and sauce, garnish with the herbs, sprinkle on the lemon zest, chilli and sumac, and serve. • Bill Granger is chef/owner of Granger & Co in London.