Louise Taylor England and Germany, with the Lionesses to win. This hinges on England topping group D which is a big if. Should they do so, though, the run to the semi-finals – and victory against France or a transitional USA – looks potentially kind. England do not want to finish second and possibly face Canada in the last 16. Suzanne Wrack If France and the USA meet in the quarters then the victor has to be favourite to lift the cup. With Vivianne Miedema leading arguably the finest frontline in the tournament, the Netherlands have a chance. As do quietly consistent Germany. A France v Netherlands final is my pick. Sophie Lawson Germany are going to win it. There are a few teams they could face but I’m going to go out on a limb and say Sweden will be runners-up. Caitlin Murray I’m picking France finally to win their first major trophy but Australia will upset their way to the final with a surprise semi-final win over Germany. Richard Parkin The top half of the draw could be stacked with heavyweights, meaning France and USA could face off in the quarter-finals. In the bottom half it could be Germany or the Netherlands who enjoy the relative armchair ride to the final. I’m feeling capricious, though, and will call France to win. Kieran Pender USA and Germany. If the world’s top-ranked teams finish first in their respective groups, they will avoid each other until the final. My money is on Germany, with a new coach and one of the world’s best playmakers. LT England’s Jodie Taylor comes into this World Cup slightly ring rusty but the upside is that the Seattle Reign striker has fresh legs. Australia’s Sam Kerr could push her close. SW Should the Netherlands reach the final, Vivianne Miedema has to be favourite for the Golden Boot. If France are able to throw off the perennial “bottlers” label, then it is likely Eugénie Le Sommer will have transferred her Lyon form to the national team. SL Vivianne Miedema. The World Cup in Canada came too soon for her but this year she is going to roll her form for Arsenal on to the biggest stage. CM This could come down to who faces a really weak team in the group stage, so I think Sam Kerr of Australia is going to bang in a ton a goals and continue scoring all the way to the final. RP The magic formula seems to be a healthy group-stage mismatch coupled with being the main source of goals for your side. I’d love to pick Norway’s Caroline Graham Hansen, but with Thailand plus Chile in the group I cannot go past USA’s Alex Morgan. KP Sam Kerr. She has scored six goals in six games this year for Chicago Red Stars and bagged 17 in 13 matches for Perth Glory in the most recent season. LT Canada have barely conceded a goal in the buildup and their defence plus Christine Sinclair’s goals look a dangerous equation. Sweden, too, are much improved and arrive seriously underrated. SW Few are predicting Scotland will get out of their group. It will be hard but I think they can do it. The best third-placed teams progress and I fancy the Scots could cause England more trouble than many are predicting. SL If Khadija Shaw is fit enough, I think she could motor Jamaica to the knockout rounds. CM I’ve talked up Australia, so I might as well keep going. I’ve been surprised by the long odds on them because I see them as a promising dark horse. I’ll also give a shout to Spain. RP Either France or Germany will offer a huge surprise – toss a coin if it’s good or bad, however. The Germans have such big-tournament pedigree but are in transition. France will either be buoyed by home support or crushed spectacularly under its expectations. KP South Korea have one of the hardest draws, in a group with France, Nigeria and Norway. But led by Chelsea’s midfielder Ji So-yun, they might well surprise. It has been nine years since South Korea won the Under-17 World Cup, and a core from that team lead their golden generation. LT Canada’s Kadeisha Buchanan. A fantastic intuitive defender with pace to burn. At 23 she is a leading light of the women’s game but will showcase her central defensive talents to an infinitely wider audience. England’s Beth Mead could, and should, also return as a real star. SW There is lots of quality in the Scotland squad but when your back is against the wall you want Erin Cuthbert fighting for you. Last year she fired Chelsea to a league and FA Cup double and this year has kept her struggling side afloat. SL Khadija Shaw. Again it depends on her fitness but on her day she is absolutely incredible and could announce herself like Marta did in 2003. CM I’ve already talked about Sam Kerr but another player to watch is Delphine Cascarino. The France winger could turn some heads. RP Mallory Pugh. The USA front three are so intimidating but, with Jill Ellis no doubt eyeing a seven-game tournament, it could be the Washington Spirit youngster Pugh who gets a chance during the group stage. KP Khadija “Bunny” Shaw scored more goals than any other player in qualification. If she can shake off a leg injury, expect her to cause headaches for Brazil, Italy and Australia in the group – and possibly beyond. LT Watching a team I cover winning all the time; in my role as north-east football correspondent that is not something that happens very often, so over to you England. Watching initially sceptical colleagues from the men’s game being won over. Seeing different parts of France – and, fingers crossed, more sun than in Newcastle! SW I’m going to the Netherlands v Cameroon. It was one of the first games to sell out. The Euro 2017 winners have attracted big bold orange crowds since their surprise European Championship heroics. SL I’ll be covering Scotland and I’m really looking forward to following them through their debut World Cup. Watching Erin Cuthbert strut her stuff across France is something everyone should be looking forward to. CM From a US perspective, the American attack looks so potent, yet the defence looks shaky. I think they might get into some wild back-and-forth shootouts and that would be a ton of fun. Fingers crossed. RP The Brazil supporters. I am hoping for a festival atmosphere in Montpellier as Australia take on Brazil in what has turned into a pretty fierce rivalry at recent tournaments. KP The level of coverage, from the Guardian and many other major media outlets, will be unprecedented. I hope this will be a truly breakthrough tournament.