Californian food is sunshine food: fresh, crisp and golden. Like Mexico, the state grows bountiful fruit and vegetables, and it is this fresh produce that seems to define its cuisine. Vegan food is all the rage on the West Coast, and you could adapt this salad by swapping the burrata for an equally creamy and delicious avocado. Serve as a starter or as part of a beautiful alfresco feast. If you can’t find burrata, use mozzarella tossed in a little olive oil and creme fraiche instead. Prep 30 minCook 20 minServes 4-6 8 ripe apricots, halved and stones removed2 tsp soft brown sugar3 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepper2 tsp chopped oregano or thyme leaves200g kale, tough stems removed2 baby gem lettuces, separated into leaves2 large, ripe beef tomatoes, cut into chunks1 large handful mint leaves4 small burrata or 2 larger ones For the seeds200g pumpkin seeds1 tbsp olive oil½ tsp smoked paprika2 tsp soy sauce2 tsp soft brown sugar For the dressing1 tsp dijon mustard3-4 tsp chardonnay or other white wine vinegar6 tsp soft brown sugar120ml extra-virgin olive oil Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/ gas 6. Arrange the apricot halves cut side up on a roasting tray and sprinkle with the sugar, two tablespoons of olive oil, and plenty of salt and pepper. Scatter the herbs over the apricots, then roast for about 20 minutes, until golden. Lay the pumpkin seeds on a separate roasting tray, mix with the olive oil, paprika, soy sauce and sugar, then season. Roast in the same oven for 10-12 minutes, stirring halfway cooking, until nicely toasted and puffed up. Set both the apricots and seeds aside to cool. Meanwhile, shred the kale leaves with a large chopping knife, then put them in a large bowl with another tablespoon of olive oil and a big pinch of salt. Massage the oil into the kale with your hands for three to four minutes, until it begins to wilt and soften. Add the lettuce, tomatoes and mint leaves to the bowl. To make the dressing, mix the mustard and vinegar in a jar with half a teaspoon of salt, the sugar and olive oil. Toss the salad in the dressing, taste, then adjust the seasoning with more sugar, salt or vinegar, as required. Arrange on one large plate or divide between four individual plates, then top with the apricot halvesIf serving on one large plate, tear over the burrata and scatter with half the seeds (reserve the rest for another time). If you are using individual plates, nestle a burrata in among the middle of the salad and scatter with seeds. Serve straight away. I love roast apricots with vanilla or saffron ice-cream. Drizzle the apricots with a teaspoon of orange blossom, some vanilla sugar and chopped pistachios before roasting as above. Leftover seeds are great scattered over stir-fries, pasta or other salads for a delicious crunch.