Venezuela, a country that once hoped for wealth and a bright future with its oil reserves and natural resources, is falling to pieces. It faces a humanitarian crisis where families struggle daily to find food, medicine and clean water as they live with collapsing public services. Many attend the ongoing protests, which are frequently violently repressed. Though I left my home in 2011 I have returned to Venezuela to document the ever-worsening crisis that has deeply affected families of every economic status. Residents queue for two hours to purchase basic goods at their local supermarket. Right; a closed petrol station in Caracas Litter is scattered around the street after bin bags were opened by residents in El Llanito, Caracas As a young Venezuelan woman, my focus was to the youth of the country in relation to how the current crisis has harmedtheir past and present, and jeopardised their future. Three families with contrasting realities took part in the photo essay, allowing me into their homes so that I could gain an insight into their lives. Family portrait: a girl with her father and mother at their home Firstly, I met an upper-class family, who asked to keep their identity anonymous for their own security. The youngest girl, who is a past contestant in the Miss Venezuela beauty pageant, has left the country to pursue her career as a model. Her brother and sister have been out of Venezuela for more than two years, working in their fields. The father said: “If they had told me, that at my age my children were going to leave because there were no opportunities, we would have left.” Graduation portraits in the living room He works as a hotel manager while he witnesses the economy fall apart, constantly trying to maintain a balance in his job alongside spiralling inflation. He said in January: “The difficulty in obtaining foreign currency is what has affected us the most. In October, the black market dollar equalled 90 bolivars and is now at 2,500 bolivars.” Inflation hit 10,000,000% in 2019. The family’s mother expressed her distress regarding their safety, specifically with health insurance companies, as they cannot secure coverage if this is paid with bolivars. They suggested finding a plan paid in dollars or to keep a large number of dollars in cash in case of an accident. The Melean family, standing outside their home The Melean family are working hard to achieve their dreams. Estefferson, the oldest brother, is now living in Chicago and studying nursing. He is covering all of his expenses with a baseball scholarship. He returned for the holidays to visit his family and his hopes for the future are high. Estefferson said: “I can open the doors for my family, to move forward and get out of where we live, as I would like them to live in a better place in the future.” They live in El Valle in Caracas, at the bottom of a favela area that is not safe. Estefferson and Gerson’s coach points at the sky during baseball practice. ‘Aim high,’ he yells Estefferson Melean holds his passport on his way back to Chicago to continue his studies The youngest brother, Gerson, is following the same dream. He is training to be signed by the Major League Baseball (MLB) organisation, while he continues his high school studies at the weekends. Sarai, the youngest sister, was completing her studies at the Andrés Bello Catholic University. However, she had to stop as the cost became too high for the family to cover. She said: “It’s tough to live with fear, knowing that for a pair of earrings, some shoes or a telephone they can kill you. The people are so desperate, they are so hungry.” Yesenia, their mother, works full time as a secretary, although she sometimes does not make it to her job across the city. With the current electricity blackouts, transportation is not working most days Public transport is not available because of the lack of spare parts and their high prices. The Fermin family Lastly, the Fermin family lives in a small town called Mamporal, a 90-minute drive from Caracas. The mother has 11 children; however many of them have left the country or are residing in other states of Venezuela. Five of her children live at home with her and her husband, Felix. The oldest son living at home is Abraham, who is away during the week while he trains to join the military. The 15-year-old son, also called Felix, said: “I want to be an artist to help my mom.”. He spends his time drawing Catholic figures with the hope of becoming an artist one day. Carmen, the youngest girl, said: “My desire is to leave Venezuela, become a doctor and help my family.” Carlos and Carmen at home Wanda, 17, was seven months pregnant with twins when I photographed her. She had been raped by a neighbour. Wanda has since given birth to two girls. The Fermin family struggle to feed themselves and the children are showing signs of malnutrition, as they often miss out on breakfast and dinner. Carlos, 14, who has not been able to learn how to read and write, said: “We have lacked food, for breakfast we have cassava or topocho [a variety of a plantain], only sometimes. We do not have lunch, when the Clap [Comité Local de Abastecimiento y Producción, or local committees for supply and production] bag arrives with pasta, maize flour and beans, we have dinner.” Felix in the living room, and right; Wanda standing in the backyard Imelda, the mother, has cancer and no treatment is available in the country. They have travelled several times to Caracas in search of medical attention, often without success. When Wanda was about to give birth, they were taken to Caracas in search of a hospital that could help them, after visiting four hospitals and being rejected because of a lack of space and facilities. Finally, as a relative knew a doctor in one of the hospitals, they managed to take Wanda in and look after her during her birth. Carlos, Wanda, and Carmen playing at the beach after school, after spending months without leaving their home town. They were happy Venezuela’s current crisis seems to have no end in sight. The country’s citizens are doing what they can to continue, but it is becoming harder day by day. The younger generation, still proclaim some hope at least. I am reminded of the moment when Carlos, Wanda and Carmen were playing in the water. They danced as if they had a break from reality, as if the water washed away their troubles for a moment.