My Friend Pedro is the best moments of an action movie. It’s your job to create them, whether by wall-running to dodge hails of bullets; kicking up a frying pan and ricocheting fire off it; or back-flipping off a skateboard, landing upside down on a swinging rope, smashing through a window and shotgunning some baddies in midair (yeah, I did that). There does exist a story, although most of it seems to be an inside joke between its creator, Victor Ågren, and himself. Our unnamed, masked gunman is mates with a sentient floating banana, Pedro, who teaches him how to be a Jackie-Chan-meets-Trinity-from-the-Matrix badass. And then they kick ass, with the help of some Max Payne-inspired slo-mo bullet time. The loose tale is propped up with light humour that doesn’t land as well as the stunt-jumps, although there are some mild chuckles. At one point, you attend a Christmas party for bounty hunters and have to fight through them in their festive knitted jumpers. Another section takes place in a city that authorities never finished because they couldn’t agree on a logo. Later, you’re in a sewer battling gamers whose brains are addled by “decades of violent video games”. While it’s a stylish shooter, it feels a lot more like a stunt bike game, where scoring rests on well-timed moves and daring flips. You could blast your way through all of the few dozen levels in a handful of hours if you wanted, but it’s most fulfilling when you focus on perfecting a highly choreographed ballet of deadly mayhem. Replaying sequences once you’ve got an idea of how to exploit the layout for maximum havoc is exhilarating. At the end of each level, you’re awarded points based on how bonkers your acrobatic performance was, rated against global rankings. Fans will undoubtedly flood the internet with videos of flawless run-throughs. Action film fanatics love the parts that make you go, “Woooaaah”. So who cares about the rest? This game’s strategy is to bin all pretence at plot and character-building, which often just labours to explain why the heroic protagonists embark on murderous rampages to save the day anyway. Sometimes all you want to do is watch and rewatch that lobby scene from The Matrix without enduring a full two hours of Keanu Reeves making confused expressions. My Friend Pedro offers the syrupy concentrate of Hollywood’s most epic fighting movies, with you as the star stunt performer. My Friend Pedro is out now; £17.99.