The World Cup so far has seen the best of Shakib Al Hasan, a cricketer who any team in this tournament would sign up with a passport the next day. Shakib does the job of two highly effective players for Bangladesh: batting with full responsibility and leading a bowling attack. His performances against South Africa, New Zealand, England and West Indies have been as good as any in the World Cup. Only Lance Klusener and Yuvraj Singh, in 1999 and 2011 respectively, come to mind although Shakib perhaps needs more time to emulate both and land the man-of-the-tournament award. Shakib sits second among the leading runscorers at this one, sandwiched by the 447 of David Warner and Joe Root’s 424 while boasting a greater strike rate than either. He does not look a million‑dollar batsman, but he is mightily effective. Data analysts may mention his out-of-control shots but in this tournament it has hardly mattered. He will go for them regardless of where they might land, because there is no dearth of confidence in Shakib. He will need it on Monday in Southampton. Bangladesh need to win all their matches to remain in contention for the semi-finals, so beating an Afghanistan team buoyed by their narrow loss to India is very important. There are few cricketers in the world who have so many strings to their bow as Shakib. He is a top-order batsman who can score quickly as well as stabilise an innings. He bowls accurate left‑arm spin with a speciality arm ball, and is capable of leading a bowling attack in any format. He is an athletic presence in and out of the circle, with a strong arm from the deep and assurance as a fielder. Shakib is also Bangladesh’s Test and T20 captain, serving his second stint since the start of last year. He leads by example, with many cricketers in the country aspiring to be him. Some of the younger players in the side became cricket fans after seeing Shakib and followed his path into the senior side. What many have failed to mimic, though, is Shakib’s personality and attitude. It is unique to Bangladesh that a person with so much talent can deliberately detach himself from the popularity that follows. Commercially, he is the most successful cricketer in Bangladesh but his ability to compartmentalise has made him even more successful. His character provides the perfect balance to an emotional Bangladesh team who swing from one extreme to the other depending on how they are performing. But his training methods can sometimes infuriate coaches and teammates, because the 32-year-old basically runs through the motions. You would not see him do a whole day’s work like Tamim Iqbal or Mushfiqur Rahim, or spend a lot of time in the gym like the ODI captain Mashrafe Mortaza. Shakib has his own method, and much of it is mental preparation. That is not to say he does not prepare at all. Having set his sights on the World Cup and with his Indian Premier League side Sunrisers Hyderabad hardly utilising him in this year’s competition, Shakib used the time to build himself. He even flew in his childhood mentor, Mohammad Salahuddin, for extra batting sessions in Mumbai. Four years ago, when he was not completing his bowling action like he used to, Shakib made a Skype call to his childhood coach Nazmul Abedeen Fahim, who was the head of cricket at his alma mater BKSP (the national sports institute). Shakib shadow-bowled in his hotel room in front of his phone while Fahim provided tips. Shakib took four wickets the next day. His track record says more about him than his methods. He is the fastest to many all-round milestones in all formats, including 6,000 runs and 200 wickets in ODIs, as well as the fastest to a 3,000-run-and 200-wicket combination in Tests, beating Ian Botham by one game. His biggest impact as a player is how he has lifted Bangladesh from small fry to a progressively improving team. And he has done so with one performance after another, since 2009 when he struck his sensational innings against Sri Lanka. Then came his stunning effort against New Zealand in the 2010 ODI series. The Test side were virtually a one-man show for many years, including several doubles like a fifty and five wickets, a fifty and 10 wickets, two fifties and a five-wicket haul as well as a 10-wicket haul and a hundred. There are so many such instances that it is easy to call him the best all-rounder in the world. If there remains any doubt, he has set about dispelling it at this World Cup. Mohammad Isam is the Bangladesh correspondent of ESPNcricinfo