Name: Sarah MillsAge: 35Income: £300 a day, three days a weekOccupation: Freelance TV producer/writer A year ago I was diagnosed with stage three bowel cancer. I’d been passing blood so one day I called 111, who told me to immediately visit A&E. A few tests showed I was anaemic. I was told more tests would be needed. Over the next few months I had to press for these tests as I knew something was wrong. Eventually a colonoscopy showed a malignant mass. They tell you in the room if you have a tumour, but I don’t think they’re allowed to confirm cancer, though it was heavily implied. My best friend was with me, and we went straight to the pub because we were in shock. It was frightening but I knew the NHS would give me the best care possible. I had surgery to remove the tumour and part of the rectum and colon, was given a colostomy, and then underwent chemotherapy for about four months. Not only did it impact my health, but financially it was a struggle, as apart from two small contracts, I couldn’t work for most of the year. Those contracts helped keep me afloat. I applied for employment and support allowance (ESA) as well as housing benefit for the rental part of my flat (which eventually rolled over into universal credit), which together came to about £700 a month and helped me pay my bills and make ends meet. Universal credit in itself was a really troubling process: the system is impenetrable. I wasn’t paid until five months after I first tried to apply. It was dreadful. During the treatment I moved back in with my parents in Kent. I would have fallen into debt if I hadn’t. When I was sick, a friend of mine recommended I speak to [cancer charity] Macmillan. They advised me not only what I should eat and drink, and what exercise I could do, but also financially, letting me know that I could contact my mortgage provider to reduce my payments, that my prescriptions were exempt, and that I could claim my travel to hospital. They also gave me a grant of £400, part of which I used to go to Center Parcs with my friends for a weekend. I returned to work earlier this year. I’ve found a part-time senior development producer contract role for three days a week, which pays me £300 a day. I still have a bit of fatigue, so I’m more limited in the sorts of roles I can look for. I live in a shared ownership flat in Dalston [in north-east London], which I bought two years ago. My mortgage is £450 a month, and rent £500. Service charge comes to £118. Other bills total about £300. I have a spare bedroom, and I sometimes rent it out to help alleviate the housing costs. I’ve just had someone staying Monday to Friday, for which I received £670 a month in rent. I’m currently looking for another part-time lodger. I spend about £50 a week on food shopping. I used to go out loads and probably spent £200 a week socialising, but now it’s more like £50 a week. Fortunately, I don’t have cancer at the moment, but I can’t say I’m all clear as I have to wait five years until after diagnosis. I still go for regular scans. The cancer has meant I’m definitely more tired than I used to be: I can’t really exercise any more. To keep myself sane during the long hours of chemo, I started a vlog and got a load of funny and famous people to keep me company. When I was ill, I regretted not having any savings. Now I plan to try to put away 20% of my earnings into a savings account. I know people say that when you have something like cancer, you should start living like there’s no tomorrow, but actually, it’s making me live like there is a tomorrow. It’s made me feel like I actually need to be more grown up and become more of an adult. Anyone in need of benefits advice after a diagnosis can call Macmillan’s free support line on 0808 808 00 00 (Mon–Fri 8am–8pm) or visit macmillan.org.uk