Look closely as you walk through the streets of Manchester and you might just see the small, red, circular plaque modestly marking Britain’s bloodiest confrontation between protesters and the authorities. If not exactly forgotten by history, then the Peterloo massacre has certainly been neglected. It has a hallowed status in the history of the radical left, but for many members of the wider public the name means little. On 16 August 1819, tens of thousands of people gathered in St Peter’s Field, united by demands for parliamentary reform. They wanted political representation for Manchester – which at the time did not have its own MP, despite a burgeoning population – and votes for working people. The gathering was peaceful, but politicians were jumpy about anything that might spark revolution. Nervous about the possibility of unrest, local magistrates sent in mounted militia who violently dispersed the crowd. Between 10 and 20 people were killed – the numbers remain disputed – and more than 650 were injured. One of the witnesses was John Edward Taylor, a local cotton merchant who wrote an account of the events. While parliamentary reform was slow and piecemeal, one of the more immediate outcomes of Peterloo was the Manchester Guardian – now the Guardian – established by Taylor in the aftermath of the massacre. In his 1821 prospectus for the paper, Taylor asserted the importance of “the influence of the public press, the spirited discussion of political questions, and the accurate detail, of facts”. In the spirit of the protesters at St Peter’s Field, the Manchester Guardian set out to “zealously enforce the principles of civil and religious Liberty”. Reading the prospectus today, it’s striking how many of its demands for fact-led, rational reporting in the face of societal upheaval speak to our current tumultuous politics. The many events and artworks marking the bicentenary of Peterloo, including a new permanent memorial designed by Jeremy Deller, open a new perspective on contemporary debates about democracy. “I think the resonance is more than just the anniversary,” suggests local poet Michael Symmons Roberts. “There is a strange set of historical connections suddenly emerging.” Peterloo and its legacy sit at the heart of this summer’s Manchester International Festival. On 7 July, a two-part commission under the collective title The Anvil – a reference to the shape of St Peter’s Field – will commemorate and reflect on the events of Peterloo. Headlining the day, a new choral piece by Symmons Roberts and composer Emily Howard will be performed by the BBC Philharmonic and a huge chorus of choirs at the Bridgewater Hall. Leading up to this, Irish multidisciplinary arts company ANU is staging free, immersive performances throughout the city. The challenge for these artists was how to commemorate Peterloo while stressing the relevance of its legacy today. ANU started with those who were killed at Peterloo and began exploring the different parts of the city they were from. Working with local artists, the company spoke to people in these various locations, asking the question: “What would it take today to make people take to those streets from those areas?” ANU’s co-founder Louise Lowe wanted to examine the demands of those at Peterloo through a contemporary lens and to amplify voices that were not usually heard. Young men told ANU about police brutality; Muslim women discussed the right to gather in public; people on zero-hours contracts reflected on workers’ rights. These conversations have produced a series of 15 installations and performances that will take place across the city on 7 July, ranging from a “huge dance sequence” to quieter and more intimate pieces. Lowe explains that the different events “will speak to each other, will inform each other, will question each other, will set provocations against each other”. Keen festival-goers can trace a route from one piece to the next, while the hope is that passersby “will just fall into them and fall out of them as they go about their day”. While ANU has focused on the present, Howard and Symmons Roberts’ piece retells the events of Peterloo itself in the form of an elegy. At the core of the composition is what Symmons Roberts describes as a “huge, woven text” – a nod to the textiles industry that put Manchester on the map. Written as a grid, the libretto reflects the multiplicity of voices involved, pulling words from banners and eyewitness accounts. Each line can be read both horizontally and vertically, skipping every other word. “The idea is that you can read across in a weave, you can read down in a weave,” explains Symmons Roberts. The aim is to capture “that sense of being in a vast crowd and sense emerging out of a more musical backdrop of language”. Howard has taken multiple different patterns from the grid and set these lines to music. “I used this grid to create a kind of chaos that rises into a focus that’s much more clear, and then back again,” she says. Over the top of this cacophony, which will be performed by the massed voices of the choirs, soprano Kate Royal will comment on the events, providing the narrative spine. Howard’s music draws inspiration from the industrial sounds of the mills, the marching of the crowds on their way to St Peter’s Field, and the traditional hymns to which protesters added their own lyrics. And like ANU’s performances, the elegy will connect Peterloo to the present day, offering an opportunity to reflect on its legacy and what it means to us now. “It’s an important moment in political history,” Howard stresses, before adding: “There’s a resonance with today, because I don’t think this matter is fully solved, so it’s still with us.” Symmons Roberts agrees, suggesting that Peterloo “has something to tell us about the connections we’re making and not making with each other at the moment”. Looking back on the political twists and turns of the months spent working on The Anvil, during which Brexit has reignited debates about democracy, he compares the turmoil and polarisation of 1819 to that of today. Even more reason to rediscover and reflect on this moment from history. • The Anvil takes place at various locations (details here) in Manchester city centre during the daytime on 7 July, then at Bridgewater Hall, Lower Mosley St, Manchester M2 3WS at 6pm that evening • The Guardian is a media partner of Manchester international festival.