In a bit of news that, unusually for these times, doesn’t make one want to hunker down underground never to resurface, a study has been released about the adorableness of dogs. Everyone loves an animal study. One of my recent favourites was reported with the headline: “Cats are nice and enjoy spending time with humans,” which I presume was commissioned and carried out by cats. This week, thanks to a UK-US team of scientists, we learn that the archetypal puppy-dog-eyes expression that makes us so susceptible to doggies’ charms and desires is down to the evolution of a forehead muscle. This is found in domestic dogs we keep as pets but not their ancestors, wolves. Dogs, according to Prof Bridget Waller, director of the Centre for Comparative and Evolutionary Psychology at the University of Portsmouth, “are very powerful animals in how they capture our hearts”. The muscle that has developed (levator anguli oculi medialis, which should be but isn’t, in fact, the name of a spell from Harry Potter) has resulted in domestic dogs’ ability to raise their eyebrows, eliciting a “nurturing response” in humans. This very much explains why my childhood dog, a black labrador named Ben, captured my young heart. When my dad picked Ben up as a tiny pup, he told me he could fit him in his pocket. This was true, though he was wearing a Regatta waterproof at the time, with pockets the size of caves. Circumstances meant I only had a couple of years with Ben, but he was my first canine love. The cock of his head and the inquisitive look, we now know are the result of 32,000 years of evolution. His giant paws were like novelty slippers. The dogs in my life today are no less emotionally manipulative, which is how I am choosing to describe them rather than giving them the benefit of “the cute factor”, in the words of the scientists. I also find it impossible to ignore dogs when roaming in my local park. They get you from both ends: the wagging tails, the doleful eyes. Often I feel bad because I tend to address the dogs before the owners. Perhaps the most famous example in recent years of the dog’s evolved expression is the golden retriever that the broadcaster Kay Burley tweeted a picture of after the 2015 Paris terrorist attacks with the caption: “Sadness in his eyes”. This was widely mocked – because the idea of the dog being at all aware of the chaos that had unfolded was rightly ludicrous – but also, there was sadness in his eyes. (Or maybe her eyes, who is to say, really?) One scientist who was involved in the latest study, Dr Juliane Kaminski, suggested that the wide-eyed and eyebrow-raising expression “is significant in the human-dog bond because it might … create the illusion of human-like communication”. That may be. But it’s certainly down to dogs’ expressive facial movements that they make such popular internet content. See the “talking” dog videos or the meme of guilty-looking dogs next to owner-created signs detailing their misdeeds. Also this week, a Channel 5 documentary introduced us to a woman who owns 34 Pomeranians, and cooks all of their meals – which is perhaps the perfect example of a human being taken in by their furry, hankering faces. Puppy eyes: they possess a lot of power. • Hannah Jane Parkinson is a Guardian columnist