Megan Rapinoe showed no sign of stemming her outspoken ways after scoring the goals that saw USA march one step closer towards the World Cup final. “Go gays!” she said after the 2-1 quarter-final victory over France in Paris and when asked to comment on whether it being Pride month made her contribution more personally significant. “You can’t win a championship without gays on your team - it’s never been done before, ever. That’s science, right there! “I’m motivated by people who like me, who are fighting for the same things. I take more energy from that than from trying to prove anyone wrong. That’s draining on yourself. But for me, to be gay and fabulous, during Pride month at the World Cup, is nice.” When the manager, Jill Ellis, was asked about whether she was worried her star forward speaking out would detract from her performance pre-match, she was emphatic: “No and, to be frank, I wasn’t aware until the press officer told me. That’s the head down approach I have. “I have not worried at all, she handled herself incredibly well at the presser the other day and you can hear her comments and expressed herself she is experienced and eloquent I would point to the performance today and say this stuff bounces off her and pushes her forward.” On the evening itself Rapinoe was thoughtful about the performance of the USA, who now face England in Tuesday’s semi-final. “We didn’t have the best night on the ball but defensively, the willingness and the discipline to do what we did was impressive,” she said. “We were ruthless in our chances. Moving on to the next round, that’s really all that matters.” For France another quarter-final defeat hurts. Their manager, Corrine Diacre, had said pre-match that: “We have had quarter final defeats haunting us for a while.” But, when asked whether this defeat was a failure for French football and whether she should depart, Diacre was clear. “I am not a person to give up,” she said. “[I have] no regret, the president of the French FA has shown his confidence with a long-term contract but he will make this decision on a personal level. We still have work to do a number of things, to work on together, I hope. “But yes, it is a failure on the footballing level. I don’t think we should shy away from that. We are a long way from our target. I hope we have won over the hearts and minds of the public and it will help the women’s game to go further and move into the next level. “We showed despite everything we weren’t too far off US I have never seen US switch to a five-man back line that early. It’s a sign.”