Two oil tankers have been attacked in the Gulf of Oman, leaving one ablaze and both adrift, a month after a similar incident involving four tankers. The US navy’s fifth fleet said it was assisting the tankers, which issued distress calls near the strategic strait of Hormuz. The crew from both tankers were evacuated. The attacks occurred along one of the world’s busiest oil routes, and the price of oil surged as the initial reports emerged on Thursday. Tensions in the Gulf have been close to boiling point for weeks as the US puts pressure on Iran in an attempt to force Tehran to reopen talks about the 2015 nuclear deal, which the US pulled out of last year. The timing of Thursday’s attacks was especially sensitive because it came as the Japanese prime minister, Shinzō Abe, held talks with the Iranian leadership in Tehran in an effort to find a basis for discussions between the US and Iran. Japan’s trade ministry said the two oil tankers carried “Japan-related” cargo. Reports of the explosions originally came from the same Hezbollah-linked news agencies in Lebanon that correctly reported attacks on tankers docked off the coast of the United Arab Emirates in May. The US blamed those attacks on Iran – an accusation Tehran has denied. Front Altair was carrying 75,000 tonnes of naphtha, a petrochemical feedstock, when it was attacked, according to Taiwan’s state oil refiner CPC, which chartered the vessel. CPC said the boat had suffered a suspected torpedo attack but other reports suggested a mine attack was more likely. The vessel was on fire but afloat, said its operator Frontline, denying a report by the Iranian news agency IRNA that it had sunk. The Kokuka Courageous was damaged in a suspected attack that breached the hull above the waterline while en route from Saudi Arabia to Singapore, Bernhard Schulte Shipmanagement said. “The ship is safely afloat,” it added. Iranian state TV reported 44 crew had been evacuated from the tankers to an Iranian port. “We’re not pointing to Iran, but we’re not ruling anything out at this time,” a US official said when asked if Iran was responsible. The UN secretary general Antonio Guterres strongly condemned the attacks and said the world could not afford a major confrontation in the region. The Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, described Thursday’s developments as “suspicious” and implied that the fault lay with a person or group trying to damage his country. “Suspicious doesn’t begin to describe what likely transpired this morning,” he tweeted, adding that the incidents took place while Abe was meeting Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, “for extensive and friendly talks”. Tensions between the US and Iran have soared, with Washington dispatching warships to the Gulf, and Tehran threatening to resume higher uranium enrichment. John Bolton announces the deployment of the USS Abraham Lincoln carrier strike group and a bomber task force in response to 'a number of troubling and escalatory indications and warnings'. Iran vows to enrich its uranium stockpile closer to weapons-grade levels if world powers fail to negotiate new terms for its nuclear deal. The US responds by imposing sanctions on Iran's metals industry. The EU urges Iran to respect the nuclear deal and says it plans to continue trading with the country despite US sanctions. The US says it will move a Patriot missile battery into the Middle East to counter threats from Iran. The UAE says four commercial ships off its eastern coast 'were subjected to sabotage operations'. Yemen's Houthi rebels launch a drone attack on Saudi Arabia, striking a major oil pipeline and taking it out of service. The US embassy in Baghdad orders all non-essential government staff to leave Iraq immediately. Saudi Arabia blames Iran for the drone attack on its pipeline. A rocket lands near the US embassy in the Iraqi capital, Baghdad, without harming anyone. It's not clear who is behind the attack, but after the initial reports, Donald Trump tweets: 'If Iran wants to fight, that will be the official end of Iran. Never threaten the United States again!' Semi-official media in Iran report it has quadrupled production of the low-enriched uranium used for civilian applications. Iran is allowed to enrich uranium, but increased production could lead it to exceed the stockpile limits in the nuclear deal. Senior Pentagon officer Vice-admiral Michael Gilday says the US has a high degree of confidence that Iran's Revolutionary Guards were responsible for the explosions on the four tankers in the Gulf of Oman. Saudi Arabia's King Salman hosts high-level summits in Mecca. He calls on the international community to use all means to confront Iran and accuses them of being behind 'terrorist operations' that targeted Saudi oil interests. Saudi Arabia says 26 people were wounded in an attack by Yemen's Houthi rebels on an airport in the kingdom's south-western town of Abha. Two oil tankers near the strategic strait of Hormuz were reportedly attacked in an assault that left one ablaze and adrift as 44 sailors were evacuated from both vessels and the US navy assisted. An inquiry by the UAE into the attacks on 12 May found the sophisticated mines were used by state-like actors, but stopped short of blaming Iran or any other state as the culprit. The US national security adviser, John Bolton, said Iran was almost certainly involved. An alternative explanation is that the attacks were undertaken by Houthi rebels fighting the Saudi-led efforts to oust them from Yemen. Iran has repeatedly said it had no knowledge of the attacks and had not instructed any surrogate forces to attack Gulf shipping or Saudi oil installations. Senior regional officials aligned to Iran and claiming knowledge of Khamenei’s approach to the standoff say he is adamantly opposed to discussions with Washington, or a proxy, from a perceived position of weakness. The officials say Khamenei assesses that Trump likely does not want to initiate a war, but rather renegotiate the nuclear deal that his administration tore up last year. Khamanei and other Iranian leaders are understood to be wanting to enter any negotiation on their own terms, and see global energy security as a key point of leverage in Washington and Riyadh. “If Iran is behind these attacks, it clearly shows that a US policy relying solely on coercion can backfire,” said Ali Vaez, senior Iran analyst and Iran Project Director for the International Crisis Group. “Diplomatic efforts by allies are necessary to dial down the tension, but they can’t resolve it as long as Washington relies on an all-or-nothing approach.” In a sign of how the Yemen civil war and the wider US-Iranian tensions are becoming intertwined, Riyadh accused Tehran of ordering a Yemeni rebel missile strike that wounded 26 people at a Saudi airport on Wednesday. Iran and the Yemeni rebels both follow branches of Shia Islam but Tehran has always denied providing more than moral support to the rebels. The rebels say missile and drone strikes against Saudi Arabia are one of the few ways they can retaliate after more than four years of bombing by the Saudi-led coalition, which has exacted a heavy civilian death toll in Yemen.