He is from Queens. She is, well, the Queen. He likes to build towers that feature his name in gold. She keeps her gold in the Tower. In public and private, he runs the gamut from boorish and braggadocious to mindbogglingly bigoted. In public and private, she doesn’t. As Donald J Trump spends quality time with Queen Elizabeth II on his state visit to the UK this week, the blinding reality is that this is no meeting of minds. It is true that these visits are supposed to demonstrate the enduring alliance between the two countries, not their respective heads of state. But this special relationship has all the personal charm of a hardened convict meeting his probation officer. You know he’s going to reoffend; the only question is one of timing. The sight of Trump’s welcome at Buckingham Palace may be a pomp-filled mark of acceptance of a pompously needy president. Yet it remains true that the US is happy to receive the recognition, and Britain must be delighted that it still has something worth conferring on a world leader, even while the nation celebrates his arrival with street protests and a giant inflatable baby. To Trump himself, the yawning chasm between him and the longest-serving British monarch is not as obvious as it is to the rest of humanity. He may even feel that the joke is on all those snooty Manhattanites who have disdained him for all those decades, but would pay good money for a seat at his state dinner with the biggest Queen ever. (Memo to the Trump 2020 campaign: don’t even think about doing this on a return visit.) Then again, this is a man who still lies about the size of his inaugural crowds, his praise for the neo-Nazis in Charlottesville, and his illegal payoffs to a porn star. His grasp of reality and decency is astonishingly weak, but his delusional sense of self-worth is rather remarkable. To be sure, the toffee-nosed Brits love nothing more than preserving their own delusional sense of self-worth by sneering at the arriviste powers. They have a word for it nowadays: Brexit. Yet it’s hard to avoid the inescapable truth that Trump is several leagues below his predecessors in the eyes of most Brits, who enjoy a love-hate relationship with the US, like most of the rest of the world. Trump currently has a 21% approval rating in the UK, according to YouGov polling, which is fully 51 points behind Barack Obama. He is eight points behind Hillary Clinton and seven behind Angela Merkel (memo to the White House: Merkel, not to be confused with Markle, is from Germany.) Trump is even lagging six points behind the dismally unpopular prime minister currently shuffling out of Number 10, having failed to achieve anything of note, including her beloved Brexit. Normal world leaders might read such numbers and heed the obvious warnings about wading into domestic politics. But as we know from numerous sources, Trump doesn’t read much and isn’t too good with numbers. Or warnings, for that matter. Normal world leaders pride themselves on staying above the fray, but Trump looks at frays the same way he looks at Big Macs. When the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan identified him as part of a global alliance of racist far-right leaders, Trump happily took umbrage while still en route to London. Even though he prides himself on leading an alliance of racist far-right leaders, Trump tweeted that “Kahn” – who is several weight classes below the presidential level – was a “stone cold loser”. There is something of a pattern to these pre-travel spasms for this president. Before leaving for London, Trump told the Sun: “I think I have great polls.” He also said that a Brexited UK could have “tremendous” trade numbers with the US because “they have never had a president like me that understands this”. They surely haven’t. This could be an awkward few days for the bad boys of Brexit. Trump made no secret of his love and admiration for Boris Johnson (“he would be excellent”) and Nigel Farage (“a very smart person”), mostly because both have been “very positive about me”. The last time a catastrophically unpopular president backed a British politician was during the Iraq war, after Bush and Blair started sharing the same toothpaste. Blair remains so toxic that he is three points less popular than Trump in a country that elected him no less than three times. After arriving in the UK on Air Force One on Monday 3 June, US president Donald Trump will be formally welcomed in a ceremony in the gardens of Buckingham Palace. It will be attended by the Queen and Prince Charles. The president will then attend a private lunch at the palace, which is expected to be attended by Prince Harry, but not his wife, who Trump recently described as 'nasty'. Following a wreath-laying ceremony in Westminster Abbey, Donald Trump will join Prince Charles for an afternoon tea at Clarence House. The Queen, Prince Charles and Prince Harry will then host a state banquet in the evening, which will be attended by prominent US citizens who live in the UK, as well as political and civic leaders. On Tuesday 4 June the visit includes a breakfast meeting with Prince Andrew, and then talks and a press conference with prime minister Theresa May at Downing Street. On the Tuesday evening Trump hosts a dinner at the residence of the US ambassador. On Wednesday 5 June Trump will take part in commemoration services in Portsmouth to mark the 75th anniversary of the D-Day landings. The day ends with the Queen formally bidding farewell to the US president. Trump’s entourage will also include two identical seven-seat black armoured limousines nicknamed ‘The Beast’, and a number of presidential helicopters. The president has at his side at all times one of five rotating military aides who carry the nuclear ‘football’ which can trigger a missile strike - equipped with communication tools and a book with prepared war plans. So what could possibly go wrong when Trump embraces his mini-Trumps in Merry Olde England? As he was leaving the south lawn of the White House for his transatlantic voyage, Trump was asked if this kind of blatant meddling with British politics was entirely appropriate. “Don’t ask me the question if you don’t want me to talk about it,” he said, displaying all the diplomatic talent that has led to trade wars with the rest of his own continent and the next largest economy in the world. There will be time for so many more questions with so many more inappropriate answers. Will Trump apologise to Meghan Markle, the Duchess of Sussex, for telling the Sun that he “didn’t know she was nasty”? Will he apologise to the rest of us for claiming that he never said the word, preferring instead to blame “the fake news media”? “No,” he told reporters at the White House on Sunday. “I made no bad comment.” This is the bubble that Trump hopes his diehard fans will never leave: a warm cocoon where the king of bad comments never says any such thing, except to nasty people and Latinos who surely had it coming. There are just enough of them to keep Fox News on top of the cable TV ratings, but there aren’t really enough of them to win another election: 52% of registered voters said they definitely would not vote for Trump, according to a Washington Post poll in April. This is not a great place to start your re-election campaign. Still, the Trump campaign is hoping for some quality images from this state visit to help lift their candidate from the sewer of the Mueller investigation and the presidential Twitter account. Who cares if the king of bad comments is meeting the queen of no comment? They all look the same size on TV. • Richard Wolffe is a columnist for the Guardian US