“There are so many things that you get asked to do,” says Jackie Kay of her role as makar, or poet laureate of Scotland, “that you think, God, wouldn’t it be great to be one of those artists who have 10 or 15 people working for them and they all make this huge big painting? I’d love to have mini-makars. I’d give them this line to do and that commission, because there isn’t really enough of you to do everything you’re asked. It’s just not possible. I’m only the one makar.” Luckily this makar, the third since the position was established by the Scottish parliament in 2004, has found time to meet up in the lobby of a Manchester hotel, prior to an appearance at the city’s literary festival, and compare notes with another eminent national bard. Tracy K Smith is the 22nd poet laureate of the United States and the fourth woman of colour to occupy the role. Her second and final term has just ended – she will be succeeded by the Native American poet Joy Harjo – but she has plenty to discuss with Kay about the satisfactions and scarier aspects of the job. Last month, Smith, 47, published Eternity, a selection of work from her four books of poetry to date, beginning with The Body’s Question in 2003 and including the Pulitzer prize-winning Life on Mars (2011), which explored sci-fi, astrophysics and the celestial nature of David Bowie. Smith was born in Massachusetts and raised in Fairfield, California, by an engineer father and a schoolteacher mother who both grew up in Alabama during the civil rights era. Reflections on race and slavery surface throughout her work, alongside meditations on desire, loss and the eternal. Kay, 10 years Smith’s senior, is one of the UK’s best-loved poets. Born to a Scottish mother and a Nigerian father in Edinburgh, she was adopted by a white Scottish couple and raised in a suburb of Glasgow. She has written numerous volumes of poetry since The Adoption Papers in 1991 – tackling subjects as diverse as sexuality, jazz and Nigel Farage – as well as a novel, children’s books and a memoir, Red Dust Road, which movingly recounts her search for her biological parents. The two women have never met before, but each has clearly immersed themselves in the other’s writing. “Before I even came today, I felt like I’d already had a conversation with you, through our work,” says Kay at one point. Both strongly believe in poetry as a means of fostering empathy by inhabiting different characters and different selves. “In a way I think of your work as a great opera of voices,” Kay tells Smith. “It’s almost like you’re saying that all of these human beings come through us, that we’re not one person, we’re many.” The two poets need very little prompting to get started and the conversation flows so freely that it’s difficult to get a word in edgeways. Kay speaks in a headlong, ebullient way, taking great pleasure in impersonations as she recalls her travels around Scotland as makar. Smith, currently a professor of creative writing at Princeton, is a touch less animated, weighing her words carefully, but she expresses herself with feeling throughout, not least when talk turns to the necessity of poetry in the age of Trump. Let’s start by talking about being a poet laureate – or makar in Jackie’s case. What’s the experience been like for each of you? JK It’s a huge honour and a huge surprise to be picked as the national poet, particularly if you had an ambivalent relationship with your country for some of your life. Lots of different things come along with it. I wrote a poem for the opening of the Scottish parliament three years ago and the Queen was there, and the whole of the parliament, and my mum and dad – my dad, who’d fought as the Communist party candidate for years, said: “I’ve made it at last, I’ve finally got in!” I’ve just written a poem to celebrate 20 years of Scottish devolution that’s multi-voiced, because I see my role – and I think we have a lot in common in this way – as not just representing my own voice but the voices you don’t get to hear from. What about you? What was it like when you were asked? TKS I was honoured and grateful, but also scared because I’d seen so many poets laureate do amazing outreach work and I asked myself, what could I do that they haven’t already done? But then I started thinking about how our national discourse in the US has become so splintered, with such division and intolerance across different perspectives, and I thought, poetry is good medicine for that, it’s something that makes everyone a little bit more attentive. What’s been so exciting to me is going into spaces where there are people who say, “Oh I’ve always been bad at poetry”, and I say, “No, this is our original language. We lived in images and metaphor and associations and dreams until it was taught that we should be thinking otherwise, and what we are doing together now is restoring something that we ought to claim.” Are you reaching audiences that you wouldn’t otherwise have reached? TKS In literal terms, yes. I’ve been going to places where someone from a coastal city, from a university environment, might not ordinarily be invited into. I’ve been to a lot of southern and rural communities, where community is divided along the lines of race, and I’ve spoken to people who are black who say, “I want my daughter here, to see someone who looks like her doing something like this”, and people who are white saying, “I drove two hours to bring my kids here because we live in a community where things are really divided and I want them to know that’s not the way the world should be.” JK Never underestimate how powerful that is. On a broader scale, I think poetry has the potential to heal some of these divides. If you look at the difficulties in the world at the moment, the answers to some of those difficulties are creative. People are coming in droves to poetry readings all over, because they feel like they need some answers. Poetry provides some of these answers because it’s not a polemic and it speaks to the different losses, divides, uncertainties and fragilities that people carry within them. In these very uncertain times, poetry is community, poetry is soul, it’s the language of being human, it finds a way to reach across. Have your duties as makar taken you to interesting places? JK It’s been extraordinary going to some really remote parts of Scotland, because you get a real sense of your country changing. I went to an island in the Outer Hebrides, Uist, and at the reading I looked out into the audience and saw a lot of lesbians, and I was amazed – the Outer Hebrides! I mentioned this to the woman who was driving me around the next day, and without missing a beat she said: “Aye, we managed to hang on to our lesbians. We lose our gay men though…” A sentence like that was unthinkable even five years ago in Scotland. You’ve both written memoirs [Kay published Red Dust Road in 2011, Smith’s Ordinary Light came out in 2015]. How did that compare to writing poetry? TKS I felt like I was learning to walk again. I really wanted to write about my mother [Kathryn, who died in 1994] and that sense of early loss in prose, rather than poetry, but once I sat down to do that, it was terrifying. It was only through that process that I came to realise my story wasn’t just about the death of a parent, but about growing up black in suburban northern California in the 70s and 80s, where race wasn’t something that we had a vocabulary for discussing outside of my home. And then I became aware of all of the ways I’d avoided hearing my parents’ stories about the hardships they’d endured growing up in the segregated south, because those things hurt me. Writing the book allowed me to acknowledge that, and I think it opened up the space for the poems that I wrote in Wade in the Water. JK I found writing Red Dust Road frightening, too. And even though The Adoption Papers was autobiographical, it felt very different, because in a poem you can jump, you can hide behind things and go from the general to the universal quite quickly, and you can say, “Well, that wasn’t really me.” TKS “That was the speaker…” JK Whereas in a memoir, there is no hiding place, and I found that very difficult for lots of reasons. Ethically, what was my right to write about these people who were still alive? Can I say things they’d be uncomfortable with? The other thing I had to confront was loss. Only when I was writing Red Dust Road did I realise that the loss from having been separated from my original mother was a loss that I carry around with me. It was an uncomfortable thing to confront, but it felt like it would move me on in terms of whatever I tried to write next, and also as a person in my life. Because we run from loss, but actually we’re made of absences and presences, and absences take up just as much space in our life as presences, they’re sat right behind us, they go to bed with us. Absence is a palpable thing. We’re taught to think that it’s not, but anybody who has suffered any kind of grief knows that grief walks alongside you and you can’t really escape it. Poetry takes us to the language of the deep self, and it also reminds us that other people matter TKS I was so moved by the passage in Red Dust Road where you are realising that your birth mother’s sense of loss that emerges in Alzheimer’s was always there, and that it was about having a child taken away. That was such a beautiful act of empathy. The conditions of our lives are so different and yet I felt that there’s so many things that they share. JK I felt that too. I really appreciate the way that you write about loss. My mum and dad are 94 and 88 and I’m living in this stage now of pre-grief. I have a double life: one minute I’m donning the plastic gloves and being a carer and next minute I’m walking out on to stage. It’s kind of doing my head in, but I find reading these poems enormously comforting because you show the different ways in which you keep people with you. That love that you have for them is still in you, and in a sense they’re still here. TKS I remember reading a Joseph Brodsky essay in college in which he wrote that at the heart of every poem is the desire not to give death the last word, even just in capturing a moment and holding it still until you can mine it. I thought to myself, this will be helpful to me one day, to realise that poems can do this. JK That’s really amazing. TKS I have this idea that we are different selves. And there’s something so beautiful about being drawn into that sense of largeness and community. JK That’s what comes across in so much of your work, the idea of the large self, almost the Whitmanesque self of being large and containing multitudes. TKS Sometimes I think poetry is a way of defying [the limits of] one’s own intelligence. For me, I don’t understand physics, politics is hard for me, but poems allow me to find a construct by which this can become not only familiar, but intimate. Sometimes I describe my poems as thought experiments. I want to imagine being in the world in a better way: this poem can help me to make the better choice – to watch, listen, feel, connect, ask – than I have the wherewithal to make as a person. Do you feel your poems actually make you a better person? TKS I feel that my poems allow me to go upstairs to that better self, and to live by her courage and insight. And I get to dwell there and impart something, but then I come back downstairs and I’m like: “What are your socks doing over there?” [laughs] JK I don’t feel that my poems allow me to be a better person at all. I think maybe being a poet gives you a different way of listening to the beat of the world, and it lets you see the past and the present as a continuum, but I don’t think it necessarily makes you a better or worse person. It’s to do with your phrase, being awake – and I like the new use of the word “woke”. It’s one of those pieces of contemporary language that I actually really enjoy, the idea that, yes, we need to wake up, we need to watch what the world is doing and listen to our young people. We need to care about the world in the way that these young people are caring about the world, and recognise some of our mistakes and see that we’ve got urgent things to deal with, and that we need to let our voices be heard. Poetry is increasingly popular, at least going by sales figures and levels of media interest. Is it because we’re going through difficult times and people are turning to poetry for comfort? TKS I tend to think that poetry offers a necessary alternative vocabulary. Increasingly we are encouraged or even required to live in this vocabulary driven by the marketplace and technology, and so our terms for love and selfhood and friendship and work have been squeezed into these really flat, monetised words. Young people sometimes write to me and say: “I’m writing a book, I’m trying to figure out how to brand myself and get followers.” Those are not things that you want! Poetry takes us to the language of the deep self, and it also reminds us that other people matter. And it allows people to feel seen and heard, especially people of colour and communities that don’t feel like they’re being seen and heard on their terms. JK There’s been a great democratisation of the world of poetry. In the past, it was seen as only certain kinds of people wrote poems, but now there isn’t that same divide. There’s all sorts of different forms: spoken-word poetry, Instagram poetry… Poets like Hollie McNish have taken off and are selling lots. But the average poet is not selling lots, that’s a bit of a press distortion; poetry is only selling more for these internet sensations. If you look into the statistics in this country, the average poet sells fewer than 200 books. But it is exciting that these different voices are coming into the world of poetry and making it more varied, more various. There has been some heated debate around Insta-poetry and ideas of accessibility, whether poetry needs be difficult in order to be worthwhile. Where do you stand on that? TKS There are people who like to be gatekeepers, and that is an explanation for why poetry was made so difficult, unnecessarily, by certain modes of teaching. It means you’ve climbed up and done the scholarship to be able to own something, so how can other people just walk up easily and own this thing? Poetry doesn’t belong to some wee white man – it’s bigger than that. It belongs to all time JK Exactly, and I really don’t like it when somebody says poetry should be difficult and inaccessible, that you have to understand every classic form of poetry before you can write it. I agree with you that there are gatekeepers who want to keep people shut out. Those same people will say that fewer people should write poetry, not more, and they are actually writing articles saying that – there’s been quite a few, not really naming names, but I would if I had a glass of wine… We met too early in the day… JK We did. But I find it really offensive actually. How dare you think that you can lock poetry up and call it yours? Poetry is bigger than that. Poetry doesn’t belong to some wee white man. It belongs to all of time and it will go on ahead of you and behind you and it’s not going to be kept. Poetry shouldn’t be a zoo animal locked up in a cage, poetry should be out in the wild, whereas some people want to keep it locked up and feed it odd bits of meat and let it roar in their face. Did either of you come across gatekeepers when you were starting out as poets? JK Lots. If you’re a black writer in any form, there’s this attitude that you have to first of all prove you’re any good. Every single black writer knows what that feels like. And it’s really shocking. When Toni Morrison got given the Nobel prize, she said: “I hope I’m being given this for the right reasons.” That really upset me. I thought, how sad that a writer of such phenomenal talent as Toni Morrison has to worry whether or not they’ve given it to her because she’s black. A white writer never has that worry. And when a black writer does get a prize, other writers, white writers, will say: “Oh, it’s so hard for white writers these days.” TKS Oh God… JK And it’s the same with women writers. There is still a terrible prejudice out there against black writers, and people don’t even check themselves. They’ll read a black writer to see, is this any good? That’s the first question they’ll be asking. And the first answer in their head will be: “They can’t really write.” Any black writer has to get past that first and it’s terribly depressing. People do it unconsciously, they don’t even know that they’re doing it. The poetry world is full of people that do that. As soon as any new voices come into the poetry world, you’ll have a number of white writers who’ll say: “Well, I like them, they’re a nice person, but they’re not really any good.” And they won’t know that they’re just doing that by default. That hasn’t changed since you were starting out? JK No it hasn’t. What’s changed is people of colour getting more recognition, more prizes and more attention. But the default position in several parts of the literary white establishment is, “Yes, but they’re not really any good”, and that will take years and years to correct. Is there the same problem in the US? TKS It’s definitely similar. One thing I will say is that American poetry has been revived and re-energised by the voices of writers of colour and immigrant communities, and publishing has visibly changed over the past two decades as a result of institutions such as Cave Canem, which began by hosting a summer retreat for black writers and sponsoring a first book contest, and has become a model for lots of other literary organisations. It’s now patently clear that the best writing that’s coming out of the States is from these places. There’s been a great flourishing, and we see that the American language and the story of America is many, many different things. That makes me very happy. JK Take an American writer like Audre Lorde, who died in 1992, but is now experiencing a renaissance both here and in the States. She was a woman way ahead of her time. When she published The Black Unicorn in 1981, it got some critical attention, but she was never really taken seriously. And now she’s being taken seriously, all of these years after her death. There have been so many writers from the States and Britain who were pioneering but didn’t get the kind of sales or attention when they were alive. Does living under Trump change your dynamic in being a poet in the world, Tracy? How does Trump affect you personally? TKS It’s changed the world I live in, and it’s changed the questions and preoccupations I live with. As much as I want to feel that [Trump] isn’t a governing presence for me as a writer, I’m thinking about the fear, the hatred, the distance from clarity and reality that we live with now… I think this is a really good time for poetry. If anybody ever thought poetry was a luxury, that’s gone. Poetry is a necessary remedy to a lot of the darkness we are subject to. JK Audre Lorde wrote this famous essay called Poetry Is Not a Luxury, and it’s lovely that that phrase has come back… Yeah, it’s strange because Trump has rejigged the notions of reality, and in a way poetry and writers need to get more real because there are different demands being placed on the writer in these times. Do you feel it’s complacent, as a poet, to avoid looking at the world around you and what’s going on in politics? JK You can’t escape the world around you. Poetry comes out of the political world. You can choose to write any kind of poetry in response, it doesn’t need to be polemical. But a poet who says that they’re divorced from the politics of the world is deluded because, to speak plainly, we all live in the political world, we’re all part of it, and why should poets be separate? My son used to ask me when he was wee: “Mummy, why are you always going to poetry?” He thought poetry was a place. And for me, poetry is a place in the world, it’s not like a space in your head. It’s a place in the world, a place at the table, it’s a physical thing. Can I bring the conversation back to where we started? As officially appointed national poets, have you ever felt uncomfortable or politically compromised by your position? TKS Well, the laureateship is a position that sits within the Library of Congress, it’s not part of the executive branch of government. My position is supposed to sit at a remove from political discourse. In fact, as laureate I was discouraged from talking about policy. But poetry talks about the ways that everything touches us. And so it was really beautiful to say: “OK, here’s a poem, this speaker is talking about being a stranger in a place where no one recognises her. Let’s talk about this.” And inevitably someone will say: “Well, this reminds me of when people immigrate to this country.” Let’s talk about that, but in human terms, as opposed to policy terms. There’s very little that poetry doesn’t reach, I would say there’s nothing that poetry can’t reach. JK Yes, I agree completely with that, and I don’t think there’s anything that’s made me feel uncomfortable, except that you have to step up a bit into a public role. Suddenly people recognise you in a different way from before, and you’re not going incognito quite as much. And that comes with its own little responsibilities, but some of that is really lovely. Last Christmas, I went to throw change to a guy who was busking and he stopped singing and said: “It’s the makar – Merry Christmas, makar!” And the other day I was in a Marks & Spencer in Glasgow and this woman said, “It’s the makar – five-pound-off voucher for you, makar!” Things like that are very beautiful but they do make you see that you’ve got higher visibility, and therefore higher responsibility and a larger public voice. And you have to use that carefully because you can’t suddenly be pronouncing on things irresponsibly. I take all those things quite seriously. And nobody gives you any lessons. You don’t get any classes or workshops on how to be a national poet. • Bantam is Jackie Kay’s most recent collection (Picador (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99 • Eternity: Selected Poems by Tracy K Smith is published by Penguin (£10.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99