The Brooklyn Nets appear to have turned themselves from outsiders to NBA contenders with the acquisition of one of the league’s best players, Kevin Durant. Durant confirmed the news on the Instagram account of The Boardroom, an online series he co-produces, as the league’s free agency period started on Sunday evening. ESPN reported that two other All-Stars – Kyrie Irving and DeAndre Jordan – are likely to join him. According to ESPN, both Irving and Durant will sign for four years for $141m and $164m respectively. A post shared by The Boardroom (@theboardroom) on Jun 30, 2019 at 3:02pm PDT Durant and Irving will form a formidable duo but there are caveats. Durant, who will be 31 in September, ruptured his achilles while playing for the Golden State Warriors in June’s NBA finals and is likely to miss the whole of next season. Irving, meanwhile, had a good season with the Celtics individually but clashed with some of his teammates, something that was blamed for Boston’s disappointing run in the playoffs. He also had a strained relationship with LeBron James during their time together at the Cleveland Cavaliers. If Jordan signs on, he will not have to move far: he already plays in New York with the Knicks. He is a three-time All NBA player but the resumes of Durant and Irving are even more impressive. Durant is a 10-time All-Star and was voted league MVP in 2014. He won two titles with the Golden State Warriors, and was finals MVP on both occasions. Irving won the NBA title with the Cavaliers in 2016, and is a six-time All-Star. They also played together for USA at the 2016 Olympics, winning gold. Several Nets players welcomed the news on Twitter, with Spencer Dinwiddie aiming a shot at those who criticised his decision to sign a contract extension. Everybody who said I shouldn’t sign the extension gtfo my mentions 🗣 pic.twitter.com/E6sqlujjXs The news will be a blow to fans of the Nets’ neighbours, the Knicks. They were considered the leading contender to sign Durant when he hit free agency, and traded away their biggest star, Kristaps Porzingis, last season. They have not made the playoffs since 2013. ESPN reported that the Knicks were unwilling to offer Durant the same money as the Nets due to concerns about his recovery from the achilles injury. The Nets, meanwhile, snuck into the playoffs last season with a group of young players but have had a disappointing time since relocating to Brooklyn from New Jersey. Sunday’s move may well change matters.