Late night discussed Trump’s call with Sean Hannity and the possibility of a US-Iran conflict. Seth Meyers discussed Trump’s phone call with Sean Hannity on Fox News, in which Trump said he didn’t see George Washington or Winston Churchill in any of the Democratic 2020 hopefuls. Meyers said: “You’re no Winston Churchill either, buddy. I don’t care if you tried on a Churchill-style hat when you’re in the UK. You don’t look like Churchill. You look like Hardy ate Laurel.” Trump spoke for so long that he cut into the next show with Laura Ingraham, but continued to talk even after he was notified. “At some point, you expect to hear a nurse on the other end screaming: ‘There you are, Donald!’” It seemed that neither Hannity nor Ingraham wanted to speak to the president, and the pair volleyed him back and forth. “They’re just passing him around like when your grandpa calls on Easter and everyone has to take turns saying hello,” said Meyers, silently miming a similar dispute. In his re-election rally campaign, Trump said the Democrats were trying to shred the constitution. Meyers said: “Dude, you tried to stop an investigation of your own campaign, and you called a fake national emergency to build a border wall on your own. The only way you could care less about the constitution is if it were written in Spanish.” Meanwhile, Hope Hicks, the former White House communications director testified to Congress but was notably stoic – perhaps because the White House says she has absolute immunity. Experts, however, are saying this doesn’t exist. Meyers joked: “Absolute immunity sounds like a hair growth supplement they sell at GNC.” Stephen Colbert discussed the increasing tensions between the US and Iran that may very well lead to war. “We can all hear the drumbeat but so far, nobody’s dancing.” Mike Pompeo went on TV to say the administration knew with confidence Iran attacked two tankers in the Gulf of Oman, and asked for the American people to trust the government. Colbert responded: “That’s like getting married and trusting your ringbearer to be Gollum.” On Thursday, a unmanned US drone was shot down over the Strait of Hormuz. “This would be like declaring war over a downed washing machine,” Colbert said. When reporters asked Trump if this meant the US was going to war, he said, cryptically: “You’ll find out.” Colbert said: “Mr President, this is an international conflict, not the season finale of The Bachelor.” But, ultimately, Trump believes Iranian leaders made a mistake in shooting down the drone and is not yet on board with going to war. “Yes, Trump understands that people make mistakes. After all, he’s had three wives and Eric.” Finally, he turned to the call between Trump and Hannity, or as Colbert calls him, “a face drawn on a thumb”. Trump told Hannity Tuesday’s 2020 launch rally in Orlando reminded him of a “tailgate for America”. Colbert agreed: “It’s exactly like a tailgate party. Lots of drinking and everyone’s cheering for a 300lb man with possible brain damage.” “Our president is making some frenemies this summer,” opened Jimmy Kimmel. Trump hosted the Canadian PM Justin Trudeau at the White House on Thursday, but the two have not had an easy relationship in the past. “You know you have a hothead president when you have to defuse tensions with Canada.” This week, Trump also appeared on the cover of Time. Kimmel commented on the awkwardness of the cover: “It looks like they named him desk salesman of the month.” In the interview, Trump said his whole life is a bet: “Right now the White House is running as smoothly as his bankrupt casinos.” Another interesting nugget from the interview is that Trump has a red button on his desk that orders Diet Coke. “It’s right next to the faucet that dispenses ranch dressing into his mouth,” joked Kimmel. Trump told Hannity that his Orlando crowd was so huge, officials had to turn people away. Kimmel fact-checked this: “By the way, we searched everywhere today. Found no evidence they asked anyone not to come.” In fact, the city of Orlando says that he had around a little less than 20,000 people, even though Trump claimed there were 121,000. “So he’s only off by 100,000 people,” chuckled Kimmel. Apparently, Trump’s campaign is using his tweets for capital gain by promoting Maga products after he tweets. Kimmel joked: “Basically, they figured out a way to monetize stupid.”