Dwayne Johnson told fans of the power of compassion and “being ourselves” while accepting a top honour at the MTV Movie and TV awards. “The most powerful thing we can be is ourselves,” said Johnson on receiving the icon generation award, given to actors who have had a positive impact on society. “When I first got to Hollywood, they didn’t know what the hell to do with me. I was a half black, half Samoan, six-foot-four, 275-pound pro wrestler. “I was told you’ve got to be a certain way, you’ve got to drop some weight, you’ve got to be somebody different. For years I bought into it because you think, ‘Oh, that’s what I’m supposed to do’ and I was miserable. I made a choice that I wasn’t going to conform to Hollywood, Hollywood was going to conform to me.” “When I was 15, I heard a quote and I’ll never forget it – ‘It’s nice to be important but it’s more important to be nice.”’ Inclusivity and celebration were the themes of the night. Brie Larson, who won the best fight award for Captain Marvel, brought her stunt doubles, Joanna Bennett and Renae Moneymaker, on stage for recognition. “They are the living embodiment of Captain Marvel,” Larson said as she stepped aside to let the women give speeches. The show included a skit on which host Zachary Levi starred in a comedic take on Jordan Peele’s Us. Levi urged viewers to nurture the kid in themselves and follow their dreams into adulthood. Lana Condor, accepting the best kiss award with her To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before co-star Noah Centineo, delivered a similarly thoughtful message: “Kiss who you want to kiss. Love who you want to love, and don’t let anyone tell you otherwise.” Daniel Levy shared a similar sentiment after winning the best comedic performance award for Schitt’s Creek. “If I’ve taken anything away from making Schitt’s Creek, it’s that kindness always wins, and love is best served unconditionally,” he said, before wishing everyone a happy Pride month. At a ceremony featuring fully gender-neutral categories, women took home several of the night’s biggest awards, including best performance in a TV show (Elisabeth Moss for The Handmaid’s Tale) and in a movie (Lady Gaga for A Star Is Born). Accepting an award from Wonder Woman star Gal Gadot, Sandra Bullock said she was happy her son could see her receive her award in a room with “real-life superheroes”. “I’m sure he will notice that they are women, just like his mama,” she said. Best movie Avengers: EndgameBest show Game of ThronesBest performance in a movie Lady Gaga (Ally) – A Star is BornBest performance in a show Elisabeth Moss (June Osborne/Offred) – The Handmaid’s TaleBest hero Robert Downey Jr (Tony Stark/Iron Man) – Avengers: EndgameBest villain Josh Brolin (Thanos) – Avengers: EndgameBest kiss Noah Centineo & Lana Condor (Peter Kavinsky & Lara Jean) – To All the Boys I’ve Loved BeforeReality royalty Love & Hip Hop: AtlantaBest comedic performance Dan Levy (David Rose) – Schitt’s CreekBreakthrough performance Noah Centineo (Peter Kavinsky) – To All the Boys I’ve Loved BeforeBest fight Captain Marvel – Captain Marvel v Minn-Erva Best real-life hero Ruth Bader Ginsburg – RBGMost frightened performance Sandra Bullock (Malorie) – Bird BoxBest documentary Surviving R KellyBest host Nick Cannon – Wild ‘n OutMost meme-able moment The Bachelor – Colton Underwood jumps the fence Best musical moment A Star Is Born – Shallow