Shares in Trainline jumped on their first day of public trading, putting the online rail and bus ticketing service on track for a valuation of as much as £2bn. The company raised £110m in an initial public offering on the London Stock Exchange, which is likely to see it join the FTSE 250 index of mid-cap firms. Trainline set its offer price at £3.50 per share, but the float bucked a recent trend of weak stock market debuts with shares rising by as much as 24% in morning trading on Friday. The price hit highs of £4.36, which would value the company at more than £2bn. Clare Gilmartin, the chief executive, owned 2.8% of the shares before the float, landing her a payday of more than £50m on paper. Gilmartin was previously the boss of the auction site eBay in the UK and Europe, but left in June 2014 to join Trainline. Before eBay she worked at Boston Consulting Group and Unilever. Trainline was founded as a standalone business in 1999 by a consortium of UK train companies. It was then sold in 2006 for £160m to private equity buyers. The previous owners had planned to float Trainline in 2015, but that was pulled at the last minute when another private equity investor, KKR, bought it for a reported £500m. It is understood that KKR will remain a major investor after the float. Since KKR took over, Trainline has embarked on a rapid growth path, expanding from the UK to sell tickets in 45 countries. The company, which employs more than 600 people mainly in offices in London and Edinburgh, claims more than 80 million visitors per month, with four in five visits conducted through its mobile apps. Trainline is aiming to take advantage of the increasing digitalisation of rail and coach ticketing across Europe, as well as further international expansion. Rail travel is also expected to increase in the coming decades as lower-carbon transport becomes a priority. Gilmartin said: “We believe we are uniquely positioned to capitalise on the vast opportunity ahead and accelerate our expansion for the benefit of our customers, our train and coach company partners and our shareholders.” The company made revenues of £210m from ticket sales worth £3.2bn in its latest financial year. The UK business made £148m in profits during the same period, according to documents published last month. Russ Mould, investment director at the investing platform AJ Bell, said: “It isn’t the cheapest ticket seller in the UK when you take into account fees – the big train companies will sell you a ticket with no fees at all, for example. However, the convenience factor means a large number of travellers are happy to use Trainline for all their transportation booking.”