Late-night hosts focused on the second night of the Democratic debate, discussing Kamala Harris’s comments about Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders’ decibel dominance. #DemDebate2: A good night for Kamala Harris, a bad night for Biden, and a very confusing night for Marianne Williamson. #Votegasm2020 pic.twitter.com/xvIbgCvlAx The Daily Show’s Trevor Noah dissected the best and funniest moments of the night, beginning with the first sign of division among Democrats, which was healthcare. “The Democrats are aligned but they have a range of opinions. It went all the way from Medicare for All with no private insurance to whatever Marianne Williamson was talking about,” said Noah. In fact, the self-help author mystified Noah, particularly when she said plans were unnecessary to beat Trump. “That’s a pretty bold move for a candidate to say, ‘I’m anti-plan, OK?’ Like her vibe, I was just waiting for, at some point, [her] to be like ‘We don’t need a plan, my friends. Just give me one vial of CBD oil and our chakras will be aligned,’” joked Noah. The candidates briefly engaged in a shouting match but Bernie Sanders had the upper hand as he is known for being loud. “Who is dumb enough to engage with Bernie in a shouting match? You realize there were 10 people on stage shouting, and the moderators, and he outshouts them all!” When the subject of race came up, Kamala Harris set herself a part as the only black person on the stage or as Noah put it, “Kamala Harris was like, ‘The rest of you need to sit your asses down.’” She interrupted an answer from Williamson to gain control of the floor. “So now that Kamala had the floor, she was going to wipe it with Biden.” During this exchange, she targeted Joe Biden for his record of working with segregationists and for not supporting bussing, an initiative that was personal to her, as she was bussed herself as a schoolgirl. “Yo, at this point, Kamala was bussing Biden right out of the debate.” In the same exchange, Biden cut himself off when giving an answer, saying he had run out of time. Noah agreed: “After Kamala did what she did to you tonight, Joe Biden, your time might be up.” On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert said that before the debate, Biden supporters handed out ice cream cones they dubbed Joe Cones. “A Joe Cone is also what Biden wears to make sure he respects personal space these days,” Colbert joked. But the friendly feeling Biden headed into the debate with was soon dashed, noted Colbert. “Tonight, that Joe Cone was met with the Kamala Harris flamethrower.” Sanders called Trump a liar, a racist and a phony and said the American people needed to understand this in order to defeat him. Colbert was doubtful: “Oh, they understand it, sir. That’s the reason why some of them voted for him.” In the same moment, Sanders asked that Trump be exposed. “Not sure if we need to do that, Senator. Trump already has a long history of exposing himself.” When Harris asked to comment on race as the only black person on stage, Rachel Maddow told the candidate she would be allotted 30 seconds for her response. Colbert mimicked the moderator’s suggestion: “OK so for 30 seconds, just sum up institutionalized racism that’s been plaguing our country since our very foundation and go!” She then talked about being bussed to school. “I believe Harris on bussing because she clearly just took Biden to school.” Harris later took aim at Trump, saying he embraces science fiction over science fact. The host quipped, “Well, of course Trump embraces science fiction. I’m pretty sure his hair was shaved off of a Wookiee’s ass.” Also live after the debate, Seth Meyers began with a comment from Trump who said all of the candidates would do poorly. “You think they’re going to do poorly? Be careful for what you wish for, dude,” said Myers over an image of Trump stalking Hillary Clinton in a 2016 debate, “because judging by recent history, doing poorly at debates is a pretty good indicator of future success.” But unlike Trump’s assertion, the debates went quite smoothly. In fact, Daniel Dale, who catalogues Trump’s lies, was scheduled to go on CNN to factcheck the debates. He later said he would not appear after the first Democratic debate as it was so truthful. “That’s wild. Factchecking is the only where Donald Trump can say he created more jobs,” said Meyers. But apparently, Biden knew a target would be on his back last night and prepared for the debate by studying his own record. Meyers called this action suspicious. “That’s like when someone ghosts you on Tinder and you have to go back and read your conversation to see where you blew it.”