Karen Carney’s first touch after stepping off the bench – a gorgeous, galvanising reverse pass – seemed emblematic of her ability to raise England’s collective bar. The Chelsea winger or playmaker invariably makes her presence felt in the dressing room but, with Toni Duggan and Nikita Parris struggling in the sort of wide roles they no longer really occupy domestically, she may spend more minutes on French fields than initially envisaged. Only two months ago the 31-year-old feared for her place in the squad but she remains one of Phil Neville’s most technically gifted individuals and surely forced herself into the starting XI against Scotland in Nice next Sunday. Neville’s side played better than during last week’s win against Denmark but, despite dominating possession, could not deconstruct an intelligent New Zealand defence whose full-backs, in particular, excelled. The Lionesses’ final ball will need to be considerably better in France and they could also do with tightening up at the back. The defending of set pieces, especially, is becoming slapdash. England have lost three of their last five home games and are struggling to score. Should England top Group D and New Zealand finish as one of the best third-place finishers – something that seems feasible considering Canada and the Netherlands will be vying for top spot in Group E – they could yet be reunited with the Ferns and their shrewd 64-year-old Glaswegian manager Tom Sermanni in the round of 16 in Valenciennes. Scots always enjoy beating the English but Sermanni’s determination to spoil the Lionesses’ party was heightened by memories of being in Vancouver four years ago as one of John Herdman’s assistants. Then England shocked the host nation by knocking Herdman’s side out of Canada 2015 in the quarter-finals. Erin Nayler’s excellent display confounded theories about women not making great goalkeepers. Admittedly England’s ring-rusty Jodie Taylor toiled up front but the Bordeaux keeper shone, proving the game’s outstanding player. Chelsea’s manager, Emma Hayes, believes goal frames should be contracted for women’s matches but Nayler’s performance contradicted that argument. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.