Anyone arriving at Chester-le-Street just after two o’clock would have been bewildered to find two umpires, 11 men in green and two batsmen flat on the ground, faces nose deep in the grass as a swarm of bees buzzed across the square. But there was no sting in the tale for Eoin Morgan, as Sri Lanka fluffed the understudy lines suddenly thrust at them and declined the offer to draw level on points with England – without completely removing the possibility of qualifying for the semi-finals as the complicated last-gasp dance continues. The nine-wicket victory with more than 12 overs remaining was only South Africa’s second win in what has been a personal dog’s dinner of a tournament. Their solitary victory before this was a slow crawl against Afghanistan. Yet there were signs of life in this autumnal triumph – a disciplined bowling display, sucking the Sri Lankans into self-destruct mode, and some incidental high-class fripperies with the bat from Hashim Amla and Faf du Plessis. Amla clonked two balls of the first over of South Africa’s reply to the boundary, leaning gloriously into a stroke on the off side before flicking the next ball through midwicket as Lasith Malinga drifted on to his pads. But in Malinga’s next over he repeatedly rooted his feet to the ground while awkwardly jousting outside off stump. A little later he pulled out a lofted shot that crawled to a standstill short of the boundary. Then a poky nudge, followed by the purest of cover drives. And so it went on, sumptuousness followed by inelegance, on a slow pitch that proved tricky for any strokeplay other than the most gung-ho. The only wicket to fall in the innings was that of Quinton de Kock, who after three fours was mesmerised by one of Malinga’s low-armed slingers, a dipping speedy yorker that crept between bat and pad to crash into the stumps. Du Plessis, the tall-standing foil to Amla’s shuffling master, finished 96 not out, clocking up his third fifty of the World Cup. He also hit the shot of the day – a dancing, towering six which was the 265th of the tournament – 88 metres straight over the Lumley End off Suranga Lakmal. His next ball was pulled masterfully through midwicket for four. Amla finished unbeaten on 80, his biggest scare coming when he gave himself out after seeing a reviewed lbw on the big screen, only to be called back when it was revealed the ball pitched outside leg stump. Their unbroken stand of 175 was South Africa’s highest of the tournament and gave some easy afternoon pleasure to a full ground enjoying the first of its three World Cup fixtures, a gentle breeze cooling the ground in anticipation of the heatwave on its slow march north. Du Plessis won the early-morning toss and had a bowl, looking for some seam movement on a good pitch. What was he after? “A win,” came the rather desperate answer. South Africa had won 16 of their last 18 ODIs against Sri Lanka but World Cup campaigns can run sides low. Sri Lanka had been given permission by the ICC to pull on their lucky yellow change jerseys that they had worn when they beat England but luck turned out to be in short supply. Dimuth Karunaratne was out to the very first ball of the morning, caught off guard by some bounce from Kagiso Rabada, his horizontal bat limp as the ball billowed to Du Plessis at second slip. From there Kusal Perera and Avishka Fernando decided to live by the sword, slotting four fours each as their left-hand right-hand combination threw the bowlers off their line. But both fell for 30, snared by the excellent man of the match, Dwaine Pretorius, playing his first World Cup game. Theirs were to be the highest scores in a total of 203 as Sri Lanka’s middle order chose to live by the sofa, stodging along, settling in, slow between the wickets, happy to block out balls – there were 187 dots in the innings – until suddenly throwing the popcorn in the air in big-hitting panic and getting out. Malinga, still a crowd favourite after all these years and who, incidentally, can still touch his toes at the start of his spells, had time to swat a burly boundary before being last man out, with three balls of the innings to spare. Things are likely to be rather more tense when England play here on Wednesday in what could be a sudden-death game against New Zealand. After the game Pretorius said: “The guys are stoked, we showed what we are capable of, I’m just sad that it’s too late.” England live in terror that the opposite could be true for them – they have already shown us what they can do, only to fall at the last.