Doctor Foster was always a preposterous melodrama, but one that was well acted, brilliantly plotted and compellingly told – in series one, at least. Yes, it strained credulity that an otherwise stable and competent GP such as Gemma Foster (Suranne Jones) would repeatedly breach patient confidentiality the second she suspected her husband of infidelity, or that any practice would allow a doctor’s close family members to register there. But if you could abandon all expectation of professional ethics, it was thrilling to watch her piece together the scale of her husband Simon’s deception and to see her tightly controlled fury build to an explosive finale. That episode started with her confronting Simon (Bertie Carvel) about his romantic and financial betrayals in front of his twentysomething mistress Kate (Jodie Comer) and her family, and ended with Gemma saving a stranger’s life. She was triumphant, Simon slunk off to London in shame and viewers were satisfied with a job well done. Then came series two, and the prognosis was bleak. Newly bullish and in possession of some fancy designer suits, Simon returned to the imaginary middle-class town of Parminster two years later, determined to ruin Gemma’s life and assume custody of their 15-year-old son, Tom. Not to worry, viewers thought. Surely she will come up with another fiendish scheme to see him off? Sadly, no. In its place, we were treated to a parade of divorced, middle-aged woman TV cliches, from Gemma drowning her sorrows in pinot to dating a patient (also her son’s teacher) and seducing Simon in a thwarted attempt at blackmail. Rather than righteously angry, she became pathetic and envious. Over the next few episodes, the exes rankled each other in petty and improbable ways: he trying to sell her house from under her; she inciting Kate (now his wife) to move to France and take their young daughter with her. This tit-for-tat built, until the last episode found Gemma bringing a suicidal Simon all the fixings for him to end his life and encouraging him to go through with it (just as the Hippocratic oath recommends). It looked as if their story might come to a bold if tasteless conclusion. Instead, the show pulled its punches at every turn, first making us think Simon had died, and then that Tom had, before setting up the supposedly shocking twist that Tom had run away because he couldn’t stand his parents’ constant conflict. Audiences felt much the same, but it was hard to believe he’d get far without his mobile or any money, and harder still to sympathise considering he had no discernible personality and his only previous plot point had been getting away with sexually assaulting a female classmate. The last scene showed Doctor Foster on her doorstep, delivering a cringe-inducing, fourth wall-breaking monologue in which she implored her lost son: “I’m here. Tom, I’m your mum. I’m sorry and I’m here. I’ll always be here.” Unlike the nursery rhyme, the show’s protagonist never actually went to Gloucester. Perhaps she should have – and stayed there.