Dear Diary, Not only have I got to learn my lines but I also have to do every single piece of homework and go to school. As Adrian would say: “Just my luck!” On a normal day of rehearsals, I leave school mid-lesson, at noon. When people ask: “Are you going to an appointment?” I say, “No I’m going to be in a West End show!” It’s a fun musical because 1, the script and music are absolutely hilarious and 2, it is all so relatable. The dances are super fun: one song, Misunderstood, is set at an 80s disco. The choreographer told us: “If you feel like what you are doing looks stupid and awkward, then you are getting it right!” Here’s a piece of literature on how I am a bit like Adrian: I can be over-dramatic at times,Fond of books, writing and dramaI’m awkward around girls, my friends are notI love playing Adrian, it’s so cool to be him… I know it doesn’t rhyme – that’s intentional! You have to work hard to play Adrian as you basically lead the show. The only time I really come off stage is to have a drink of water or a quick change. At the end I feel exhausted but excited to perform again soon. Yours faithfully, Aaron Gelkoff, aged 13 1/6 Dear Diary, We have rehearsed for a whole month, six days a week. By the end we had learned the whole show. One of my best friends, Mikey, is also playing the part of Adrian. We were in the musical Matilda together, where I had the role of Eric and went on to play Bruce so got to eat the cake! It’s been brilliant rehearsing with Mikey for the same role. Being in the West End is so exciting. My favourite part is the moment when you step out on stage. It’s awesome. Being an actor and a student at the same time can be quite challenging. It can be difficult to catch up – I have an app where my teachers post the homework so I can keep up to date with everyone else. I have read the first Adrian Mole book: it was my aunty’s when she was a teenager, so is very old, an original from the 80s. I found it really funny and could relate to some of Adrian’s problems. I have just started reading the second book. I really am quite like Adrian Mole in real life. I sometimes get spots on my nose and it’s really obvious and embarrassing – but I haven’t fallen in love yet! Nicholas ‘Nicky’ Antoniou-Tibbitts, aged 13¾ Dear Diary I love being in rehearsals: acting, singing and dancing. When I get home it doesn’t stop. I carry on practising my lines in my room late into the night – well, until Mum makes me go to bed. I loved seeing the set for the first time. There are pens, pencils and sharpeners everywhere. Some of the props are even from the 80s – really old! I always make sure I’m wearing my lucky red trainers when I’m travelling to the theatre. I’ve done this for every show I’ve ever been in and now I can’t stop! Sometimes it feels nerve-racking because I want everything to be perfect. But it is more exciting than scary. I get bored if I’m not working hard on something. Luckily I get more support from my mum and dad with my acting than Adrian does with his poetry! Being in the West End is really fun. It was amazing being the boy in The Snowman and Matilda was so cool. Now I’m Adrian Mole – I can’t believe it. Adrian is a great character to play because he is so dramatic about everything he does, even the small things! I enjoy how he takes himself so seriously. Michael ‘Mikey’ Hawkins, aged 12 ¾ Dear Diary, Being a teenage actor is no different from being an adult actor really. The hardest bit is that it’s so exhausting. Whenever I have a day off, I always try to sleep but I’m not very good at sleeping so I usually just end up practising. Usually, when I go to auditions as teenager, I am going for roles that are rather a lot younger than me. It is very rare that I come across a role that is a similar age to me and has a very similar personality to me. I’ve done panto with Craig Revel Horwood and was William in Goodnight Mr Tom last summer which was completely different and quite serious. Adrian is an amazing character and doesn’t actually have that much of a different life from me. I live with my parents and my big brother and younger sister. It’s a busy, noisy family home with everyone coming and going, and trying to get along but with the odd argument – especially about which of us children is going to unload the dishwasher. Everyone can relate to Adrian … even girls! Everybody has a bit of Adrian Mole in them. Rufus Kampa, aged 13 and 1 day The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾ – The Musical is at the Ambassadors theatre, London, until 12 October