The London Metal Exchange has issued a daytime drinking ban for its 120 trading floor members, cracking down on a reputation for boozy meetings and liquid lunches chronicled by the former trader Nigel Farage. The ban affects staff employed by members of its trading floor, including clerks and traders, who set prices for industrial metals around a ring of red leather couches. They will now be required to stay sober throughout the working day. LME members’ drink-fuelled lunches have been detailed by Farage, who worked at the exchange after leaving school and counted among his favourite City haunts the Lamb pub in Leadenhall Market. The move comes months after the LME issued its first ever code of conduct, after coming under fire for hosting a cocktail party at the Playboy Club in Mayfair. The code stresses that drinking at LME-branded or third party events should be in “moderation”, and that events should not be held at venues that make some members uncomfortable. Men make up the majority of the exchange’s floor traders. An LME spokeswoman said: “The LME has broad powers under its rulebook to ensure fit and proper behaviour on the ‘ring and ring’ dealing, and members have policies and procedures in place regarding the behaviour of their staff while conducting business on the ring. “The LME appreciates the high standards upheld by its members, and has formalised the general position that ring-based personnel should not consume any alcohol prior to conducting business.” The exchange has not given details details of how it will punish those who flout the new rule, which was first reported by Bloomberg. It is understood the ban has been introduced partly because of a recent surge in trading, which has raised concerns that investor cash could be put at risk by drink. The tougher rules on alcohol consumption are also part of a wider crackdown on unsavoury behaviour across the City, which is trying to shed its reputation as a boys’ club. The insurance market Lloyd’s of London made headlines in 2017 for similarly banning its 800 direct employees from drinking during working hours. This year the ban was extended; people believed to be under the influence of drink or drugs are barred from entering the building. About 40,000 people have passes to Lloyd’s, which also pledged to turn its on-site bar into a coffee shop.