For a long time – years, in fact – Bob Bob Cité sat on my “It’ll never happen” list, along with other planned restaurants too preposterous to exist. Every time it slipped down the schedule, after yet more delays to this £25m refit, I had a touch of the Statler and Waldorfs. Owner Leonid Shutov’s plan was to commandeer level three of the £225m Leadenhall Building – or the Cheesegrater as it is unaffectionately called by Londoners who powerlessly acquiesce to these cute nicknames for hideous skyscrapers. Shutov would create a bigger, better, kookier, mid-air version of his firstborn, Soho’s Bob Bob Ricard. It’s worth noting that the original, classic Bob Bob feels like a fictitious, Kardashian-class Trans-Siberian Express dining carriage envisaged by Tim Robbins. It is a dark, glamorous, wilfully daft caviar-and-chicken-pie palace. “Press for champagne” tempts a button at every booth; and, as gimmicks go, that one has never got old. The all-new, reimagined Bob Bob would feature, we’d heard, rare Japanese bookbinding paper on the walls, identical twin private dining rooms – one in red and one in blue; 1888 Baron de Sigognac armagnac on the menu at £830 a pour, and 48,000 rare imported wall bolts pinning the whole hot mess together. You could still press for champagne, but now your table number would flicker on a ticker-tape neon track running around the walls. The highly respected chef Eric Chavot joined the project and stayed put, despite Bob Bob Cité feeling, at times, as imminent as a Morrissey and Marr reunion or a new George RR Martin release date. But I have eaten those words – with a side of escargot en persillade. Bob Bob Cité is open and, like it or loathe it, you cannot possibly ignore it. It is vast, eccentric, luxurious and shiny – oh so very shiny, like having dinner on the bridge of the Starship Enterprise. I ate twice here in one week, lingering on both occasions for multiple hours, chipping away at Chavot’s world-class, sturdy onion soup with baguette et beurre d’Isigny, or demolishing the excellent, albeit flamboyant, lemon meringue tart. Because, in the privacy of a Bob Bob Cité booth, with such good service and the real world so very far below, there’s a level of escapism that is wholly seductive. Restaurant World is on shaky ground in 2019, but at Bob Bob Cité it’s 1997: London is swinging, money is flowing; let’s all have a round of -18 degree Imperia vodka shots in tiny fancy glasses and stay out until one of us is pregnant by a Gallagher brother. I must stress that Bob Bob Cité is more than a triumph of posh hand soap, imported lampshades and over-delicious food. What Shutov’s eccentric dreamscape needed was a base of solid French cooking, and though Chavot’s relatively short menu is rife with Gallic glamour, you will be fed. You won’t leave hungry – bankrupt, perhaps, but not hungry. There are oysters gratinée teamed with black truffle hollandaise, and a good, fresh salade de tomate with silverskin anchovies. There’s a small, fat bowl of Scottish rump beef steak tartare with soft-boiled quail’s egg and, from “les grillades”, a ribeye steak with shallots at £32 and lobster thermidor at £48.50. Perhaps the best thing on the menu is the relatively simple grilled sea bream, its skin rubbed with lemon and saffron, that comes served with roasted cherry tomatoes – a snip at a mere £35. The language of Bob Bob Cité’s menu is a sort of restaurant Esperanto: thick slices of smoked salmon on a fancy, caviar-strewn potato salad are “chunky saumon fumé” – despite that sounding like something deluxe one might buy in Aldi for a cat. The vegetable pie has been sent to Siberia, returned to London via Paris, and is now on menu as “Le ‘Pie’ du Maraîcher”. It is a delicate, flat, delicious, prettily embossed, heart-valve-clogging dish of jerusalem artichoke and king oyster mushrooms in a sea-green champagne and truffle velouté. “I am eating a small mushroom pie for £21.50 and it doesn’t even have a pastry bottom. The chips are an extra seven pounds,” I text to my brother as an act of wilful and ongoing north/south provocation. “Absolute robbing bastards,” he replies, as is standard, eating a Ginsters Piri Piri Slice in a layby. “You understand nothing about fine dining,” I reply, airily. One of us is certainly in the right here. But after many years, I’m still just not sure who. • Bob Bob Cité 122 Leadenhall Street, London EC3, 020-3928 6600. Open all week, noon-3.30pm, 5.30pm-midnight. About £70 a head, plus drinks and service. Food 8/10Ambience 8/10Service 10/10