Last summer, Emily Atack was, as she puts it, “heartbroken, depressed, frustrated, bored”. Her relationship had ended, and her last few films – Patrick, a live action Disney family comedy, and Lies We Tell, a crime thriller starring Harvey Keitel – had flopped. She was also broke. “I needed a new path, and guidance,” Atack says as she gazes out over the Thames from the balcony of a London hotel and sips a coffee. “Money and career aside, I didn’t know who I was or where I belonged any more.” After Atack’s breakout role in the Bafta-winning E4 teen comedy The Inbetweeners, it seemed she would be for ever imprinted on the public imagination as her character Charlotte “Big Jugs” Hinchcliffe. The series ran from 2008 to 2010, after which she at first worked continuously, often cast in films as either a sex symbol (2014’s Almost Married) or the girl next door (2016’s Dad’s Army). An attempt to rebrand herself as a serious actor had limited success. “I’m in a Disney film with Jennifer Saunders; no one’s watching it.” But Atack did have another option. She knew that the producers of I’m A Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here! wanted her on the show. They had already asked her to appear three times, and each time she had said no. Then, in 2018, when they came knocking again, Atack thought: why not? “In this business, if you want to survive, you’ve got to recreate or re-brand yourself. I thought: OK, how about I start saying yes to a few things rather than saying no, and see what happens.” The rest is history. Atack came second in the 18th series of the show, losing out to Harry Redknapp. Young, female viewers in particular took to her fun-loving attitude and struggles with body image. Her spell on the show cemented her place as Britain’s collective big sister: the sort who drinks too much prosecco, tells filthy jokes and hoists up her dress to show you her Spanx. On leaving the jungle, Atack signed an endorsement deal with the online brand In The Style rumoured to be worth £500,000. In keeping with the body-positive message Atack espoused in the bush, the company pledged to stop airbrushing on its website. Atack has just completed a sold-out nationwide tour of her debut one-woman show Talk Thirty To Me, a mishmash of anecdotes about her wild party days, alongside heartfelt reflections on what it is to be a young woman in the public eye. A book, based loosely on the show’s themes of turning 30 and loving yourself, will be released later this year. A documentary series, Emily Atack: Adulting, starts this week on W. One scene from Adulting features Atack having a fertility test, on screen. Like Atack, her ovaries are over-achievers. “Sixteen follicles!” quips the doctor examining her. “Well done you!” (A follicle count of around 10 would be average.) Having a fertility test felt both reassuring, and also nerve-wracking, she says: “When you look at your body like that on a screen, and you know the science of it all, you go: ‘Right, OK, so in two years’ time that will diminish.’ You do need to think about it. The doctor even said to me: ‘Well done for getting this checked out.’” Although viewers might struggle to understand Atack’s concerns about her fertility at her age, she worries about it because most of her friends have already started having kids. “It’s normal to be in the industry and not have kids right now, because everyone’s very career-savvy. But because I don’t surround myself with that, but with my mates I’ve been hanging around with since I was 12, they’re all doing the Bedfordshire baby thing. I think, should I be doing that?” Atack comes from a show-business dynasty. Her mother, Kate Robbins, is a comedian best known for her work on the satirical show Spitting Image. Her father, Keith Atack, is a musician, and Paul McCartney is a relative. Growing up, famous friends of her parents were constantly around. She reminisces about popping over to Victoria Wood’s house, and going to a Steps gig with Julie Walters and Dawn French. Despite her starry background, Atack is curiously classless in real life – you would never associate her with the other privileged scions of celebrity families. She attributes this to her parents’ decision to send her to a state school. “We grew up very normal kids – I hate the word normal, because it makes it sound boring. I don’t mean that. It was just a very suburban, ordinary school. I love my parents for not sending us to private school. I’m still friends with all the people I went to school with now.” Atack has very much branded herself as an ordinary woman, trying to make sense of a quarter-life crisis.It is a savvy move – who doesn’t, approaching 30, sometimes feel lost? But I’m not buying it. She doesn’t look as if her life is a shambles. If anything, things are going superbly for the 29-year-old: her career is flying, and she is in a relationship with the film producer Rob Jowers. It is a remarkable turnaround, given where things were a year ago. Is she really as shambolic as she would have us believe? “To be honest, if I look at my life as a whole, it’s in a million times better place than it was,” she admits. “So in that sense, absolutely, I’m getting it all together.” It is easy to forget how long Atack has been in the business – she was 17 when she was cast in The Inbetweeners. She then became a regular fixture in lads’ magazines – the covers are still hanging on her living room walls. “I was getting all of these glamorous, sexy, girl-next-door-type roles, and that’s great. I was all: ‘Hey, I’m sexy!’ Posing in my pants. But you can’t do that for ever. You especially can’t do that, if – like me – you love going to the pub and you love Christmas Day dinners every weekend. The point is, my body was becoming way more womanly, and I wasn’t looking like the girl next door any more.” When the sexy ingenue roles started to dry up, Atack changed direction. “I did this whole thing of going: ‘I want to be taken seriously as an actor, I don’t want to be this pin-uppy type any more, I’m going to dye my hair brown and try and do that. I’m an actor now. I’m going to play police officers.’” It didn’t work. “Once you’ve cemented a vision in people’s minds of what you are in the industry, that’s the only way people see you.” Meanwhile, light entertainment kept calling. “I was knocking on all these doors, trying to get into a party I just wasn’t invited to,” she laughs. “And then I had the party of light entertainment, going: ‘You’re invited! Come here!’ And I’d been saying: ‘No, no no’ for ages. And then I thought: You know what? This is the party I’m going to go to, where I’m invited, and where I can be the best version of myself that I can be.” But persuading her agency that she was going to pause her acting career was a struggle. “I had to be honest with them and just be like: ‘Guys, I’m not trying to be the next Keira Knightley. Let’s stop banging on this door. We were aiming for the wrong target.’” For much of her career, Atack has been viciously harassed about her appearance online, so I’m A Celebrity also offered the chance to have a digital detox. “I’ve got this opportunity to not have my phone and to not be anxious about social media, and not be called fat for a bit.” Atack is candid about how loving her body in an industry that fetishises extreme thinness can still be a daily struggle. “I so badly want to sit here and go: ‘I love my body.’ But I can’t lie and say it doesn’t upset me when I get called fat.” In one telling moment from her new series, Atack admits to worrying about her weight 80% of the time. “Even when I’d left the jungle, and I had lost a stone and was feeling the best I’d ever felt, I was still thinking: ‘I’ve got to keep this up.’ If I wasn’t in the industry and I just had a regular job, working in an office, I would probably love the way I look.” Watching Atack’s career go from strength to strength is satisfying, because she spent so long being the butt of the joke. “I’m still struggling to find my voice on panel shows,” she says of her time as a guest on Celebrity Juice. “There’s an element of sexism in it at times. People just don’t really laugh at your jokes if you’re the young girl on a panel show.” She sees the standup tour, and her forthcoming book, as opportunities to prove her mettle. “I’ve got blonde hair and wear extensions and fake tan and false eyelashes. I’ve always been judged for that … [I’m] the punchline. And I’ve just had enough. I wanted to prove you can have blonde hair, fake tan, false eyelashes, and still write about things, still know about things, still have decent things to say.” Emily Atack: Adulting is on W on Wednesday at 10pm