I ordered two new smartphone contracts for myself and my wife. My wife decided to go for a different handset, so I cancelled her contract and reapplied. On the delivery day, I called to find out when it was coming, only to be told the order had been cancelled. No one could tell me why. I ordered again with a different company, and was told I’d receive delivery the next day. Soon afterwards, they called to say I’d failed a credit check. I immediately tried another online company only to be refused again. I think my credit score immediately dropped because of these applications. My biggest problem now is how do I have all of this reversed so that I can get a new phone, and will it now affect my credit report? SH, London Several applications in quick succession can compromise your credit rating because it could signify desperation or fraud. A credit report doesn’t show whether you were refused credit, only that you’ve requested it and your score is affected by how recently you applied. The credit search performed by the lender, in this case mobile phone companies, remains on your report for up to two years, although most lenders are only interested in the last three to six months. One new contract can temporarily reduce your score by a small amount. “This is why we always encourage people to fully investigate any credit refusal before trying again,” says James Jones of credit reference agency Experian. “With credit provided through a store, you will usually need to get details of the finance provider’s underwriting department and ask them to reveal the main reason. They have to tell you and once you know, you’re in a much better position to work out what to do.” Check your free credit report at all three credit reference agencies (Experian, Equifax and TransUnion) to make sure there are no errors, then continue tracking the guide scores and wait three to six months until your scores recover. Report checks count as soft searches and don’t affect your score. In future, leave gaps of around three months between credit applications. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions