Johanna Konta’s Paris dream refuses to end, as she buried an in-form Sloane Stephens on the rebuilt clay of Court Philippe Chatrier, 6-1, 6-4 to become the first British semi-finalist here since Jo Durie in 1983. It was a stunning performance, one of the best in her career, 71 minutes packed with searing serves, six aces among 25 winners, to leave the 2018 finalist clueless from start to finish. “That was one of the best claycourt matches – ever,” was Chris Evert’s final judgment. “I could not see this coming. But all credit to Jo Konta. I’m speechless. Not even giving her a glimpse ... Jo Konta I take my hat off to you.” Evert, by the way, had confidently predicted victory for her compatriot. Annabel Croft described Konta’s tennis as, “faultless”. The only point she dropped on serve in the second set was a double fault. “Sloane looked shell-shocked.” Konta, predictably, tried to keep a cap on her emotions, but did say courtside, “This is my first match on the new Chatrier, and playing the way I did against one of the best players in the world, I’m feeling really proud of myself. Dealing with the super-windy conditions against an opponent like Sloane, I was just pleased to keep her on the back foot a little bit.” Konta, who saved a break point and held through deuce in the first game of the match, crafted two chances in the fourth game, and cashed in for a 3-1 lead. Stephens, who is always dangerous with her heavy, precise groundstrokes, took a couple of points off the Konta serve but couldn’t crack it, and the British No1 could hardly have been in a better place towards the end of the first set, after 25 minutes of engrossing tennis. The American, a US Open champion and a finalist here 12 months ago, might have thought she was playing herself, so pinpoint direct were the replies coming across the net. Particularly memorable was a backhand return into the deuce corner that left Stephens gob-smacked and rooted to the clay. She got back in the fight but was again helpless when Konta stuck a hard, flat forehand beyond her reach, and served for the set. After half an hour, she had three set points and four aces on her log, and needed just two of them as a buttress against an opponent who had pretty much given the frame up, hitting a tired forehand long. This was as good as Konta can play, and a deal better than Stephens was managing in response. If Konta played her best ever tennis to beat Donna Vekic in the fourth round, this first set was a notch up from that. Her challenge was to sustain a level that must have surprised even her – and probably her low-key coach, Dimitri Zavialoff. There was no hiding place for Stephens in the second set, as Konta kept up the machine-gun pace to break her for the third time. Down a set and 1-3 with ball in hand, Stephens looked distinctly uninterested until she found a couple of huge forehands and a good serve to hold to love. Against Garbine Muguruza on Sunday, she began slowly and found some gears to win in three sets; against Konta she was stalled in the starting blocks for a worryingly long time, throwing her hands in the air as winner after winner sped past her. Confusion and despondency was etched on her face. Konta, meanwhile, was inscrutable, giving nothing away, as ever. Evert, commentating on Eurosport, observed as she cruised towards the finish line, “Playing like this, there isn’t anyone who could beat her.” Stephens went to the service line after just over an hour needing to hold to stay in the tournament, and just hung on. Having not dropped a single point on serve in the second set, Konta hardly lacked for confidence; could she steady her nerves, though? Indeed she could. While she did double fault to finally drop a point on serve, she took the first of two match points with Stephens’s final forehand edging on the wrong side of the white line.