Iran has said it will not hesitate to respond to any repeated attempt to violate its sovereignty, in the wake of the downing of a US drone that sent tensions between Washington and Tehran rocketing. In a culmination of deteriorating relations since Donald Trump walked away from the Iranian nuclear deal with world powers in May last year, Iran shot down a US Global Hawk surveillance drone on Thursday and Trump ordered limited air strikes as a reprisal. But he cancelled them, by his own account, only 10 minutes before launch because of concerns over likely deaths. On Saturday, the Iranian foreign ministry summoned a United Arab Emirates envoy to complain about the UAE allowing the US drone to be launched from a US base on its territory, the Iranian Fars news agency reported. Foreign ministry spokesperson Abbas Mousavi told the semi-official Tasnim news agency: “Regardless of any decision [US officials] make, we will not allow any of Iran’s borders to be violated. Iran will firmly confront any aggression or threat by America.” A senior commander of the elite Revolutionary Guards struck a similarly defiant note, in comments quoted by the Islamic Republic News Agency (IRNA). Brig Gen Amirali Hajizadeh, head of the Guards’ aerospace division, said: “This is our response to a violation of Iranian space and if the violation is repeated then our response will be repeated. It’s possible that this infringement of the Americans was carried out by a general or some operators.” The firm reiteration of Tehran’s position comes after Trump threatened Iran with “obliteration” in the event of a war in comments to NBC’s Meet the Press in an interview due to air on Sunday. However, Trump also said he was open to talks without preconditions and suggested Iran’s nuclear programme and US sanctions would be the only subjects of discussions, adding to the confusion over Washington’s position. Other US officials have listed an array of demands Iran would be expected to meet, and have been vague whether any or all are preconditions for a return to dialogue. “Trump is notoriously mercurial but one thing he is consistent on is that he does not want to drag the US into a new war,” said Thomas Juneau, a former Canadian diplomat and assistant professor at the University of Ottawa. “His face-saving solution is to say he called off a military strike on Iran. We have avoided direct violence, but the underlying issues are still there with no off-ramp or process at this point that could lead to a de-escalation.” In the interview with NBC, Trump insisted he did not want a war with Iran but if a conflict did break out there would be “obliteration like you’ve never seen before”. “But I’m not looking to do that,” he said. “You can’t have nuclear weapons. And if you want to talk about it, good. Otherwise, you can live in a shattered economy for a long time to come.” The combination of dire threats and openness to freewheeling dialogue echoes Trump’s approach to North Korea in 2017. Unlike North Korea, however, Iran does not have a nuclear arsenal and is deeply sceptical of talks with the US after Trump reneged on a multilateral deal on limits to Iran’s nuclear programme agreed in 2015 with European states, Russia and China. A diplomat in the region said: “Iran doesn’t just feel attacked by the military threat. It’s mostly by the sanctions. Even if the US doesn’t attack, Iran will perceive the sanctions as an escalation and may feel they have to respond to those. I don’t think the US understands this. “Trump presents himself as open to negotiations, but he isn’t really. He won’t remove sanctions and rejoin the [nuclear deal] and anything he says isn’t credible because he pulled out of that agreement in the first place.” In London on Saturday, the British government said a Foreign Office minister would visit Iran on Sunday to call for “urgent de-escalation in the region”. The ministry said: “At this time of increased regional tensions and at a crucial period for the future of the nuclear deal, this visit is an opportunity for further open, frank and constructive engagement with the government of Iran.” To NBC, Trump denied a report that US planes were in the air when he aborted the attack on Thursday night Washington time. He said: “No, but they would have been pretty soon, and things would have happened to a point where you would not turn back, you could not turn back. Nothing was green lighted until the very end because things change.” The president gave an account of his decision-making process, saying it hinged on the issue of likely casualties. He said his generals came to him about half an hour before the strikes were to begin. Accounting to his account, Trump told them: “I want to know something before you go. How many people would be killed, in this case Iranians?” Trump recalled: “[They said] ‘Sir, I’d like to get back to you on that’ – great people, these generals. They came back and said: ‘Sir, approximately 150.’ He went on: “I thought about for a second and I said, ‘You know what, they shot down an unmanned drone, plane, whatever you want to call it, and here we are sitting with a 150 dead people that would have taken place probably within a half an hour after I said go ahead.’ And I didn’t like it, I didn’t think, I didn’t think it was proportionate.” There has been some scepticism about Trump’s account. The Washington Post quoted US officials as saying the president had been given casualty estimates earlier in the day and had still approved the operation, which would likely have used Tomahawk sea-launched cruise missiles aimed at anti-aircraft batteries and other military targets. Trump has tweeted there were three targets in all. According to the New York Times, the casualty estimate was supplied by Pentagon lawyers and passed to the president by White House counsel Pat Cipollone, bypassing hawkish national security aides. Tucker Carlson, the rightwing talk show host, reportedly told Trump a conflict with Iran would torpedo his chances of re-election. The Times also quoted Gen Jack Keane, a retired army vice-chairman close to the Trump White House, as saying the president received information that Iranian leaders were furious with the local commander who had ordered the Global Hawk to be shot down. Another, unnamed official said there was concern that the Global Hawk and P8 spy plane carrying a substantial crew which the Iranians say was shadowing the drone, had violated Iranian airspace at some point in their flight over the Strait of Hormuz. US defence officials have hitherto insisted that the drone stayed more than 34km from the Iranian coast, well outside Iranian airspace.