When Christopher Hassall was writing his biography of the poet Rupert Brooke in 1962 he found the woman he most wanted to interview, Noël Olivier, with whom Brooke had had an on-off relationship for four years, maddeningly uncooperative. To his chagrin, she simply could not see why her own story – she had lived a long and professionally successful life in her own right – should be subsumed into Brooke’s, and she frustrated Hassall at every turn. Subsequent biographers didn’t fare much better, though they rightly sensed that understanding Olivier and her three sisters, all of whom had known Brooke, was key to understanding his milieu. In this compelling biography Sarah Watling tells their tale for the first time. It is the story of the end of Victorianism and the birth of the modern age. It is also, grippingly, the story of the early feminist movement, and a vital contribution to the construction of an alternative women’s history. The Oliviers grew up at the turn of the 20th century in the Fabian Eden of Limpsfield in Surrey, surrounded by Russian anarchists and writers and intellectuals. The sisters were raised in line with “principles of freedom”, which included being allowed to roam, climb trees “like monkeys” and skin rabbits – leading their nursemaid to wonder “if all Socialist infants are so exhausting”. They were fortunate, at a time when any sort of intellectual study was believed to be damaging to the female reproductive system, to have a father, Sydney Olivier (later a member of Ramsay MacDonald’s postwar Labour cabinet), who arranged tuition for them with a lecturer from University College London, while their mother, Margaret Cox, encouraged political engagement. For the Olivier women, suffrage, the burning topic of the day, was a family matter. Margery, the eldest sister, marched in suffrage processions beside her mother. The younger girls, Brynhild, Daphne and Noël, brimming with Olivier self-confidence, were dismayed at having to listen to men they regarded as “certainly not qualified to vote” discussing politics. All except Bryn took up the chance of a university education denied to the previous generation. They enrolled in Newnham College, Cambridge, but became frustrated with a society “that offered them these opportunities as gifts without extending them rights”. The bucolic idealism underpinning the Fabian worldview was expressed in the sisters’ passion for all things natural and outdoorsy. At Cambridge their circle included Brooke and his friends in the Apostles, who joined them in the communal camping expeditions for which the group became known. Insofar as they had a philosophy it was one in line with Rupert’s brand of bohemianism: an odd blend of athleticism, nudity and childlike camaraderie. During extended camping trips in the New Forest, Kent and Dartmoor they slept in the open, swam naked and developed indiscriminate but chaste crushes on each other. They were sometimes joined by the Bloomsberries James Strachey (brother of Lytton) and Virginia Stephen (later Woolf). Virginia, incorrigibly urban and sceptical, gave them the name “Neo-Pagans” while seeming flummoxed by the Oliviers’ self-sufficiency and lack of the usual feminine responses (“She has a glass eye,” she wrote waspishly about Bryn, “one can imagine her wiping it bright in the morning with a duster”). Brooke was equally vexed by them. He seems to have fallen for each of the sisters in turn, but his most persistent attachment was to Noël, whom he met in 1908 when he was 20 and she still a schoolgirl of 15. He does not come out of the episode well. After wooing her for years with mixed success, he was finally defeated by her sexual reticence and her determination to pursue a medical career and live an independent life. In a nasty letter he told Strachey, who was also in love with her, that there was no point in sacrificing their friendship “for an off chance at a cunt”, predicting that Noël would get her comeuppance one day, “when she’ll suddenly feel a sort of collapse & sliding in her womb, & incomprehensible longings. It’s when the ova suddenly begin popping out like peas.” It’s a valuable moment of insight into the tortuous psychosexual makeup of a man whom Watling otherwise treats only sketchily. In her admirable drive to foreground the women in this story, the male players can become two-dimensional. Brooke, who was struggling at the time with an awareness of his own bisexuality, suffered a nervous breakdown in 1912. Watling says nothing about the confusion and self-disgust that triggered his collapse, preferring to ascribe it to his simultaneous rejection by Noël and by another love interest, Ka Cox. She is quite brilliant, however, at gauging the Olivier sisters’ reaction to Brooke’s sudden apotheosis on his death in the Aegean in 1915 as patriotic demigod. Overnight, with the publication in the Times of an obituary written by Winston Churchill, “the flawed man of whom they had unfiltered experience was transformed into a mythological hero before their eyes”. Noël was excised from the sanitised memoir of Brooke rushed out soon after by Eddie Marsh, after which she steadfastly ignored requests by biographers to see his letters. She realised that the only way she could regain any control was to keep her own version of her life to herself. Watling approaches the ambitions and qualified successes of these four extraordinary women with even-handed empathy In these war years Noël emerges as a rare creature for her time: a woman of authority. Though many of the professional concessions recently made to women were being revoked, she followed up her training at the Royal Free Hospital by carving out a career in medicine in the 1920s and 30s. Her talent lay in making shrewd personal decisions: having thrown Brooke over, she accepted a proposal from a fellow doctor, an unflashy Welshman (“Why didn’t you marry one of those romantic young men? Why? Why?” Virginia cried) and went on to have four daughters of her own without giving up her job as a paediatrician. Her sisters weren’t always as canny. Bryn married a fellow “Neo-Pagan” but was surprised, when she had an affair, that her husband failed to share her l The ugly wrangle of their split (according to law he could divorce Bryn for adultery, but at first refused, while she was unable to divorce him on the same grounds) and custody battle over their children – the courts gave them to the father – were a rude awakening from Fabian idealism. “It did not occur to one that he would ever in any circumstances attempt to take advantage of such an anti-feminist law,” Bryn lamented.iberal opinion of her conduct. She found that “telling him simply ruined married life”: he promptly had a revenge fling. Meanwhile Margery, a no-nonsense economist who had always seen marriage as the death of a woman’s mental development, began to show alarming signs of delusional thinking, insisting that several men (including Virginia’s brother Adrian) were in love with her. Noël tried to refer her to Sigmund Freud for treatment, but he declined. Margery became increasingly violent and was evicted from various nursing homes before eventually being diagnosed as schizophrenic. You have to wonder what role the mood of conservatism after the first world war played in the disintegration of such women. Daphne, a teacher who survived her own brush with mental illness, reacted to a narrowing set of options by looking for fulfilment in spiritual terms, falling under the spell of Rudolf Steiner and his anthroposophical gobbledygook. Yet there were practical achievements too, as Watling points out: Daphne found a long-term purpose in setting up Britain’s first Steiner Waldorf school, Michael Hall, which flourishes to this day. Watling approaches the ambitions and qualified successes of these four extraordinary women with even-handed empathy. Her fragmentary method, consisting of large chronological leaps, will be disorienting for anyone who doesn’t already have a basic grasp of the context. But unlike Hassall and the generation of biographers before her, she has the radical good sense to investigate the Olivier story by starting with the Oliviers themselves. • Elizabeth Lowry’s novel Dark Water is out in paperback from riverrun. Noble Savages: The Olivier Sisters by Sarah Watling is published by Vintage (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.