It’s nearly a decade since Kate Atkinson’s gruff private detective Jackson Brodie last appeared in print. In the intervening years, Jason Isaacs has brought him to brooding life on screen in the BBC series Case Histories, named after the first Brodie book, and his creator has produced her most acclaimed historical novels, including Life After Life and its sequel, A God in Ruins, both of which won the Costa Novel award. Now, after three books set during the second world war (the Costa winners were followed by Transcription in 2018), Atkinson has returned to Brodie and a very contemporary theme: the sexual exploitation of women and children. Ten years since we left him, now living back in his native Yorkshire, Brodie’s solitary existence has been interrupted by the arrival of his 13-year-old son, Nathan, for the summer holidays. Negotiating the hazards of parenting a teenager in the modern world would be challenge enough for Brodie, whose age is left deliberately sketchy (though basic maths suggests he must be close to a bus pass), but his son’s privileged existence is a constant reminder of his own youth: “By the time Jackson was 13, his mother was already dead of cancer, his sister had been murdered and his brother had killed himself.” The weight of these early losses has always given Brodie a fierce sense of responsibility towards vulnerable children, but there’s a knowingness in the way Atkinson plays with one of the conventions of her chosen genre: the lone wolf detective with the tragic past. She has never been a straightforward crime writer, and in Big Sky, as in the four previous Brodie novels, she gives the impression of winking at the reader, making us complicit in the recognition of cliches and expectations. The playful literary tricks that she made overt in Life After Life and A God in Ruins – the deliberate flagging up of her fictional constructs – have always been more subtly present in the Brodie novels. There are frequent references to crime fiction and its tropes; characters often observe that they are engaged in something that might happen in a novel or a film, often with the wry acknowledgment that life isn’t really like that: “Running for the border, he thought, like a man in a book or a film, although he was neither, he was a man in his own life, and that life was falling apart. And there was no border to run for, unless you counted the invisible administrative one between North Yorkshire and Teesside.” Big Sky is laced with Atkinson’s sharp, dry humour, and one of the joys of the Brodie novels has always been that they are so funny, even when the themes are as dark as child abuse and sex trafficking. Brodie is hired by Crystal Holroyd, the surgically enhanced wife of a dodgy local businessman, who believes she is being followed. “Crystal was hovering around 39 years old, and it took a lot of work to stay in this holding pattern.” Crystal has overcome her own tragic past, as the victim of a historic paedophile ring involving senior establishment figures, many of whom were never named. The case is being reinvestigated on the quiet by a pair of young female detectives called Ronnie and Reggie (inevitably nicknamed the Kray twins); Reggie turns out to be Reggie Chase, who appeared in the third Brodie book, When Will There Be Good News?, as a 16-year-old orphan who saved his life. Her investigation begins to dovetail with Brodie’s, leading them to a showdown with a trafficking organisation that links all the novel’s disparate characters. If Atkinson relies heavily on coincidence, that too is entirely deliberate; “a coincidence is just an explanation waiting to happen”, is a favourite adage of Brodie’s. These have always been novels about character, and there are enough moments of tenderness between parents and children to balance out the cruelty inflicted on the young. Anyone familiar with Atkinson’s work will know not to look for easy resolutions or happy endings. “History repeating itself,” Jackson observes towards the end. “But then that was all that history ever did, wasn’t it?” There is one particularly pleasing incident of narrative justice, however; one of the men finally arrested in the historic abuse case is a peer of the realm, “a veteran and vocal anti-Europe campaigner”. Coincidence? Perhaps. • Big Sky by Kate Atkinson is published by Doubleday (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99