Slaven Bilic has been named as the new West Bromwich Albion head coach. The Croatian has signed a two-year contract and Albion hope his appointment will excite their supporters and take the club on a path that leads them back to the Premier League. Albion have been without a permanent manager since Darren Moore was sacked in March, and identifying a replacement has been a far from straightforward process. Jimmy Shan, the first-team coach, took over in a caretaker capacity and remained in that post until the end of the season, which finished with Albion losing on penalties to Aston Villa in the Championship play-off semi-final. In the month since that defeat Albion have worked their way through a long list of contenders, including Danny Cowley, the Lincoln City manager, Chris Hughton and Bruno Labbadia, the former Wolfsburg manager. Bilic emerged as the standout candidate, however, after a second round of talks. “I’m delighted with this opportunity of course,” said Bilic, whose last job was with the Saudi Arabian club Al-Ittihad. “We want to improve on the pitch and Albion have convinced me they want to return to the Premier League. Albion have a short-term project and a long project and they do not clash. They made it clear they wanted me to be the one to lead them in this and I didn’t think twice once they had spoken to me.” While the wait has been a little frustrating for some Albion supporters, the news that Bilic has accepted the post is likely to placate them. The 50‑year‑old is a strong personality, vastly experienced and will be a high‑profile name in the Championship. There will need to be a rebuilding job of sorts at the club, mindful of the need to reduce the wage bill after Albion failed to return to the Premier League at the first time of asking, but Bilic has clearly received assurances that the ambition is there to mount another promotion challenge next season. Albion are confident they have found the right man to deliver on that front. “From the moment we spoke to Slaven, we were struck by his enthusiasm and excitement about this challenge,” Luke Dowling, Albion’s technical director, said. “He is determined to get back to the Premier League and believes passionately that he can do that with Albion. “We believe he is a great ‘fit’ for us – his presence, experience and management qualities are just what we need.”