Paramilitaries killed at least 100 people when they attacked pro-democracy protesters in Khartoum on Monday, civil society groups in Sudan have said. Previous estimates put the number of casualties from the attack on a sit-in protest at around 60. However, the Sudan Doctors’ Committee, a group associated with the opposition movement, said on Wednesday that at least 40 bodies had been retrieved from the Nile and then disposed of by security forces. The feared Rapid Support Forces (RSF), paramilitaries armed and organised by the former dictator Omar al-Bashir, are blamed for the killings. Sudan has been under military rule since Bashir was ousted in April following massive demonstrations against his repressive regime. The force, which has a history of systematic human rights abuses, was also accused of further murders in the Sudanese capital and in its twin city of Omdurman amid scattered protests in recent days. Activists estimate 10 people were killed on Tuesday, including five in the White Nile state, three in Omdurman and two in Khartoum’s Bahri neighbourhood. The dead included several children, one aged eight. The doctors’ committee is the medical arm of the Sudanese Professionals Association, which has been leading protests against military rule. “Forty bodies of our martyrs have been retrieved from the Nile river yesterday. They were taken in pickups belonging to the Janjawid militias to an unknown destination,” it said in a statement on Wednesday. There was no independent confirmation of the claim but there have been repeated reports from witnesses and activists that the dead and injured had been thrown into the river, which flows through Khartoum, over recent days. Many protesters caught in the violence are still unaccounted for, and the death toll is likely to rise further. One activist in Khartoum, who did not want to be named, said: “We are still looking for my cousin. He was there … We are just hoping he is being cared for somewhere but can’t contact us.” Harrowing details of rapes by the paramilitaries are also emerging. At least one such assault took place when the RSF invaded a hospital close to the site of the sit-in where injured protesters were being treated. Others occurred in the street when paramilitaries chased and caught fleeing civilians, activists said. Jehanne Henry, the associate Africa director of Human Rights Watch, said the reports of sexual assaults were credible but the extent of such violence was unclear. Weam Shawga, a women’s rights activist, told the Guardian that she was threatened with rape by the RSF when they attacked the sit-in on Monday. “I was beaten with sticks and they told me that we could’ve raped you as we did with other women … We know that you are here because you want to have sex,” she said. Arrests of opposition leaders are continuing despite calls for restraint from international powers. The British ambassador in Khartoum, Irfan Siddiq, called the detentions “outrageous” and said confidence building was necessary, not further escalation. Gunfire was heard in Omdurman, the twin city of Khartoum, on Wednesday, as paramilitaries moved to break up dozens of barricades put up by residents. Six people were killed in the Ombada neighbourhood, including Alamein Ismail, a 22-year-old police officer who was waiting in front of a barber’s shop for a haircut when he was shot through the eye. “He crawled on his knees to the hair salon [to seek help] but people found him dead when they came out,” his cousin Amina told the Guardian. Residents in Omdurman are now carrying knives and sticks to protect themselves from thieves. One described a ghost town with no transportation or police. Adam Abakar, a mobile phone shop owner in Elshaby market, who was carrying a stick and a knife, told the Guardian he knew of people who had been “robbed and beaten up by thieves just for carrying mobiles and some cash”. Protest organisers have dismissed a call from Lt Gen Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, the leader of the Transitional Military Council (TMC) which currently rules Sudan, to resume talks. Negotiations between the TMC and opposition leaders had come close to a deal before breaking down around two weeks ago. Mohammed Yousef al-Mustafa, a spokesman for the Sudanese Professionals Association, said the proposal could not be considered “serious” when “Burhan and those under him have killed the Sudanese and are still doing it. Their vehicles patrol the streets, firing at people.” “We will continue in our protests, resistance, strike and total civil disobedience,” al-Mustafa said. Burhan, who took power in April after the ousting of Bashir, said on Tuesday that elections would be held within nine months and that all previous agreements with the main opposition coalition had been cancelled. The military’s move to oust Bashir, whose brutal and repressive rule lasted 30 years, followed months of protests that culminated in a massive demonstration outside the defence ministry in Khartoum. Burhan also promised an inquiry into the violence which he blamed on imposters “wearing RSF uniforms”. The RSF is largely composed of militia accused of systematic human rights abuses during the war in Darfur. The force is led by Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, known as Hemedti, who also serves as deputy head of the TMC. Leaders of the pro-reform opposition alliance said an open-ended civil disobedience campaign would continue to try to force the council from power. Protesters in Omdurman described running battles with the heavily armed RSF. “We didn’t let them breath. We blocked everywhere, until the RSF soldiers came and we had to escape, but returned even before they had moved onto the next barricade and shut our street again,” the leaders said. “We will keep going until the TMC has fallen. We don’t want to negotiate with them anything.” The crackdown has drawn strong criticism from the US, UK and other nations. However China, backed by Russia, blocked a bid at the UN security council on Tuesday to condemn the killing of civilians in Sudan and issue a pressing call from world powers for an immediate halt to the violence, diplomats said. Analysts say the countries with the most influence over Sudan’s military leadership are Egypt, its neighbour, and Saudi Arabia. Both have offered significant financial and diplomatic support to the TMC in recent weeks. Egypt has called for restraint but Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have not made public statements. Burhan visited Egypt shortly after the breakdown of talks with the opposition at the end of last month. After Cairo, Burhan went to the UAE where the powerful Emirati crown prince, Mohammed bin Zayed, vowed to help Burhan “preserve Sudan’s security and stability”. Dagalo, the RSF leader, visited Saudi Arabia days before the crackdown to meet senior officials.