Ford has confirmed that it will close its Bridgend engine plant in September 2020, with the loss of 1,700 jobs. Workers at the plant were informed of the decision on Thursday morning. The decision is a major blow to the local community, the British car industry and manufacturing capability in south Wales. Ford blamed the closure on the imminent end to a contract for engine production for Jaguar Land Rover (JLR), as well as a global decline in demand for the Ford engines made in Bridgend. Stuart Rowley, president of Ford in Europe, said the closure was prompted by the carmaker’s global cost-cutting drive – although he added that Bridgend was more expensive than other plants building the same engine. He said: “Changing customer demand and cost disadvantages, plus an absence of additional engine models for Bridgend going forward make the plant economically unsustainable in the years ahead.” Production of Ford’s 1.5 litre Dragon engines will cease in February, followed by the end of production for JLR in September 2020. The closure will cost Ford $650m (£512m) in redundancy and pension payments. Unite, which represents workers at the plant, said Ford had betrayed its workers. The union’s assistant general secretary, Steve Turner, said: “Ford will be taking an economic sledgehammer to the Welsh economy in an act of gross industrial sabotage if it doesn’t urgently reverse these closure plans.” The announcement is the latest blow to the British car industry this year. Honda announced in February that it planned to shut its Swindon plant in 2021 with the loss of 3,500 jobs, and Nissan has reversed its decision to build the new X-Trail vehicle at its Sunderland plant. JLR, owned by India’s Tata Motors, is also cutting thousands of jobs. JLR, which runs the largest British car-making operation, has come under pressure after a slump in sales in China. The Bridgend closure will leave Toyota’s Deeside engine plant and Aston Martin Lagonda’s new St Athan plant as the only major car-making locations in Wales. The Ford plant has manufactured petrol engines since 1980 and supplies the company’s factories across Europe. It had been thought to be particularly at risk, however, because the contract to make engines for JLR will end this year. Ford has three factories in the UK, the others being a diesel engine plant in Dagenham, east London, and a transmissions plant in Halewood, on the outskirts of Liverpool. The company is undergoing a round of steep cost-cutting around the world. It announced widespread job losses across its European operations in January and said it would consider closing plants.