Neil Woodford’s listed fund has sought to reassure investors after its share price ended a turbulent week for the renowned asset manager at a record low. Woodford Patient Capital Trust Fund told the City on Monday that it was “pleased” with the performance of its investments – but this did not prevent its shares hitting fresh lows in early trading. A week ago, Woodford, one of the UK’s best-known stock-pickers, banned investors from cashing out of his flagship vehicle, called Woodford Equity Income Fund, after being overwhelmed by customer withdrawals following a series of poor market bets. It has been suspended for at least four weeks. Woodford’s Patient Capital Trust Fund, which is listed on London’s FTSE 250 index, subsequently saw its share price tumble and it ended at 62.8p on Friday, a record closing low, down from 76p before Woodford gated the Equity Income Fund. In an attempt to calm investors’ nerves, Patient Capital Trust said: “The board is pleased with the operational progress of its portfolio companies, which the board believes continue to have the potential to deliver attractive returns, in line with the long-term mandate of the company. The operational performance of these businesses is not impacted by recent events.” Despite this reassurance, shares in Patient Capital Trust dropped as low as 59.2p on Monday. Susan Searle, chair of Patient Capital Trust, added: “The board is closely monitoring the situation and is engaging with its shareholders and advisers. Separately, the board is in regular dialogue with the portfolio manager. The board wishes to emphasise the long-term approach of the company and will continue to keep shareholders updated as necessary.” Woodford apologised to investors on YouTube on Wednesday, and at the weekend the chief executive of the stockbroker Hargreaves Lansdown, Chris Hill, also issued an apology, after thousands of the FTSE 100 company’s clients found their money trapped in funds run by Woodford. The wealth manager St James’s Place dropped Woodford on Wednesday, dealing another blow to the fund manager.