The first day my partner went back to work after we’d had a baby, I had to shower, eat breakfast and make my lunch at 4.30am. In the dark. Without waking the neighbours. I had no other choice. My partner’s 90-minute commute and his 7.30am start time meant he had to leave the flat at 6am and wouldn’t be home again until 7pm. Thirteen straight hours of keeping an utterly helpless infant alive, on my own, having never done it before. If I wanted to eat, wash the night’s sweat, breastmilk and mustard baby shit off my body and have something for lunch, then I had to get it all sorted while there was someone else on hand to hold, rock, soothe, bounce or wind our baby. Because my partner was retraining (after a career change in his early 30s) he was entitled to precisely no paternity leave. Not so much as a day to bond with, attend to or care for his son. Let alone me. At his employees’ discretion he managed to get five days off as compassionate leave. Which is why, less than a week after giving birth, with blood still flowing from my body, my pelvis still creaking back together and having had less than two hours of continuous sleep, I watched him cycle off into the cold pre-dawn air, the imprint of the baby’s sling still marked against his shirt, as I prepared to face my first day, alone, with a baby. If I’d had a caesarean, I might not yet have been able to stand. A new report published by Unicef has ranked the family-friendly policies of 41 high- and middle-income countries, including (in descending order) Sweden, France, Lithuania, Japan and the United States. The ranking was drawn up according to the length of each country’s paid maternity leave; duration of paid leave reserved specifically for fathers; the share of children under three in childcare centres; and the share of children between three and school age in childcare or nursery. It will come as no surprise to many British parents to read that the UK slides in at a cool fourth place from the bottom, just tipped to the last post by Cyprus, Greece and Switzerland. This final foursome proves, before you’ve even got into the meat of the thing, that wealth is no indication of quality of life, government support or family-friendly policies. As the report concludes, “even the world’s richest countries fail to offer comprehensive solutions to all families”. The support for mothers who struggle to breastfeed is being snatched away from us by government underfunding Here in the UK, we are trapped under a government absolutely beguiled by false economy. I’m not surprised that a decade of austerity has left us with internationally low rates of breastfeeding and poor attendance at childcare centres. Nor was I particularly shocked to read that, according to a survey by the National Childbirth Trust in 2017, half of all women experience a mental health issue during pregnancy and the first year of their baby’s life. As the journalist Luiza Sauma put it on Twitter this morning, “In my opinion, postnatal depression is a rather rational response to being left alone at home with a newborn baby and a traumatised body.” Funding cuts to health and social care services, enacted by the Tories, have already caused the closure of more than 1,000 Sure Start children’s centres, caused a shortage of 107,743 NHS personnel in England including over 3,000 midwives, and have seen health visitors either stretched to cover more than triple the recommended caseload, or their service quietly privatised. Meanwhile, cuts to local government budgets have been so vicious and so continuous that, all over the country, libraries, hospitals, community centres and leisure centres have had to close, leaving people with few, if any, places to turn for support during the endless, punishing early days of parenthood. According to the last UK-wide Infant Feeding Survey, conducted in 2010, increasing the number of babies who are breastfed could cut the incidence of common childhood illnesses such as ear, chest and gut infections and save the NHS up to £50m each year. And yet the support for mothers who struggle to breastfeed (myself included) is being snatched away from us by government underfunding. If we genuinely care about the health and prosperity of future generations then we, according to the report, must remove barriers to the take-up of childcare leave, especially those faced by fathers; enable all children to access high-quality, age-appropriate, affordable and accessible childcare centres, irrespective of their personal or family circumstances; fill the gap, where it exists, between the end of parental leave and the start of affordable and accessible childcare so that children can continue their development without interruption; and ensure that mothers can breastfeed both before and after they return to work by providing such things as guaranteed breastfeeding breaks, places to pump and store milk and quality childcare nearby. I would vote for that. I would vote for all of that. Instead, after those first, five heady days of co-parenting I was utterly and immediately submerged in a life of breastfeeding, cleaning, crying, fear and exhaustion, standing at the window, staring at the world, feeling entirely numb. Life was happening around me, I knew, as I turned circles inside a Tupperware box marked “motherhood”. Even with my unfathomable levels of privilege it was hard. It was bewildering. But it was also entirely avoidable. And I don’t just mean by moving to Sweden. • Nell Frizzell is a columnist and writer