After getting into hot water with DC Comics for an issue in which congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez looked a little too much like DC’s Wonder Woman, independent publisher Devil’s Due has hit back with a replacement cover – in which “AOC” looks remarkably like Supergirl. Devil’s Due said that it had been issued with a cease and desist letter from DC in May after it published a limited edition of its comic Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and the Freshman Force, showing her in an outfit like Wonder Woman’s, holding the American flag. According to Devil’s Due, DC said the cover “violates their Wonder Woman copyright”. Comics news site Bleeding Cool reported that the letter requested the edition, which only ran to 250 copies, should “not be distributed, but recalled and returned or destroyed”. Now Devil’s Due has released a replacement cover that it is calling the Cease and DCist edition. This time, AOC is depicted in an outfit that references the DC character Supergirl, Senator Bernie Sanders resembles the Green Lantern, and congresswoman Ilhan Omar echoes Batman. “A parody of a parody! Yet still somehow less of a parody than Washington!” says the cover. “Don’t be MAD. This isn’t about any actual DC superheroes.” Devil’s Due added that “although Wonder Woman and her attire make no appearance in the Cease & DCist Edition … it cannot confirm or deny whether her invisible jet is on the new cover”. Devil’s Due publisher Josh Blaylock said: “The irony is, the cease and desist was already a moot point by the time we received it. Regardless of it being unwarranted, as a retailer exclusive, the extremely limited amount of copies were already out of our hands. I’m assuming anyone who bought one is now awaiting trial in a Hall of Justice holding cell. Thoughts and prayers.” Just 500 copies of the latest variant cover are being published, with a portion of proceeds going to immigrant legal services provider RaicesTexas.org. Ocasio-Cortez previously told TMZ it was “incredibly humbling” to have been the subject of the comic book, and that she was especially honoured that proceeds would be given to RaicesTexas. “I’m just a normal person doing her best,” she said, expressing the hope that her character might inspire “a little girl somewhere.”