The books I am currently readingVolume 1 of a really good new collection of Katherine Mansfield’s letters, still in manuscript; Isabel Colegate’s Orlando trilogy; a tiny book of Camus’s speeches called Create Dangerously; and Arundhati Roy’s new essay collection, My Seditious Heart, every page of which gifts you her far seeing, her calm and intelligent urgency, the wisdom and relief of her articulacy, her courage. The book that changed my life Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye – but all of her writing does this every time – and her profound understanding of what books do and what they’re for. The book I wish I’d writtenThis changes by the week, month, day. Right now it’s Namwali Serpell’s The Old Drift, her debut novel and a sprawling lifeforce, a history of Zambia partly told by mosquitoes. The book that influenced my writingLewis Grassic Gibbon’s 1930s north-east Scottish trilogy, Sunset Song, Cloud Howe and Grey Granite. Not only did he invent a sentence structure that works like breath through the body of the reader, and a kind of Scottish English that’s simultaneously rich and spare, but these three novels taken together make a formally stunning and cunning work of art. The book that is most underratedDoes it help to think of books in terms of ratings? If lots of people really love something, then that’s great. If really good things get missed, then readers will find them eventually, because readers are indefatigable when it comes to the good. The writers I tend to remind people about, because I know the pleasure they’ll get if they haven’t yet read them, are the great Paul Bailey, the 1930s German writer Irmgard Keun, the new young Scottish writer Helen McClory and the mighty Helen Oyeyemi. The book that changed my mindIt’s not that it changed my mind, but that it freed my mind – Alasdair Gray’s 1982, Janine. I was 19 or 20 when I heard him read from this. I bought it and read it and knew then that fiction could do anything. The last book that made me cryLorenza Mazzetti’s London Diaries, her memoir of coming to London from Italy in the chaos and brokenness of the years after the second world war, how she met both casual cruelty and unexpected kindnesses, and how a smattering of luck, bravado and good friendship forged the film-maker and artist she became. It transmits the terrible fracture and surreality of aftermath as only a real admirer of Kafka could. The last book that made me laughNicola Barker’s I Am Sovereign, out next month. It’s about someone selling a house, and it’s about the human being as a home for the soul. It’s one of the funniest, most finely achieved comic novels, even by her own standard, and I think it’s a masterpiece. My earliest reading memoryThe Beatles’ 45 double A side “She’s a Woman” / “I Feel Fine”. I was quite small. I worked out the word “Beatles”, then “the”, and then because I knew the songs I worked out which words were which. My comfort readingAnything/everything by Muriel Spark. She discomfits us with such pleasure, such merriment, then returns us, via this merry intelligence, to a place where we can take real comfort in things. The book I most often give as a giftItalo Calvino’s Six Memos for the Next Millennium. I think it’s one of the best books about writing ever written. The book I’d most like to be remembered forI’m quite happy to be forgotten, thank you. But the book I’m happiest to have written so far is a novel called There But for The. • Spring by Ali Smith is published by Hamish Hamilton. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.