Virat Kohli has diagnosed tournament pressure as the reason for England’s predicament, with the India captain having previously expected Eoin Morgan’s side to dominate their home World Cup. Speaking as he prepared for Sunday’s crunch group game in Edgbaston – where tickets are changing hands for four-figure sums and a strong away support is expected – Kohli recalled his prediction a month ago that totals of 250 will be defended by sides. Asked about the hosts, who must surely win to keep their semi-final hopes alive, the 30-year-old replied: “Everyone is a bit surprised. We thought England were going to dominate in their own conditions. But I said before pressure is a massive factor, low scores have got to be defended. That was because I have played in two World Cups. Anyone can beat anyone. We got a scare against Afghanistan the other day. You can’t take anything for granted. “Other teams have outplayed England on occasions, that can happen to any side. England have to sort out their own issues, I guess. The more basic you can keep things at a tournament like a World Cup, the better. The more you attach emotion or excitement to it the more you put too much pressure on a situation.” Kohli, showing off the new orange-and-dark-blue change kit that India will wear for the match, knows all about pressure himself, having long dealt with the expectation of one billion supporters to become, almost inarguably, cricket’s greatest one-day batsman. Though he has only one ODI century from 27 innings on UK soil to date – 107 during a six-wicket defeat in Cardiff eight years ago – Kohli returns to the ground where, during last summer’s Test series, he produced a stellar 149 against the moving Dukes ball while his teammates floundered. Edgbaston, Sunday 30 June, 10.30am BST England Roy, Bairstow, Root, Morgan, Stokes, Buttler, Woakes, Moeen, Rashid, Archer, Wood. India Sharma, Rahul, Kohli, Shankar, Jadhav, Dhoni, Pandya, Shami, Kuldeep, Chahal, Bumrah Kohli said: “It would be a lie if I said I am not under pressure [when I come out to bat]. I am probably good at hiding it. Everyone feels pressure and butterflies in their stomach. I am glad I feel like that, if I didn’t I would probably not have enough motivation to play any more. It’s not about what you have done before, it is about that particular day. Maybe that’s why my body language is the way it is. Everyone feels pressure, it’s just the way you portray it to the opposition is what makes all the difference.”