New York Mets manager Mickey Callaway cursed at a reporter, and pitcher Jason Vargas had to be restrained from charging at him during a confrontation in the team’s clubhouse after a loss on Sunday. The confrontation with Tim Healey of Newsday occurred after the Mets blew a late lead in a 5-3 defeat to the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field. Reporters asked repeatedly after the game about Callaway’s decision to stick with reliever Seth Lugo during the eighth inning instead of going to closer Edwin Diaz. Lugo allowed a go-ahead, three-run homer to Javier Baez. After his standard postgame news conference, Callaway walked past Healey in the clubhouse. Healey told Callaway he would “see you tomorrow,” and Callaway responded by calling Healey a “motherfucker”. According to several reporters Callaway walked away and then returned, cursing at Healey again and telling Mets staff to “get this motherfucker out of here”. When Healey did not leave, Vargas, who did not play on Sunday, stared down the reporter and reportedly said “I’ll knock you the fuck out, bro.” Vargas then attempted to charge at Healey but was restrained by teammates Noah Syndergaard and Carlos Gomez. No blows were exchanged in the incident. Callaway told the public relations staff to “Get this motherf—-er” out of the clubhouse and when Healey didn’t leave, Vargas got into a stare down with him. Words were exchanged and Vargas had to be restrained from him. The Mets apologized to Healey in a statement hours later. Healey has declined comment. “The Mets sincerely regret the incident that took place with one of our beat writers following today’s game in the clubhouse,” the team said in a statement. “We do not condone this type of behavior from any employee. The organization has reached out and apologized to this reporter and will have further discussions internally with all involved parties.” The Mets were expected to challenge for the NL East but find themselves at 37-41, nine games out of first place and Callaway’s future as the club’s manager has been under question. They start a four-game series against Philadelphia on Monday.