Nick Kyrgios, the rebel without a handbrake, crashed through the barrier of acceptable behaviour yet again on Thursday, showering the respected chair umpire Fergus Murphy with so much invective he risked being thrown off the ATP Tour for the third time in three years. For all that Kyrgios might have had a case to make about a lousy line call in his 7-6 (4), 6-3 win over the Spaniard Roberto Carballés Baena, he could so easily have been evicted from the Queen’s tournament – as he was in Rome only a month ago, for hurling a chair on court. A punitive fine is the least he can expect for saying to Murphy: “Bro, you are taking the fucking piss mate. The ball was this far out, no joke. What are you doing? It’s so far long. Like, what are you actually doing up there? Bro, it’s taking the piss. I refuse to play. Your hat looks ridiculous, also. It’s not even sunny.” Murphy (who ignored Kyrgios’s jibe at his hat) gave him a code violation for unsportsmanlike conduct – and Kyrgios continued playing … and ranting, through one changeover after another, berating a lines official and making fun of his opponent. He called for the tournament supervisor, to little effect – and won the match, but still was unhappy. He chuntered constantly – at one point saying to himself: “So lazy, do something, so lazy you are. You were playing Fifa until 3am, what do you expect?” – but properly exploded only once in his second match, against the Canadian teenager Felix Auger-Aliassime, who mostly ignored the storm to win 6-7 (4), 7-6 (3), 7-5 and plays the tournament’s other hotshot, Stefanos Tsitsipas, in the quarter-finals. Eccentrically, Kyrgios, who served underarm four times (losing the point each time), played a shot between his legs on deuce to give up match point, then was easily passed at the net. Since he announced his arrival by knocking Rafael Nadal out of Wimbledon five years ago, Kyrgios has been suspended and heavily fined many times while simultaneously failing to live up to his immense promise. Those facts cannot be wholly unrelated. In his relatively short career, the Australian has been fined more than $190,000 and banned for a total of 12 weeks for swearing, tanking, unsporting behaviour and even taking a mobile phone on to court. He has greeted most of the penalties with a shrug. At times he has been contrite, promising to try harder – or even try at all. Yet he invariably returns to his default position, like an insolent child finding comfort in a tantrum in front of guests. He has beaten all the best and lost to others far below him in the rankings. Towards the end of last year, he revealed he was seeking professional help to address mental health issues. During a video interview this week with a young fan Vuk Vitic, Kyrgios smiled when it was put to him: “Some people told me – not me – that you don’t try sometimes.” He replied: “Yeah I don’t. Makes me a bad guy.” “You ought to try.” “Yeah, you’re right.” Yet, for all that Kyrgios engages empathetically with children, he struggles with authority – and with himself. He is the enigma code of tennis: unfathomable.