NSW five-eighth Kirra Dibb fired the Blues to a come-from-behind 14-4 win and a fourth-consecutive Women’s State of Origin victory over Queensland. The Blues were outplayed in the first half but came storming back into Friday night’s contest in the second 30 minutes, with Dibb having her fingerprints all over most of her side’s biggest moments. In front of a crowd 10,515 at North Sydney Oval, the 21-year-old turned on a masterclass in what was her representative debut. Queensland led 4-0 at halftime, should have led by more and looked set to break NSW’s stranglehold on the fixture. The home side had a chance to go ahead when halfback Maddie Studdon dribbled the ball behind the line and Shakiah Tungai latched onto it and seemed certain to score. But the Blues’ winger bounced the ball and was denied by the bunker. That’s when Dibb imposed herself on the game. She was instrumental in evening up the scores when she fired a cut-out pass for Jessica Sergis which caught the Queensland defence short. And after the crafty No 6 booted her side into field position with a 40-20, Studdon sent Tungai over. The No 5 made no mistakes this time to give her side the lead for the first time and they never surrendered it. The Maroons lost star winger Meg Ward to what appeared to be a knee injury. And when Studdon dummied her way through the line, it sealed the Blues’ fourth straight win over Queensland. Blues prop Simaima Taufua laid the platform for her side, running for a game-high 153 metres, while star centre Isabelle Kelly was also outstanding. Queensland had the lion’s share of field position and territory in the first half on the back of a 5-1 penalty count and the Blues’ poor kicking game. Tallisha Harden went close to opening the scoring, however Ali Brigginshaw’s final pass was called forward. Tazmin Gray finally broke the deadlock five minutes before the break to give her side a 4-0 lead at half-time, however the Maroons did not trouble the scoreboard again. Blues coach Andrew Patmore said after his side looked out-of-sync and were dropping balls at training during the week, he pulled them in for a truth session which turned around their camp. “We all realised we had a clunkiness early in the week,” Patmore said. “We had, not a crisis meeting, but a quick talk about it. They owned it. I led the conversations but they led the conversations and made sure we stuck together, settled out our differences, worked out our timing.” Queensland coach Jason Hetherington lamented that his side should have held a bigger lead at half-time but praised their efforts. “No, I would have liked a bit more,” Hetherington said. “We had a try disallowed with a forward pass and there were a couple of other little opportunities. I couldn’t have been prouder of the girls. We were better in the first half and the Blues were better in the second half.”