Fascinating reports from Italy suggest Gigi Buffon has an admirer in Marcelo Bielsa and could conceivably be on his way to Leeds once his contract with Paris Saint-Germain expires at the end of the week. As implausible and unlikely a move as it might seem, the Italian legend has “previous” played in Italy’s second tier, having been one of a few big name stars to stay with Juventus when they were demoted in 2006 as punishment for assorted shenanigans. When asked why he’d chosen to stay, the goalkeeper said it was an easy decision “because I’ve never won Serie B”. As luck would have it, he’s never won the Championship either. Cursed with the kind of itchy feet a liberal sprinkling of athlete’s foot powder just can’t cure, Christian Eriksen is headed for the White Hart Lane exit door and has been tipped to sign for Real Madrid. In an interesting twist to the story, the Sun say Tottenham have asked for Marco Asensio in exchange. Whether or not Zinedine Zidane would sanction such a move for a 23-year-old who has yet to maximise his enormous potential remains to be seen, as Real’s manager has previously insisted the winger has a big future at the Bernabéu. “I have spoken to him and told him that he will be fundamental to the team and I want him here with us,” Zidane said towards the end of last season, when asked to comment on apparent interest from Liverpool in his player. In a bid to prove the Hollywood maxim that “nobody knows anything”, the Mirror, by contrast, claim Eriksen’s mooted move to the Spanish capital has actually fallen through and maintain that the Dane will head to Manchester United or Juventus instead. Tottenham are also reported to have bid £17m for Fenerbahce’s Macedonian midfielder Eljif Elmas and are prepared to throw Dutch striker Vincent Janssen in to any deal as a sweetener. Having upset Celtic fans by abandoning their club in the middle of last season, Brendan Rodgers hopes to further irritate them by signing midfielder Callum McGregor for Leicester City. According to the Daily Record, Celtic chief executive Peter Lawwell has told his former employee that the 26-year-old is not for sale. Celtic are open to offers for full-back Kieran Tierney, however, but have turned their noses up at an opening bid of £15m from Arsenal. Diminutive Uruguayan midfielder Lucas Torreira could be leaving the Emirates after just one season, with Arsenal reported to be in talks with Milan over a £34m move that would involve an initial £7.13m two-year loan deal. Arsenal boss Unai Emery is also hopeful his Emirates overlords will release enough funds to allow him to bid for Crystal Palace winger Wilfried Zaha. In other news pertaining to Arsenal, Inter winger Ivan Perisic is reported to be angling for a move to the Emirates. The Croatian is unwanted at Inter, unlike Manchester United striker Romelu Lukaku and Lille’s in-demand winger Nicolas Pépé. Genk winger Leandro Trossard is in talks with Brighton, with reports from Belgium suggesting the 24-year-old will join Graham Potter’s Seagull revolution for the thick end of £18m. Meanwhile at Southampton, Dutch midfielder Jordy Clasie is in desperate need of a new home and could be sold to AZ Alkmaar. Premier League newcomers Sheffield United are courting Huddersfield captain Jonathan Hogg, while Burnley central defender Ben Gibson has been told he is surplus to requirements at Turf Moor and should find himself a new club. Aston Villa and Sheffield United are both interested in a player who would cost them around £15m.