I came out last year, just before my 34th birthday, as a bisexual woman. As a result, I regularly hear from people asking what they should do because they’re getting older and, sometimes, are more frightened to come out. I understand. I wasn’t sure what to do for a long time – I didn’t know if I was going to be accepted or understood. As a 35-year-old who had been previously engaged to a cis man and as someone who could have never imagined being publicly happy with a woman or nonbinary person – I empthasise. Coming out as bisexual – a misunderstood sexuality – added layers of insecurity and doubt. Will everyone think I’m just seeking attention? Do I just need more Instagram likes to make this go away? Just because I think Zoë Kravitz is beautiful does that really equate to being queer? Why didn’t you do this earlier? People look at me now, a vocal queer activist, and wonder what I’ve been doing for the past 25 years. I get asked what it was like to “live a lie”. It wasn’t a lie – I’ve always known I’m attracted to women, I just didn’t feel safe enough to say it out loud. There’s no denying the levels of doubt that enter your mind when coming out, but that’s the reaction to years of conditioning – to be a good straight Indian wife to a straight Indian man. I knew deep down that I was attracted to more than just men, but I wasn’t sure that it meant I was queer or that I could do anything about it. Yet as a straight-presenting queer, I had the privilege of taking my time in coming out. No one’s attacked me before for being different or assumed my sexuality. Safety is the key here – no one can expect you to come out until you’re ready, whether it’s because of your family, religion, culture, work or mental health. If the next generation of young people are taught the concept of different sexualities and genders in an open and transparent way it will help with their journey. But while this debate continues, more people will suffer with mental health issues, some will come out later in their lives because they don’t feel safe, many will harm themselves or be harmed by others. Although I want people to feel safe and comfortable before making any public announcements, I’m also aware of the nature of the world we live in. Homophobic attacks are becoming more common, having more than doubled in England and Wales since 2014; our trans (especially black) brothers and sisters are being killed. When Ann Widdecombe publicly says that science “may produce an answer” to being gay, she’s telling people like me that it’s not OK to come out. That there’s something wrong with us. This narrative has run deep in my life – from family to the media. People around me have used “lesbian” as a slur or the butt of a joke. The media gives a platform to homophobes. All this fuels uncertainty in the minds of LGBT+ people, it perpetuates mental health issues and creates a hostile environment for anyone considering coming out. It’s vital we change that narrative. Don’t let your friends call someone “gay” as an insult, don’t let people make assumptions about someone’s identity and don’t try to out someone before they’re ready to do it for themselves. Allies of the LGBT+ community need to create an environment of safety to allow us to feel welcomed. Understand that letting your children learn about all sexualities and genders won’t instantly make them queer – that’s not how that works. Children don’t hear about Henry VIII killing his wives and go around murdering their partners. Education is important for the wellbeing of all communities – whether immigrant or LGBT+. It took years of work before I could allow myself to feel comfortable in my sexuality. I found that my openness and mental health came hand in hand. My mind told me I was worthless, and so I didn’t believe my sexuality was of any importance. But part of my mental health issues were the result of the homophobia I had witnessed around me. I understand why it took me this long to come out, but perhaps if we can change the environment in which I grew up, it won’t take others so long. • Sharan Dhaliwal is editor of Burnt Roti