When I think of California, I think of two of my favourite pastimes: surfing and sourdough. Eight years ago, inspired by the San Franciscan sourdough revolution and the Tartine bakery in particular, I started my own sourdough called Cleo, which grew into a food-waste campaign called Cleo The Friendship Bread: an easy, zero-waste recipe for people to pass on with a little sourdough starter. When making sourdough, the usual approach is to overfeed the starter, which results in an excess that needs somehow to be disposed of. However, when used regularly – at least once every two weeks – you can feed your starter just the amount you need to make bread, and store a tablespoon of the mix in the fridge to build your starter back up each time. If, however, you do find yourself with too much starter, try these pancakes before it ends up in the compost bin. Pancakes are a delicious and thrifty way to use up excess starter after feeding if you don’t have time to make bread. Just one tablespoon of starter can be added to almost any amount of flour. The more flour, the slower the initial fermentation, but if the starter is active, it will eventually ferment. If you want to add a larger amount of starter, that’s fine, too – just make sure you add at least the same weight of flour to the starter and the same amount of water, so a ratio of 1:1:1. This will make sure the starter has enough food to rise and not be too sour. At least 1 tbsp active sourdough starter25g wholemeal flour per pancake25g filtered water per pancake1 pinch bicarbonate of soda (optional)Something sweet – date syrup, honey, maple syrup, etc – to serve (optional) Mix together the starter, flour and water and leave in a warm place for three to five hours for it to rise. If the starter is sluggish and inactive, add a pinch of bicarbonate of soda to help it rise. When the batter is airy, heat a thick-based frying pan over a medium heat, brush a touch of oil around the inside, then spoon in dessertspoonfuls of the pancake mix, leaving space for them to spread out. Cook slowly until golden brown, then flip and cook for a further couple of minutes. Serve with sweet syrup or your savoury topping of choice.