Tens of millions of people across South America were left without electricity early on Sunday after a massive power failure left Argentina and Uruguay almost completely in the dark. Argentina’s El Clarín newspaper said the “gigantic” power collapse had struck at just after 7am local time, affecting virtually the entire country as well as Uruguay, Paraguay and some cities in Chile. Argentina’s energy secretariat blamed the blackout on a failure in the transmission of electricity from the Yacyretá hydroelectric dam on the Paraná River and said it was working towards a “complete restoration” of power. The reason for the breakdown was not immediately clear. Una falla masiva en el sistema de interconexión eléctrica dejó sin energía a toda la Argentina y Uruguay. Ampliaremos con más información. #SinLuz #CortedeLuz “While the causes are still unknown, we estimate that electrical services may gradually begin to return in three hours,” Argentina’s largest electricity distributor, Edenor, announced on Twitter. But civil defense chief Daniel Russo warned it could take up to eight hours for electricity to return. Alejandra Martínez, a spokeswoman for Edesur, described the power failure as “an unprecedented event”. Only one region of Argentina - the southern archipelago of Tierra del Fuego - was reportedly unaffected. According to El Clarín – which described Sunday’s power cut as the worst in Argentina’s recent history – the outage paralysed part of the transport system in Argentina’s capital, Buenos Aires, stopping trains from circulating and knocking out traffic lights. Buenos Aires water company AySA asked residents to conserve water because the outage meant its distribution system was not functioning. The incident comes just over three months after a series of historic blackouts began to blight crisis-stricken Venezuela. Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, blamed those failures on US-backed saboteurs he claimed were waging “an electrical war” against his administration. But Maduro’s opponents and most specialists said corruption and poor maintenance of Venezuela’s electrical grid were the true explanations. Millions of Brazilians were affected by a massive blackout in 2009 that authorities said was caused by a failure in the transmission of electricity from the Itaipu hydroelectric dam.