As the United States prepare for their opening game in the Women’s World Cup on Tuesday against Thailand, it is easy to view the Americans as prohibitive favorites. The US are No1 in the Fifa rankings, defending World Cup champions, and boast some of the best players on the planet, with Megan Rapinoe, Alex Morgan and Tobin Heath spearheading their attack. But the Americans look at it differently. After all, a lot has happened in the four years since the Americans lifted the trophy in Canada. In 2016, they suffered their earliest exit in a major tournament ever, losing to Sweden in the quarter-finals of the Rio Olympics. They have been conceding goals at a worrying clip against top-10 teams, and in the run-up to the World Cup they have failed to beat fellow contenders France, England and Japan. But maybe that’s a good thing. Germany are the only team to have retained the Women’s World Cup, and one reason other teams – including the US – have failed may be the complacency that comes with sitting at the top. The US don’t have to worry about that. “We’ve had a difficult cycle,” Megan Rapinoe admitted shortly after the Americans arrived in France this month. “We’ve been up and down with performances and sometimes the results, not doing well coming off the 2016 Olympics. So, this group feels that motivation and desire to go and win it.” That Olympics loss has also encouraged the team’s coach, Jill Ellis, to squeeze out veterans in search of youngsters who can bring more dynamism and unpredictability. However, when push came to shove, and Ellis named her final roster for the tournament, she went with experience, giving surprise roster spots to veterans such as Ali Kreiger and Morgan Brian, who had been on the fringes of the squad. Now, just as in in 2015, the US will have the oldest roster at the World Cup. Yet Ellis has tried to evolve the USA’s game. The players are expected to push forward from all over the field, rotate and interchange, and use counter-pressing to win possession. It’s a high risk, high reward style that may leave the Americans vulnerable to counterattacks – and indeed the US conceded 10 goals in five games against top 10 teams this year. On the other hand, the Americans trust their ability to outscore anyone. Full-backs, including likely starters Crystal Dunn and Kelley O’Hara, will bomb forward and provide attacking outlets. Julie Ertz, the defensive midfielder, will join them. The Americans will resemble a battering ram, wearing opponents down. “There’s been a lot of talk that, ‘Oh, the back line is letting in a lot of goals’ but people seem to forget that the way our team plays, we commit a lot of numbers forward,” Dunn says. “We really do push numbers high – not to say we can’t recover, but there are risks that are taken with the way we play. We’re a transition-based team and we love to go forward, especially myself.” For years, fans and pundits have wondered whether the rest of the world had finally surpassed the US, a team that has always possessed superior grit and athleticism but not always the same technical finesse. The USA’s up-and-down form, including a 3-1 loss to France to open 2019, has only increased that discussion. The Americans have never failed to make the semi-finals of a World Cup, and making it that far would be a reasonable follow-up for the reigning champions. But a quarter-final exit would be a disaster. Unfortunately for the US, that is a realistic scenario, especially as the draw puts them on track to face powerhouses France or Germany in the quarter-final. Even if group-stage results shake up the bracket, it will be tough either way. That’s because no longer are the title contenders just the US and a couple of other teams. Several nations can win this World Cup, including some teams that play a more skillful, purposeful style than the Americans. England and the Netherlands, two teams who have never been considered contenders in World Cups past, are among that group. But the Americans are confident their own approach, which is just as much about a relentless mentality than any of Ellis’ tactics. “At the end of the day, it’s about winning,” Dunn says. “Looking back on a game, no one’s going to care about, did we connect all of our passes or did we outplay them? It’s about, did we win the game? I think the team that keeps that closest to their hearts is going to lift the trophy.” If this World Cup is decided by who wants it the most, the Americans are surely contenders. It’s not just the stinging loss in the 2016 Olympics that has added a push, but the gender equality lawsuit the players filed against the US Soccer Federation, which would make another rousing success on the biggest stage all the more useful. The players insist the lawsuit isn’t on their minds but it clearly looms in the background – Rapinoe says the players get “incremental updates” about the legal proceedings but “after the World Cup our attention can go back to that”. The Americans, of course, aren’t the only ones playing for loftier goals. Jamaica, for instance, has been severely underfunded by their federation and are keen to prove in their World Cup debut they are worth more investment. Players from Australia used the eve of the World Cup to call out Fifa on equal pay. Even France are playing to make more in-roads in a country that locals say has always cared more about the men’s team. In that sense, this World Cup feels more competitive and more pivotal than past editions. Not just because so many other teams have the talent to test the top-ranked Americans, but because more than ever, this tournament offers a chance to push its participants to a higher plateau of relevance. The stakes feel higher across the board, even as the Americans insist the pressure isn’t on them. “I consider France the favorites and I feel like all the pressure is on them,” Rapinoe says. “We’re just here to play and enjoy ourselves.”