Chris Froome was “lucky” not to have sustained even greater injuries following his crash last week, according to his teammate Geraint Thomas. Froome crashed into a wall at 37mph in the French town of Roanne last Wednesday, leaving him with multiple broken bones including a fractured neck, a fractured right femur, a broken hip and fractured ribs. Thomas, who will lead Team Ineos into the Tour de France in Froome’s absence, said the accident “could have been a hell of a lot worse” and admitted the absence of the 34-year-old will be a “big blow” to the team. “It’s scary. It’s never nice to hear, especially when it’s a close friend. It sounds horrific really,” Thomas told the BBC. “It sounds like he was lucky to come away with the damage he’s done. It could’ve been a hell of a lot worse, which I guess is a positive in a bad scenario. “He’s got the best care around him so hopefully he can get back on the bike soon. I’ve sent him a couple of messages but I’m sure he’s got a few to get through. The whole team’s behind him.” Last year Thomas became the third Briton, after Bradley Wiggins and Froome, to win the Tour de France. The question of who would lead the new Team Ineos into this year’s race was subsequently a hot topic – now rendered academic by Froome’s injuries. Thomas said he is excited to be taking charge, though he accepts the team face challenges if they are to succeed. “Every interview I’ve done this year, they’ve asked about [team leadership]. That’s one thing everyone can stop asking me now. Being the leader of the team, I’ve led the team numerous times now and I’ve got used to that role. We’ve got Egan [Bernal] as well, who’s going to be there by my side, so it’s going to be exciting. “When it comes to the actual race, [Froome] is one of the greatest Grand Tour riders ever, so not having him in the team is a big blow. It gives us one less option when it comes to the last few kilometres of the big mountain stages but that’s sport and you’ve got to deal with it. “We’ve got a strong squad anyway and whoever comes in, OK they’re not Chris Froome but they’ll still add to the team.”