When Ackley Bridge began in 2017 there was a slight tendency to be sniffy about the raucous school drama. Who was it for? What did it offer an audience supposedly getting most of their TV viewing from streaming and online sites? Hadn’t we been here before with Waterloo Road? More fool the naysayers, because the third series of Ackley, as its fans affectionately know it, begins on Tuesday and it does so as one of Channel 4’s most popular dramas. What’s more, the show, which follows the merger of two Yorkshire schools – one predominately white, the other mostly Asian – has amassed a devoted young audience that has continued to grow with each season. Channel 4’s figures suggest that 32% of its viewers are aged between 16 and 34, the channel’s highest youth skewing drama since 2015’s This Is England 90. Meanwhile, a robust online presence includes Tumblr sites devoted to various different characters, eager Twitter feeds counting down the days until the show’s return and a savvy social media presence that utilises everything from Instagram to Snapchat. “The enormous response from younger viewers did really take me by surprise,” says series creator Ayub Khan-Din, best-known for the film East Is East. “I think every school show that’s gone before – Grange Hill, Waterloo Road – they’ve all had something to say to the generation that’s watched them, but the thing with this generation is that they’re very tech savvy and so the way in which they communicate their feelings about the show is so different. Of course, it means we have millions of critics, who know the show backwards and let us know instantly if they don’t like something, but I think that’s what makes it exciting.” Channel 4 commissioning editor Manpreet Dosanjh agrees. “When the trailer for the third series was released we instantly had superfans breaking it down, creating memes, ” she says. “One of the big reasons that Ackley works is that we hit a sweet spot between outrageous conversations and memorable characters who have viewers going: ‘I love those characters, they’re like me.’” Penny Woolcock, who has directed a number of episodes, including its pilot, was keen to ensure that Ackley Bridge remained rooted in its Yorkshire community. Roles from extras to speaking parts have all been filled by local pupils, many of whom had never considered a career in acting before, and Woolcock stress the importance of ensuring that the show truly gives back to Halifax and its surrounding regions. “We’ve had kids who’ve had roles on the show and then go on to apply to college, kids who’ve learnt about the wider aspects of filming about the art departments and the costume department and the technical side,” she says. “Some of them are now writing and making their own movies. One of the boys told me: ‘I’d be prison if it hadn’t been for this show.’” It helps too that the enthusiastic young cast bring an energy of their own, presenting a portrayal of British Asians that is far from the lazy stereotypes of much TV. “They’re absolutely hilarious,” Woolcock says. “Really quick witted and sharp. I think our viewers, particularly the younger ones, respond to that because, for example, too often you only see young Asian men on TV playing terrorists or paedophiles or involved in a plot about honour killing.” Alex Lamb, the series producer, agrees. “When we were initially casting for the series we went to the PE departments and asked them for the cockiest football and rugby players they had,” he says. “Halifax and Bradford are full of alpha lads who never thought they could play that sort of role on TV and the show has really opened doors to them and to viewers at home.” Similarly, a character such as glamorous mean girl Alya challenges audiences to see beyond the hijab, says Khan-Din. “I think that’s really great for people to see that these girls are bolshy and opinionated because it’s not something we’ve seen on TV before.” It’s not just the teenage cast who have helped the creators to see things with fresh eyes. “I remember there was one scene where we talking to an older Asian lady about what music her character would listen to and we were doing that stereotypical thing of assuming bhangra,” says Lamb. “She looked at us a bit scornfully and said: ‘No I like listening to Elton John and Kylie,’ which really made us realise that we just had to throw those stereotypes out of the window.” What really got the show traction among its young audiences, however, was its refusal to pull its punches when tackling tensions within the two teenaged Muslim and white communities. “We have to be true to ourselves and expose the darker side of living in this community as well as we can within the 8pm slot,” says Khan-Din. “This is the story about the amalgamation of a white school with an Asian school and you can’t avoid the politics of that, it’s always there bubbling under.” The show is particularly adept at balancing those darker moments with a lovely lightness of tone, occasionally breaking out a musical interlude and tackling its teenage love stories with sensitivity and heart, most notably Muslim Nas’s tenderly handled coming out. “I’ve had some truly beautiful responses from girls who are going through the same thing that Nas has,” says Amy Lee Hickman, who plays her. “People have come up to me on the street and said that watching her coming-out story gave them the push to tell their parents or people close to them the truth about their sexuality. I think that’s one of the most incredible things about Ackley Bridge – it tells stories that young people can relate to that haven’t been celebrated on TV in this way before and gives a lot of different communities a voice.” As for the show’s continued success both with younger audiences, Dosanjh thinks it boils down to one simple point. “It’s all too easy to think that teenagers have a short attention or only love glossy and superficial shows, but that’s a very redundant way of thinking,” she says. “Ackley shows that if you offer viewers a good emotional story that reflects their lives without soft-soaping them then they will become immersed.” Ackley Bridge returns to Channel 4 at 8pm on Tuesday