Boris Johnson has claimed he can achieve an “orderly, managed Brexit” on deadline by ditching the Northern Irish backstop in favour of “alternative arrangements”. Giving an extensive BBC interview after facing criticism for ducking media scrutiny, the Conservative leadership frontrunner insisted he was not aiming for a no-deal Brexit. “I think that we can get to a situation in which we are able to leave smoothly with an orderly, managed Brexit, and that’s what we should be aiming for,” he told the World at One. “But the only way to make sure that we convince our partners that we’re determined to get that outcome is to prepare for no deal – and I think people do understand that.” Asked what he would do about the backstop, which he described as “that prison, that Hobson’s choice”, Johnson pointed to the Brady amendment. Passed by parliament in January, with the support of the government, the amendment called for the backstop to be replaced with unspecified “alternative arrangements” – although the government then tried to renegotiate this with Brussels and failed. The Brady amendment demands that the backstop arrangement in the EU withdrawal agreement to prevent a hard border in Northern Ireland should be replaced with 'alternative arrangements'. The backstop is hated by many Tory Brexiters because it would keep the UK in an effective customs union until an alternative solution could be found to prevent the need for infrastructure at the border. The backstop has no time limit and exit can be only by joint agreement between the UK and the EU. Brexiters would like to see the backstop replaced either by an as-yet-unknown technological solution to ensure a smooth border or at least an end date or a unilateral exit mechanism.In order to seek this from Brussels, Theresa May decided the government should back an amendment tabled by Sir Graham Brady, a Tory backbencher, which said the backstop should be replaced. She also pledged to reopen the withdrawal agreement and change the text. The European Union has been adamant that both things cannot happen, but Downing Street believes that gaining a majority in the House of Commons for the change would demonstrate the crucial breakthrough needed to avoid a no-deal Brexit. After initial scepticism, members of the hard-Brexit European Research Group swung behind the government, though Tory remainers rebelled against it, and the amendment passed by 16 votes. However, the group has made it clear it will not necessarily back whichever compromise she may come back with. Johnson suggested this could be the “maximum facilitation” approach he advocated while in Theresa May’s cabinet, from which he resigned over her Chequers deal last summer. Asked about the challenges of checking goods that cross what will become the external border of the EU if, as he intends, there are different regulations on either side, he said that was “easily capable of solution”. “The obvious way to do it is to make sure that you have checks on everybody who breaks the law, but you do it away from the border,” he said, adding that the full details should be left to work out as part of the next phase of negotiations over Britain’s future trading relationship with the EU. “The facilitations that need to be provided to enable that to take place – those should not be preordained by the backstop. They should be remitted into the implementation period for discussion after we have left,” he said. The EU27 have repeatedly insisted on the backstop as the legal underpinning of both sides’ commitment to avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic. “Our friends and partners over the channel will say we can’t do this, this is a unicorn,” Johnson said. “But I think there is a solution to be arrived at in this area, and we should work hard for it.” As well as setting out more details of his Brexit plan, Johnson sought to burnish his liberal credentials by promising early legislation to enshrine the rights of EU citizens in law. “There is a clear way that the now effectively defunct withdrawal agreement can be disaggregated: the good bits of it can be taken out,” he said. Johnson claimed that once Britain had left the EU he would focus on pursuing, “modern, progressive conservatism”, which he called a “winning formula”. “Once we get Brexit off the front pages, there will be a massive opportunity for the Conservatives, once again, to occupy the centre-ground of British politics,” he said. “Now is the chance for us to do some absolutely fantastic things.” Johnson denied having used cocaine since a “single inconclusive event” more than 30 years ago. The former foreign secretary, who has repeatedly appeared to dodge questions about previous drug use throughout his campaign, said he had only used the Class A substance once. Johnson described the incident as “a single inconclusive event that took place when I was a teenager and which I have extensively described”.