An England team surfing into a World Cup on a wave of hype? Check. The same team being touted as genuine contenders by its many media cheerleaders? Check. An opening group game against dangerously underrated opponents to whom few give a snowball’s chance in hell? Checkity, check check check. While there is no shortage of bores on social media disgraces who care so little about women’s football they seem compelled to spend their every waking hour droning on about how inferior it is to the men’s game, the parallels between England’s Lionesses pitching up for the Women’s World Cup and countless men’s teams arriving at major competitions before them are striking … and rather ominous for those of a cynical bent. With tedious, pointless arguments about the perceived shortcomings of women’s football put to bed, tucked in and read a story by John Stones, Ross Barkley, Harry Maguire and Kyle Walker, the time for pointless comparisons is now over. The Women’s World Cup kicks off in Paris on Friday night, where an estimated 47,000 people are expected to convene for the tournament opener between hosts France and South Korea. The fact that there are other teams – 23 of them, in fact – apart from England competing may come as a surprise to anyone who has been following the coverage of Phil Neville’s side, who play their opening game against a comparatively unheralded and reclusive Scotland side in Nice on Sunday night. “We’ve talked long and hard about it, we’ve not been shy about our expectations,” blurted Neville, following last weekend’s chastening warm-up defeat against New Zealand. “Now we need to deliver.” While England are widely expected to see off a Scotland team they thrashed 6-0 at Euro 2017, the line-up they will face this time is a completely different proposition. With several part-timers among their ranks at the time, Scotland’s players have since received government funding which enabled them to take six-month sabbaticals from their day jobs and focus solely on preparing for the World Cup. “It’s a massive difference now,” bugled defender Nicola Docherty. “We had a lot of [knack] two years ago but we’ve got a new coach [Shelley Kerr] now and a different style of play. We’re also properly fit.” Meanwhile in the England camp, Toni Duggan has called for “equal criticism” of the women’s team, claiming the plaudits heaped upon them even when they play badly are rather patronising. “Is it just because we’re the women’s team?” she asked. “Is it just because we’re girls? If that was the men you wouldn’t be saying that. I’m not asking for journalists to criticise us all the time but it would be a sign of progress.” While the pre-tournament hype has mirrored that loaded on to assorted England’s men’s teams down the years, it seems it will take an abject and unwanted group stage humiliation to measure just how much media perceptions of the Lionesses have really changed. Join Jacob Steinberg from 6pm BST for hot opening ceremony and MBM coverage of France 3-0 South Korea. “I can’t tell you what this means to Kiyan’s mum, to me, his brothers and sisters, his friends and people who have been supporting the work we have been doing. Kiyan would be blown away by what is going on” – Mark Prince, whose son was stabbed to death outside his school aged 15 when he broke up a fight in 2006, thanks the QPR fans who have chosen to rename Loftus Road as The Kiyan Prince Foundation Stadium for next season. “To inject a note of seriousness in The Fiver, I’m tired of hearing the FA apologise for England fans abroad. How about offering to pay for the clean-up and police time? All England tickets should be sold with a security deposit that’s only returned if there’s been no trouble, otherwise the money should all go to the host country in a gesture of goodwill. The FA talks too much and makes too little effort” – John Daykin. “Since my last letter (24 May) on the travails at my beloved, financially-knacked Bury FC, I can report that club legend Ryan Lowe, veteran of three separate spells at the club as a striker and the architect as manager of the most exciting ‘brand of football’ I’ve witnessed in 20 years, and vice-captain – popular wing-back Nicky Adams, veteran of three separate spells at the club and king of the assist – have left the Shakers to take up work elsewhere. Things look increasingly bleak, and all the while our promotion-winning squad appear rich pickings for our more solvent rivals. The next court date is 19 June. In the meantime, if anyone wealthy and scrupulous would like to save the day, that would be great. Or at the very least, are there any potential noodle partners out there?” – Darrien Bold [shout to the Plymouth fans doing their bit too – Fiver Ed]. “Re: Fiver letters passim. Please don’t tell Brighton’s chief scout about John Stones” – Tony Crawford. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Darrien Bold. Gareth Southgate has been reflecting on England’s capitulation and eventual extra-time exit from the Nations League against the Netherlands.“I think fatigue has played a part, as well as a lack of match sharpness,” he yawned. “I can’t overreact. This is incredibly painful for my players but we’ll be stronger for our experiences.” Harry Winks: England’s midfield future? Meanwhile, England fans have criticised stadium authorities and Uefa for not doing enough to stop “dangerous crushing” after the electronic ticket system stopped working before Thursday’s game. “Kids in tears, women fainting. No violence, just panic,” said one, Tom Ambrose. “When people asked for help, police raised batons and sparked further crushes.” Coventry City will play their (18 miles from) home games at Birmingham City’s St Andrew’s next season after a groundshare was agreed. Everton’s new No 2 is MTV Cribs’s Luis Boa Morte. “I’m very happy to be joining a big club with so much history and tradition,” he cheered. Wales manager Ryan Giggs reckons Manchester United-bound Daniel James just needs to be himself when he moves from Swansea. “It’s the biggest club in the world so my message to him is enjoy the challenge,” he tooted. Chelsea have appealed to the court of arbitration for sport over their two-window transfer ban. And Stéphanie Frappart has become the first woman to be named in Ligue 1’s pool of referees. “I am proud and honoured,” she whistled. “Being the first woman to referee in Ligue 1 is a privilege, an honour and a responsibility.” It’s Women’s World Cup predictions time. We’ve reached the end of our Experts’ Network previews with No 23: Chile and No 24: Sweden. Carli Lloyd faces the end with USA! USA!! USA!!! armed with her most valuable weapon, writes Caitlin Murray. How much do you know about the Women’s World Cup? Take our quiz. Your Golden Boot page for bookmarking. Barney Ronay watches John Stones fluff his lines as Frenkie de Jong stayed on script for the Netherlands. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!