Andy Murray, who returns to tennis in the doubles at Queen’s this month, has said he is “pretty relaxed” about ever playing singles again. “I thought during the whole injury troubles that tennis was the most important thing to me and getting back on court was going to make me happy,” Murray said, reflecting on his slow but steady recovery from a hip operation in January. “Ultimately, once I got rid of the pain and I’ve started to enjoy doing other things, fun things with my friends and my family, I’m pretty relaxed about whether I get back on a court competing again. It would be nice but if I don’t, I’m OK with that as well.” Talking in an interview for Amazon Prime with his first full-time coach, Mark Petchey, the triple slam champion, who turned 32 last month, was frank about his circumstances. “The first six or seven weeks [of rehab] were pretty hard, uncomfortable,” Murray said. Trying to exercise through that wasn’t particularly nice. “But the quicker you get it moving, the quicker you’ll be back on your feet again. Then I’d say from weeks eight and nine, it’s really started to go quite nicely. [I’ve] been able to do a lot of things I have not done for a really long time without pain. Playing golf and walking the dogs is fun and enjoyable now, whereas it was pretty uncomfortable for a couple of years.” Murray’s home life, after 15 years on the road, is centred on spending quality time with his wife, Kim, and their two young daughters. It sounds as if he is enjoying the change, although he admitted he may be hard to live with sometimes. “When I can help out with the five o’clock wake-ups, it’s nice to have me around, but the rest of the time they’d like me out of the house.” He also wants to see more than the four walls of a hotel room and the journey to and from courts. “If I do get back to playing, something I’d try to do a bit more of is spend more time out in the cities, seeing sights, exploring. We get to go to amazing places, some of the nicest cities in the world. Often we spend most of our time at the courts practising and in hotels, having room service. It’s not what people might imagine it to be – if you’re trying to do everything properly.” Murray told Petchey there has been no shortage of support for him in the locker room. “It has been nice,” he said. “In Australia [after he lost in the first round and the organisers played a video on court of messages from the leading players] it was tough because I didn’t know what the outcome of anything was going to be. The genuine feeling at that stage was that I might not be playing again. “I’ve always been at arm’s length with a lot of the players. I am not massively close with loads of guys in the locker room. There’s a few that I get on with really well. Who have I had messages from? I’ve had a couple of messages from [Roger] Federer. [Stan] Wawrinka, he’s messaged me a couple of times. Rafa [Nadal], once or twice – and a lot of the British players as well. “If the match I played in Australia [losing to Roberto Bautista Agut in five sets] was my last one, it would be an amazing way to finish as well. It was a great match, brilliant atmosphere. As I get older, especially because of what I have been through the last couple of years, I’ve realised it’s not about winning all the time. It’s actually about giving your best effort. That day, I could not have given more than what I had.”