Hats, pageantry and winning jockeys with a Y chromosome: it is all part of the tradition at Royal Ascot. Lizzie Kelly, Bryony Frost and Rachael Blackmore all rode winners at Cheltenham in March but it now 32 years since Gay Kelleway’s victory on Sprowston Boy in the Queen Alexandra Stakes. What might have been a groundbreaking success has proved to be anything but. It is, on the face of it, a little embarrassing for Flat racing’s showpiece event. Even Hayley Turner, twice a Group One winner and the most successful British female rider with more than 800 winners to her name, has missed out at Royal Ascot, although she did finish a head behind the winner on Margot Did in the Albany Stakes in 2010. Hollie Doyle was on the runner-up in last year’s Sandringham Handicap, while Josephine Gordon, the champion apprentice in 2016, was a half-length second on Steady Pace in the Wokingham two seasons ago. But these are very much the exceptions. In all, 115 runners at Royal Ascot since 1989 have been ridden by women and 10 have made the frame, at an average starting price of 42-1. Even that number hides the actual chance of most runners ridden by women at the meeting. Margot Did was strong in the betting at 7-1, while Dream Castle, in the 2017 Jersey Stakes, was a 9-2 shot for Gordon who also rode a 6-1 favourite in the Sandringham Handicap the same afternoon. The majority of the remainder, though, were effectively no-hopers. Female riders are not riding winners at the meeting because, for the most part, they do not get realistic opportunities to do so. In all the tradition and hidebound formality that sets Royal Ascot apart, this could be seen as one more example of lingering sexism at the meeting where, until a few years ago, women in the Royal enclosure were assumed to be mere appendages of their husbands when it came to the names on their badges. But before jumping to any conclusions, consider this: the great majority of the country’s male jockeys never get a decent chance to ride a Royal Ascot winner either. The same goes for apprentice jockeys, even the best of the up-and-comers whose claims do not guarantee rides in the handicaps as would be the case elsewhere. Around a third of the horses running in British handicaps in June over the past 15 years have been ridden by a rider with a claim. At Royal Ascot in the same period, 7% of handicap rides – 217 in all – went to a claiming jockey and five were winners. These included the future Derby-winner William Buick, who was, with hindsight, pretty good value for a 5lb claim on Dark Missile in the 2007 Wokingham. Essentially, it is only the elite riders – a dozen at most – who get full books of rides at Royal Ascot, where the horses change from race to race but the jockeys do not. As things stand, no major stable has a female rider as its No 1 and until that changes the next woman to ride a winner at the Royal meeting seems likely to be an apprentice for whom all the cards fall right in one of the handicaps. Raising Sand, 12-1 Royal Hunt Cup Loves the track, goes on the ground and had too much to do on his seasonal debut but still finished strongly and clocked an excellent time. With any luck in running, very hard to see him out of the frame.   King Of Comedy, 6-1, St James's Palace Stakes Has looked a little quirky at times but the form of his three wins is rock-solid and he bolted up in the Heron Stakes last month. Frankie Dettori is likely to be on stable-companion Too Darn Hot but he may well regret it. Cross Counter, 5-1, Gold Cup Last year's Melbourne Cup winner but still only four and just nine runs into his racing career. Still has scope for improvement, returned in winning form at Meydan in March and little to find with Stradivarius on form. That could take 10 years – or, possibly, a few days. Nicola Currie is the leading female apprentice at present and she looks to have one of the best chances for a female rider at the meeting for several years aboard Jamie Osborne’s Raising Sand in Wednesday’s Royal Hunt Cup. This is one of the most competitive events of the week and the draw could also play a role, but Raising Sand has so much going for him that his current odds of 12-1 look much too big. He is an Ascot specialist – he scarcely runs anywhere else – and he was a convincing two-length winner over seven furlongs in a £100,000 contest last October. Raising Sand also ran an eye-catching trial for Wednesday’s race on his seasonal debut, finishing strongly into fourth in the Victoria Cup. Currie knows him well, having ridden him on his past four starts, and has a live chance to double the number of female winning riders at the meeting. It is another sign of the depth of competition at Royal Ascot that even a jockey as popular and prolific as the former champion Jim Crowley has just five winners at the meeting, one of which was the 33-1 chance Bacchus in last year’s Wokingham. He should get the week off to a good start, however, via Mustashry in the Queen Anne Stakes and has real hopes of an opening-day double if Battaash runs up to his best form in the King’s Stand Stakes. King Of Comedy has a very similar profile to Without Parole, John Gosden’s winner of the St James’s Palace Stakes 12 months ago, and is worth backing at around 6-1 against Phoenix Of Spain and Gosden’s Too Darn Hot in the feature race on day one. Sea Of Class will hopefully be ready to run close to her best in Wednesday’s feature, the Prince Of Wales’s Stakes, while Cross Counter, the Melbourne Cup winner, could prove to be a serious and progressive opponent for Stradivarius in Thursday’s Gold Cup. Ghaiyyath may be able to get back in Saturday’s Hardwicke. Salisbury:  1.55 Stallone 2.30 Mongolia 3.05 Tribal Craft 3.35 Forbidden Land (nb) 4.10 Archer's Dream 4.45 Chica De La Noche 5.20 Youkan Doncaster: 2.10 Wufud 2.45 Sacred Dance 3.20 Sea Of Faith 3.55 Consequences (nap) 4.30 Mr Buttons 5.00 Lightning Attack 5.35 Maid In Manhattan