In a list of phrases likely to be ascribed to season 2019, “Welcome to the Rhyce Shaw era”, falls somewhere well below “Melbourne solidifies top four spot”, yet here we are. So… welcome to the Rhyce Shaw era. On Friday night, North Melbourne played football as if they had what is known in the commercial patois of sport as a brand. It is a physical brand that supporters will undoubtedly ascribe to “the shinboner spirit” – a no-apologies resolve to be more physical made evident by Cameron Zurhaar’s five first-quarter tackles. And by night’s end they had out-Richmoned Richmond with intense pressure and ferocity, giving their fans a sign that the future may be bright with players such as the 19-year-old Luke Davies-Uniacke who rubbed the harder edges off a grittier North with skill and poise. Which brings us in a roundabout way to Melbourne, a team that lacks not for hardness at the ball, but very much for poise. The Demons descent into madness on the weekend felt as though they went to Darwin to stage King Lear in football guernseys. Having established that we are working off an older version of Melbourne, and not last year’s preliminary finalist, Saturday night’s two-point loss to Adelaide was gloriously probable. This season, any thought of Melbourne being a credible finals threat has had the shelf-life of yoghurt. We are once again watching a team where there’s nothing like a five-goal lead in the third quarter to bring out the worst in them. The Demons led from the 17-second mark of the game and were not headed until a goal from Brad Crouch put the Crows in front with just four minutes to go. In the game’s final stanzas, the Dees had two set shots from within range, but missed both – including Sam Weideman’s sprayed shot from directly in front with just 10 seconds to go. Melbourne’s self-inflicted mediocrity was evident in the contributions Nathan Jones, James Harmes and Jayden Hunt made to their last quarter score of 1.8. In fact, only one of the Dees’ last dozen shots on goal found its target. While it’s bewildering that professional footballers should be so inept, and somehow getting worse, at the game’s core purpose Weideman’s miss in particular seemed like a metaphor for the Demons’ entire season. Melbourne now turn the halfway mark of the season at 3-8, with games against three top-eight teams to come – Collingwood, Fremantle and Brisbane. The first of which had a rare stumble against the second at the MCG on Saturday, when the underdog dressed in the holy raiment of white and purple, ended their host’s seven-game winning streak with a Michael Walters goal with just 30-seconds to go. Like Melbourne, the Dockers look a very different team from the 2018 model, and their round five win away at Greater Western Sydney now appears a portent of a much-improved Dockers than an anomaly in a season that’s had more than a few. Fremantle was once again led by Nat Fyfe who finished the day with 32 disposals, and now appears to be plying his trade with a greater supporting cast, with solid contributions from Connor Blakely and Nathan Wilson along with a combined 53 touches and four goals from Walters and Bradley Hill – although the first of Walter’s goals, which appeared to have broken two of Chris Mayne’s fingers, should have been reviewed. Magpies’ coach, Nathan Buckley, refused to blame the goal review controversy for his team’s loss, saying that the Pies didn’t deserve to beat the determined Dockers. Had he weighed in he’d have simply joined a growing chorus of voices bemused, unhappy – or in the case of a Richmond fan banned for three games, abusive – with the current state of officiating. The operating assumption of AFL fans has it that umpires are never allowed to be wrong – a standard to which we rarely hold footballers, and one to which we certainly never hold ourselves. Although if we had the opportunity to reverse our mistakes with the aid of video replays, we’d rightly kick ourselves if we failed to take the opportunity. So bad was the error that the AFL made the almost unprecedented call of conceding that it got it wrong. Although you expect such conciliation won’t be as forthcoming after a half-full stadium sat through a one-sided slog in Shanghai. In yet another display of inconceivable provincialism, it was reported that St Kilda had been planning this trip – finding flights, accommodation and places to eat – since November. While the China experiment is of clear commercial benefit for Port Adelaide, its broader cultural one is bereft. On the surface, a meaningful push into the Chinese market is pointless. When you dig deeper, it still is. One only needs to compare the atmosphere of the Shanghai game to the scenes after the game in Darwin to see that the AFL should focus on those areas that don’t take its teams seven months to prepare for a weekend. But then again, in the Rhyce Shaw era, anything is possible.