“I saw him in a room of 500 people and fancied him straight away,” says Zahraa, who met David in 2014 at a Model UN conference, an educational event for students. “I was in black tie and she was in a ball gown,” says David. “No, this a disagreement we always have,” laughs Zahraa. “I hadn’t had time to get changed so I was wearing this boring shirt dress.” Whatever she was wearing, David enjoyed spending time with her. Still, they didn’t make plans to meet again. “I was in my first year of university at Exeter and he was studying in the Netherlands, where he’s from,” Zahraa says, “but we became friends on Facebook.” When David announced that he would be coming to London in 2017, Zahraa jumped at the chance to see him. “I sort of engineered it,” she says. “I told him I’d be in London even though I was living in Exeter.” The pair met up at an exhibition at the Royal Academy of Arts, where Zahraa was determined to impress him with her cultural trivia. “We had intense discussions about the paintings, but we also caught up because we hadn’t seen each other in so long,” says David. He had no idea Zahraa thought of it as a date. “Because we lived apart I didn’t really think of it like that.” After a couple more meetings, David’s reservations about the distance began to fade. “She was so charming, smart and interesting, I thought, ‘I really want to give the long-distance thing a go.’” They began to chat more often online. When Zahraa went to visit her cousin in Amsterdam, she and David met up and explored the city together. “One night he took me out to this club and we stayed out until 5am.” That year, he moved to London to study and the pair decided to move in together. “I love that he has such great general knowledge and we can talk about everything,” Zahraa says. “We communicate in the same way and it makes problems easier to solve.” David says he loves Zahraa’s intelligence and open-minded attitude. “She’s always willing to see other points of view and gets on with everyone.” From art to electronic music, the couple share lots of interests. But Zahraa is more religious than her partner. Although her extended family are Catholic, her parents converted to Islam before she was born and she was brought up a Muslim. “I consider myself a Sufi of the Mevlevi order,” she explains. “I don’t wear traditional Islamic dress, but I do keep up with my prayers and beliefs.” The couple lived together while David was in London, but Zahraa was clear that she didn’t want to have sex before marriage. “I was a bit shocked at first,” says David, who considers himself spiritual, but not religious. “But I realised that I really valued the non-physical aspects of our relationship and the interests we shared. For me it’s not such a big deal.” Zahraa says others have judged them for their living arrangements. “Other Muslims think it’s wrong because we’ve lived together, and people from a western background just find it odd.” She says it takes “a lot of soul-searching” but it works for them. “Sometimes couples use sex as a way to make up. We’ve learned to bond in other ways. We communicate more.” David says that while Zahraa’s faith can lead to the occasional disagreement, they have a huge amount of respect for each other’s beliefs and “always find a way to compromise”. The couple do want to marry at some point, but have no plans to rush down the aisle. Since they lived together in London, David has spent six months in San Francisco and now has a job in the Netherlands, while Zahraa works in London. “It’s not about age, but maturity,” he says. “We want to be settled in our careers and be financially secure.” Though they are currently based in different countries, they hope to live in London together eventually. “We need to know what’s happening with Brexit,” says Zahraa. “At the moment it’s hard to plan more than six months ahead.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about you, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.