The American television star Kim Kardashian West has caused controversy in Japan by naming her new line of shapewear Kimono, prompting some to accuse her of disrespecting the traditional outfit. The reality TV star and trainee lawyer unveiled her new Kimono line on Instagram, describing it as a collection of skin tone-colored shapewear and stating she had been working for a year on underwear that she claims offers “solutions for women that actually work”. The announcement received mixed reactions, with some offering their criticism on Twitter at #KimOhNo. “She’s been to Japan many times. I’m shocked. She has no respect,” tweeted one user in Japanese. “I like Kim Kardashian, but please pick a name other than Kimono if it’s underwear,” wrote another. Wow, @KimKardashian. Thanks for BUTCHERING Japanese culture!!! My culture is not your plaything.You don't have any respect for people who are not your family, do you? In the 15 yrs developing this project, couldn't you find a cultural advisor?#KimOhNo #culturalappropriation https://t.co/OsDYVZxPhx “The Japanese government should file a protest against Kardashian,” wrote a third. In Japanese the word kimono means “something to wear”, while Kardashian West’s use of it appears to be a play on her first name. The clothing line’s website offered no explanation for the choice of name, though the post included a series of photos from the brand with a caption stating the brand has been 15 years in the works.⁣ Not everyone was opposed to the name, with some arguing it could offer a chance to promote a traditional outfit that is declining in popularity in Japan. Once a standard of the Japanese wardrobe, the kimono is now often reserved for special occasions such as weddings and coming-of-age ceremonies and is mostly worn by women. While the elaborate traditional outfits might appear to have little in common with the second-skin items in Kardashian West’s clothing line, kimonos are often hugely expensive and are also known for being hard to wear. Women sometimes hire experts to help them to dress in kimonos because the outfit requires seemingly endless nipping, tucking and strapping. The Kimono line is not the only surprise the 38-year-old star has sprung on fans this year, ranging from unexpected additions to her family to pursuing a legal career and dabbling in politics. In May, she and her husband, Kanye West, shared photographs of their newborn son, Psalm, born via surrogate. Kardashian West already has three children with West: Chicago, 16 months; North, six years old; and Saint, aged three. In an interview published in the April issue of US Vogue, the Keeping Up with the Kardashians star revealed she is studying to become a lawyer. Four US states, including California, offer a path to qualification by what is known as “reading the law”, or apprenticing with a practicing lawyer or judge. Since last July Kardashian West has been logging the required 18 hours of weekly supervised study with two mentoring lawyers. Nor has the world of politics escaped Kardashian West’s attention. A year ago, Donald Trump commuted the sentence of Alice Marie Johnson, a 63-year-old woman serving a life sentence in prison without parole for a first-time drug offense, after she brought up Johnson’s case during a meeting with the president at the White House. Kardashian had apparently partnered with Jared Kushner, who has advocated for sentencing reform for nonviolent offenders, to try to convince Trump to pardon Johnson. But there maybe other motives too: West announced his ambition to become US president at the 2015 MTV Video Music Awards. West repeated that plan last September, saying he is serious about a presidential bid in 2024. “If I decide to do it, it will be done, I’m not going to try,” the rapper and fashion designer told Chicago’s DJ Pharris.