America was reeling on Saturday after 12 people were shot dead at a government building in Virginia Beach late on Friday afternoon. It was the deadliest mass shooting this year and prompted fresh demands for gun control reform. The 12 who died were named, as was the gunman who killed them. Describing a “horrific crime scene”, police and city leaders said they would name the suspect only once, preferring to focus on those he killed. Four people remained in local hospitals, seriously injured. At a news conference, Virginia Beach city manager Dave Hansen struggled to suppress sorrow and anger as he described “a senseless, incomprehensible act of violence”. As he listed the dead, his co-workers, he referred to them in the present tense. Eleven were city employees who worked in Municipal Building Two. One was a contractor who was trying to get a permit. They were: Laquita C Brown, of Chesapeke, Virginia; Tara Walsh Gallagher, of Virginia Beach; Mary Louis Gayle, of Virginia Beach; Alexander Mikhail Gusev, of Virginia Beach; Katherine A Nixon, of Virginia Beach; Richard H Nettleton, of Norfolk; Christopher Kelly Rapp of Powhatan; Ryan Keith Cox, of Virginia Beach; Joshua A Hardy, of Virginia Beach; Michelle “Missy” Langer, of Virginia Beach; Robert “Bobby” Williams, of Chesapeke; and Herbert “Bert” Snelling, of Virginia Beach. The dead, Hansen said, “leave a void we will never be able to fill”. He added: “Right now, we’re tracking four [people] that are seriously injured and are in Virginia Beach and Norfolk hospitals.” The injured were not named. One policeman was injured, saved by a bulletproof vest. Police chief James Cervera said officers responded from their building close by “within minutes” of the first call from Municipal Building Two. There was no verbal exchange with the gunman, he said. “Once he identified them he immediately opened fire,” Cervera said. “They returned fire. This was a long-term, large gunfight.” The gunman was killed. The shooting stunned Virginia Beach, a resort city of 448,000 residents and 3m annual tourists, and renewed national debate about gun violence. Joe Biden, the former vice-president who is running for the Democratic nomination in 2020, described himself and his wife, Jill, as “heartbroken”. “When will we finally say enough is enough?” he tweeted. “It’s long past time to hold our leaders accountable.” Cervera named “the 13th person”, as Hansen referred to the gunman, as DeWayne Craddock, 40, a 15-year employee of the Virginia Beach public works department. According to the Associated Press, Craddock spent time in the army national guard and received military training at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. He graduated from Old Dominion University with a bachelor’s degree in civil engineering. On Friday, police said the gunman used a .45 caliber handgun with a suppressor and “extended” ammunition magazines he used to reload repeatedly. On Saturday, Cevera said additional weapons had been found at the scene and at the suspect’s home. He did not disclose details and did not answer questions about motive. The attacker walked into the building just after 4pm on Friday and opened fire “indiscriminately” on co-workers, Cervera said, adding: “This is a large-scale crime scene, a horrific crime scene.” He noted the psychological toll taken on those who responded to the shooting and investigated overnight. The shooting took place on all three floors of Municipal Building Two, Cevera said, adding that the gunman gained access simply by having a security pass. Megan Banton, an administrative assistant, said she heard gunshots, called 911 and barricaded herself and about 20 colleagues inside an office, pushing a desk against a door. She texted her mother to say there was a gunman in the building. “We tried to do everything we could to keep everybody safe,” Banton told the AP. “We were all just terrified. It felt like it wasn’t real, like we were in a dream. You are just terrified because all you can hear is the gunshots.” Cervera told reporters his force had undertaken training in how to respond to public shootings in March. An “active threat citizens defense workshop” had been due to take place on Saturday, offering advice on how to “face an armed individual with bad intentions”. Police cancelled the event. Virginia Beach is the biggest city in its eponymous state and a popular holiday destination. The municipal complex lies several miles inland from the Atlantic coast. The visibly shaken mayor, Bobby Dyer, called Friday “the most devastating day” in the history of his city. It was the deadliest instance of gun violence in the US since November 2018, when a dozen people were killed at a bar and grill in Thousand Oaks, California. Other recent death tolls include 58 people at a concert in Las Vegas in October 2017; 49 people at a nightclub in Orlando, Florida, in June 2016; 17 people at a high school in Parkland, Florida, in February last year; and 11 people at a synagogue in Pittsburgh in October. The White House said Donald Trump had been briefed. On Saturday, Trump tweeted that he had spoken to Virginia governor Ralph Northam and city leaders “to offer condolences to that great community. The federal government is there, and will be, for whatever they may need. God bless the families and all!” The president is a close ally of the National Rifle Association, which is headquartered in Virginia. Democrats competing with Biden to take on Trump next year were quick to demand reform. Senator Bernie Sanders wrote on Twitter: “The days of the NRA controlling Congress and writing our gun laws must end. Congress must listen to the American people and pass gun safety legislation. This sickening gun violence must stop.” Cory Booker, Steve Bullock, Pete Buttigieg, Julian Castro, Bill de Blasio, John Delaney, Kirsten Gillibrand, Kamala Harris, John Hickenlooper, Jay Inslee, Wayne Messam, Beto O’Rourke, Eric Swalwell, Elizabeth Warren and Andrew Yang all weighed in too. The prospect of an end to business as usual in Washington, however, still appears remote.