Starbucks’ UK-based European business paid just £18.3m in tax last year, while paying the coffee giant’s parent company in Seattle £348m in dividends collected from licensing its brand. The company, which has faced years of heated criticism for paying very little tax in the UK, reported on Thursday that its European, Middle Eastern and Asian business (EMEA) paid $23.6m (£18.3m) in tax on $230m of royalty payment earnings in the year to the end of September 2018. Starbucks EMEA, which collects royalty income from 38 countries from Norway to Morocco, said it paid “an effective tax rate of 23.7%” – above the UK’s corporate tax rate of 19%. At the same time, Starbucks EMEA sent $448m to its global headquarters in Seattle. The money is being brought back to the US following president Donald Trump’s “tax holiday” on overseas earnings. The big dividend payment is part of Starbucks’ plan to “refocus on maximising total shareholder return” and will result in a windfall for shareholders, including Howard Schultz, the company’s billionaire founder and former chief executive, who owns 3% of the shares. In the UK, where there are about 1,000 Starbucks stores, the company paid just £4m of tax to the exchequer despite raking in £387m in sales. Starbucks said it paid such a small amount of tax because it made a £17m pre-tax loss in the UK. The loss comes after paying out £75m in “administrative expenses”, which includes royalty payments of £27.4m. That means that Starbucks UK is paying about seven times more in royalty payments than it is paying in tax. Martin Brok, president of Starbucks EMEA, said: “Doing business in EMEA continues to be challenging for Starbucks. From the changing consumer landscape to high rents and political uncertainty, there are ongoing pressures across the region. “While our 2018 figures show that we have made progress – boosted primarily by a large one-off gain from the deal signed with Nestle last May – our UK business recorded a loss in spite of a similar top line performance. “Starbucks announced its refreshed global strategic priorities in 2018 to refocus on maximising total shareholder return. To that end, the EMEA business received dividends from its regional subsidiaries of $148m and paid dividends after tax to its ultimate parent company, Starbucks Corporation, of $448m.” Starbucks said it had paid $74m in tax in the UK since relocating its EMEA headquarters to London in 2014, following public and political outrage over how little tax Starbucks paid in Britain. In 2012, it was revealed that Starbucks had paid just £8.6m in taxes on £3bn in UK sales since 1998, when it launched its first UK coffee shop. George Turner, director of Tax Watch UK, said: “The relocation of Starbucks regional HQ to London has clearly resulted in some additional tax payments to the UK, but there are still big questions over the company’s tax affairs in Europe. “The UK has in recent years moved to a territorial tax system where we only seek to tax profits generated from operations in this country. The exemption on dividend income is part of this and makes the UK a very attractive location as a regional HQ for US companies. “Starbucks claimed that the large profits being recognised in their UK-based European HQ arise from dividends on which tax has already been paid overseas – but where that tax was paid, and how much, is as clear as the coffee on which those profits were made.”