NSW have kept the State of Origin series alive with a dominant 38-6 win over Queensland in a rain-soaked Game 2 at Optus Stadium in Perth. Each of coach Brad Fittler’s contentious recruitment choices paid off for the Blues, with so-called “out-of-position” centres Jack Wighton and Tom Trbojevic having particularly strong games. One of the Blues’ best was James Maloney, who plays the same way whether it’s a generic NRL round game or a must-win Origin clash. Even in steady and, at times, torrential rain, the five-eighth threw passes and held his nerve. He talked all game and through half-time in the sheds, and competed on every play. His Blues team-mates fed off his confidence and played adventurous, dry-weather rugby league in slippery conditions. In a typically physical start, Dale Finucane began the match with No.14 on his back, with Paul Vaughan on the bench. Both teams ran with purpose on a wet Perth surface. There’d been 58mm of rainfall in the previous 24 hours. Wighton’s left foot drilled kicks. Trbojevic flew in the air and on the ground. He was held up in the fourth minute. Maloney kicked in goal then threw a forward pass first play from the drop-out. Yet in typical style he continued to throw them. The Blues went wide time and again, through the hands, on early tackles. Maloney bombed brilliantly for Trbojevic to fly like Nick Reiwoldt. Fittler had picked Trbojevic at right centre and there he was, “out of position” on the left, out-leaping Kalyn Ponga to score. Fittler chose the best footballers he could and told them to play. Blake Ferguson did a job, carting the ball up hard from dummy-half. As in Game 1, Queensland had to weather much heavy, physical work. Daly Cherry-Evans and Ben Hunt kicked on early tackles, fullback in the line. Wighton obstructed a chasing Will Chambers. Referee Gerard Sutton signalled a try and threw it upstairs. Upstairs agreed; and Queensland had their second penalty try in as many matches. The Blues responded. Daniel Saifiti charged hard and played the ball quickly, which led to quick hands. Halves combined with backrowers and Tyson Frizell ploughed over after a juggle. Nathan Cleary converted and it was 12-6. The Blues were clearly the better team. Television confirmed it – NSW ran for 444 metres to Queensland’s 222m. Then the rain really teemed down. Nevertheless, the match attracted a sold-out crowd of 59,721. But the Blues continued to play. There were long passes on zero tackle to men in space. Maloney ripped off a brilliant 40/20. Ferguson dropped a bomb and his team-mates understood – they didn’t even bother with the mandatory bottom pat of forgiveness. When he bundled Corey Oates into touch next set, he was mobbed as the great redeemer Maloney threw a pass to Josh Addo-Carr who crossed out wide. The pass was ruled forward. It was not forward out of the hands. But it looked like it was. Same thing. Rugby league needs a GPS chip in the Steeden as they have in the players’ jumpers. The first 30 minutes were similar to Game 1 - NSW dominant in possession and territory. Damien Cook began to scurry. James Tedesco did too. He was best on ground. A brilliant run from dummy-half beat a claque of Maroons and Trbojevic backed up like a good right centre would. Cleary’s conversion made it 18-6 at half-time. Wade Graham, another Fittler inclusion, moved to five-eighth after Cleary succumbed to an ankle injury. It mattered little. Queensland could barely fire a shot in the face of the hard charges and ball-play of their opponents. Tyson Frizell’s run hurt defenders. Queensland couldn’t play the ball in the Blues’ end. Fatigued from all the defence, their attack lacked alacrity. Maloney landed a pair of penalty goals. Addo-Carr burned Queensland with pace and adventure, and Tedesco backed up inside. He back-handed, flick-passed to Trbojevic and the big Manly fullback went in under the posts for his hat-trick. Graham set up a try for Addo-Carr who added another after a brilliant backline play.