Eoin Morgan denied a suggestion he was scared when batting but admitted England’s confidence has dipped following the 64-run defeat to Australia that has left their World Cup hopes in the balance. While Australia have booked a semi-final berth by moving to 12 points with a sixth win, England must beat India and New Zealand in their final group games to ensure the chasing pack of Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Pakistan are truly kept at bay. This high-pressure scenario for the world’s No 1 side comes after an initially fruitless morning with the ball allowed Australia to post 285 for seven – Aaron Finch top-scored with 100 – before limping to 221 all out from 44.4 overs in the chase. “Confidence isn’t where it was at the start of the tournament,” said Morgan, whose side have now lost three games in the World Cup while chasing – previously their strong suit in ODI cricket. “I think both this game and the defeat to Sri Lanka, we struggled with the basics of our batting mantra: strong intent, building partnerships and doing it in our own way. Everything is within our control. We are in charge of how we go from here on in. We win two games, we definitely go through.” Morgan was himself caught on the hook for four off Mitchell Starc during a top-order collapse of 54 for four, with Kevin Pietersen suggesting the England captain had backed away when facing the left-armer’s first delivery. Oh no, Eoin Morgan looked scared! That Is A Horror Sign! The former England batsman wrote on Twitter: “Oh no, Eoin Morgan looked scared! That Is A Horror Sign.” He then added: “The England captain stepping to square leg when Starc bowled his first delivery to him made me think England could have a little problem over the next week or so. I hope not, but I’ve not seen a captain show such a weakness for a while.” When this assessment was put to Morgan, the England captain replied: “Really? Excellent. It didn’t feel like that at all.” After Morgan’s dismissal, Ben Stokes fought hard, defying tightness in both calf muscles to top score with 89. But when a memorable inswinging Starc yorker crashed into his stumps to leave England 177 for six, the game was in effect up. Jason Behrendorff, who kickstarted the English rot by bowling James Vince for a duck second ball, finished with the standout figures of five for 44 and a place on the Lord’s honours boards. Speaking afterwards, Behrendorff revealed that watching England’s bowlers fail to make inroads with the new ball – Finch and David Warner put on 123 for the first wicket – informed Australia’s lengths when it came to defending the total. The left-armer said: “That’s something we were assessing when they were bowling – not many balls were hitting the stumps and we made a conscious effort to get the ball up there and try and swing it.” As with Pietersen’s assertion, Morgan was having none of it, replying: “We made Australia play and miss a lot. But that’s his opinion and he’s entitled to it.” The form of Stokes, who also top-scored in the defeat to Sri Lanka, was England’s chief positive with the bat. And in typically bullish fashion the all-rounder outlined this England team’s sense of destiny, despite now entering must-win territory. Stokes said: “This is our World Cup. We’ve had great support over the last four years and we know how much a World Cup means to fans. We know that as players as well. We’re not going to take a backward step. This is our World Cup.” Jason Roy, who has missed England’s last three games with a torn hamstring, netted on the Nursery Ground between innings; the chances of his return to face India on Sunday have surely increased despite the obvious risk of a recurrence. Morgan added: “With four days of rehabilitation he is hopeful of being fit. If it is a big risk, we will play it as it is.”