Car hire firms are one of Guardian Money’s most complained-about sectors. Dodgy operators praying on unsuspecting holidaymakers by making them take out their extra “must-have” insurance or hitting them with fake damage bills at the end of the rental are all too commonplace. So what do consumers need to look out for this summer to ensure they don’t get ripped off on the road? Don’t automatically log on to the Hertz or Europcar website to make your booking, the third party websites almost always offer a cheaper price. This week Hertz wanted £350 for a week’s hire in July out of Zurich airport. Holidayautos.com offered a smaller car for £274, or a bigger car than Hertz for £289. Money recommends Holidayautos, Rentalcars, Which? favourite Zest, and Ryanair’s car hire. If two of you will be driving, factor that into the price comparison as most firms charge more for additional drivers. We would avoid hires through Goldcar, and Green Motion. They are cheap, but we get too many complaints about both. If a car is much cheaper than rivals, avoid it, as they will try to make up the money elsewhere. Hire a car at Malaga airport and you will face a bewildering range of prices and options. Unless you really are only going to do 100km over the whole week, go for a hire than offers “unlimited” mileage. Always opt for full-to-full fuel deal – it’s much easier, and you won’t get stiffed for an unexpected fuel-refill charge at the end, assuming you return it filled up. Do you have the choice of collecting from the terminal or off-airport? Opting for the latter is usually cheaper, but you could find yourself being driven miles into the desert. If the prices are similar, you are tight for time, or you just want an easier life, stick to a terminal branch. Longer hirers may decide to go off-airport if the saving is considerable. But check the reviews – previous passengers will expose very long transfers. Avoid the cheapest two-door car, instead go for four doors. It will only add a few pounds, but you’ll get a better value car. Over the years, Money has recommended readers pre-buy excess insurance, with a stand alone provider. Insurance4carhire.com was a long-time favourite, but it has put up its prices in recent months and its annual European cover now costs £45, or £30 for seven days’ short-term cover. Reducemyexcess.co.uk is a cheaper alternative that is equally well regarded. Buy annual European cover for £40.85 for the year, or £19.37 for a week’s short-term cover. You have to buy it before the hire commences. Daily cover is offered. Buying cover this way is always cheaper than buying it from the car hire firm, plus you get better cover (for example the tyres and windows will be included). If you damage or mis-fuel the car, or it is stolen, you pay the car firm the agreed excess – typically £1,200, and then claim it back from this policy when you get home. Arrive in the car hire office and the excess insurance – or “super collision damage waiver” in car hire jargon – hard sell will immediately begin. Just don’t fall for it and say no to everything. You don’t even need to tell the hire firm you have already bought cover, just say you want the car on the terms of the original policy – and will pay for any damage you cause. They will tell you that towing charges are extra and theft is not covered. Ignore it all. If you are offered a free upgrade to a bigger car, get it in writing that it is free, or just refuse. The firm will authorise the car hire excess (£1,200) on your credit card so you must have sufficient credit to do this – most cards will allow you raise your limit for a week or two, if needed. It has got to be a credit – not a debit or prepaid – card. The biggest single mistake most people make when hiring a car is to just drive off. Don’t believe the hire staff when they claim there is no damage, because there almost always is. Examine every panel, remembering to look under the bumpers. Put down every possible scratch and blemish on the vehicle condition report that is part of the agreement. Check the windscreen for small cracks, and the wheel hubs for scratches. Is the spare wheel there, has it been used and is it pumped up? Closely examine the edges of the wing mirrors and doors. Take photos of the car from every angle, and of any existing damage. You may also want to take a video at the pick-up location. Crucially, get the form signed by the hire firm rep – even if it means a long walk back to the terminal. If it’s too dark to properly inspect the car on pick-up, note this on the form and inspect it the following morning, informing the car hire company of any damage. Photograph the report and email it in to the hire firm. If the car looks like its been on the Paris-Dakar rally, check the oil and fluids are there. Arrive with a bit time to spare, with a full tank and a clean interior. You might think a quick vacuum of the car is all that’s necessary, but you could be charged £45 or more if the car hire company has to do it. Sand from beaches should always be removed. Get the car inspected while you are there if possible, and signed off as fine. If returning a car when the rental desk is closed, take photographs and videos of the vehicle to ensure that damage is not added later when it is inspected. If you did damage the car, fill in the forms and keep copies as you will need these to claim it back from the insurance. Keep all the paperwork safe after you get home, and a careful eye on your credit card statements to ensure no extra charges have been taken. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.