Susie Mesure It could be really beneficial for you to read this article. But, let’s face it, wouldn’t it be tempting to just leave it for later? After all, procrastination is one of the most common barriers to getting things done. It’s the reason why some jobs just seem to linger indefinitely on our to-do lists. When we’re at work, procrastination can be particularly self-defeating. Tasks left untackled grow more problematic. Some of us find ourselves so busy just putting things off that we end up having to play catch up in our own time. These problems can be exacerbated when running your own business. When you’re your own boss it can be harder to stay disciplined – especially if you’re working on your own or at home However, it turns out that procrastinating doesn’t mean you’re workshy, lazy or incompetent. It’s more likely to mean you’re just trying to stop yourself from feeling bad. This could either be because you have to do something you’d rather not, such as boring business admin, or you’re worried you won’t be able to complete the task to your satisfaction. In a 2013 study (pdf), Tim Pychyl, professor of psychology and member of the Procrastination Research Group at Carleton University in Ottawa, and Fuschia Sirois, from the University of Sheffield, found that procrastination is an emotion regulation problem, rather than a time management problem. “We procrastinate because of an aura of negative emotion around a task, whether this is internally generated or because of the nature of the task itself,” says Sirois. In other words, we delay doing something because we want to make ourselves feel better right now. And it’s human nature to worry more about feeling good now rather than at some point in the future – so don’t make the problem worse by beating yourself up about it. “This applies to all of us. I study this [subject] and I still get all worked up about a task,” says Sirois. “When you’re in an emotional state you’re not thinking rationally.” The solution, says Sirois, is to cut through the negativity. She suggests trying to find some aspect of the task that is meaningful, no matter how humdrum it seems. “All tasks have some level of meaningfulness, such as: ‘If I do this, it will put a smile on someone’s face.’ Or: ‘I’ll be better at report writing if I do this.’” Alternatively, she recommends trying to make the future feel more immediate by imagining yourself standing in the shoes of your future self: the person you will be next week, either with the task still hanging over you, or with the relief of having completed it. However, Sirois sounds a note of caution about placing too much emphasis on the end result: “Focus on the journey and what you’ll learn [from the task]. Focus on what’s interesting about it and all the steps you will take, rather than the end product, because otherwise you might worry whether it will be good enough.” Other tips for overcoming procrastination include reducing your goal to completing just the first stage of the job at hand. That way, you’ll get a rush of positive feelings on completing the first step, which will hopefully help motivate you to complete the next stage. Another approach is to make a more conscious decision to decouple your sense of self-worth from the task that you’re avoiding. Robert Kelsey, author of a series of books exploring the things that hold people back, says that when people struggle to get through their to-do list, self-esteem can be the culprit rather than poor productivity or organisational incompetence. In his book Get Things Done, he notes: “Procrastinators can suffer from feelings that range from irritation and regret to intense self-condemnation and despair.” Life coach Will Aylward admits that he finds it hard to avoid procrastinating. He recommends being honest with yourself. “At the start of each working day, ask the question: ‘What do I not want to do today?’ Help yourself to become aware of the important, but perhaps less enjoyable tasks, that you might be tempted to procrastinate on.” Aylward also suggests asking for help. “I seek accountability from a fellow entrepreneur by telling him my intentions for the week,” he says. “This works because we don’t seem to mind breaking promises to ourselves, but do not like being seen as inconsistent in the eyes of other people.” Emily Hyland, a nutritional therapist who set up Om Nom Health to help people with their diets, believes the trick to avoiding procrastinating is to bribe yourself with a nice cup of tea or some other treat as a reward for finishing a task. “Working at home means temptation is everywhere,” she says, “and some days I’d much rather stay curled up in bed listening to the radio. But then I remember that I run my own business and if I don’t do it then it doesn’t get done.” Starting her day with the trickiest tasks can also help. “Then the rest of the day feels like a breeze,” she says. Another possible solution is to remind yourself why you were bothering in the first place. “I also have a little vision board of all the things I’m working towards to get myself motivated,” says Hyland. “It can be tricky being your own boss and it can get lonely sometimes, but reminding yourself of why you do what you do can really help stay focused.” If all else fails, try working right up to your deadline. Works for me. Whatever your business, don’t keep knocking essential tasks to the bottom of your to-do list. Tailor your business insurance with AXA. It couldn’t be simpler. That’s one less thing to worry about, and more time to spend getting on with business. Get a quote online today.