There is probably more job security in bomb disposal than there is in coaching tennis players but Dimitri Zavialoff, Johanna Konta’s third mentor in two years, is sanguine about his employment situation. Konta, who plays Sloane Stephens in the French Open quarter-finals on Tuesday, plainly trusts Zavialoff and they have thrived mutually since getting together in October. Zavialoff, who talks as softly as a spy before bedtime, has helped Konta rise from 45 in the world to 26 at the start of this fortnight. After reaching two clay-court finals this season – and beating Stephens in the second round in Rome – as well as four excellent wins at Roland Garros (the red-dirt hell-hole on which she fell four times in a row at the first time of asking), she is two matches away from playing in her first grand-slam final. She has reached two slam semis, in Melbourne in 2016 and at Wimbledon a year later. But her career, like that of many players, is littered with false starts and new beginnings. Zavialoff is her fifth coach in five years, after Esteban Carril, José Manuel García, Wim Fissette and Michael Joyce. Did he wonder sometimes about how long he and Konta would be working together? He smiles and says quietly: “It’s like human relationships in general. They are sometimes short, sometimes for life – so what can I say besides that? It’s a work relationship and … I can’t say more.” Like his boss, Zavialoff says he lives “only for the present”. It is a mindset that grips the sport. They play it point by point, rally by rally, shot by shot. And while he tiptoes around the hard questions about their fledgling partnership, he is sure Konta is made of championship-winning material. “She was always a good player and that’s what I keep telling her,” he says. As for her remarkable rehabilitation on clay, he says: “I knew something would happen since I started working with her. Whether it will happen on clay or after I didn’t know but I was kind of waiting for it to happen – and it did happen on clay.” As for her “No Plan B” mindset, it seems Zavialoff may have persuaded Konta to be more flexible – which she has described as “malleable” in recent statements. He says: “It’s [about] showing her how good she is, and inviting her to try – to try and even miss sometimes, and sometimes try and achieve something. I really don’t want to control anything in there.” Zavialoff, a self-confessed “not very good” player when young, has lived in France for 20 years. His father was from a Russian family who moved to Switzerland and he has retained a close connection with Swiss tennis. He worked with Stan Wawrinka for 17 years, guiding him into the top 10, and spent five years with the former top-10 player Timea Bacsinszky, who described the collaboration before they split last year as “absolutely great”. Konta and Wawrinka also share a British agent, Lawrence Frankopan – and her friend-on-Tour, Donna Vecic, whom she beat to reach the quarter-finals, was Wawrinka’s partner until recently. Dimitri’s brother, Grigori, once managed Wawrinka. This is how tennis often works: a web of friends and trusted allies. Konta takes comfort that she has a winning record against the remaining seeds: Stephens, Madison Keys, Ashleigh Barty, who meet on the other side of the draw, the defending champion, Simona Halep, who demolished the teenage prodigy Iga Swiatek 6-1, 6-0 on Monday, and Petra Martic, who plays the other starlet left in the fight, Marketa Vondrousova, on Tuesday. While Konta has plenty of supporters and friends here, there are those who see danger in the quarter-final. Lindsay Davenport says of her American compatriot: “Sloane is a tough nut on these courts. You don’t see this side of Sloane necessarily in the other tournaments, week to week on the tour but I saw it here last year [when she made the final]. I’ve seen it again here this year.” Does Zavialoff think Konta can win the French Open? “I can’t tell a player or promise a player she will win a grand slam. What I know is that she will be tough to beat. So, if anyone from the other players manages to do that … good for them. And if not? Then …”