The singer-songwriter, producer and multi-instrumentalist played a barnstorming set on the Park stage on Friday – and then plunged into the festival’s hedonistic after-hours spots. Hello Georgia. I hear you’re a bit of a Glastonbury pro. What was first one like? I’ve been coming here since I was a kid. My dad [Neil Barnes] is in Leftfield and they headlined the Other stage in 1999, when I was about seven. I was like a mascot in my Leftfield T-shirt and pigtails and I used to want to get up on stage. I was fascinated by what drives thousands of people to want to come together in front of a show. Later in life, I realised why. It looked like your own show this year was quite emotional? It was. I’ve always wanted to play a solo show on a big stage at Glastonbury and I didn’t think it would be like that. I wasn’t expecting as many people to be there dancing. I was shocked. You never know how many people are going to listen to your music but I really wanted these new songs to connect more and be accessible in a way that my first record wasn’t. It was also emotional because my best friend’s dad died yesterday and he was a Glastonbury OG. She would have been here and it’s very sad. Was your dad at the side of the stage in a Georgia T-shirt? He was in the audience, apparently. It’s mad because it’s 20 years on. That’s cosmic or something. Is Glastonbury a bit of a family affair then? I guess it is. I came here six years ago, though, and had a completely hedonistic experience where I didn’t sleep the whole time and hung out in Shangri-La. But now it feels like I’m going a bit easier and Mum can come. Didn’t you get your mum to pitch your tent, Georgia? That sounds so bad. No, a friend of mine set up camp and, because I got my mum her ticket, I said: “You’ve got to sort the bed out.” And she unpacked my suitcase, too! So what does a hedonistic Glasto look like for you? One year, I played with Kate Tempest and it was the first show before her first album came out. She was on the brink of world domination and everyone was in such high spirits. And then, boom, I couldn’t remember a thing. Except for when I went to a stage called the Temple to see Aphex Twin’s secret set, but we were actually dancing to a completely different DJ. You have to queue a lot to get into venues at Glasto. What’s your best blagging tip? I always cry. I’ll get the tears on and that tends to work. I was at the Rabbit Hole in 2017 with Flaming Lips and, to queue jump with them, I cried. I was like: “I’m with the Flaming Lips, don’t make me look bad!” So we got let in and got Wayne Coyne in a dress and had a mad immersive theatre experience. I think Wayne kept the dress. What’s been your best crap celeb spot? Rio Ferdinand was here one year, on a golf buggy with Jamie Hince from the Kills. That was a really random pairing. And then there was the bunch of Love Islanders two years ago. My friend got one of them to sign her boobs. Where are you going to take your mum later? I’ve been working with the Black Madonna and she’s DJing later, so we’re going to go. My mum and her really get on, and I think she’s got Mum a special pass. It’s up a crane! She’s so inspirational and such an ambassador for the LGBT community. When you go to a show of hers, it’s what the dancefloor’s meant to be about – inclusivity. It really inspired me for my record: I wanted people to come to the shows and have a loving time and feel like they can be whoever they want to be. There are so many elitist scenes in music and the Black Madonna cuts right through that bullshit.