Donald Trump has requested a meeting with the Conservative leadership candidate Michael Gove, amid rumours that he will also see Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage during his visit to the UK. The US president is expected to see Gove later on Tuesday, after being hosted by the outgoing prime minister, Theresa May. His decision to ask for a meeting with Gove comes after the prominent Brexit campaigner was the first to secure a UK interview with Trump as president, writing a sympathetic piece for the Times that praised his intelligence and plan to govern by spreadsheet. Donald Trump says "I don't know Michael" Gove. Here's an example of them not knowing each other.... pic.twitter.com/rYcFmADkb6 During the interview in what Gove described as Trump’s “glitzy golden man cave”, the president described the UK as “smart” for voting to leave the EU. It later emerged that Rupert Murdoch, the media owner whose newspapers look set to back Gove for the Tory leadership, sat in on at least part of the interview. Johnson’s camp has not confirmed whether he will meet Trump but an encounter would seem likely given the US president told reporters last week that the Conservative frontrunner was a “friend of mine”. Trump will also see Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary, another of the Tory leadership hopefuls, at some of the official government events. After arriving in the UK on Air Force One on Monday 3 June, US president Donald Trump will be formally welcomed in a ceremony in the gardens of Buckingham Palace. It will be attended by the Queen and Prince Charles. The president will then attend a private lunch at the palace, which is expected to be attended by Prince Harry, but not his wife, who Trump recently described as 'nasty'. Following a wreath-laying ceremony in Westminster Abbey, Donald Trump will join Prince Charles for an afternoon tea at Clarence House. The Queen, Prince Charles and Prince Harry will then host a state banquet in the evening, which will be attended by prominent US citizens who live in the UK, as well as political and civic leaders. On Tuesday 4 June the visit includes a breakfast meeting with Prince Andrew, and then talks and a press conference with prime minister Theresa May at Downing Street. On the Tuesday evening Trump hosts a dinner at the residence of the US ambassador. On Wednesday 5 June Trump will take part in commemoration services in Portsmouth to mark the 75th anniversary of the D-Day landings. The day ends with the Queen formally bidding farewell to the US president. Trump’s entourage will also include two identical seven-seat black armoured limousines nicknamed ‘The Beast’, and a number of presidential helicopters. The president has at his side at all times one of five rotating military aides who carry the nuclear ‘football’ which can trigger a missile strike - equipped with communication tools and a book with prepared war plans. Farage, the leader of the Brexit party, said no meeting with the president had yet been scheduled but that he might get a call requesting one. Asked about the prospect of a meeting, Farage told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “I’ve met him many times before when it has been ‘Oh, I’m free, maybe Nigel can come and see me’, so I’ll wait and see if I get a call this afternoon.” Trump is not having a one-on-one meeting with May but they will attend a series of other events together to emphasise the connections between the two countries, including the D-day commemorations in Portsmouth on Wednesday.