What now for Tottenham Hotspur, who must return to the drawing board following their defeat at the hands of Liverpool in Saturday’s Champions League final in Madrid. While they were away, somebody sketched portraits of Real Betis’s central midfielder Giovani Lo Celso, his Lyon counterpart Tanguy Ndombélé, Celta Vigo striker Maxi Gómez and Fulham winger Ryan Sessegnon, whose collective price-tag of well over £140m could send a chill down the spine of the club’s thrifty chairman Daniel Levy. Meanwhile at Manchester United, Romelu Lukaku‘s mooted £60m move to Inter has hit a snag. Reports in assorted English tabloids suggest the Serie A side need to raise £40m by the end of this month in order to comply with financial fair play rules and will therefore be unable to make any big name signings unless they can offload a couple of players first. Asked by the BBC World Service if he was hoping to sign Lukaku, new Inter manager Antonio Conte was non-committal(ish). “I think now it’s very difficult to talk about this,” he said. “For sure, we have a plan to try to improve the team but it will be very important for the players, it will be very important to have a great will and great ambition, me, the players and the club, to try to reduce this gap.” United are interested in a right-back, but are believed to have baulked at the £30m Tottenham Hotspur are asking for Kieran Trippier, who looks to have have played his last game for the club. Crystal Palace whelp Aaron Wan-Bissaka is also the subject of interest at Old Trafford, but may prefer to join their local rivals Manchester City, who are also keen on securing his services. Roma winger Cengiz Ünder is wanted at Everton, who have had an initial bid of almost £25m for the Turkish winger turned down by the Italian club. The 21-year-old has also turned heads at Arsenal. Having been linked with a move to Manchester United, Everton’s Brazilian winger Richarlison has told FourFourTwo he’s happy where he is. “It’s a nice feeling when you get praise for your good work, but I’m not thinking about a transfer at the moment,” he said. “I’ve just arrived at Everton. I’m happy here.” Bless. No shortage of uncertainty remains over the future ownership of Newcastle United and the reign of Rafael Benítez as the club’s manager. The Express claims the Spaniard has decided that if the Bin Zayed Group are successful in their takeover bid, he’ll treat himself to Paris Saint-Germain goalkeeper Kevin Trapp and Jan Hurtado, a 19-year-old Venezuelan striker with Argentinian side Gimnasia. And finally, unwanted at PSG, where his contract expires at the end of this month, Adrien Rabiot has been offered £175,000 per week and a £4.5m signing on fee by Manchester United, but would prefer to keep his Thursday nights free and is angling for a move to Liverpool instead. Previously a target of Tottenham, Juventus and Barcelona, the French midfielder is reported to have priced himself out of a move in January.