The city of Brussels has cancelled plans to dress its famous Manneken Pis statue in a Michael Jackson costume on the 10th anniversary of the controversial star’s death following the latest allegations against him. An event to be attended by senior city officials during which the municipality would have formally received a miniature sequined jacket, black trousers, trilby hat and single white glove has also been dropped. The 60cm (24in) Manneken Pis – “peeing boy” in the local dialect – was scheduled to be dressed as Jackson on 25 June on the initiative of a Belgian fan club, a decision that had been approved by the city’s previous administration. The costume show, and other festivities due to take place over a six-hour event at Brussels city hall, was to be the culmination of a series of tributes leading up to the 10th anniversary of Jackson’s death in 2009, at the age of 50. The municipality said the cancellation – approved unanimously by councillors – was made in response to the Leaving Neverland documentary, which revived claims that Jackson had sexually abused children. Delphine Houba, a city of Brussels councillor responsible for culture and tourism, said that as the costume had already been made the clothing would be “administratively received” but that “from then on, we will not dress [him]”. Neither will the items be put on public display in the museum of the Manneken Pis, where 1,025 pieces of clothing tailored to fit the statue are held. The Leaving Neverland documentary told the story of two men who say they were groomed and sexually abused as boys by Jackson. Following its showing at the Sundance festival in January and its broadcast on TV in March there was widespread condemnation of the singer, whose music was dropped by radio stations around the world. The creators of The Simpsons also shelved an episodes featuring Jackson’s voice. The Mannekin Pis statue is dressed about 130 times a year in various outfits to mark special occasions or events, such as St Patrick’s Day, Christmas or the start of the Olympics. The city was said to have been particularly concerned about the possibility of a backlash from the public over the Jackson outfit during its hosting of the Grand Départ of the Tour de France, when the city will be flooded by tourists. A spokesman said: “The city council of Brussels has not been insensitive to the documentary and has chosen to adopt a cautious position.” Jermaine Jackson, the singer’s older brother, led the family’s denunciation of the HBO documentary, which he claimed had uncritically reported the claims of the two men featured in the programme.