Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching The Handmaid’s Tale, series three, on Channel 4 in the UK. Please do not add spoilers for later episodes in the series. You can find recaps for previous episodes here I never tire of those top shots of the white handmaids’ bonnets, moving around like blinkered cattle. The ladies in red are all off to the market in pairs, as usual. And June is waiting for Ofmatthew, her new partner. Ofmatthew is a colossal pain in the arse and has clearly been assigned to June because she fervently believes in the ideology of the republic. “We’re about to take back Chicago, my mistress tells me,” she simpers. June internally mutters something about “pious little shits”, and they disperse around the bland interior of the supermarket with its sparsely stacked shelves of canned goods and furtive women trying to catch each other’s eyes. Muzak plays. We hear talk of the stand-off between the Marthas and the handmaids, establishing that until the women trust each other, there can be no revolution. This episode screams for the women to stop sitting on the fence and work together. When June puts on the drab mud-coloured dress of a Martha later on, it’s symbolic as well as a good disguise. In the parlour of the Lawrence house, the hunched figure of Aunt Lydia sits, silver-topped cane supporting her, asking the Lawrences how Ofjoseph is settling in. She’s alive! Despite the work of Emily’s knife and the dozen or so steps she hit as she fell, the woman is indestructible. Although she does look pretty battered and beaten. The switch where she suddenly turns on June and cattle-prods her in the guts betrays the torrent of anger at Lydia’s core. Even the devout women are reaching breaking point as they struggle with their own subjugation while the men behave as they like. This is what happens when you try to wrestle the equality genie back into the bottle. “I wonder what the voltage is on those things,” says Joseph coldly as he leaves a stricken June on the stairs. We get it. He’s capricious and June cannot rely on his initial kindness returning anytime soon. Later, when she puts him in danger by harbouring the injured Martha, he shows again how he is only here to help himself. It does make it quite hard to think of him as the same man who risked his life to smuggle her out just two episodes ago. Is he actually two people? Does he have a twin? June’s keenness to roll her sleeves up and join the revolution is undeniable. It’s (partly) why she stayed. She’s a soldier now, albeit one with no actual military experience. But the woman can bury a body single-handedly. I wouldn’t mess with her. “Come on, Breaking Bad, let’s go,” she says to the Marthas, persuading them to take her with them on the next bust. “Strange to finally be invisible,” she says, clad in her mud-coloured smock later. The handmaids’ dresses mean visibility, like “blood on snow”. Is that Atwood’s imagery? I love it. Very Angela Carter. As tragedy unfolds and the resistance bomb-maker they tried to help returns to them with a bullet-hole in her, we see again Commander Lawrence’s utter lack of compassion. I am so confused by him. Meanwhile, Mrs Lawrence seems to be offering June some kind of tacit alliance this week as she covers for her when she sees the blood on the wall, and again later when she is planting things in the garden. Is that the exact spot where June buried the unfortunate woman? “Do not let this be for nothing,” June urges the surviving Martha, who leaves just before Commander Lawrence arrives to find the dead woman on the basement floor. He tells June she is like a child, taking too much, then he roars at her when she asks after his wife. They really aren’t friends this week at all. Where did nice Josh Lyman go? Back on the market walk, Ofmatthew is full of zeal, ranting about the disobedience of the dead woman. She is the voice of the regime this series, spouting invective about the ingratitude of women. I loved June’s deadpan remark about another handmaid who died because “her shopping partner snapped, pushed her under a bus”, exactly at the moment the bus rolls past. Perfect comic timing. Meanwhile, over the border, we witness the gradual healing of Emily’s’ broken spirit and the bonding between Luke and his wife’s new baby. The two, guided and supported by Moira, both find what they need by the epsiode’s end and I have a feeling it will often be the Canadian scenes this series that provide us with optimism. The links between Gilead’s survivors and their counterparts over the border grow stronger. Later we see Emily getting her eyes tested. “Better? Worse?” the optician keeps asking. She emerges with new glasses and a new clarity on her situation. She phones her wife. “Hi, it’s me,” she says into her clamshell phone. Her wife’s car blocks the street as she takes in the voice of the ghost suddenly talking to her like no time has passed at all. And again, the little bird of hope is back, chirruping on my finger. Praise be. Episode 1: OffredEpisode 2: Birth DayEpisode 3: LateEpisode 4: Nolite Te Bastardes CarborundorumEpisode 5: FaithfulEpisode 6: A Woman’s PlaceEpisode 7: The Other SideEpisode 8: JezebelsEpisode 9: The BridgeEpisode 10: Night Episode 1: JuneEpisode 2: UnwomenEpisode 3: BaggageEpisode 4: Other WomenEpisode 5: SeedsEpisode 6: First BloodEpisode 7: AfterEpisode 8: Women’s WorkEpisode 9: Smart PowerEpisode 10: The Last CeremonyEpisode 11: HollyEpisode 12: PostpartumEpisode 13: The Word Episode 1: Night What is wrong with Mrs Lawrence? Is her jumpiness the result of some hideous chemical experiment by her husband? What’s left of America is still fighting the new regime but it sounds like they’re about to lose Chicago. At what point do other countries get involved? Is the special relationship over? That burial scene near the end was incredibly powerful. This woman is now so inured to pain and abuse that she can do impossible things.