Author Michael Pollan was born in 1955 in Long Island, New York. His first book, Second Nature, came out in 1991, and he has since published eight more books on gardening, food and mind-altering substances. He teaches nonfiction at Harvard University and journalism at University of California, Berkeley. The paperback of his How to Change Your Mind: The New Science of Psychedelics (Penguin, £9.99) is out now, and he will be speaking at a 5x15 event at Emmanuel Centre, London on 4 June. The Overstory by Richard Powers I tried to get my book club to read this and they were like, “Yeah, yeah, yeah...” Then, of course, it won the Pulitzer prize and they’re all going to read it. It’s a very ambitious novel that succeeds in displacing the human from the centre of our concerns in reading fiction: it’s as much about these great redwood trees as it is about the characters trying to save them. And the science in the book is solid – many trees in redwood forests are connected by a network of mycelia to send warning messages, exchange nutrients. Trees are much more sociable than we ever realised. Never Look Away (dir Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck) I was a little reluctant to go, because it’s three hours long and biopics of artists are usually cringeworthy: my wife’s a painter, and we know a lot of artists. This is based on Gerhard Richter, even though his name is not used; his life intersected with Nazism and Germany before the fall of the Berlin Wall. It was an interesting depiction of how one’s biography and the various traumas you’ve been exposed to find their way into your work – you understood Richter’s work a lot better for having seen this movie. I found it really convincing and compelling. The Rhythm Society, San Francisco We went to an all-night dance party organised by this group in the Bay Area. It was an extraordinary experience, held on an aircraft carrier, the USS Hornet, on the vernal equinox. It was 500 people, from their 20s to their 70s, dancing to electronic music from midnight until dawn. There was no alcohol, which changes the tone of a social event – you don’t get into that gropey, aggressive end of the evening. There were definitely various chemical enhancements involved for some people, but everybody was discreet about it. There was a lot of collective effervescence. The Flip: Epiphanies of Mind and the Future of Knowledge by Jeffrey J Kripal This is a pretty obscure but interesting book by a religious studies and philosophy professor. We generally assume that matter produces mind, and consciousness is a product of brain cells. But there are a number of people, including many scientists, who have come to the conclusion that mind precedes matter – that’s the flip. This is a book about those people and how they came to that view. It’s very clear and lucid: Kripal makes the argument with such verve, humour and openness to the possibility he might be wrong, it’s delightful. Noguchi Museum, New York This is in a very industrial area in Queens – it’s an unpropitious neighbourhood to find an island of Zen calm, but my son, who’s studying to be an architect, told us it’s his favourite museum bar none, so we went there. It’s the former studio of Japanese-American sculptor Isamu Noguchi, and it was turned into a museum after he died. It’s very minimalist: it has his mostly stone sculptures in a beautiful Japanese garden and in his studio. He draws out of stone more variety and complexity than you can imagine is in a piece of basalt, which is what he worked with a lot. Hoover Dam, Nevada My wife was doing a series of paintings on dams, so we took a trip here in the last year or so. It’s about a half-hour from Las Vegas – that’s where they generate the power to light the city and collect water for it. You can’t settle the west without these dams. It was built during the Great Depression and is a gorgeous piece of art and civil engineering at the same time. The sheer wall of concrete is a stunning thing to behold, and even the room with the generators has beautiful mosaics on the floor.