Paul Mason is right (Labour has no choice but to back remain, 19 June), but Brexit policy change alone will not regain lost support. To be credible there must be a change of leadership and a decisive break from three years of failed “constructive ambiguity” over Brexit. By echoing the Conservatives’ “respect the will of the people” nonsense, Labour has locked itself into a blind alley. Under new leadership Labour should explain what a Tory Brexit means: the devastation of employment as industries reduce UK operations or quit altogether rather than face the logistical nightmare of border controls, tariffs, increased bureaucracy and an end to single-market harmonisation; further decline in inward investment; reduced diplomatic status; reputation damage; reduced access to Europe-wide instruments in fighting organised crime and terrorism; loss of access to dozens of specialist agencies; loss of influence in EU defence and international security institutions; damage to Anglo-French defence and security relations; a degraded role in the transatlantic alliance; a weakened voice inside Nato; exclusion from EU-negotiated trade agreements with over 60 countries; threats to peace in Northern Ireland and the Good Friday agreement; risks to the integrity of the United Kingdom itself, including potential Scottish independence. Economic damage will make Labour’s plans to invest in the NHS, social care, the regions, technology, research and renewable energy completely unaffordable. Only under new leadership and a remain policy can Labour emerge stronger from this chaos.Dr Simon SweeneyUniversity of York • I must disagree with Paul Mason. I don’t think he has realised that Jeremy Corbyn’s appeal as a politician is his integrity: he is a man of his word and acts on principle. What Mason wants him to be is just another politician, a person without principle, like Boris Johnson, who calculates what manoeuvres will bring political success. If that means contradicting on Wednesday what you said on Monday, like Nick Clegg over tuition fees, then so be it. Mason, like many others, is trying to get the Labour party to support remain and to call for a second referendum because he thinks it will pay political dividends. But the Labour party has a moral obligation to honour the results of the referendum and indeed in its last election manifesto made a promise to do so. It is unscrupulous to break a promise because you think that breaking it will bring you an advantage. Corbyn, unlike those who are urging him to break his promise, knows this.Malcolm PittockBolton • Why in the Brexit debate is freedom of movement only discussed in terms of inward immigration to the UK and its future control? Citizens of the EU27 nations will continue to enjoy their right to freedom of movement within the 27, while UK “citizens of nowhere” who have embraced this freedom lose these rights through no choice of our own. Our opportunities for outward immigration are being stripped away. I for one am bereft.Margot CrookshankHove • Paul Mason quite rightly challenges, at last, the wisdom of the Labour leadership’s indulgence of leave voters in traditionally Labour-voting areas, emphasising how many remain voters (many from the same areas) this policy risks alienating. For more than three years Labour seems to have accepted that there is nothing it can do about Labour supporters who voted leave. Has it ever thought about actually trying to persuade people? It can’t be that difficult to expose Brexit for the extreme rightwing coup it is, its chief cheerleaders a mixture of old Etonians and failed bond dealers with no interest in protecting jobs, the NHS, workers’ rights or indeed anything other than their own careers and pockets. Of course, some people will remain committed to Brexit, but a bit of enthusiasm and leadership in 2016 might have made all the difference – and still could. The Labour leadership’s feeble performance during the referendum campaign and since is why I no longer vote Labour.Matthew TaylorHove • You report (Corbyn rebuffs calls to win back voters with move towards remain, 20 June) that 26 Labour MPs have warned Jeremy Corbyn that embracing a second Brexit referendum would be “toxic to our bedrock voters” and that “party strategists” have produced evidence for the shadow cabinet that a more pro-remain position would not win back voters in sufficient numbers. These assessments are countered by the article by Peter Kellner, based on the latest YouGov polling evidence, that you published online (Trying to unite the country over Brexit won’t win Labour a general election, 19 June) but not in print. Kellner wrote that “In all bar a very few constituencies, most Labour supporters in leave constituencies voted remain three years ago” and that a decisive move towards a fresh referendum would lose the party only a small number of voters. So who are we to believe – YouGov, or a small collection of anti-second-referendum Labour MPs and backroom strategists?Nicholas de JonghLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition