Lee Bowyer has signed a one-year contract extension at Charlton Athletic just hours after the club announced talks had broken down over his wage demands and insistence on using an agent over the negotiation process. The Charlton owner Roland Duchâtelet, who is still attempting to sell a loss-making club, had released a remarkable statement via their official website on Monday afternoon suggesting Bowyer would leave upon the expiry of his deal at the end of this month. They claimed Bowyer “feels he should be paid like many other Championship managers” and added: “That the average Championship club makes a loss of around £15m per year is not something players should care about. The owners are crazy.” Yet Bowyer is understood to have contacted Duchâtelet immediately after the release of the statement – which had prompted a furious reaction among the fanbase – and conducted further talks with the owner overnight, with compromise duly reached. “We went on a real journey last season,” said the manager, who had originally been appointed on a caretaker basis at the club before taking over permanently last September. “The club came together – the players, the staff, the fans and we achieved something special. The journey hasn’t finished yet and I’m delighted this has all been agreed. “This has been a long process and I never wanted to leave, I love this club. I’d like to thank the owner for giving me the initial opportunity and now for continuing to believe in me. We have a fantastic fanbase here and my focus continues to be getting our squad in the best possible shape for the Championship next season.” Charlton finished third in League One and defeated Sunderland in the play-off final to secure a place in the second tier after a three-year absence. Duchâtelet had cited Bowyer’s desire to use an agent to negotiate a deal as potentially constituting a conflict of interest over transfer policy. “What Lee has achieved in his short time at the club is very impressive,” said the owner, who is attempting to sell Charlton to the Cardiff City chairman, Mehmet Dalman. “He has united the club once again. “I would like to thank Lee for his professionalism during this process. While the negotiations have been ongoing, he has continued to work on building a squad for the club’s Championship campaign. Stability is essential and I am very pleased we now have the best man in place to lead us forward next season.”