A decade before the Empire Windrush brought around 490 West Indians to Tilbury docks in 1948, marking the symbolic beginning of a multicultural Britain, the vessel was in use as a Nazi cruise ship, taking passengers on package holidays organised by Joseph Goebbels as part of his “Strength Through Joy” public enlightenment and propaganda programme. Most people will recognise the ship from the famous Pathé news footage that showed Jamaican ex-servicemen disembarking in England, pronouncing that these people were “citizens of the Empire coming to the mother country with good intent”. Over the last year, images of it have illustrated articles about the immigration scandal that took the ship’s name, and in which thousands of legal British residents were wrongly classified as illegal immigrants by the government, some detained and deported, others sacked or made homeless. Paul Arnott’s book shows that this trip from the Caribbean to Britain was by no means the only significant voyage it made. Originally known as the Monte Rosa, the German ship started life in Hamburg in 1931, and wasn’t rechristened until a year after being captured by the British as a war prize at Kiel in 1945. The designation of SS Empire Windrush was “optimistic as the British Empire referred to was shrinking by the month”. Arnott paints a rich portrait of life on board the cruiser in its heyday, where passengers were fed pancakes with cranberry sauce and sardellenwurst – pork sausage meat to which anchovies had been added, (“to the British palate this might seem a surprise choice”). The ship took Germans, many of them Nazi-leaning, who decided to escape the Depression for a new life in South America, thereby helping create, in Argentina, one of the most fascist regimes outside Europe. In the 1930s, membership of the Nazi party was obligatory for merchant seamen, so on arrival in Buenos Aires men would raise their right arms in salute. It brought the German ambassador to Argentina in 1933 who disembarked wearing full SS uniform, announced that he came bearing personal salutations from Adolf Hitler, and led the waiting crowds in singing Deutschland über Alles. Detailed accounts of the Nazi-orchestrated summer cruises around the Mediterranean and off the Scandinavian coast come from records compiled by Gestapo spies. “A parallel today would be if one arrived at a Butlins or Center Parcs ... and discovered that more than half of the bookings had been made by a government-endorsed cult,” Arnott writes, “accompanied by a small cell of government spies who’d report back to a single all powerful government minister on the totality of both behaviour and misbehaviour on these holidays”. These cruises were designed to promote the philosophy of National Socialism while simultaneously boosting tourism to aid Germany’s faltering economy. In 1942, it was roughly converted to a prison ship, the below decks area cleared of tables and chairs and turned into a series of huge cages, where prisoners were divided by sex and age. It brought hundreds of Norwegian Jews to Hamburg, where they were made to board wagons at gunpoint and transported to Auschwitz. Later the same ship brought lebensborn children (the product of liaisons between SS soldiers and suitably Aryan women) from Norway to live in Germany. Within a few years, after it had passed into British hands, musicians were playing again in the dining hall, fancy dress parties were thrown by the captain for the first-class passengers – the horror of earlier voyages forgotten. Arnott’s book offers an unusual perspective, revealing how a vessel, criss-crossing the oceans, changed history. • Windrush: A Ship Through Time by Paul Arnott is published by History (RRP £20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.