Even from a distance there is no harmony between Bette Midler and Donald Trump. Regular foes on social media, the music legend and the American president sparred again this week during Trump’s flashy state visit to Britain. The US commander in chief called Midler a “washed up psycho” on Tuesday after she had to back down following a tweet she posted, and later deleted, that repeated a fake quote from Trump mocking Republicans. Midler on Sunday tweeted a copy of an old image of Trump appearing to quote the then-real estate magnate, saying: “If I were to run, I’d run as a Republican. They’re the dumbest group of voters in the country. They believe anything on Fox News. I could lie and they’d still eat it up. I bet my numbers would be terrific.” But on Tuesday she retreated, though with a jab of defiance. “I apologize; this quote turns out to be a fake from way back in ‘15-16. Don’t know how I missed it, but it sounds SO much like him that I believed it was true! Fact Check: Did Trump say in ‘98 Republicans are dumb?” she tweeted. Despite a packed two days in London hobnobbing with the royal family and outgoing prime minster Theresa May, Trump found time to hit back. “Washed up psycho @BetteMidler was forced to apologize for a statement she attributed to me that turned out to be totally fabricated by her in order to make ‘your great president’ look really bad. She got caught, just like the Fake News Media gets caught. A sick scammer!” he tweeted on Tuesday. Unbowed, Midler went on to mock Trump’s sartorial style while in London and also to point out: “Trump said he was greeted by thousands in the UK, but they were actually thousands of protesters.” She rounded off that tweet with: “How does he always hear the opposite of the truth? Donald, if you’re reading this you SHOULD NOT slam your dick in a door!” She added: “I want to thank everyone who came to my defense last night during my personal Battle of the Bulge with he who must not be named. Your wit and good nature really lifted my spirits; as a newly washed up psycho, I am very grateful for your thoughts and prayers.” Least likely words we’ll ever hear from Midler on Trump? “Did you ever know that you’re my hero?”