The Derby failed to find a clear-cut leader of the three-year-old generation as five horses crossed the line within a length of each other, but the French equivalent at Chantilly on Sunday produced a much more convincing winner. Sottsass surged past Persian King, the favourite, inside the final furlong to give Jean-Claude Rouget his third win in the Prix du Jockey Club in the past four seasons. Persian King, the winner of the French 2,000 Guineas last time out, was still travelling strongly on the home turn and briefly hit the front before Cristian Demuro, who had been following him through, made the decisive move on Sottsass as Persian King’s stamina waned. Aidan O’Brien, who won a record-equalling seventh Derby on Saturday with Anthony Van Dyck, never looked likely to break his duck in France’s premier Classic although Cape Of Good Hope stayed on well in the closing stages to finish fourth. Madhmoon, who finished a half-length second to Anthony Van Dyck at Epsom, was reported to be in good shape on Sunday morning having arrived back at Kevin Prendergast’s stable in County Kildare at 1am, while Teleprompter, who finished last after starting at 5-1, will be given time to get over his fourth race since late March. “It’s going to be a difficult judgment because he looks great this morning,” Hughie Morrison, Telecaster’s trainer, said. “He’s in the Irish Derby [on 29 June], the Eclipse [on 6 July] and the Grand Prix de Paris [on 14 July] but they might all come too soon. We might just put him away and run him at York.” ITV Racing’s peak viewing figures for the Derby were slightly down on 2018 at 1,742,000, 2.6% below last year’s peak of 1,788,000. The average audience dropped more abruptly, perhaps at least in part owing to the afternoon being the hottest of the year, to 796,999, down by 138,000 (14%) from 935,000 in 2018. A crowd of 36,000 watched the Epsom Classic from the stands and enclosures with “tens of thousands” more watching for free on The Hill. Surrey police reported there had been six arrests at the course and one at Tattenham Corner station after the race. Six of those arrested have been released pending further inquiries, including two suspected of offences involving physical assaults, while a 31-year-old man from Wokingham was charged with being drunk and disorderly and will appear in court next month.