A frenetic, over-the-top action game about sexy demon hunters, in which you are assaulted by hellish creatures, flashy visual effects and absurdly energetic rock music all at once. It is sensory overload, and an absolute blast. What we said: “It’s bloody, spectacular and irresistible, all cheesy one-liners, guns, swords and explosions while guitars scream in the background, and it plays like a dream.” Read the full review A brilliant remake of the 1998 survival horror classic, providing series heroes Leon Kennedy and Claire Redfield with terrifying new challenges as they explore the zombie-infested Racoon City police station. What we said: “The rhythm, gradually building from many minutes of quiet exploration and puzzle-solving to gigantic, pulverising boss battles, is exact and beautiful, like some monstrous Wagner opera.” Read the full review A reluctant archaeologist sets out across a surreal galaxy at the behest of her mentor, visiting strange places and stranger people in pursuit of a lost professor. You piece together the language of an ancient civilisation as you go, but it’s the sturdy writing behind the characters that envelops you in this fiction. What we said: “A winding but exhilarating galactic sojourn that differs from linear fiction in that it remembers and adapts to every choice and every path you follow in order to build a story acutely individual to the player.” Read the full review A detective story set in a parallel-universe version of the 90s internet, at once nostalgic and wildly weird. You play an enforcer trying to track down illegal behaviour online, discovering a hilarious range of fictional internet subcultures as you work. What we said: “Rather than lazily pastiching the ugliness and awkwardness of turn-of-the-century web pages, it really conjures that time when the internet was a place to go rather than a liminal omnipresence.” Read the full review Slice through nightclubs, dodgy warehouses and hotels full of crime-lord goons as a drug-addicted samurai with the power to rewind time. Stylish in both form and substance, like a video-game reimagining of Drive, it has enough narrative intrigue to pull you through its story at breakneck speed. Slick, colourful and unrelenting, Apex Legends burst into the battle royale genre dominated by Fortnite and attracted 25 million players before a week had passed. Crammed with chunky weapons and wild characters, it is an absolute blast. What we said: “This is the battle royale genre pitilessly trimmed to its wildest moments, where every encounter is a riot of explosive jump-cut hyper-violence. It is not for the faint of heart or slow of trigger-finger.” Read the full review A supernatural-tinged samurai game centred on nerve-jangling, steel-meets-steel sword combat and themes of undeath, Sekiro is an extraordinary game that reveals more of its brilliance the longer you play – if you can rise to its very high difficulty level. What we said: “If you have the time and dedication to throw at its mountainous challenges, you will find here an exquisite game whose subtle themes, gradually unfurling mysteries and beautiful samurai-period sights reward the determined and skilled player.” Read the full review Renowned London studio Failbetter Games returns with an imaginative steam punk exploration adventure in which players pilot spacefaring locomotives across the cosmos, combatting pirates, madness and starvation. What we said: “This is a game about gradually and fearfully charting a vast, hostile space, not brashly conquering it. And there are wonderful and terrible sights out in the farthest reaches.” Read the full review It’s the sense of place that makes Metro Exodus stand out among shooters: its post-apocalyptic Russia is evocative and the pace of play is often slow and tense. You’re as likely to die because of a crack in your visor as at the hands of some mutant creature. What we said: “Metro Exodus’s narrative explores where and how people look for hope when the world has ended … a world stunning in its devastation.” Read the full review The seminal interactive fiction series draws to its violent, shocking and engrossing conclusion with teenage hero Clementine seeking to save a younger child from the undead hordes. But can anyone really survive? What we said: “By investing in its characters’ personalities and motivations and making each fight a real struggle for your life, The Walking Dead makes violence more meaningful.” Read the full review A short, surreal comedy game about a red blob with long, wibbly legs, this bite-size platformer has the freewheeling, almost improvisational feel of late-night animation, or a weird kids’ TV show that you saw once on holiday in Sweden and can never quite be sure you didn’t dream up. The work of lone Finnish designer Arvi Teikari, Baba Is You is an innovative meta-puzzler where the rules of each level are displayed as blocks on the screen: move them around and you create your own rules and your own solutions. Mind-bendingly brilliant. What we said: “Baba Is You is an invitation to play the role of a chaotic god, rewriting the rules of the universe … From this simple premise, Teikari spins dozens of ingenious challenges.” Read more The undisputed heavyweight of gore-splattered fighting games returns for an 11th bout of spine-ripping, eye-gouging punch ups. With a fresh selection of horrific finishing moves, it certainly hasn’t mellowed with age. What we said: “Comfortably the best Mortal Kombat in a long time. Played competitively against another person, it’s great, and the single-player experience is the most accomplished of any recent fighter.” Read the full review Combining the open-world space exploration genre with the movie Groundhog Day, this singular adventure asks players to attempt to solve an ancient mystery before the nearby sun goes supernova – but every time it does, you wake up at the start of a time loop, ready to make more progress. Offbeat and exceptional. Inspired by Douglas Adams and sci-fi anime, tiny development team Blue Manchu filled this strategy shooter with anarchic humour and cyberpunk style, creating an involving and gripping spaceship scavenging adventure. What we said: “An idiosyncratic joy – a brash, clever, juvenile head-trip, messy at the edges but all the more likable for it.” Read the full review A space station adrift. A lone crew member in peril. A mission that’s not what it seemed to be. Observation’s setup is familiar from plenty of science fiction, but this clever, creepy, extraordinary game is transformed by its perspective: instead of playing as the endangered human, you are the AI that runs the space-station mainframe, looking on through fuzzy cameras as astronaut Emma Fisher tries to figure out what’s gone so terribly wrong. What we said: “Observation has the formal innovation of something like Her Story; it’s an idea so good that you wonder why it hasn’t been done before. It’s unsettling and unconventional, and I was totally unable to turn away.” Read the full review The longrunning real-time strategy series brings its epic simulated warfare engine to ancient China as 12 warlords compete to dominate and unite the country. Intricate battles mix with subterfuge and political alliances to provide a nuanced challenge. What we said: “A wonderfully torrid period epic that understands the greatest stories are written about people, not empires.” Read the full review One or two players must think their way through 270 levels, using the judicious placement of boxes to scale heights, block hazards and make progress. Japanese studio Hal Laboratory has been making wonderful, deceptively simple puzzle games for almost forty years, and its latest is a masterful continuation of that legacy. The Gardens Between is about friends Arina and Frendt and their childhood memories, represented as island gardens. As they wander through each garden, you have to pause, rewind and fast-forward time – touchscreen swipe controls work beautifully for this – to ensure they reach their goals unharmed. A meditative oasis of calm, whose mix of puzzles and storytelling feels perfect to dip in and out of. Read the full review The earthy delights of Shakespearean London are the draw here. You play astrologer-cum-doctor (alternatively: complete charlatan) Simon Forman, a real historical figure with a very colourful career. Listening to a range of ailments from Forman’s patients, you consult the stars to provide (terrible) advice and medication. It’s a witty interactive novel, with a pop-up book style, that reveals its depths as you get to know the patients. The music, voice-acting and Elizabethan slang show impressive attention to detail, too. Read the full review A sort-of sequel to cult smartphone hit Game Dev Story, this puts you in charge of a fledgling games studio with ambitions to be the next EA or Ubisoft. There are different interlocking ways to upgrade your company, staff and games, some of which you have to figure out for yourself. But once you grasp the details, this becomes a ferociously addictive business simulation, as you help your pixel-graphic staff take on the gaming world. “Clash Royale but with footballs” would be the pitch for this game. It’s a multiplayer online battle-arena game based around passing, shooting and tackling, and it works brilliantly. Your players – who are all animals – form your deck of cards, ready to be laid down in matches to outfox your opponents. It’s one of the most accessible games of this type, as long as you like football, but there is also deep enjoyment to be had crafting the perfect team as you win matches and treasure chests to unlock and upgrade cards. Hit indie farming sim Stardew Valley turned out to be a game as much about people – and their emotional backstories – as it was about farming. The Stillness of the Wind has a similar emphasis on humans. Well, one human. You play Talma, an elderly farmer who slowly tends her goats, chickens and plants, trades with a salesman who visits every day, and reads letters from her family. It’s in these letters that Talma’s quietly moving story reveals itself. Read the full review In the early days of the app stores, racing was seen as a difficult genre for smartphones – especially the kind of slip’n’slidey road-racing games that touchscreen controls were thought to struggle with. Rush Rally 3 is the latest proof that this is poppycock. It looks good, there’s a well-structured career mode and skidding round tight bends feels exactly as you’d want it to. You could quite easily mistake Linn: Path of Orchards’ app-store icon for a new Monument Valley game. It shares a visual sensibility, as well as rotation-based puzzles. It’s no copycat though. Here, you’re swiping to control your character, Aban, as the platforms and scenery shift around her. Finishing a level is rewarding, but bagging extra medals for collecting scattered shards offers the real challenge. This War of Mine is an inspired twist on most war games, focusing on the experience of the civilians caught up in a conflict rather than the soldiers. In this story you play a father trying to protect his daughter. It starts bleakly, with grief and sickness, and continues in that vein, with mounting tension. The game involves difficult choices throughout. You’ll be thinking about it long after it’s over. The Escapists 2 puts you in the slammer, then challenges you to get out: but only after you’ve learned the routines of prison life, identifying the weak points (or people) to target. It’s a game that demands thoughtful planning rather than bull-in-a-china-shop action. It’s also very funny, with sharp and sometimes surreal banter. If you like the idea of card-battler games like Hearthstone but are put off by their competitiveness, try Knights of the Card Table. It’s designed to be played alone as you crawl through a dungeon slaying monsters and grabbing treasure. The game does a great job of explaining the way its battles work and is a very accessible way into the genre for newcomers. “Idle games” such as this have thrived on smartphones. These are apps you check in with every so often for a few minutes, before leaving them to carry on in your absence. Here you design a garden, collect flowers and earn money by attracting visitors, without ever feeling hassled to give it more time or money than you want to. A brand new world from Nintendo for mobile, newly available in the UK after its original release in the US, Japan and other countries in 2018. It’s an action role-playing game in which you create a party of adventurers to explore dungeons – complete with a dragon whom you can call in for battles when needed. Actually, the real fun comes in geeking out over everything between the battles, carefully levelling up your heroes and balancing their abilities. Touch and swipe controls have turned out to be perfect for mini-golf on mobiles. This game refines the idea beautifully, chucking hole after hole at you with a variety of obstacles and tricksy angles to negotiate. Its one-fingered controls – touch the screen, then pull back and let go to putt – work well. Meanwhile, the varied and frequently silly balls (and bombs and bees) you can unlock add spice. From the Godzilla films to the classic arcade game Rampage, there has long been a thrill in seeing huge monsters smash up urban landscapes. Monsters With Attitude offers a fun, cartoonish spin on the city-stomping trope. You choose an alien beast and then send them out to bash buildings, growing in size as they go. It’s cathartic, silly enough to put a smile on your face, and online multiplayer lets you test your smashing skills against others.