Sometimes you just want to gather actors to your breast, crush them close and whisper in their ears that all of this will be over soon. So it is with ITV’s new six-part drama Beecham House. The first two parts play over consecutive nights – the second episode is on Monday night – which is the equivalent of ripping off a plaster quickly. The remaining parts are to be shown over the following Sunday nights, to let some air get to the wound and hope it heals. Basically, it’s Downton Abbey relocated to late-18th-century Delhi, covering the adventures of John Beecham; the man, the chest, the legend. Oh, and the beard. Which, as his mother (played by Lesley Nicol, who was Mrs Patmore the cook in the actual Downton Abbey) notes on her arrival in Delhi after not seeing him for 12 years, “sits handsomely on your face”. That one really should have gone back for an edit. Beecham, his chest, beard and legend are played by Tom Bateman, who looks like a cross between Aidan Turner and Jamie Dornan. I mention this to save you the 20 minutes of squinting distraction that you will otherwise go through before you can work it out and settle. Bateman does the very best he can with the script that, I can only imagine, was thrust at the actors from the wings just before the cameras rolled. Most of the first hour is spent repeatedly establishing Beecham’s anachronistically heroic, or possibly heroically anachronistic, bona fides. If we hear once that he has resigned from the East India Company in protest at its rapacious, colonialist impulses in order to set up as an independent businessman with the good of the oppressed continent at heart, we hear it a thousand times. “I am a fair trader, not a pillager,” Beecham tells the suspicious General Castillon (Gregory Fitoussi, who is also resolutely unfazed by his dismal lines and cipher-character, a mercenary for the Mughal emperor Shah Alam II). “Their expansion plans are shameful,” he announces to the Maharajah he must persuade to grant him a trading licence. “I have severed ties with them.” When Beecham’s old pal Samuel (Marc Warren, as game as the rest of the poor bastards) turns up, having been sacked from the East India Company for giving evidence against it at a trial our hero should have testified at too, he also is assured by Beecham that “Their hypocrisy sickens me!” Out of guilt, Beecham makes him a partner, which may yet turn out to be a wrong move, given that Samuel has reason to resent his friend (“They sullied my name!”) and is, I would remind you, played by Marc Warren – whose CV in its entirety reads “shifty”. No one else has anything much to do. The love interest is a local governess, Margaret Osbourne (Dakota Blue Richards, who was Lyra in the film adaptation of Philip Pullman’s The Golden Compass and no slouch). Her main activity so far is to wander around Beecham’s palatial home (“How nice it must be to sit under this tree!”) and throw into disarray his mother’s plans to marry him off to Violet, the companion she has brought with her from England. Various servants giggle and whisper in corners about the master and the mysterious baby and its attendant whom he has brought with him. “You will learn that I am a private man,” he says, although we viewers are privileged by glimpses of the erotic dreams he has of an Indian woman whose presence he reaches for yearningly as he wakes, only to find his bed empty. As a standard ITV drama it would be risible – a meagre, basic plot being parcelled out by actors constrained by lines that make them sound as if they are giving dictation to a secretary they have every reason not to trust. But as a passion project of the rightly feted director Gurinder Chadha (Bhaji on the Beach, Bend it Like Beckham, Bride and Prejudice) that was touted as a corrective to the tradition of period dramas that prioritise and do not sufficiently problematise the white colonial version of history, it is simply bizarre. So far – and, although I acknowledge that we are just one hour into six, nothing about the series suggests a remarkable deepening or complication of the endeavour is imminent – it is a straightforward white saviour narrative, and unless having white characters who are as underdeveloped as the Indian ones is the equality dreamed of, it is hard to see how any progress has been achieved here at all. As it stands, it’s a jewel in no one’s crown.