Cristiano Ronaldo was only 19 when Portugal hosted Euro 2004 and reached the final. Ronaldo scored his first international goal in that tournament, heading in a last-minute consolation in a 2-1 defeat to eventual winners Greece in the group stage. Ronaldo is now 34, a reigning European champion, the country’s most capped player and their all-time leading goalscorer. If he lines up alongside João Félix this week, he will also have the perfect view of another promising 19-year-old making a big entrance at a tournament on home soil. Portugal are the the bookmakers’ favourites to win the Nations League. They have home advantage – and Ronaldo – but they also have an exciting crop of young players. Bernardo Silva, still just 24, has emerged as a genuine world class talent and he will carry the hopes of a nation in the years to come, but Félix is the hot property of Portuguese football right now. The teenager has been given his first call-up to the national side after a stunning breakthrough campaign with Primeira Liga champions Benfica. He scored 15 goals and registered seven assists in 26 league appearances this season, with a direct hand in a goal every 80 minutes ensuring he has become one of the most sought after youngsters in Europe. It remains to be seen whether the ever pragmatic Fernando Santos will get the best from the teenager but Félix scored with 22.4% of his shots this season, suggesting he is ready to partnering Ronaldo this week and potentially filling his boots in the future. Kevin Mbabu is also preparing to take over from a veteran of international football. The right-back has the far more favourable task of replacing 35-year-old Stephan Lichtsteiner, who has been dropped from the national team after he was released by Arsenal. Lichtsteiner had a pretty dismal season, but Mbabu is on the up. He has already made an £8m move from Young Boys to Wolfsburg this summer and he could prove a steal at that price. The 24-year-old started two of Switzerland’s four group games in the Nations League – a 6-0 thrashing of Iceland and a 5-2 win over Belgium – and he looks set to be a regular fixture at full-back. He also performed admirably for Young Boys against strong opposition in the Champions League this season, completing twice as many chances as any of his teammates (12 in five appearances). His attacking endeavour down the flank will be pivotal if Switzerland are to pull off an upset against Portugal. Donny van de Beek did not begin the season as a guaranteed starter for Ajax but he ended it as a mainstay in a side that thrilled Europe and regained their Eredivisie crown. The 22-year-old has been used sparingly by Ronald Koeman to date but could be an important player for the Dutch this week, with Champions League winner Georginio Wijnaldum only linking up with the squad late on Monday night. Van de Beek will most likely be competing with the Liverpool player for the No 8 role in the Netherlands’ 4-3-3 formation, playing a key role in breaking the lines and finding pockets of space in the final third. Van de Beek did that for Ajax over the course of the season, scoring 16 goals for the club en route to a domestic double and Champions League semi-final. He also used his intelligent movement and vision to pick up 10 assists in the league, meaning he had a direct hand in a goal every 128.5 minutes. It helps that Van de Beek has developed an understanding with Frenkie de Jong at Ajax. De Jong is off to Barcelona after the Nations League and Van de Beek may soon follows his teammate in making his own big move. Given that Jordan Henderson, Dele Alli and Eric Dier have also joined up with the squad late following the Champions League final – and Harry Winks was not called up given the timing of the game in Madrid – Rice could be crucial to England’s prospects this week. Up against a Netherlands side that move the ball quickly through midfield, the West Ham youngster has an important role in breaking up play. The 20-year-old did this superbly for the Hammers this season, with his timing in the tackle very impressive. He committed just 17 fouls in the whole campaign, despite ranking among the top 10 players in the Premier League for tackles (98). Only three players in the league won possession in the midfield third more times than Rice (161) this season and he could be the shield to England’s defence for years to come. His pass accuracy of 86.4% was the best of all West Ham players to feature more than 10 times and his ability to retain as well as regain possession will be equally important to Gareth Southgate. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored on Twitter and Facebook• Follow Martin Laurence on Twitter