The netball star wife of sacked Wallabies star Israel Folau, who posted his bid for cash to fund his legal fight against Rugby Australia on her own social media, won’t be sanctioned by her league. Maria Folau, who plays for Adelaide Thunderbirds in Super Netball, re-posted her husband’s online campaign, which aims to raise $3 million. Israel Folau’s $4 million contract was torn up in May after one of his social media posts citing the Bible was deemed homophobic. It was an eventful day for Maria Folau, who also missed two chances on the siren as the Thunderbirds were held to a 51-51 draw by the NSW Swifts in Adelaide. “There is no action required by the league,” a joint statement released on Sunday by Netball Australia and the Super Netball league said. “We will continue to support Maria as a valued member of the Thunderbirds and the Suncorp Super Netball league.” The fundraising post, republished to Maria Folau’s Instagram page on Friday, explains the couple has spent more than $100,000 on legal fees to fight the termination. As of 2pm on Sunday, a GoFundMe page set up by Israel Folau had raised more than $645,000 of its $3 million target. Netball South Australia chief executive Bronwyn Klei also weighed in on the controversy, defending her organisation as committed to providing an inclusive environment. “We also believe in fairness and perspective,” she said, shortly before Folau took to the court for the Thunderbirds clash with the Swifts. “Like millions of other people across Australia, Maria Folau uses her personal social media platform to share her life and beliefs with her family, friends and fans.” Klei made clear Netball SA does not endorse the post, but said the social media policy had not been contravened. “Maria is a key member of the Thunderbirds,” she said. “We continue to support her as we support all our players.” Former Diamonds captain Liz Ellis slammed the sport’s peak body in Australia for its response. “Yeah nah not good enough,” she wrote on social media. “There is no room for homophobia in our game. Anyone who is seen to support or endorse homophobia is not welcome.”