Janet Jackson has said her brother Michael’s musical legacy will continue, but refused to comment on enduring allegations of child sexual abuse. Two men, James Safechuck and Wade Robson, made detailed allegations of sexual abuse by Michael Jackson in a documentary, Leaving Neverland. The singer died 10 years ago this month. Janet Jackson, 53, supported her brother throughout the child sexual abuse allegations, which he denied before his death. The two siblings also sang a duet on the 1995 hit Scream, a track that retaliated against media coverage of the claims, which had first emerged two years earlier. When asked about her brother’s legacy in an interview with the Sunday Times magazine, she said: “It will continue. I love it when I see kids emulating him, when adults still listen to his music. “It just lets you know the impact that my family has had on the world. I hope I’m not sounding arrogant in any way. I’m just stating what is. It’s really all God’s doing, and I’m just thankful for that.” Members of the Jackson family, including Michael’s brothers Tito and Marlon and his nephew Taj, resolutely denied the allegations made in Leaving Neverland, which was directed by Dan Reed. They drew a mixed reaction from the singer’s friends and fans, some of whom claimed the programme, which aired in the UK on Channel 4, was “all about the money”. Discussing growing up in one of the world’s most famous families, Janet said her father, Joseph, had insisted his children had music careers and refused to allow her to study business law because he saw musical talent in her. “When parents see something in their children, I guess they guide them in that direction,” she said. “Especially when you’re talking about children who grew up in that urban area. Music was a way to keep us off the streets. “My father saw a way out for his children. A better life. And thank God for that.” Janet Jackson went on to sell millions of records and become one of the most successful female solo acts of all time. She will make her Glastonbury festival debut next weekend.