Decades ago a medical consultant told me he had been at a dinner with a (then) Tory party grandee. No doubt after his tongue had been loosened by imbibing, the grandee told my friend that: “We are going to get rid of the NHS. It’s a socialist invention.” That had the awful ring of truth about it those many years ago. Trump now seems keen to facilitate this government’s wish to privatise the NHS (Report, 3 June). How long before we see an American-style NHS? Not long, I fear.Dr Stephen PaceyNorth Muskham, Nottinghamshire • I have never quite understood the leave campaign’s wish to “take our country back”. I didn’t realise we had lost it, but it now becomes clear – they want it back to give to the United States. God forbid.Carlotta KramskoyWestbury-on-Trym, Bristol • Jacob Rees-Mogg says an elected American president cannot be compared to Mussolini and Hitler, who were mass murderers. But both of them were elected leaders first, too, so the comparison can be made. Rees-Mogg has had a failure with his “history book”. He obviously is as poor over more modern European history.David CritchardExeter • In his praise for the Queen, President Trump, diplomatically, did not mention that he was elected to his position and that the British people have no choice.Jenny BushellLondon • Written from the perspective of the last century, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy states: “The President’s job – and if someone vain and stupid enough is picked he [sic] won’t realise this – is not to wield power but to draw attention away from it.” Plus ça change...Austen LynchGarstang, Lancashire • Can us radical crochet practitioners please have access to Tatiana’s Trump crochet pattern (Letters page photo, 4 June)? It will come in very handy for future demonstrations (and Christmas presents). Please also tell me she’s made it for her politics A-level?Christine PeacockManchester • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition