The Rumour Mill sometimes feels out of step with the modern world, with the kids playing snake on their mobile telephones while listening to Smashmouth on their MP3 players and chatting away on MSN Messenger. We also often feel slightly at odds with who’s considered a top notch player these days, so with that in mind we do wonder slightly about the various stories this morning that report a very lengthy and extremely wealthy queue is forming for Leicester’s James Maddison. Now, Maddison is a fine young player and has done well in his first season in the Premier League, but well enough to justify Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United and Tottenham – the Premier League champions, the Champions League winners, the Champions League runners-up and Manchester United – all apparently madly slavering to be the ones to pay £60m for him, as the Daily Star claims? This could of course be the work of a shrewd agent pumping up the tyres of his client, but if not then this is finally proof that The Mill used to be with ‘it’, but then they changed what ‘it’ was. Now what we’re with isn’t ‘it’ anymore and what’s ‘it’ seems weird and scary. It’ll happen to you! Far more understandable is Arsenal’s desire to rip up their defence and start again, which according to Goal is exactly what they plan to do this summer. Stephan Lichtsteiner has already been given the hoof, but Laurent Koscielny, Shkodran Mustafi, Nacho Monreal and Calum Chambers could all follow him, it says here, with Arsenal open to offers for all of them. But who will replace them? There are various theories around in various outlets, and they include Sampdoria’s Joachim Andersen, RB Leipzig’s Dayot Upamecano, PSG’s Thomas Meunier, St Etienne’s William Saliba, Barcelona’s Samuel Umtiti, and Crystal Palace’s Aaron Win-Bissaka. The latter two will be too expensive in all probability, but the rest could be goers. In a manner of speaking. In fizzingly promising youngster news, Chelsea are suddenly confident that Callum Hudson-Odoi will sign a new contract and make it one less thing for them to worry about in a summer with plenty to worry about, while Manchester City are apparently most happy to pay João Félix’s £106m release clause to free him from Benfica and Liverpool are very very very very very keen on Matthijs de Ligt, as anyone with half a brain and a willing bank account is. Also, Manchester United’s pursuit of Swansea’s Daniel James continues apace, while their pursuit of Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly continues very much not apace, one of the oldest transfer sagas in Christendom lumbering into its 427th year. Also the Express reports that the deal potentially taking Paul Pogba back to Juventus could have a Paulo Dybala-shaped sweetener thrown in. Some odds and ends: Derby are looking at Lee Bowyer as a potential replacement for Frank Lampard if he answers the siren call of Chelsea; Daniel Levy has instructed Real Madrid to do one as they sniff around Christian Eriksen; Harry Maguire is yours for £85m, say Leicester; there are some spurious reports in Spain that Kylian Mbappé has handed in a transfer request, but who knows what’s happening there. And finally, in one of those rumours that seems to make just too much sense, Atlético Madrid are in for Marcos Alonso. Because of course they are.