Two articles about hate crime in the same edition: one by a victim (I was victim of a hate crime: I can’t stay silent, Anita Sethi, 24 June) and the other about victims (Two men left injured in homophobic knife attack by young boys). Hate crime is an everyday occurrence for a large number of ethnic minority, religious minority, LGBT, disabled and trans citizens. In their important research, Kusminder Chahal and Louis Julienne (1999) described the impact on their interviewees and others: family relations between spouses were affected, health and wellbeing of individuals were compromised and there was a sense of social isolation because friends and relatives were less likely to visit. Children were not allowed to play outside and, in some cases, had problems at school. It is clear that in such crimes not only do the victim and their family suffer, but others in the same minority category do, too. They are known as “message crimes”, because they send a message out that anybody with the victim’s characteristics is not welcome in the community. Research has shown that this type of crime is more damaging and disrespectful than non-aggravated versions of the same offences, such as criminal damage, public order offences or common assault. People will be more ready to report this type of crime if there is support and a clearly identified group of specialised sentencers to stem the rising tide of such behaviour.Andy StelmanBishops Castle, Shropshire • Congratulations to Anita Sethi for her courageous moves to bring a racist thug to account. She was lucky to have had a guard on the train who had the sense to get witness statements and ring ahead for the police. If some train companies bring in driver-only trains, there will be no officials to deal with the situation.Hazel DaviesNewton-le-Willows, Merseyside • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition