Can any of us be prepared for the death of a parent? Dealing with the shock and pain of grief, and then having to manage all the different financial aspects in a level-headed manner, can be daunting. There are practical financial steps you can take. But what if complications arise – for example, the deceased parent lives abroad, which may mean dealing with overseas property or assets, or there is no will? Then there are the funeral costs, sorting out bank accounts, investments and so on, and the whole legal side of things. Artist and photographer Victoria Obolensky, 43, whose work has been exhibited all over Europe, found her world turned upside down when both her stepfather and father died within 18 months of each other. This meant she had to manage two sets of financial affairs, with the added complication that one parent lived overseas. As an only child, she was also faced with the enormity of dealing with some of this on her own. Her stepfather, who had brought her up since she was aged one, died in October 2015, while her father, who lived in Portugal, died in March 2017. Talking about her stepfather Alex’s death, she says: “I was shocked, surprised – he had a stroke and died three days later in hospital.” Her stepsister dealt with the immediate practicalities, including registering the death, getting copies of the death certificate, informing all the relevant government departments and freezing bank accounts, as she was appointed the executor of the estate. However, Obolensky discovered that when it came to the inheritance, the codicil – a document that allows someone to make amendments to an existing will instead of completely rewriting an existing version – was unsigned and, as a result, it was not adhered to, so as a prospective beneficiary she received nothing. Ministry of Justice figures show there has been a rise in the number of wills contested in the high court in the UK. In 2018 there were 86 contested probate cases – up 8% compared with 2017. Obolensky only learned that her father Gavin had died in Portugal through a friend who lives there. “His death was a complete shock – he was relatively young, very fit and effectively very healthy, though he had heart problems, I believe, about six months before he passed away,” she says. His estate was, she explains, “a complete mess – he left no will, and I’m still dealing with it to this day. “All the papers were far from being in order, and the fact that he lived in Portugal and I reside in the UK means that logistically it has been a nightmare. My friend, who lives in Portugal, brought me out there, and I stayed with her. I had to deal with the funeral arrangements and all the paperwork.” The UK government publishes some useful leaflets (available for free online) on what you need to do and the practical support available if a family member or friend dies abroad – go to gov.uk/government/publications/coping-with-death-abroad. Meanwhile, when it comes to wills, a recent YouGov survey found that 59% of UK parents either do not have a will or have an outdated one. If the deceased leaves no will, and there is a surviving spouse or children, then they will generally deal with the estate. Unexpected hurdles can arise, as Obolensky found out. “I didn’t speak Portuguese, and my friend dealt with all of the translation. In terms of selling his assets, which were a car in Portugal and a five-bedroom house in Brazil, it’s been time-consuming – emailing lawyers in the initial stages, flying over there, being on the phone to the British embassy in Portugal, who are phenomenal in terms of being helpful.” She adds: “An English lawyer based there drew up the paperwork, as I had to get power of attorney, which cost £120. As an only child I found it overwhelming, and we are still dealing with the estate in Brazil two years later. I had to reach out to contacts, and one who is savvy within the property market knows a Brazilian lawyer who is handling the reselling of the estate, so there will be a percentage of the property that’s paid to them on the completion of the sale.”