You can count on one hand the superstars thatwho have properly shifted the needle when it comes to pop. Madonna, Prince and Michael Jackson are obvious but it’s perhaps Jackson’s younger sister Janet who has cast the biggest shadow over the current crop of empowered female pop stars. Her 1986 album Control told a since well-trodden story of emancipation and independence that’s been replicated by everyone from Beyoncé and Rihanna to any ex-TV talent show or recovered child star looking to make their mark. The follow-up, Rhythm Nation 1814, saw her discussing the Black Lives Matter movement before the term was coined, while 1993’s Janet showed that female sexuality didn’t have to be taboo. (OK, Madonna may have got there first with that one, but the point stands.) When she makes her Glastonbury debut, three decades into her career, it is initially a discombobulating experience to witness the actual “Miss Jackson if you’re Nasty” standing on stage in a farm in Somerset in front of a mass of sunburn. It’s not helped by a weirdsound mix that means her vocals are weirdly buried on All for You album track Trust a Try, which she launches into after arriving on stage via a riser on to a raised platform flanked by eight dancers. Lewis Capaldi she isn’t. The opening deep cut is a fake-out, as she then dashes out a medley of greatest hits taking in the sweaty R&B of If, basically all of Control’s huge singles (What Have You Done for Me Lately into Control into Nasty) and the throwback disco of All for You. If the crowd seem initially hesitant – perhaps kept at a distance by the high-gloss arena-show levels of production – then the undeniable bangers win them round. Janet also relaxes into it with a beaming “I could learn to love this Glastonberry (sic)”. The pacing is relentless, as is the choreography, with songs often chopped down into minute-long highlights. The Janet album is represented by That’s the Way Love Goes and a horny Throb; there’s a frankly ridiculous Rhythm Nation 1814 medley that takes in the featherlight Escapade, the ridiculously OTT Black Cat and a joyous Love Will Never Do (Without You); and her more recent back catalogue is touched on with deep cuts Rock With U and the bouncy R&B Junkie. But the crowd are here for the hits, and an extended Rhythm Nation seals a set that feels like a rundown of R&B/pop’s recent history. “We need more love” she announces before descending into the stage. For 50 minutes it was everywhere.