This article is part of the Guardian’s 2019 Women’s World Cup Experts’ Network, a cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the 24 countries who have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from two countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 7 June. Jamaica’s Reggae Girlz, who are ranked No 53 in the world, are set to make their historic bow at the Women’s World Cup in France as the first ever Caribbean team to appear at the finals. That achievement came by way of their momentous third-place finish in the Concacaf Championship after a dramatic 4-2 penalty shootout win over Panama in October. The Reggae Girlz lost only two games (2-0 against Canada and 6-0 against the United States) during the entire qualifying period, scoring 53 goals and conceding 14. They were led by the talismanic striker Khadija “Bunny” Shaw, who ended the qualifiers with 19 goals. The team travelling to France includes several American and English-born players with Jamaican heritage and is virtually the same one that competed in the qualifiers but the coach, Hue Menzies, has been able to unearth some new additions before this summer’s tournament. Menzies and his players have taken a liking to the 4-3-3 formation, as they bank on their speed and athleticism to open up opposing defences, particularly from the wide areas. Shaw, as always, will be the focal point in the attacking trio and could make a difference against their more illustrious Group C opponents if is she is able to get on the ball close enough to goal. The Reggae Girlz appear more effective when playing on the break using their speed and the return of the forward Trudi Carter from injury should add further impetus. The defence showed its strength in the qualifiers and, while they often play deep against tougher opponents, the centre-backs sometimes step up in an attempt to pressure the ball high and support the midfield’s attempt to gain possession. Strong performances can be expected from the captain, Konya Plummer, and her fellow defender Allyson Swaby. They are both strong in the air and resolute on the ground. Without doubt Jamaica are one of the biggest underdogs at the World Cup but they are certainly not going to the tournament accepting defeat and the work ethic that has brought them this far will be in evidence again. Hue Menzies was born in England and grew up in Jamaica before moving to the United States in 1980. He now has more than 30 years of coaching experience and also has 15 years of Olympic development coaching experience at the national, state and regional levels. He was introduced to the national women’s programme on the recommendation of ambassador for Jamaica’s women’s football, Cedella Marley, in 2014. Despite the lack of resources, Menzies achieved the historic feat of making Jamaica the first Caribbean team to qualify for the Women’s World Cup. Khadija “Bunny” Shaw is a 5ft 11in player whose physicality and speed of thought has allowed her to have success from a young age. In fact, she was so good from such a young age that she played for Jamaica’s Under-15, Under-17 and Under-20 teams simultaneously since the age of 14. She made her debut for the senior women’s national team on 23 August 2015, scoring once in a 6-0 win over the Dominican Republic. Since then, the 22-year-old has been a force to reckon with and she already heads the Reggae Girlz all-time charts with 26 goals in 30 caps at the time of writing. In 2018, Shaw was the first female player to be named the Guardian Footballer of the Year, an award given to a footballer “who has done something truly remarkable, whether by overcoming adversity, helping others or setting a sporting example by acting with exceptional honesty”. Shaw has studied at Eastern Florida State College and University of Tennessee and is expected to turn professional this summer. Christina Chang is the oldest player in the Reggae Girlz squad at 33. Despite her age, the US-born defender, is in the best shape of her life, and readily takes time away from her busy schedule as an air traffic controller at Miami international airport to parade her skills. So passionate and dedicated is Chang to the Jamaican cause that she decided to put on hold her plans to start a family in order to play at a World Cup. She has booked her honeymoon for after the tournament in France. Women’s football in Jamaica came to life in 1991 when the Reggae Girlz played their first international match against Haiti, losing 1–0. Since then, they have become one of the top women’s national football teams in the region, along with Trinidad & Tobago and Haiti, and currently boast their highest ever Fifa ranking at 53. They have made six appearances at the Concacaf Women’s Gold Cup since 2002 with their best finish coming in 2018 when they finished third (which led to them qualifying for the World Cup in France). There have been bumps on the road, however, and eight years ago the women’s programme as well as the women’s Olympic programme were disbanded by the Jamaica Football Federation (JFF) due to lack of funding, which saw the country being taken out of Fifa’s women’s world rankings after three years of inactivity. The programme was restarted in 2014 with the support of Cedella Marley, the daughter of the late Bob Marley. Marley’s robust fundraising efforts eventually helped the Reggae Girlz achieve their historic World Cup qualification. Some will already have heard about the 17-year-old sensation Jody Brown. The diminutive player may be shy in nature but once she has a ball at her feet her true personality comes to light. Brown is one of only a few players who have so far represented the country at all levels — Under-15, Under-17, Under-20 and now the senior Reggae Girlz team. And she has done so with distinction. She had by the time of writing made 10 appearances for the senior team, scoring seven goals. Her impressive performances at the Concacaf Women’s Championships earned her the best young player of the tournament awards. While it is not impossible for the Jamaica to get out of Group C and into the last 16, they face a daunting task to do so. As such, the realistic aim for the team known for its determination and spirit is to secure at least one victory in their first outing at a World Cup. TheReggae Girlz are certainly an outsider to make the last 16. Not available. Not available. Sherdon Cowan writes for the Jamaica Observer. Follow him here on Twitter.