I’ve never subscribed to beauty dictated by seasons. However, this glowfest skin/tangerine lip/pool hair combo, as seen at Fyodor Golan, is summer personified. The orange lip is not easy. It takes confidence and can draw attention to blemishes and redness (a light, dewy foundation with highlighter should sort this). For the uninitiated, dip in via a sheer orange or coral. Concealer on the lips creates a great canvas, lip liner gives better definition and a reddish orange is universal. 1. Dolce & Gabbana Miss Sicily Lipstick in Angela £27, harrods.com 2. Algenist Reveal Concentrated Luminizing Drops £30, spacenk.com 3. Sleek Lip Dose Soft Matte Lip Click Lipstick in You Already Know £5.99, boots.com4. Jillian Dempsey Clean Tint in Poppy £26.50, thisisbeautymart.com 5. Guerlain Terracotta Skin Highlighting Stick in Blush £34, selfridges.com Being unequivocal, particularly in beauty, has a habit of coming back to bite you on the proverbial… I always maintain body scrubs are a colossal, messy swizz, hence I don’t recommend them. And then this came along. Created by Amanda Harrington, famed for giving the rich and the famous the most divine sunless tan, this body scrub is on a different level. Even if you have no intention of tanning, if you have dull and lacklustre skin, this is a must. Unlike most scrubs, the formulation includes glycolic and fruit acids (so don’t forget to follow with sunscreen) that nibble away at your dead skin to reveal its fresher, less comatose sibling. It also includes skin-soothing aloe vera as opposed to oil and it comes in a squeezy tube so you can manage the output easily. As the texture is akin to a semi-foamy cleanser, albeit with fine particles (biodegradable castor beads), a little goes a long way. Massage into wet skin and, minutes later, you have smoother, brighter, softer skin. So while I’m still not really an advocate of body scrubs, this is one I would absolutely recommend adding to your weekly body care routine because it actually works. Amanda Harrington Glycolic Body Scrub, £22, harveynichols.com Mask everything The ‘no filter’ hydrating mask from Marianna Hewitt and Lauren Gores Ireland, with vitamins and antioxidants, is an overnight treatment, primer and travel mate. Summer Fridays Jet Lag Mask, £42, selfridges.com Milking it A luxe but inexpensive milky cleanser (with cherry blossom, liquorice extract, meadowfoam seed oil) for removing makeup without stripping skin. Jeju Daily Multi-Phase Purifying Cleansing Milk, from £9.53, beautypie.com Sooth operator Use this glorious mist-meets-foam spray – it’s marvellous for soothing dry atopic skins – and you’ll understand why those in the know rave about this French pharmacy brand. SVR Topialyse Baume en Spray, £15, lookfantastic.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.