Christie Spurling, the founder of the charity N-Gage, said that as a teenager he “would never have thought it was possible” that he would one day be awarded an MBE for his work with young people in Manchester. Given away by his birth mother and adopted by a white couple in the north of England, he struggled at school and was excluded at 14, moving shortly afterwards into a residential home where he lived with “some of the most broken and damaged people you could ever find”. That experience ultimately drove him to work with others in a similar situation. He said he hoped to eventually take his medal to an assembly at a school where he has worked, “to tell young people that no matter how disengaged you are with education, you can still go on and achieve something. Look at me – I have no GCSEs and I’m a chief executive of a charity.” Spurling joins hundreds of campaigners, activists and volunteers across the country who have been recognised in the birthday honours. Among them are 15 foster carers who between them have looked after more than 1,000 children – including one couple with a highly appropriate surname. Margaret Foster, known as Jean, and her husband, William, have fostered 186 and adopted two over 34 years in their home town of Burton upon Trent. “It’s the best job in the world. I love doing what I’m doing,” she said. “We love the kids. The worst part of the job is letting them go.” The youngest recipient in 17-year-old Richard Collins, who has Asperger’s and set up a support group aged just 13 in his home town of Cookstown, County Tyrone. At 100, John Heyman is the oldest, recognised for services to the community in Binsted and Alton, Hampshire. Both receive the British Empire Medal. Also honoured are Nimco Ali and Leyla Hussein, who each received OBEs for their work campaigning against female genital mutilation and gender inequality. Ali joked that her mother would be “proud and embarrassed at the same time – the idea that I got my award for talking about my vagina is not something that is celebrated in my community”. Ali, who is campaigning to end FGM around the world by 2030, said: “The trajectory of the world will change when we stop cutting girls. It sounds very big but I think ending FGM is the key to saving humanity.” Describing herself and Ali as “a pair of troublemakers – I’m the girl who tried to smuggle vagina cupcakes into Ethiopia”, Hussein said: “For me, accepting this award is really all of us accepting it together.” A man who witnessed the Lockerbie bombing as an 18-year-old off-duty police officer is also honoured with an MBE. Colin Dorrance saw the Pan Am flight 103 crash in the Scottish town on the evening of December 21 1988 and was immediately recalled to duty. Last year he took part in a cycle ride from Lockerbie to Syracuse in the US to mark the 30th anniversary of the bombing, which claimed 270 lives. His award is for services to law and order, to the remembrance of Pan Am flight 103 and to charity.