Last year’s extreme weather meant a tough year for many of the UK’s bees, and conservationists are concerned that could have a knock-on effect this year and beyond. According to a report from the Bumblebee Conservation Trust, they could face long-term problems from future heatwaves. But we can give them a helping hand. You don’t need to keep honeybees to help bees – in fact, a 2018 study commissioned by Cambridge University suggests that this can harm wild bees. It’s thought that the more bees there are in an area, the more competition there is for nectar and pollen; if every shopping centre has three or four hives on the roof, what does that mean for the wild bees? It would be easy to assume that our built-up towns and cities are deserts for pollinators. Yet among the grey is also green: parks, gardens, balconies, doorsteps and window boxes, each with the potential to feed a city of bees. In fact, urban spaces can, in some instances, be better for bees and other pollinators than the countryside, where wildlife has largely been pushed out to make space for more crops and livestock. Gardens and parks are home to a greater variety of flowering plants than in the wild, and for a longer season, too. What’s more, we’re less likely to use pesticides in them, enabling bees and other pollinators to feed safely. Indeed, a study published last summer in the journal Proceedings Of The Royal Society B found that bumblebee colonies in urban areas were actually stronger than those in the wild. Most bees are solitary: in the British Isles there are about 267 species of bee; of those, 220 species of wild bee are solitary. These nest individually; the male and female mate then the female finds somewhere to lay her eggs. She makes a series of cells, in which she lays an egg on a “cake” of pollen and nectar, and then, coming to the end of her life cycle, she dies, leaving her young to feed themselves on the stores she has left for them. Some nest in the ground, in lawns or sandy borders. Others nest in cavities, such as walls, old plant stems and holes in dead wood. Many survive in urban areas. Wild bees include 25 species of bumblebee, which, like the honeybee, live in a colony led by a queen: she largely stays in the nest while her workers forage for nectar and pollen to feed the grubs. Nests are annual, and you may be lucky enough to find one beneath a shed or hedge. The tree bumblebee nests in bird boxes. To help wild bees, you don’t need to buy loads of kit. You don’t even need a garden. The first thing to do is grow as many flowering plants as you can cram into your outdoor space. All bees need nectar and pollen, both to feed themselves and their young. Some emerge from hibernation as early as February, while others wait until September. Therefore, growing flowering plants from February to November is key. Grow crocus and primrose in spring, lavender in summer, and Verbena bonariensis and echinacea in autumn. The second thing to do is to create nesting habitats. If you have a garden, start a compost heap, or let an area of grass grow long, and leave twigs and leaf litter to accumulate at the back of your borders. Bumblebees might make a nest or even hibernate here. You could also erect a bee hotel – a box designed to mimic the cavities in which some solitary bees nest – in a garden, balcony or doorstep. If we make all our green spaces bee friendly, we will help tackle the extinction crisis head on. Leafcutter solitary bees There are several species of leafcutter bee (Megachile species). They nest in cavities, such as old plant stems and holes in dead wood, but will readily use bee hotels. They use pieces of rose and wisteria leaf to line their nests. To attract them, grow old roses (with floppy leaves), such as gallica roses, and sweet peas and knapweeds. Flies June to August. Wool carder solitary bees This distinctive bee (Anthidium manicatum) has black with yellow spots down each side of its abdomen. The female nests in bee hotels higher up than other species, so you may entice them in if you live in a high rise. The female lines her nests with hairs from furry leaves, such as lambs’ ear. Grow these and mullein to attract them. Flies June to August. Red mason solitary bees Another cavity nester, this rusty orange bee (Osmia bicornis) lines its nest cells with mud. It’s thought to be about 125 times more efficient at pollinating apple blossom than the honey bee. Grow fruit trees and catmint to attract them. Flies April to early July. Buff-tailed bumblebees This large, black and yellow species (Bombus terrestris) with a buff or white tail nests underground in old mouse holes, beneath sheds. Nests are annual and founded by the queen, who might have about 150 workers in summer. Grow lavender, alliums and cornflowers to attract them. Flies March to November. Tree bumblebees Ginger, white and black, the tree bumblebee (Bombus hypnorum) specialises in nesting high up, and seems to have a preference for bird boxes. Grow daisy-type flowers, such as single dahlias or chamomile to attract them. Flies March to July. • Wildlife Gardening For Everyone And Everything by Kate Bradbury is published by Bloomsbury at £14.99. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.