Anthony Joshua handled the burden of being called the world’s best heavyweight with the earnest diligence of a class try-hard determined to get top grades in his A-levels, at least until his shock defeat by Andy Ruiz Jr two weeks ago. Deontay Wilder, the heavy-handed Alabamian who has held the WBC’s version of the title for half a decade, is a hard man who burns on a paranoia that is not entirely misplaced. Meanwhile Tyson Fury is the only one who seems to be enjoying himself. He makes his Las Vegas debut on Saturday night against the unheralded Tom Schwarz in the first fight of a money-spinning contract with Top Rank and ESPN. At Tuesday’s final press conference he prowled the stage with eyes ablaze like a veteran stand-up, draped in a suit emblazoned with the images of old-time bare-knuckle champions and a pair of sunglasses at rest on his gleaming dome, any and all inhibitions probably stashed next to wherever he had left his dress shirt. “I feel like the crowd has warmed to me,” the 30-year-old Fury said. “Everyone has been very welcoming. The American people, all different types of people, have been coming up to me, people from all over the world here in Vegas. People who don’t speak English, people who don’t even watch boxing. It’s quite humbling, to be honest. It’s a very great experience to be here, Las Vegas, MGM Grand. It’s where all the great fights happen. Seeing your face on all the movie screens and posters is great.” Schwarz, a German who is somehow ranked No 2 by the World Boxing Organization despite being unknown to all but the most hardcore observers until the match was announced in April, looks the part at a strapping 6ft 5in, undefeated in 24 fights including 16 victories inside the distance. But the ledger is, shall we say, light on recognisable names and includes only one 10-rounder, a unanimous decision over the ordinary Dennis Lewandowski three years ago. While Ruiz’s split-decision loss to Joseph Parker offered spectators a yardstick, Schwarz’s wholesale lack of experience at the elite level makes him something of an unknown quantity, even as the bookmakers have done their best in pricing him at 15-1. In short, Fury is expected to win and look good doing it. When last we saw the Gypsy King in December he had spent most of the evening boxing the ears of Wilder, frustrating the undefeated American champion with a stubbornly effective jab and deft movement, even surviving a ninth-round knockdown to roar back in the final reel. He was felled a second time by a violent combination in the last round, seemingly unconscious on descent, before making it to his feet in a scene too fantastical for a Rocky movie and settling for a split draw. The career-best performance was all the more astonishing as it came on the heels of his very public bout with addiction and mental illness, when he surrendered all the belts he won from Wladimir Klitschko while ballooning from 260lb to nearly 400lb during a 31-month layoff. Now Fury, who once made headlines for his archaic views on women and homosexuals, has become an improbable champion for what has been called the biggest taboo in elite sport. “I talk about mental health a lot because it’s very important to me,” he said on Tuesday from a stage at the David Copperfield Theater. “Only 18 months ago, I was in a very, very dark place. I just wanted to prove to people that there is a way back. You can come back from anything. Nothing is impossible, and if you’d seen me a time ago when I was very heavy and very unwell … I love to inspire people to get better and change their lives as I did mine. And I’m living proof that anyone can change. “I was down and out. I have my family right here, and even those guys thought I was gone. There was no return for The Gypsy King. No more. He was finished. I dusted myself off, got back on the road, got back mentally well, and me, [trainer Ben Davison] and the whole team, we worked very hard for a long time to get to this position. “I am living the dream. That’s why I’m so happy, so positive all the time. I’m one of the only people who is living what they want to do. There is nothing else that I wanted to do. As a kid, I wanted to be heavyweight champion of the world. So now, everything is a bonus. I wake up every day, enjoy life, and take life as it comes.” The gnarly truth is that everyone is looking a bit closer at this one after Joshua’s shock defeat in New York. But any likelihood of Fury overlooking his dance partner was surely torpedoed when Ruiz turned the division on its ear, capturing the WBA, WBO and IBF title belts in one of the biggest upsets in the division’s centuries-spanning annals. “We prepared for Tom Schwarz the same way we prepared for Deontay Wilder, just having that extra time for his body to recover from a 140lb weight loss,” Davison said. “The Germans are very well known for doing things correctly and doing things right. Good fundamentals. I know that he’s added a good training team and I’m sure there will be elements of his game that he’s added as well. Obviously we’ve kept a keen eye on him.”