1) Tok! Tok! Tok! That’s the sound of Wimbledon approaching, so let’s have a look at some vintage action from SW19 down the years. Pathé news on 1968, the first of the Open era, including Billie-Jean King, Rod Laver and more, a 1910-70 montage, these snapshots of crowds in 1970 and in 1973 and a more exhaustive account of the early years is right here. Oh, and here’s extended highlights of Nadal v Federer in the 2008 final because it was an epic one, of course. 2) Before he was MVP in the NBA Finals, the Toronto Raptors’ Kawhi Leonard finished with 41 points to lead a Game 7 win over the Philadelphia 76ers, with his last two points coming off a buzzer-beater from the corner. It was an incredible shot – and it’s now been recreated in Lego by a Raptors fan. The Shot heard around the world. In LEGO. #WeTheNorth pic.twitter.com/osDwkSBtk5 3) It’s been quite the week for long-range goals, topped off by this stunner from inside his own half by Wayne Rooney, while Hérold Goulon scored an amazing stoppage time free-kick from inside his own half in the Malaysian FA Cup. What made it so impressive was that he was striking a dead ball. Which gives us an excuse to present a collection of some of our favourite strikes from way downtown. Let’s start with Paderborn’s Moritz Stoppelkamp, who took the ball down on his chest on the edge of his own area before walloping home from 85 yards. Free agent Charlie Adam may want to remind potential suitors of his stonking strike for Stoke at Chelsea as he looks for a new club. Fara Williams had the cheek to score straight from kick-off for Reading against Arsenal, Elfsborg’s Stefan Ishizaki scored with a volley from near the touchline while in his own half in 2012 (but it bounced before going in so he loses points), whereas Alejandro Camargo’s 60-yard volley in 2016 was hit with outrageous power. And here are some other crackers from Rivaldo, Roger García and John Bailey. And we didn’t even mention David Beckham. Oh! 4) The Women’s World Cup quarter-finals are upon us. Here’s how England beat hosts Canada in 2015, while Brazil v USA was a thriller in 2007 and in 1999 Brazil won an epic tussle with Nigeria 4-3 thanks to Sissi’s sublime Golden Goal free-kick. 5) If you have some time to spare, watch Speedway Stars, a brilliant film from 1993 documenting the ups and downs of the world champion Gary Havelock, his rivals and his family. 6) It was the British F1 Sidecars Grand Prix at Brands Hatch this week. Even with technological advances in safety, the passengers’ athleticism and bravery takes the breath away. Sidecar racing back in the day was even wilder, though. Here’s a lovely video of the heroic world champion Stan Dibben’s thrilling career on the flying three-wheelers. Wilhelm Noll wasn’t bad either. 1) This is rally. 2) Ray Houghton, 25 years ago this week. 3) Vive Le Tour (1962)! 4) Esoteric NHL rules. 5) There was an incredible finish at Brands Hatch in the British Supersport feature race recently, with overtaking aplenty on the last lap and then a photo-finish in which Jack Kennedy pipped the series leader Alastair Seeley. Seeley didn’t take it well, giving the winner a couple of kicks at high speed. Probably not advisable. Spotters badges: denothemeno, whobroughtoranges, GrahamClayton. Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.