Another day, another housing crisis story confirming what we already knew: things are really bad. New research from Citizens Advice has found that not only do half of landlords not know about or understand their legal obligations, but that their tenants aren’t aware of their rights either and, even when they are, they don’t always feel able to enforce them. Two-thirds of tenants said that their landlord has not addressed disrepair in their home, 15% said they believed that disrepair was a major threat to their health and safety, and 32% said that their home did not have a carbon monoxide alarm despite requiring one. This, Citizens Advice says, leaves hundreds of thousands of renters living in mouldy, potentially dangerous homes with some missing smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors. There’s a serious power imbalance. Renters fear complaining – even when they know they’re within their rights to When it comes to renting, there’s a serious power imbalance. Renters fear complaining – even when they know they’re within their rights to – because, despite the government’s recent promise to do away with section 21 of the 1988 Housing Act, which allows landlords to evict tenants without having to give them a reason, the provision still actually exists. It’s technically illegal to evict someone for complaining about conditions and yet, we know that 46% of tenants who make a formal complaint to a local authority about their landlord find themselves issued with a section 21 order. Despite the work of MPs such as Karen Buck in bringing in the Homes (Fit for Human Habitation) Act, as the number of people who rent in Britain grows, it’s quite clear that the private rented sector isn’t fit for purpose. Following deregulation in the late 1980s, which included doing away with rent controls and the introduction of section 21, the buy-to-let market boomed, social housing stock dwindled and house prices began to climb. But the wages of younger people did not, and increasing numbers could no longer afford to buy a home. By 2011-12, there were more people renting privately than there were in social housing, but neither the quality of rented homes nor the legislation to protect tenants kept up with that change. Between 2010 and 2018, the number of households renting rose from 3.6m to 4.5m, making the private rented sector home to one in five households. These are not just avocado-guzzling millennials but families and older people too. The number of renters is only set to grow, with a quarter of the population expected to rent by 2021. What’s more, many landlords were dipping their toe into the buy-to-let market as something of a side hustle. They weren’t professional housing providers or faceless plutocrats. They were our wealthier neighbours and, sometimes, our friends. Indeed, today we know that almost half of landlords own just one property while only 17% own five properties or more. Britain’s renting crisis has been inexcusably obvious for almost a decade now. But successive politicians after Thatcher have ploughed on, ignoring the private rented sector in favour of an increasingly facile focus on buyers (or, rather, the lack thereof), come what may. Why? Well, homeowners vote. In a speech at the Chartered Institute of Housing’s conference on Wednesday, Theresa May explicitly acknowledged this by saying that social housing has been a “victim of the single-minded drive for home ownership” under successive governments. That’s absolutely true, and so has the private rented sector. How do we explain such serious structural neglect? Perhaps the fact that so many MPs, historically, have also been landlords contributed to the laissez-faire attitude towards renting and political oversight of renters. Let’s not forget that Buck’s bill was defeated by the Conservatives when it first passed through the House of Commons in 2015. It passed on the second attempt, in 2018, because voting against it post-Grenfell would have been unthinkable. Home, whether you own it or not, is where you go to sleep and wake up every day. It’s where we raise our children and care for the elderly. It ought to be a place of safety. There can now be no doubt that the failure to intervene in the private rental market, to introduce legislation in favour of tenants ensuring minimum standards, safety and regulating housing provision has brought us to where we are today. Dysfunctional markets don’t regulate themselves. • Vicky Spratt is a freelance journalist and housing campaigner