The United States does not want to go to war with Iran, the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, said on Sunday, following an attack on two oil tankers in the Gulf of Oman last week. Pompeo reiterated that the US believes it was “unmistakable” that Iran was responsible for the attacks, in an interview with Fox News Sunday. He stressed a need for diplomacy and said American officials are reaching out to their foreign counterparts. “President Trump has done everything he can to avoid war. We don’t want war,” he added. He said intelligence officials have “lots of data, lots of evidence” tying Iran to alleged attacks on two oil tankers traveling near the Strait of Hormuz, a transit route for Arab oil shipments to Asia. He gave no details. He said that Washington will guarantee free navigation through vital shipping areas. “The United States is going make sure that we take all the actions necessary, diplomatic and otherwise that achieve that outcome,” Pompeo said. US-Iran tensions are high following accusations by the Trump administration that Tehran carried out attacks last Thursday on the two oil tankers in the Gulf of Oman. Iran has denied having any role. “The intelligence community has lots of data, lots of evidence. The world will come to see much of it,” said Pompeo, who headed the Central Intelligence Agency before becoming secretary of state. Pompeo said he did not want to discuss possible next steps the United State might take in response to last week’s developments. “Iran will not get a nuke weapon. That’s the goal,” he said when asked about the possibility of Trump sending more US troops and military hardware to the region. “I made a number of calls to colleagues around the world yesterday. I am confident that we will have partners that understand this threat,” Pompeo said. Pompeo’s comments come after Mohammed bin Salman spoke publicly for the first time since a second attack on Saudi oil tankers in the Gulf of Oman, blaming its arch-rival Iran and vowing that Saudi Arabia “won’t hesitate to deal with any threat” to the kingdom’s interests. According to an interview for the pan-Arab daily Asharq al-Awsat, published on Sunday, the crown prince said: “We do not want a war in the region … But we won’t hesitate to deal with any threat to our people, our sovereignty, our territorial integrity and our vital interests.” The UK foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said on Sunday Britain was “almost certain” Iran was behind the oil tanker attacks, adding that London did not believe anyone else could have done it. Hunt said: “The great risk of the situation we are in is both sides in this dispute think the other would not want a war.”