Donald Trump has provoked widespread laughter on social media with a typo suggesting he had recently met a VIP marine mammal among a roll call of world leaders. Listing “the Queen of England (U.K.)” and the leaders of France, Poland and Ireland, Trump wrote on Thursday that he had also spoken to “the Prince of Whales”. Social media users reacted with delight to the gaffe, posting pictures imagining how such a meeting might have looked. First photos in from Trump's meeting with the Prince of Whales pic.twitter.com/MclQIT9G2A White House Staff preparing to meet with the Prince of Whales. pic.twitter.com/uJfmvkHzXV There were pictures of whales looking suitably regal and ready for the pomp and circumstance of a state visit. pic.twitter.com/iBl8tgKMoZ And marine-themed makeovers for Prince Charles himself. Prince of WHALESI'm still laughing 😂 😂 😂 #PrinceOfWhales pic.twitter.com/hizuUeRdZ5 Prince of Whales. pic.twitter.com/tK1YbkwHc1 There were a lot of puns: He just confused him with the Dauphin “I’m with the Spelling Police and I’m issuing you a cetacean.” This joke floundered. Prince of Whales.. Did Trump do that on porpoise? (New York accent required for the full, groan inducing,) effect Prints of Whales pic.twitter.com/XMtbcoC2HE Some of the familiar Trump meme pictures came out with new captions. DOES THE PRINCE OF WHALES RULE OVER DOLPHINS TOO? pic.twitter.com/hgbI10VrSs “Why is everyone laughing at me for knowing the Little Mermaid’s dad?” pic.twitter.com/oSk52LoS1s “DID YOU KNOW THE PRINCE OF WHALES ISN’T ACTUALLY A WHALE HE’S A HUMAN MAN I THINK HIS NAME IS WILLY I’M SAD AS I THOUGHT I WAS GONNA PET A BIG FISH WHEN I WAS IN THE ENGLAND KINGDOM” pic.twitter.com/pWmqFhTaC2 While others took the opportunity to redesign the iconic Y Ddraig Goch with a fresh new Trumpian look. 'Prince of Whales'...you idiot #Wales #Cymru pic.twitter.com/1UF32Lww6B Nostalgia for the Free Willy movies surfaced. Dumold Trump meeting the Prince of Whales pic.twitter.com/f1i2VCIPFC And users with a long history of Twitter could not help but recall how appropriate the gaffe was, given that Twitter’s own original emblem of service failure used to be known as the “fail whale”. Prince of Fail Whales pic.twitter.com/dlNTeUhISy During Trump’s state visit to the UK, he met the Prince of Wales on several occasions, including a dinner at Winfield House, the US ambassador’s residence in London, where Charles and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, were the guests of honour. The president was tweeting on Thursday in the context of a recent interview where he appeared to suggest he would not contact law enforcement if he were offered information from a foreign power that might help him in the 2020 US election. As yet, unlike with Russia, there have been no suggestions that marine mammals played any significant role in his 2016 victory. Trump has subsequently deleted and posted a corrected version of the original tweet. Trump’s tweets have previously gifted the world the word covfeve.