Since the 1970s, Californian food has had the reputation for being ahead of the pack – fresh, local and plant-based long before the rest of the world went green – yet Californian wine is a quite different beast. It should more accurately be called US wine, anyway. Despite the fact that all 50 states now produce or bottle their own wine, California accounts for around 90% of all the wine made in the country. As a result, it caters for mainstream American tastes with higher levels of alcohol, oak and sweetness than is typical on the west coast and, in the case of the new Apothic Inferno (£13 Sainsbury’s, 16%), a beefy red aged in bourbon barrels, a good dash of smoke and barbecue, too. Like many Californian wines (including two I hadn’t realised), Apothic is owned by the near-ubiquitous Gallo, which has 15 wineries across California and Washington state, including Barefoot. They are the typical face of Californian wine: smartly priced, professional, aware of their market and, on occasion, prepared to lead it; but lacking excitement, individuality and soul. These days, it’s no easier to buy a thrilling Californian wine for less than £20 (and that’s quite a high bar) than it was 15 or 20 years ago. The picture is not entirely downbeat, though. What California does well, it does very well indeed, and that includes chardonnay, cabernet and pinot noir, the favourite of the film Sideways. Of the half-dozen or so I’ve tasted recently, I really liked the Edna Valley Pinot Noir (owned by, sigh, you-know-who; see today’s pick) and Backhouse Pinot Noir 2016 (13.5%) at a reasonable (for California) £15 a bottle at Roberson, but I don’t think many of you will be able to resist the new Plow & Press Pinot that Aldi is stocking for just £7.99, which is incredible value for money. Then, of course, there’s California’s calling card, zinfandel, which at its best is a sensuously delicious red, though too often “hot” and jammy. If you want to see what it’s capable of, go to California specialist James Hocking for a bottle of Lodi’s newly imported Oak Farm Zinfandel 2017 (£18.99), which is admittedly a whopping 15%, but also beautifully in balance with some lovely, dark, ripe, brambly fruit; it’s also available from Butlers Wine Cellar in Brighton. Overall, however, you’ll still find much better value for money pound for pound from Chile and Argentina. Why should Californians struggle to please European tastes at a price Europeans want to pay? Why indeed. Plow & Press Californian Pinot Noir 2017 £7.99 Aldi, 13%. Juicy, fresh pinot with a slick label. Try it chilled with seared tuna. Edna Valley Pinot Noir 2016 £13.99 on mix-six Majestic (or £15.99 a single bottle), 14%. Lots of sweet fruit, but not too jammy. Excellent for the price. Taste the Difference California White 2017 £10 Sainsbury’s, 13.5%. Unusual, rich, Rhône-ish blend of chardonnay and five other grape varieties. Good BBQ white. Frei Brothers Sonoma County Cabernet Sauvignon 2016 £17.99 Waitrose, 14.5%. Lovely, smooth, velvety cab (and another under Gallo ownership). Ideal for a Father’s Day Sunday roast. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.