This was always going to be a tough test for Wales but it was a case of what might have been as they suffered defeat under the sweltering Osijek sun. A first loss in their Euro 2020 qualifying campaign was no disgrace given the calibre of the opposition, and Wales pushed hard for an equaliser late on after David Brooks had pulled one back. But a first-half James Lawrence own-goal and a predatory strike from the outstanding Ivan Perisic proved decisive. There was a lingering feeling that had Wales tried their luck earlier, they might have come away with something to show for their efforts. “We had so many good chances and we didn’t put them away,” said Ryan Giggs. “We didn’t play well and gave away two poor goals. I said to the players we’ve missed a chance, especially with the way we ended the game. We ended so strong and looked the fitter side. It’s definitely one that got away.” Wales looked a much better side once Brooks had been introduced from the bench. “He’s only trained for two days,” said Giggs to explain why the midfielder was not picked from the start. “I understand he scored the goal and looked lively when he came on, but he couldn’t have started the game. You saw the conditions and we have other players fit. “We have a game on Tuesday as well. It was difficult leaving him on the bench, but it was the right thing to do.” The result means Wales drop to third in Group E and have a game in Hungary on Tuesday. Here, temperatures touched 30C – necessitating a drinks break midway through each half – and Wales chased the ball for long periods. Giggs matched Croatia’s three-man midfield with Joe Allen, Will Vaulks and Matthew Smith, the latter making his first competitive start. Croatia have never lost a European Championships qualifier at home and it was no surprise to see them dominate the ball early on. Perisic fired over before Gareth Bale – who started on the right – sent a long throw over the defence to Harry Wilson, who could only shoot straight at Dominik Livakovic. Croatia then moved ahead. As Wilson appealed for a free-kick, Luka Modric picked up possession and sprayed a wonderful ball forward to Perisic. Wayne Hennessey made the fatal error of staying on his line and Perisic was left with plenty of time to deliver a low cross that Lawrence could only turn into his own net. Croatia came out firing for the second half. Josip Brekalo cut inside and forced Hennessey into a save before Mateo Kovacic slammed home the rebound via a deflection – but the goal was ruled out for offside. It did not take Croatia long to score again, though. Wales failed to clear again as the ball bounced around the penalty area and the outstanding Perisic capitalised, brushing off Connor Roberts to smash home. Bale then went close with two quickfire efforts, first rifling a free-kick over, then working Livakovic following a sensational pass from Allen. Giggs sent on Brooks and Ethan Ampadu and Bale tested Livakovic once more from distance. The changes improved Wales no end and it was Brooks who gave his side a lifeline. He received the ball from Roberts and fired hopefully on goal, his strike finding the net via a deflection off Domagoj Vida. The goal sent the 1,000 travelling fans into delirium and Chris Mepham almost increased their joy when he had a header saved from a corner. Hennessey then saved well from Andrej Kramaric before Brooks stretched in an attempt to score a late game-changer. But a Welsh equaliser never arrived. “It was a very tough game,” said the Croatia manager, Zlatko Dalic. “We started well but the heat and the conditions killed us. The only important thing for us was the win. We are still the favourites in this group. We are aiming for first place and I think Wales and Slovakia are the best candidates for second.”