Whether on canvas, panelled quilts or in children’s books, Faith Ringgold is a storyteller. This concise retrospective at Serpentine sprints through almost 50 years of strong and precisely considered works. All contribute to Ringgold’s grander enterprise, in which narrative is deployed as a powerful force, taking back histories and suggesting alternatives to the status quo. Ringgold was born in Harlem, New York, in 1930. Her early paintings throb with insidious threat, of society’s hypocrisy, insincerity and thoughtless self-interest. In They Speak No Evil (1963), six white men, their eye sockets deep and vacant, are squashed together in an abstracted mass beneath the red glow of a stained glass window, cropped to suggest a glaring, demonic eye. Their blank, mask-like faces present a godly facade concealing, the painting suggests, unspoken ills. Seven of the 20 paintings from Ringgold’s American People (1963-7) series are shown here: a collective picture of a turbulent period in US history. In the first portraits in the series, red, white and blue dominate (if you want a precedent for Shepard Fairey’s lauded “Hope” poster for the Obama campaign, look no further). In #9: The American Dream (1964), a glamorous female figure, half black, half white, languidly displays an outsize diamond ring against a descending red arrow, suggesting downfall accompanying the pursuit of material wealth and superficial status. #6 Mr Charlie (1964), painted the same year James Baldwin’s Blues for Mister Charlie was staged, presents an elderly, oleaginous white man, not quite managing to place his hand on his heart in a masquerade of sincerity. For #19: US Postage Stamp Commemorating the Advent of Black Power (1967), Ringgold exploits graphic techniques associated with pop art. A commemorative stamp bears a grid of 100 faces cropped down to the eyes and nose. Ten black faces are arranged in a diagonal, bisected by the letters “BLACK POWER” crossing in the opposite direction. Less visible, but effectively dominating the canvas, is the phrase “WHITE POWER”: a pervasive underlying structure that refuses to announce itself. Ringgold’s mother was a fashion designer, working as Madame Posey, and had learned to quilt from her grandmother and great grandmother, both former slaves. Ringgold came to quilting from a different route, after seeing Tibetan and Nepalese tankas – portable cloth scroll paintings – at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. In the tankas at the Serpentine, Ringgold experiments with radically different combinations of image and border, among them paintings carrying historic texts, and patterns simultaneously referencing central African Kuba textiles and modish geometric abstraction. In the Slave Rape (1972) portraits, naked women modelled on Ringgold and her daughters flee through stylised undergrowth. The quilted borders locate these stories as part of a female tradition, the reinsertion of now-invisible histories of women fleeing slavers on the African continent. In the early 1980s, following the death of her mother, Ringgold started exploring quilts as a narrative format, drawing on devotional folk paintings – such as Mexican retablos – cartoon books and other pictorial storytelling traditions. The star turn is the magnificent Who’s Afraid of Aunt Jemima? (1983). Ringgold reimagines Aunt Jemima – a fiction created as the face of a pancake brand, based on a racist archetype from 19th-century minstrel shows – as a stylish entrepreneur, telling her story through four generations. It’s a gorgeous and intricate object, its cast of characters embroidered with real bead necklaces and sparkling sequin eyes. While Ringgold returned to something closer to a tanka format for subsequent works, her 80s quilts are intense, complex and exciting: information is everywhere, including the scraps of fabric forming the borders. Subway Graffiti #2 of 3 (1987) crams friends and neighbours together on a subway platform in a visual homage to New York graffiti artists of the era: their names and tags chase around the surrounding panels. Woman on a Bridge #1 of 5: Tar Beach (1988) is inspired by hot summer nights as a child, lying on a Harlem rooftop, and became the basis for Ringgold’s first children’s book. The show closes with two quilts from the American Collection (1997). In the first, a mother, weeping blood, stands clasping her naked children before an oozing American flag. In the second, Black Liberty, her torch extinguished, turns her back on a sea filled with drowning black bodies, stretching to the horizon. Both recall the violence on which the US was constructed, and with which a dominant power structure is maintained. It feels grotesque that it has become so commonplace in reviews to note that works created in response to racist and misogynist systems of the last century should still feel so relevant, but alas they do. At Serpentine Galleries, London, 6 June to 8 September.      