“No, I don’t take any drugs, I take books,” says the unnamed narrator of Ingeborg Bachmann’s Malina, first published in 1971 and translated from German by Philip Boehm. And with mind-bending novels such as this around, who could argue? Bachmann described it as an “imaginary autobiography” and, like her, the narrator is a middle-aged writer living in Vienna. Around those basic facts is constructed a startling edifice of psychological intensity, centred on the men in her life. Her lover is Ivan, for whom she shows a dedication less romantic than pathological: “Even if Ivan was created just for me, as he certainly was, I can never claim him solely for myself. For he has come to make consonants constant once again and comprehensible, to unlock vowels to their full resounding … ” She worships Ivan “for retrieving me from underneath all the rubble”, even though he insults her in staccato, cut-off conversations (“Gray and brown clothes make you old”). She doesn’t communicate with him, but chops up her narrative with fairytales and imagined interviews, confiding in the reader. And why, we wonder, doesn’t Ivan seem interested in Malina, the person she lives with? Malina is a mystery, defined only by the impact he has on our narrator. Is he a man, Malina, or a woman, Lina? Is he real, or an aspect of the narrator? (“I don’t want to lead Ivan astray, but he will never realise that I am double. I am also Malina’s creation.”) Nothing is really certain; even her passport has her profession “crossed out twice and written over”. Malina embodies the equanimity the narrator cannot achieve in her own mind and body. This originates in childhood with her father, who represents Austria’s struggle to come to terms with its Nazi past. Her father’s abusive atrocities tear the book down the middle (“I am fired to death in the kiln of my father’s frenzy”) and run through its second half. Amid all the talking (and much smoking of cigarettes), there is a plot, which sends Malina, Ivan and the narrator to a destructive conclusion. Malina’s long sentences hold the reader close, and the novel’s white-hot emotions make it an addictive read. Bachmann’s vision is so original that the effect is like having a new letter of the alphabet. Malina was intended as the first part of a trilogy; Bachmann’s death in 1973 from injuries sustained in a house fire, before she could complete it, is a loss to literature. • Malina, translated by Philip Boehm, is published by Penguin Modern Classics (RRP £9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.