Eoin Morgan moved to play down fears over Jos Buttler’s fitness but admitted his vice-captain will not be risked against West Indies on Friday if there is any doubt. Buttler suffered a hip injury when striking an almighty six into the river Taff off Mosaddek Hossain during England’s total of 386 for six against Bangladesh. While he batted on, making 64 from 44 balls, the 28-year-old was in obvious discomfort when running between the wickets and did not emerge for the second innings, with Jonny Bairstow taking over the gloves. Speaking after the 106-run victory, Morgan said: “There’s no serious concern at the moment. He’s going to be monitored over the next 48 hours but at the moment it’s more precautionary rather than not being able to do his job. I’m quite confident that it’s not a serious injury. “We’ll use every day as much as we can to try to get him back on the park. If he is a risk going into the next game [in Southampton], it might not be worth it.” Beyond concerns over Buttler, Morgan was effusive in his praise of Jason Roy, whose 121-ball 153 helped England pass the 338 for eight made in the 2011 tie against India in Bangalore for their highest World Cup total in history. The right-hander’s ninth one-day century will once again give rise to talk of him entering England’s thoughts for this summer’s Ashes series, with his one-day captain confident his skills can indeed transfer over. Morgan said: “He’s a luxury. He just goes on and gets big scores. They can range from 140 to 180 and the rate he gets them at is so difficult to defend. He scores all the way around the ground, he takes really good bowlers down and hits good balls for boundaries. He’s great to have in the side. “One of his biggest strengths at the moment is his temperament. I’ve said this before but I do think he could play Test cricket at some stage. He has every attribute to be a Test cricketer, whether that’s now or in a couple of years’ time is not for me to decide. He certainly has all the attributes.” Morgan confirmed Moeen Ali was left out of the XI solely for tactical reasons – chiefly the ground’s short boundaries – but his return later in the week could depend on matters at home, with the all-rounder’s wife due to have their second child in the coming days.