Shares in the troubled Kier Group dropped sharply after reports that the construction and services company is looking to sell its housebuilding units in an attempt to cut debt and simplify its structure. According to a report in the Times, Kier has sounded out advisers on the possibility of selling the housing division at a price of between £100m and £150m. It is the latest turbulent development during a difficult period for Kier, which employs 20,000 people and works on large infrastructure projects such as HS2 and London’s delayed Crossrail. Last week investors dumped its shares after a profit warning prompted comparisons with Carillion, a former rival that collapsed last year. The profit warning sent Kier shares to 164p, their lowest in two decades. This was less than half the 409p per share that investors paid in December when Kier launched a £264m emergency fundraising in an attempt to avoid the same fate as Carillion. Investors shunned the cash call, with only 38% of the shares taken up, and financial institutions had to step in. Kier’s chief executive, Haydn Mursell, quit the following month after eight years in the job. Kier shares, which had made a partial recovery in recent days, slumped almost 20% on Friday, taking them back to 164p amid surprise at the likely valuation of the housebuilding operation. Analysts said the suggested price tag was disappointing considering that Kier’s assessment of the value of the business was £291m in 2018. Several big British building firms have suffered since regulators tightened rules for contractors operating in the public sector after the Carillion collapse and the slide of another peer, Interserve, into administration in March. Last week Kier said its underlying full-year profits would be substantially below earlier forecasts, at about £129m rather than £169m. The company took on Carillion’s share of the HS2 high-speed rail project and took sole ownership of Highways England’s smart motorway programme in Cheshire. It is also the UK’s leading regional builder of schools and hospitals.