The restaurants that line the cobbled Georgian streets of Edinburgh’s West End project an air of exclusivity and expense. But amid the boutique hotels and cocktail bars, just a few feet from Princes Street and in the shadow of Edinburgh Castle, you’ll find a restaurant with an inclusive atmosphere that delivers feelgood food while supporting a charitable cause. Owner David Hall took charge of Vesta, formerly known as Home, in July 2018 and the restaurant partners with Social Bite – a charity that seeks to end homelessness in Scotland. Named after the Roman goddess of hearth, home, and family, the restaurant is committed to supplying free meals and training opportunities to homeless and vulnerable people in Edinburgh. Customers can donate the price of a coffee or a meal through a “pay it forward” scheme, which funds the restaurant to host 40 homeless diners every week. “Any restaurant can have a lovely aesthetic, great food and great service. We’ve got all of those plus a unique selling point in our work with Social Bite,” says Hall. “Every Monday afternoon we close the restaurant to serve a two-course meal to people who are homeless, either on the streets or in temporary accommodation. The diners are served the same menu as paying customers and volunteers and social workers come along to offer advice and support. Some of our vulnerable patrons wouldn’t feel comfortable coming to a restaurant even if they were able to pay, so we offer a space free from judgement where they are treated with dignity and respect.” The recently refurbished space boasts a bright, airy aesthetic that attracts locals and tourists throughout the day. Stephen Thompson, visiting from Edmonton, Canada was taken with the decor: “I was walking by and the restaurant happened to catch my attention. The menu looked great, so I decided to give it a go. When you’re dining alone you can miss the company, but the staff are so friendly and welcoming.” Cathy McCarron and Paul Burley, visiting from Derry: ‘The restaurant was striking’ Cathy McCarron and Paul Burley, visiting from Derry, were also attracted by the look of the restaurant. “We walked the whole length of Princes Street and nothing caught our eye. The restaurant was striking and even the name Vesta stood out,” says McCarron, taking a seat in the bar area, perfect for a spot of people watching. “We were just reading about the pay it forward scheme and think it’s a wonderful idea. We’ve visited Edinburgh many times and our son has recently moved here. It’s our first time at Vesta – we’ll be back though!” The restaurant’s walls are adorned with photos of famous visitors, including Leonardo DiCaprio, Malala Yousafzai and Social Bite supporter George Clooney. Literature detailing the charity’s mission and achievements decorates the tables, but there is no hard sell. Donations aren’t expected, but it’s a testament to the quality of the dining experience and the customers Vesta attracts that most choose to “pay it forward.” It was the partnership with Social Bite that first brought Vesta to local resident Elaine Matheson’s attention. “I had lunch at the Social Bite cafe several times so knew of the brand and thought it was an interesting concept,” she says. “I work nearby so decided to give the restaurant a try. The combination of the restaurant’s mission and the quality of the food is why I keep coming back. I normally come in after work and it’s a great place to catch up with friends, or to come as a couple. The atmosphere is friendly and casual.” Dishes at Vesta; David Hall, the owner; a customer paying using iZettle With many of Vesta’s customers paying by card, Hall needed a payment system that was simple to set up and worked smoothly. “As an independent business with a changing menu and promotions we need a system that allows changes without complications and iZettle allows you to make alterations in an instant. We can’t be holding customers up when they are on a tight sightseeing schedule or need to get back to work, and the payment system works so quickly.” Hall built his career in some of the best-known restaurants and bars in the nation’s capital and finds joy in meeting Vesta customers from all walks of life. “Edinburgh is a bustling, dynamic city and we have visitors from all over the world,” he says. “You strike up some amazing conversations and I enjoy finding out why they’re visiting and what they love about Edinburgh. We find it really rewarding when people are leaving, telling us they’ve just had the best meal on their trip.” Open daily from 10am, the restaurant treats customers to a seasonal, locally sourced menu bursting with vegan and vegetarian dishes and comforting classics, such as fish and chips. The weekend brunch offering extends into the late afternoon and includes everything from a traditional Scottish breakfast to vegan pancakes – all to be washed down with a Bloody Mary or a colourful smoothie. Food that is attractive, flavourful and affordable is rare in the city centre but Vesta delivers on all three. For more information about iZettle’s innovative platform, visit izettle.com