Summer makes some single people think of going on dates, and a slew of friends have recently signed up for dating apps. The “science” of the algorithms behind these services is always being updated but the underlying presumptions seem to stay broadly the same: assuming that it doesn’t all come down to the photo, you can find a good match by identifying the things you like, and finding someone who likes them too. “Like” in this context tends to stick to a few well-lit areas. “Jerry, let’s not tell our sad stories,” says Renée Zellweger in the famous line from Jerry Maguire – an assertion that, when the movie came out in 1996, struck me as the epitome of healthy adult dating etiquette and now strikes me as delusional. From a marketing perspective, it is impossible for a dating app to get too close to the truth about attraction – not because it comes from a place no online questionnaire can reach, but because a genuinely useful set of questions in this area would be almost too unpalatable to bear. Niche interests are amply provided for, but they tend to focus on the physical, like guys with beards I wonder what a truly honest dating questionnaire would look like. What’s your favourite book? What’s your favourite movie? Was your mother a narcissist? Do you understand that people to whom bad things have happened occasionally have violent and unpleasant opinions, and how much of a free pass should one give them? Do you think a bad mood can basically be fixed by eating a banana? (I do! Sort of.) How are you with money? I mean, how are you really with money? Are you the guy at the group dinner who only had a salad? Is it better to be generous and broke or tight-fisted and solvent? Do you mistake anxiety for intimacy? When you don’t get what you want do you: a) sulk, b) scream, c) pretend you didn’t want it in the first place. Which is worse, yelling or passive-aggression? Do you think that filling an entire house with the mushroom cloud of your mood is OK if you haven’t actually come out and said anything? Are you cheerful/maudlin/aggressive when drunk, and can you even remember? The dating app market has become sufficiently diverse that niche interests are amply provided for, but they tend to focus on the physical, like guys with beards. Psychological niches are less well delineated. This seems to me to be a gap in the market. Raised by controlling parents? Here’s someone so relaxed you will date them cheerfully for two years, before despising them for the very thing that first seemed so wonderful. The biggest problem with the dating app process is that it seems to assume we are drawn to the like-minded. A positive response to the question “Do you like leftwing politics?” will return a list of other leftwing users, without getting at the possibility that, actually, what you like is being with someone who shares your mindset to a degree, but has a few thrillingly wrong opinions to which you can simultaneously feel superior, while secretly admiring them for their freedom of mind. Build this into an app and the future is yours. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist based in New York