The parents of a gambling addict who took his own life have launched a legal bid to hold the government liable for his death, potentially opening the floodgates to multiple compensation claims citing lax regulation by the state. Charles and Liz Ritchie, who founded the Gambling With Lives charity after their son Jack killed himself aged 24, want the inquest into his death to consider article 2 of the European convention on human rights – the right to life. Article 2 inquests are held in cases where the state has failed to protect the deceased person from risk. Charles and Liz Ritchie told the Guardian: “The government has been well aware that gambling exposes people to the risk of addiction and consequent suicide, but has failed to take effective action to regulate the industrialised electronic gambling that can cause such severe addiction. “Over many years they failed to regulate gambling, educate the public about the health risks or make adequate treatment resources available to people who suffer harm. “They have allowed the industry far too much influence and control to keep the health risks hidden and failed to demand sufficient funding to pay for treatment.” The Sheffield coroner, Christopher Dorries, will hear arguments from lawyers acting for the Ritchies on Friday, before issuing a verdict that could have significant implications. Although the Ritchies are not seeking financial compensation if they are successful, a landmark ruling in their favour could trigger financial claims from relatives of other people who took their own lives after suffering a gambling addiction. The industry regulator the Gambling Commission and the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, which oversees gambling policy, are opposing the attempt. The legal team arguing the Ritchies’ case are understood to be confident that if article 2 is engaged during the inquest, the coroner will find that the government failed to treat gambling as a risky activity akin to smoking and drinking alcohol. The Ritchies are understood to be hopeful this would force the government to tighten gambling regulation to avoid future claims. Changes could include prominent health warnings attached to gambling products such as fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs), one of the products that Jack Ritchie was addicted to. The maximum stake on FOBTs was slashed to £2 from £100 earlier this year, following a long-running campaign, after the government acknowledged they were a “social blight”. A Gambling Commission spokesman said: “Jack Ritchie’s death was a tragedy and our thoughts continue to be with his family and friends. “Any suicide connected with gambling harm is one too many and we are absolutely committed to working with the industry and our partners to protect consumers. This is now a legal proceeding and it would be inappropriate for us to comment further until the inquest has concluded.’’ The DCMS had not responded to a request for comment at the time of publication. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org