When India and Pakistan came close to war this year, Dalawar Chaudhry pulled out all the stops to ensure tensions did not boil over in the area of west London where he lives – home to sizeable communities originating from both nations. During the worst military crisis between the neighbours in decades, he organised meetings, put up posters calling for peace and even met Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan. But the diplomacy has now been dismantled, the détente discarded; there is a cricket match to play as India face Pakistan in what is viewed as the world’s most politically charged and intense sporting derby. Chaudhry is a well-known businessman and figure within the Pakistani community in Southall, and an estimated 300 Pakistan fans will gather in his restaurant to watch the World Cup match on giant screens. Even before a ball has been bowled, the celebrations have been planned. The restaurant’s traditional Pakistani bus will be driven through the streets, decked out in the nation’s green and white flag, while the Pakistan team have accepted an invitation for dinner in two weeks’ time, which Chaudhry hopes will be to honour a victory. “When there was the threat of war I was a peacemaker and a diplomat,” he says. “But this is cricket. The gloves are off – there’s no room for niceties because pride and honour are at stake. Obviously we don’t want to see any trouble, but we are firmly entrenched in our own camps. There’s not much diplomacy when it comes to India-Pakistan cricket.” Matches between the two have generally been laced with history and politics over the past 72 years, since India was partitioned to create Pakistan. It is a rivalry running deeper than bat and ball, encapsulated in the immortal words of the writer and cricket fan CLR James: “What do they know of cricket who only cricket know?” But the ante has been upped ahead of Sunday’s clash at Manchester’s Old Trafford ground in what is a perilous time in the long-running, volatile relationship between the nuclear-armed rivals. In February a suicide bombing in the disputed region of Kashmir killed 40 Indian paramilitaries, with a Pakistan-based militant group claiming responsibility. India responded with airstrikes, which led to one of its jets being downed in a dogfight and the pilot, wing commander Abhinandan Varthaman, captured and later released as a “gesture of peace”. Both armies have continued to trade shelling and gunfire while their respective politicians and media have exchanged verbal salvos. Today’s match has also been targeted. India threatened to pull out of the clash, citing security concerns. Officials from the country’s cricket board called on the International Cricket Council, the sport’s governing body, to “sever ties with countries from which terrorism emanates”. This was widely viewed as an attempt to get Pakistan banned from international cricket, or, at the very least, thrown out of the World Cup. Indian cricket administrators are refusing to speak with their Pakistani counterparts while their teams have not played each other in their respective countries for six years.“This is by far the most explosive and politically laden match between India and Pakistan that I can ever remember,” says Mihir Bose, author of The Nine Waves, a history of Indian cricket, who compares the rivalry to a Bollywood saga. “The two nations are like a bitter, divided family and the only time they come together is on the cricket field. Because of recent events, there’s a lot more riding on it than just cricket, because politicians from both sides are using the game as an instrument of state policy.” The outcome is that Old Trafford will stage its biggest ever security operation for a sporting event, with armed police on patrol and vehicle barriers erected around the ground. Extra security guards are also being deployed to prevent any trouble between rival fans. Police are stepping up patrols in cities across the UK where there are significant Indian and Pakistani communities, following sporadic violence during previous encounters between the two nations. Three miles from Chaudhry’s restaurant, staff at the Indian Gymkhana club in Osterley, west London, have been busy preparing for the 500 mainly India fans who will gather throughout the day in three giant marquees to watch the clash. Founded in 1916 by princes and maharajahs living in London, the club has become a hub for Indian cricket fans and is known for jubilant celebrations whenever the team defeats its old foe. “There’s always a lot of tension when India play Pakistan, but this time it feels as if there’s more,” says Qays Mir, the club’s general manager. “People are getting very excited. For some it’s hard to get away from religion and politics when it comes to this match, but our club doesn’t get involved in this. We have some Pakistani fans attending. There’s always good banter and we’ve never had any trouble. Both sets of fans are desperate for victory but we just want to see a great game.” Interest in the match is so high that more than 500,000 people applied for the 25,000 tickets on offer at Old Trafford, with some being sold on the black market for £3,000 each. It is expected to be the most-watched World Cup match with millions tuning in around the world. The last time India and Pakistan met on the cricket field was also in England, during the 2017 Champions Trophy final, which was watched by an estimated 1 billion people. Pakistan won, prompting wild celebrations bordering on jingoism, which many Indian fans also stand accused of when their team wins. With the two teams taking to the field against a backdrop of heightened antagonism there is perhaps one thing that could take the heat out of matters. Heavy rain, which has already claimed four World Cup games, is again forecast. The great British weather may prove to be the most powerful adversary either India or Pakistan will face in the battle for bragging rights and a whole lot more.