1) The Women’s World Cup is heating up, so let’s have a look at some history. Here’s a documentary celebrating 50 years of the Donny Belles, trailblazers in the English game; a short film on women’s football during the first world war; a game between Handley Page Girls and Ladies Sterling Football Club in 1919; women footballers looking cool as you like in 1920; a bit from BBC Teach on the history of the women’s game; and the National Football Museum taking us through England’s run at the unofficial World Cup in 1971. 2) The cricket World Cup is also getting there and England appear to have a chance. As such, here are some reminders of what happens when that happens: West Indies dealing with things in 1979; Australia dealing with things in 1987; and Wasim Akram dealing with things in 1992. Go carefully, people. 3) A World Cup ’92 bonus: Jonty Rhodes channels Superman to run out Inzamam-ul-Haq. 4) It’s 27 years this week since Sweden knocked England out of Euro ‘92. So here’s the goal that did it, elevated by the brilliance of Barry Davies, and while we’re here, some more incredible commentary: the Radio Goal collection of amazing moments, originally a cassette given away free with Goal magazine; the late, great Sid Waddell and Dave Lanning narrate Phil Taylor’s two nine-darters in the Premier League final of 2010; and Richie Benaud’s final stint, on the final day of the 2005 Ashes series. 5) Nerves appeared to get to Ferland Mendy as he failed to impress with some attempted keepy-ups at his Real Madrid unveiling. He isn’t the first to make a mess of his tricks and flicks when being presented by one of La Liga’s super-clubs. Comme Ferland Mendy, ils ont raté leurs jongles le jour de leur présentation 👇 #Oups pic.twitter.com/cgBgpUSNBu 6) Cliff Thorburn and Alex Higgins did not like one another. Sadly, YouTube is silent on the violence, but here they are, arguing over a green ball, after which an affronted Thorburn refuses Higgins the use of his extension. 1) The top 10 goals of the 21st century (in someone’s opinion). 2) A rally car speeds down a country road, only to find another car coming the other way. Contains swearing in Slovenian. 3) Are corners pointless? 4) The top 10 goal from the Copa América in 2011, 2015 and 2016. Spotters badges: LeeWall, YorkerBouncer, whobroughtoranges, denothemeno. Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.