In 2016, Amitav Ghosh published The Great Derangement, an examination of collective denial in the face of climate breakdown. It posed a question: why did the gathering clouds of environmental catastrophe appear to present fiction – including his own, where he noted his tendency to address the subject only obliquely – with “peculiar forms of resistance”? Future generations would surely conclude that “ours was a time when most forms of art and literature were drawn into the modes of concealment that prevented people from recognising the realities of their plight”. A crisis of climate is, therefore, also a crisis of culture, one in which writers’ fears of improbability, of depicting apocalyptic fractures of history and geography within the confines of a story expected to take its metre from the scale and scope of human lives, have resulted in evasion. Given that this dilemma affects science fiction and the scenarios of alternative history to a lesser degree, the problem seems to lie squarely with fiction in the realist mode. Much has changed in the last three years, albeit not enough for anyone to claim that art has got a handle on how to talk about the impending disaster. And Ghosh’s response in his new novel is straightforward: if realism is not a capacious enough vessel to accommodate the truth, then dispense with it. Gun Island brims with implausibility; outlandish coincidences and chance meetings blend with ancient myth and folklore, tales of heroism and the supernatural set in a contemporary world disrupted by the constant migrations of humans and animals. Amid the freak cyclones and oxygen-starved waters come the stories of migra­tion across the ages Its narrator embodies scepticism and a frequently limiting adherence to empirical reality. A rare book dealer of Bangladeshi heritage, he has settled in Brooklyn after a politically adventurous youth. His name has mutated from Dinanath to the American-friendly “Deen”, and he mitigates his emotional and romantic difficulties with visits to a therapist while attempting to keep financial troubles at bay by amateurishly dabbling in stocks, shares and complicated insurances against the future. But a visit back home to Kolkata – his family having relocated to India during Partition – threatens to derail his self-imposed and self-contained exile. Events turn on the mention of a Bengali legend, the tale of a merchant fated to travel the world seeking a safe haven from the goddess of snakes, Manasa Devi. It is a story passed down through centuries, with which Deen has been familiar since childhood; its retelling at a party sparks a journey that takes Deen from the mangrove swamps of the Sundarbans to a Los Angeles benighted by forest fires to a gradually sinking Venice. Along the way, we meet a glamorous Italian professor whose erudition allows for a belief in precognition and visitations from the dead; a pair of young Bengali men who submit to the vicious charges of the dalals (traffickers) in order to reach Europe; and an intense marine biologist who is tracking the disturbing rise in stranded whales and dolphins – the result, she believes, of the spread of oceanic and riverine dead zones. Many of the interactions take place by text, phone, email, social media; a facet of the carbon economy that Deen slowly comes to realise has shifted our perceptions of place and time entirely. It’s little surprise to find Ghosh playing fast and loose with conventions; his Ibis trilogy, set against the backdrop of the opium wars, was founded on puckish digression and operatic swoops between tragedy and comedy. Gun Island, too, is keen to play with its own ridiculousness; as Deen and the professor slowly disinter the likely origins of the novel’s founding myth, their grandiose speculations often call to mind the satirical portrayal of the academic world that one might find in a David Lodge novel. Turn the page, though, and a king cobra is about to strike, or a block of masonry to fall from a building and narrowly miss one or other of our principals. If Gun Island can at times feel a touch breathless – a detailed description of the habits of Irrawaddy dolphins, for example, giving way to an emergency dash in search of a rare anti-venom treatment, with mysterious symbols scrawled on the side of a shrine thrown in – then its underpinning is solid. Amid the freak cyclones and oxygen-starved waters comes the story – or stories – of migration across the ages; tales of escapology, of deprivation and persecution, of impossible yearnings for a new world that bring us, inexorably, to the terrified refugees on the Mediterranean. Which is, perhaps, Ghosh’s essential point; a shaggy dog story can take a very roundabout path towards reality, but it will get there in the end. It has to, or we’re all doomed. • Gun Island is published by John Murray (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.