Gaby Hinsliff is right (My dad studied late in life. He wouldn’t get the chance now, 1 June). She knows from family experience that mature learning is rich in rewards both professional and personal. The Augar report acknowledges this, making positive recommendations as to how to extend its reach: the reintroduction of maintenance grants is particularly helpful. Welcome as it is, this development merely foreshadows what should be a policy direction for the future. As president of Birkbeck I know how successful our pattern of evening study for working people proves to be. Students of all ages get on-site, face-to-face evening teaching from specialists in a whole range of subjects, leading on to full-scale undergraduate and master’s degrees. Currently post-18 education is dominated by three-year university courses taken up immediately after school. This emphasis needs to change. Lifelong learning needs to be embedded in our working lives: the development of AI, indeed of technology of all kinds, calls for regular retraining. Employment patterns shift, people switch careers. There are other benefits too: learning a new language can help stem symptoms of ageing. While welcoming Augar’s proposals, I suggest this is only the beginning: lifelong learning must be made far more widely available, easier to access and to afford, so that it can enrich more people’s lives, as Gaby’s father’s was enriched.Joan BakewellPresident of Birkbeck • Gaby Hinsliff set out a powerful case for lifelong learning and why it should be supported to a greater degree by governments. There are big questions to be resolved, not least about whether publicly funded opportunities to learn should be “rationed”, which usually means restricting the chances available to adults. This will be an issue for Labour’s national education service if it is to replicate the principles underpinning the NHS. Rationing healthcare is generally felt to be a bad thing, so would the same apply to the NES? One solution could be to explore Gordon Brown’s proposal for a lifetime education grant. Fashioned in a flexible format, with periodic “top-ups”, it could make fresh opportunities to learn new things available for all throughout life. The idea of lifelong learning is making a comeback, with at least half a dozen national inquiries under way. One of these, the centenary commission on adult education, reflecting a broad span of opinion, is hinged on the anniversary of the groundbreaking 1919 report. The commission is inviting recommendations for inclusion in its 2019 report. Anyone who would like to contribute, or keep in touch with the Adult Education 100 campaign, is very welcome to contact rosey@co-op.ac.uk.Nigel ToddChair, Board of trustees, Co-operative College CIO • I would never have had my career without free further and higher education as an adult. Having already trained as a nurse (paid, of course, although not a lot), in 1973, aged 25, I went back to FE full-time to study A-level sciences at a college in Nottingham at no cost (doing nursing in the holidays). Then I went to University College Cardiff to study for a BSc in zoology/chemistry with a full grant from Notts county council and a mature student grant. Then I was offered a research grant from the Natural Environment Research Council that enabled me to study for a PhD. Hence I was able to become a lecturer and ended up as a senior manager of a large vocational department of a FE college. None of my qualifications would have been available to me if I had had to pay for my courses. How lucky we were, and how dreadfully unfair it is that adults today don’t have these opportunities to enrich and develop their careers.Dr Jude AndersonCardiff • When I was working in adult education there were lots of opportunities, but in recent decades we’ve seen the disappearance of extra-mural departments and the reduction of LEA provision to skeletal levels. Liberal adult education is now only available at a price that excludes those on lower incomes. The charity University of the Third Age (U3A) has filled the gap to a degree, but is purely voluntary and unfunded. To introduce lifelong learning, fill the skills deficit and serve an ageing population, Auger is right to advise more public funding, though he should have mentioned the U3A which, as adult education always has, makes small subsidies go a very long way.Dr Bill Jones(Director extra-mural studies, University of Manchester, 1986-92) Beverley, East Riding of Yorkshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition