The link between austerity and stalling life expectancy, and between inequality and adverse health and wellbeing, is so strongly supported that I am unsure that we need the full-scale inquiry that many eminent epidemiologists are proposing (“Why is life expectancy faltering?” Special Report). Might it not be better to direct attention to the sort of fine-grained, focused studies that help us understand how these economic and social differences get under the skin? People dying earlier are dying of specific things. How can we link lack of money, cuts to support available and the impact of austerity and inequality on the life choices people consider they have with the illnesses they are dying prematurely of? We also need to understand what is working in other countries where life expectancy is higher and in other parts of the UK where local experiences are bucking trends. These sorts of studies open the way to interventions to disrupt the connections between disadvantage and adverse outcome and to replicate successes. Epidemiologists have interpreted the world in valuable ways; the point, however, is to change it.Neil SmallProfessor of health research, University of Bradford In response to “We want to live forever” (Magazine), the meaning of carpe diem as used by Horace is not to ignore the future, but, rather, not to trust that everything is going to fall into place for you. But should that involve making heroic attempts to extend one’s already considerable lifespan? I am proud to have been part of the therapeutic drugs revolution that took place over the latter half of the last century. But what if we were to make a series of breakthroughs (via drugs, gene therapy or lifestyle) that extended life to 150 years and beyond? In an already overcrowded world, the consequences would be horrendous. I feel content to have a mere 20 years of fruitful retirement – more than my grandparents had – and to leave the world to the next generations. So be content with the 70, 80 or 90 years you have been given and at the same time “do not go gentle into that good night”.Robert JonesProfessor emeritus, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Edinburgh You say of Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt, with regards to Brexit, that they “seem entirely unperturbed about its impact on the least affluent areas of the country” (Editorial). What about Brexit’s impact on the least affluent areas of the world where climate change is already having a devastating impact? How will we cope with our task of cutting back our carbon emissions if we are busy setting up new trading agreements with Japan and planning to import beef from Australia and chickens from America? “The damage they seem all too willing to wreak on Britain” they will also, one way or the other, wreak on the whole planet.Barbara Mullarney WrightLondon W3 Of course “cultural institutions should have some principles”, but there can be little surprise that Oxford University is going to set up a “predator-funded ethics centre” with the £150m donation from financier Stephen Schwarzman (“Ethics fly out of the window at Oxford when big donors come calling”, Comment). The university, like Cambridge, has failed to introduce a contextual admissions policy that would increase diversity among undergraduates, offer more opportunities to students from northern and working-class backgrounds and decrease the domination of private schools. Rather than adopting a more “ethical” admissions policy, it would appear the opposite may be happening, so one of our top universities accepting a massive gift of dubiously acquired money should astonish no one. Vice-chancellor Louise Richardson claims Oxford’s “judginess” has been left behind, but only, it would appear, when it comes to money!Bernie EvansLiverpool This government, like so many before it, has professed to do something-anything about our profligate and damaging over-reliance on prison but chickened out (“There are better answers than jail for women who have offended”, Comment). This is especially so for non-violent offenders and those deemed at low risk of future offending. The likelihood of converting them into recidivists is boosted several-fold by their unintelligent incarceration. The self-same perverse recipe – if in doubt, jail – also applies to male offenders, in particular the young and those so geriatric that the notion of them reoffending would be laughable were it not so indefensible. Empty the prisons – any mature administration would be leading from the front on this vexed issue, rather than remaining afraid of its own shadow and addressing the initial reticence of a society surely open to rational persuasion. We have almost doubled our prison population since the early 90s, abjuring the dictates of common sense and the examples of more enlightened and effective policies in an increasing number of other nations. Why is what passes for a strategy so stuck in aspic?Malcolm FowlerSolicitor and higher court advocate (retired), former chair of the Law Society’s Criminal Law Committee,Kings Heath, Birmingham Vanessa Thorpe, in her assessment of Mark Rylance’s decision to leave the RSC, says cultural institutions must inevitably prostitute themselves to big business, regardless of how nefarious those businesses’ practices are (“Mark Rylance is brave...”, Comment). Failure to do so, she asserts, will threaten the financial viability of many institutions and mean the certain end to the RSC’s cheap ticket scheme for young people. Neither would be the case if the government ended its subsidies to the fossil-fuel industries, which at the last count stood at £10.5bn per annum, and applied a small proportion of that towards proper funding of the arts. The more artists who follow Rylance’s lead (and the more of us who welcome these stands), the sooner, hopefully, the government might act accordingly.Dave HunterBristol You cannot fault Rylance’s moral probity, but this is a sullied and compromised world and sometimes right-minded principles may have to be shelved for the ultimate good and viability of the commodity. The arts are being subjected to more and more cuts and privations and sometimes the greater cultural benefits to its people can offset its dubious connections. If we all step away, the financial ground might open up and swallow our cultural scene altogether. There is enough uncertainty without losing thought-provoking plays that can often in this medium make sense of our mendacious world. Shakespeare said: “How far that little candle throws its beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world”, but we don’t want to extinguish the light completely as we are in need of it more than ever to lift our spirits.Judith A DanielsCobholm, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk