The sea has no gender. It is the definition of fluid, which is probably why so many photographs of bodies of water are included in this exhibition of artists who question the very existence of stable gender identities. Peter Hujar’s photographs of the transgender community in 1970s New York are shown between two pictures of the dark, untamed waters of the Hudson River. Catherine Opie’s photographs of the Pacific capture a nature that is infinitely suggestive, sea and sky merging in misty paleness until it is hard to tell what’s air and what’s ocean. Why should male and female be any easier to separate? Kiss My Genders celebrates artists “whose work counters entrenched gender narratives”. There’s certainly not much left of those narratives by the end. From Del LaGrace Volcano’s photographs of drag kings to Ajamu’s shot of a man caressing his erect penis with a hand gloved in black lace, it’s a bonfire of categories. Yet it does more than contribute to the impassioned politics of identity. It touches, in profound ways, on what it is to be human, and why we need this great river of the unfixed. Maybe everyone was more free back before there were hierarchical societies or monotheistic religions to define us. Kent Monkman’s painting Stag Hunting (After Theodor de Bry) is set in a North American past of shamans and shapeshifters. Hunters are creeping up to a river, disguised under deer skins, to shoot stags – except one of them is wearing high heels. This is Monkman’s alter ego, Miss Chief Eagle Testickle, who has travelled back in time. First Nations peoples, argues Monkman, had a concept of a third gender between male and female. A similar fascination with mythologies, in which human identity could be imagined in more bedazzling ways, glares with jade eyes from Martine Gutierrez’s self-portraits as a pantheon of Aztec deities. We can be gods, or heroes anyway. That appears to be the moral of Luciano Castelli’s Golden Record 3, a photograph of the artist covered in gold leaf. He looks with calm hauteur from his glam transfiguration. And I do mean glam. Monkman, Gutierrez and many more artists here are firmly of the 21st century, but Castelli created this golden apotheosis in 1974, the year he participated in an exhibition called Transformer: Aspects of Travesty. Taking its title from Lou Reed’s 1972 album, Transformer – whose hit song Walk on the Wild Side put transgender life stories into pop culture – and with a catalogue full of references to David Bowie, this marriage of art and glam rock is today seen as the foundation of gender-questioning art. Castelli is a sensational artist. At the start of Kiss My Genders you encounter his watercolours of himself as Lucille, with bold lipstick and impenetrable eyes. In a 1975 self-portrait, he lies on a bed naked except for a waist chain and stockings. The leg hairs under the nylon add to the sense of personal experiment. There’s plenty of naughty playing in Kiss My Genders. The earliest artist here, Pierre Molinier, said he made his 1960s montage photographs for his own pleasure. Their sense of sinful private gratification is intense. Molinier put on black stockings and lingerie and photographed himself, combining and repeating his images to create surreal forests of his own flesh in conventionally female attire. In a 1974 photograph, he portrays his fellow outlaw Castelli wearing a black gauze top and stockings. These pioneering works reveal something unexpected. Transgender art has not simply come into being to express 21st-century needs or beliefs. It has an impressive history, one so strong it suggests there is something primal about it. Hujar’s portraits include Candy Darling on Her Deathbed, a black-and-white image of the star of Warhol’s underground scene in hospital, dying from lymphoma. It is a portrait of courage. Surrounded by flowers, with a rose laid on the bedclothes as if at the end of an opera, Darling knows this is the final scene and proudly lives up to it. In case you thought it was all about fun and fantasy, again and again the art here shows you tough reality. Hujar’s photographs in his series John Heys in Lana Turner’s Gown depict a man who is obviously a man under his makeup, boldly posed as a 1940s femme fatale. As in a Lou Reed song, brutal truth mixes with wilful self-invention. This is where the art becomes a suddenly serious meditation on what it is to be a person – to inhabit an identity, or to repudiate it. Opie’s photographs are both unsettling and authoritative. Justin Bond looks like an all-American college girl, except for the black-laced corset. He’s got great hair. Amy, as the work is called, is invisible behind the smoke from her cigar. She’s a model of vest-wearing monochrome American masculinity that is pure James Dean. You can’t fail to be seduced by this show’s glorious assault on all of our assumptions. It shows that gender is mobile because we live in our heads, not our biology. “Candy says I’ve come to hate my body …” sang Reed about Candy Darling. Obviously a lot of artists here love theirs, and it’s a love without limits. When Jennifer Miller poses as Marilyn Monroe for Zoe Leonard’s camera, it’s hard to stop admiring her body, or her beard. • Kiss My Genders is at Hayward Gallery, London, 12 June-8 September.