Prep 20 min, plus restingCook 10 minMakes 20 300g sweet potato, peeled and coarsely grated 150g baby spinach leaves, finely chopped3 tsp turmeric1 tsp chilli flakes3 large eggs 100g plain flour1 tsp baking powderSalt and pepperVegetable oil, for fryingSweet chilli sauce, to serve Put the sweet potato, spinach, turmeric, chilli flakes, eggs, flour and baking powder into a large bowl and mix well. Season generously, then leave the batter to rest for 15 minutes. Pour enough vegetable oil into a large, deep frying pan or saucepan to fill to a depth of about 5cm. Heat the oil over a medium-high heat and bring to frying temperature (add a pinch of the batter: if it sizzles immediately, the oil is hot enough). Line a plate with a double layer of kitchen paper. When the oil is ready, stir the batter. Using two dessertspoons, form quenelles of the mixture: scoop up the mixture with one spoon and use the other to press down and shape it. Lower the quenelles carefully into the hot oil and fry in batches, six at a time – it is important not to overcrowd the pan or the temperature of the oil will drop and your fritters will not be crisp. Fry the fritters for one minute, then turn them over and fry for another minute or so, or until nicely browned all over. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the fritters from the oil to the paper-lined plate to drain. Serve hot with sweet chilli sauce. Prep 10 minCook 5 minServes 6 200g feta, finely crumbled100g Greek yoghurtSalt and pepper6 slices sourdough bread5-6 baby cucumbers, cut diagonally into 5mm-thick slices1 tsp sumac1 tsp dried wild oregano1 tsp pul biber chilli flakes½ tsp nigella seeds50g pomegranate seedsOlive oil, for drizzling (optional) Combine the feta and yoghurt in a bowl, and mash. Season with black pepper and just a little salt. Chargrill the sourdough in a griddle pan on both sides or use a toaster. Divide the feta mixture into six portions and spread a portion on each slice of toast. Arrange the cucumber slices on top, then sprinkle over the sumac, oregano and pul biber. Scatter over the nigella seeds and, lastly, the pomegranate seeds. Drizzle over a little olive oil, if desired, and serve immediately Prep 20 minCook 30 minServes 4–6 Vegetable oil, for frying200g best-quality polenta (not quick-cook)250ml buttermilk1 tsp cayenne pepper2 tsp garlic granules2 tsp sumacSalt and pepper4 large tomatoes, such as beef tomatoes3 tbsp dried wild oregano Pour enough vegetable oil into a large, deep frying pan or saucepan to fill to a depth of about 2.5cm. Heat the oil over a medium-high heat and bring to frying temperature (add a little polenta: if it sizzles immediately, the oil is hot enough). Line a plate with a double layer of kitchen paper. Pour the polenta on to a plate. In a bowl, mix the buttermilk with the cayenne pepper, garlic granules, sumac and a generous amount of salt and pepper. Slice the tomatoes into 1.5cm-thick slices – I usually get about four slices per tomato. Discard the ends, because the polenta doesn’t stick to the skin very easily. Drag a tomato slice through the buttermilk and shake off any excess liquid, then place it gently in the polenta and coat the cut sides and edges as best you can, carefully patting the polenta on to the slice to encrust it. Lower it carefully into the hot oil, then repeat with the remaining tomato slices, frying in batches to avoid overcrowding the pan. Gently fry the slices for about a minute on each side, or until they start to brown. If they brown too fast, your oil is too hot – in which case, take off the heat until the oil is at the right temperature. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the slices from the oil to the paper-lined plate to drain, then sprinkle over some salt and the oregano. Serve hot. Prep 30 minCook 5 minServes 6-8 For the seasoning1 tsp cumin seeds1 tsp coriander seeds1 tsp yellow mustard seeds½ tsp chilli flakes1 tsp dried wild oregano For the hummus 2 x 400g cans chickpeas Salt and pepper12–15g fresh turmeric, peeled and finely grated 1 fat garlic clove, peeled and very finely chopped2 tsp cumin seeds, toasted and crushed Finely grated zest and juice of 1 unwaxed lemon 4 tsp tahiniOlive oil, for drizzling 1 large cucumber, cut into batons150g radishes, halved4-5 celery sticks (with leaves), cut into 5cm batons250g cherry or baby plum tomatoes8 carrots, peeled and halved lengthways (or 4 large carrots, peeled and cut into batons)Olive oil, for drizzlingSalt and black pepper To make the seasoning, heat a small frying pan over a medium heat. Add the cumin, coriander and mustard seeds and toast, shaking the pan, for two minutes. Transfer the seeds to a mortar, mix in the chilli flakes and grind to a coarse powder. Stir in the oregano and set aside. To make the hummus, use a food processor or blender to blitz one can of chickpeas with its liquid, until completely smooth. Add a generous amount of salt and pepper, the fresh turmeric, garlic, crushed cumin seeds, lemon zest and juice, and tahini, and blitz again briefly until the ingredients are well incorporated. Add the remaining can of drained chickpeas and pulse briefly to break them down. I like a nice chunky texture, but continue to blitz if you prefer it smooth. Add salt and pepper as necessary. Transfer the hummus to a serving bowl and drizzle over some olive oil. Arrange the prepared vegetables on a serving platter (place the cucumber batons skin-side down). Drizzle over a good amount of olive oil, season generously, then season heavily with the toasted-spice mix. Serve immediately with the hummus. • Bazaar: Vibrant Vegetarian and Plant-Based Recipes, by Sabrina Ghayour (Mitchell Beazley, £26), is out now.