Running a sustainable Football League club is possible only if you are lucky, according to the Stevenage chairman, who is about to offer shares in his club to supporters. Phil Wallace has presided over the most successful period in Stevenage FC’s history since he bought the team in 1999. But with clubs in the Football League experiencing growing financial uncertainty – 52 of the 72 clubs reported losses in 2017-18 – Wallace says it is no longer enough simply to run your club well if you want to keep your head above water in the lower leagues. “In my opinion you can’t run a football league club sustainably without luck,” says Wallace, whose primary commercial interest is the £1.7bn valued Lamex Food Group. “You’ve got to have good housekeeping, good governance. You need to be smart with your recruitment. You need to be clever and talented with your coaching. But then you also need luck. It’s not a business in the way that my company is.” Stevenage finished just a point outside the League Two play-offs last season and posted a small profit in 2017-18. But the results were in large part due to the sale of the young defender Ben Wilmot to Premier League Watford and Wallace believes unexpected windfalls are increasingly important in keeping smaller clubs afloat. “Just look at the last couple of seasons,” he says. “Newport have had some fantastic cup wins but some fantastic cup draws. That’s put seven figures into their bank account [when] four years ago they were just about to go out of business. Exeter are another that were close, then they drew Manchester United in the FA Cup, with a replay. So luck’s a major part.” The health of Football League clubs was more parlous than ever in 2017-18, according to the Deloitte review of football finances. Championship clubs posted record losses, while across the 72 Football League clubs wages exceeded £1bn for the first time. In Leagues One and Two, while revenues generally remained static, wages increased by 11% and 8% respectively. Wallace acknowledges that some clubs are less dependent on good fortune – those with rich owners. Indeed among the clubs posting the biggest losses were Wolves and Fulham, who both invested heavily, but successfully, in their attempts to reach the Premier League. That option is not available to Stevenage, according to Wallace, but he hopes to raise £1.2m through selling 12% equity in the club to supporters. The offer has been arranged with the sports crowdfunding platform Tifosy, which recently helped Norwich City raise £5m to renovate its academy. Such a share scheme has “never been done before”, according to Wallace, who says funds will “principally” be used to fund transfers and wages. He also plans to offer shareholders voting rights on certain issues, like kit design, though his shareholding will ensure he retains a controlling interest. The scheme is currently available for “pre-registration” via the club. “We would take that money and principally invest in the recruitment of young players and wages, so that we can attract better players,” Wallace says. “The idea would be that, if you are going to attract better players, we are improving our chances of getting promoted from League Two to League One. “We missed the play-offs by one point and we’ve been in League One before for three seasons too, so that’s not new to us. But if we get into League One, or when we do, we pay a 25% one-time dividend. If we get into the Championship we return 75% of the investment and [investors] still hold the shares. “It’s high risk, in terms of [promotion] might not happen. But I don’t think it’s high risk in terms of the club going bankrupt since I’ve been here for 20 years, so there’s a degree of solidarity behind that. It’s all part of the momentum of the club going forward. We’re building a new stand, just about to finish that, finish off the ground development, we’ve got a great training ground, so it’s all about momentum and creating some excitement.”