Late-night hosts focused on Donald Trump’s continued time in Britain as well as providing an introduction to the world of Boris Johnson. Meet Boris Johnson: British politician and stunt double for Jeff Daniels in “Dumb And Dumber.” pic.twitter.com/jxID8CgQ1o On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah introduced a section where he explained exactly who Johnson is to a US audience firstly by comparing him to the president. “Look at them,” he said. “They look like they were separated at birth, and I mean purposely.” He explained that Johnson could be the next UK prime minister, a job that’s now become “about as desirable as being Kanye West’s social media manager” before comparing him to a “stunt double for Jeff Daniels in Dumb and Dumber”. He then played footage of Johnson getting stuck on a zipline. “I guess at the same time though it’s probably good preparation for handling Brexit,” he said. Noah recounted a selection of Johnson’s most offensive statements and ended with him referring to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, as a Dobby lookalike, which he did say was accurate. “He looks like Dobby got a job at KPMG,” he joked. Noah continued: “It’s pretty ballsy for Boris to make fun of someone for looking like a Harry Potter character when he looks like a midlife crisis Malfoy.” While the Daily Show host remains unsure of Johnson’s suitability as a leader, he is sure of one thing. “I don’t know if he’d be a good prime minister but I do know that he definitely deserves his own sitcom,” Noah said. On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke about Trump’s time in Britain. “Throughout the trip, Trump has insisted that instead of protests, the people of London have been cheering, and today he was right because he left,” he said. Trump travelled from London to Dublin, where he said he knew most Irish Americans, with Colbert joking about some of his closest friends: the Lucky Charms leprechaun, Liam Neeson, Filet-O-Fish, etc. He also spoke about Trump’s interview with “chatshow chumbucket” Piers Morgan, who started by telling him how well-behaved he was around the royal family. “We’re complimenting the president like he’s a dog?” Colbert asked. Trump then said that the Queen walked at the same pace as he did, which Colbert said was either “an odd compliment or a strange confession”. Trump went on to say that tornadoes have always been a problem and that 40 years ago there was a real binge of them. “Who hasn’t gone out for a tornado and had a few too many?” Colbert joked. Morgan asked Trump if he regrets not being able to serve during the Vietnam war, and Trump said he didn’t agree with it and it was so far away. “That’s what’s horrible about war: the commute,” Colbert said. On Jimmy Kimmel Live, the host spoke about Trump’s attendance at the D-day commemoration. “He initially agreed to attend because he thought the D stood for Donald,” he joked. Kimmel continued: “The only beach Donald Trump would storm is spring break in Daytona.” He also spoke about Trump’s thought on the climate crisis and how reportedly Prince Charles spent time trying to convince him of the severity. “If Prince Charles was smart he would have talked exclusively about the impact climate change would have on the fried chicken industry,” he joked.