I’m 70, with chronic asthma. For the last while, I’ve been living in a semi-rural area with no central heating, no hot water and no cooking facilities. This is rather trying. I have an old back boiler which has only needed one repair in 30 years. The gas fire, which stands in front, has never failed. To support this impeccable behaviour, they have had an annual service from British Gas. As, however, the renewal rate rose, I’ve just switched to Saga which outsources to Axa. Their service technician tested both for emissions. He struggled to dismantle the fire and concluded all was in order. However, half an hour later he said he was shutting off my gas because of a hole through which fumes could leak. I noticed a gap on the boiler flue hood had been raised slightly as though he’d attempted to lever it up. Saga insisted it had nothing to do with them. Axa said it would investigate and made a verbal offer to reimburse me for three nights in a B&B. However, it says the investigation may take 40 working days during which I would be without gas. British Gas is sending a copy of its last service report from 2017. It says there was no evidence of a hole. VC, Luddenden Foot, West Yorkshire Your ordeal turned into a 10-month saga. After the Observer intervened things started moving at a speed as glacial as your home. Axa permitted you to summon a British Gas technician who suggested someone might have tried to move the hood. Since your boiler is obsolete and parts can’t be found, you faced having to replace it. This would have meant demolishing your fireplace and the flue, and knocking through walls. Axa initially offered £250. For six weeks you had to cook and shower at friends’ homes and you say your health deteriorated. Then an independent technician was sent – by Axa, at your behest – who decided the gap in the flue hood was immaterial and there had been no reason to disconnect the gas, which he reinstated. Saga, which acknowledges its investigation only began after my contact, sent a bouquet and hamper. Axa eventually increased its offer to £600 to compensate for the 42 days you were without gas, which you declined because it does not address the financial, physical and emotional costs. It then appeared the seal on the gas fire, which heats your kitchen/dining room, was damaged when it was dismantled for the service, so it couldn’t be reconnected. It would cost £750 plus installation for a replacement compatible with your old boiler. Four months after your initial complaint, Saga promised £1,000 towards a new fire, until a British Gas technician judged your old one could be safely reconnected temporarily, whereupon it withdrew the offer. You took your case to the ombudsman, who ruled you are due £800 compensation. Saga says: “We are very disappointed with the service VC received … while Axa is required to handle complaints relating to claims, we should have stepped in sooner.” Axa says it is investigating the complaint and is looking to resolve the situation “as quickly as possible”. • If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions