One of several England defenders who failed to impress against the Netherlands last night, Kyle Walker may be disheartened to learn Manchester City are hitching their skirts at Juventus right-back, João Cancelo. Bought from Real Madrid for £26m, Danilo is expected to leave the Etihad this summer and City are reported to have rejected a £13m bid from Inter for the Brazilian. With Juve also believed to be interested in the full-back, a player-plus-cash deal could be in the offing. One man who had a more enjoyable evening in Guimaraes was Matthijs de Ligt, who has been consistently linked with a move to Barcelona but is now being tipped to join Paris Saint-Germain. With Leonardo due to return to his former role as sporting director with the French champions, ESPN say the Brazilian has been in constant contact with Mino Raiola, the player’s agent and is apparently more inclined to meet what are described as the broker’s “high commission demands” than Barcelona. PSG are also believed to have offered Tottenham Julian Draxler in exchange for Christian Eriksen. A longtime target of Manchester United, Harry Maguire is ready to ignore overtures from Old Trafford and move to their City rivals instead. With their fans increasingly frustrated by their club’s non-appointment of a director of football and lack of activity in the transfer market, United could also miss out on Maguire’s teammate James Maddison, who would rather stay at Leicester than take his chances in Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s squad. Having been impressed by Youri Tielemans during his spell on loan last season, Leicester want to sign him permanently but will have to fend off interest from Tottenham Hotspur and – you’ve guessed it – United. Everton defender Jonjoe Kenny is wanted by Bundesliga side Schalke, while his team-mate Idrissa Gueye could be off to PSG. Following his impressive breakthrough season in the Premier League, Everton left-back Lucas Digne is wanted by Tottenham, who will have to offer Danny Rose and lots of cash to get him. Elsewhere on Merseyside, 19-year-old Liverpool midfielder Rafael Camacho will become the latest member of Wolverhampton’s burgeoning Portuguese community if Nuno Espírito Santo gets his way. Newcastle fans will be unimpressed to learn of speculation linking Salomón Rondón with a move to Fenerbahce. The Venezuelan striker established himself as a firm fan favourite while on loan at St James’ Park from West Brom last season, but with the current mushroom cloud of uncertainty hovering over the Tyneside club, he and his current employers could be forgiven for listening to concrete offers from elsewhere. Crystal Palace want to sign Jerdy Schouten and Thomas Ouwejan, a pair of Dutch footballers the Rumour Mill has never heard of before, while Barcelona are prepared to offer the slightly better known veteran Italian goalkeeper Gigi Buffon a new home. Should he sign for the Spanish side, he could take the dressing-room peg vacated by Philippe Coutinho, who has told the Camp Nou hierarchy he wants to move elsewhere. And finally, as reported yesterday, Eden Hazard’s dream move to Real Madrid is this close to becoming a reality. The Spanish side will pay £88.5 million up front for the 28-year-old playmaker in a deal that could be worth as much as £130m to his current club depending on add-ons related to appearances, goals and silverware. Hazard has been told the two clubs have reached an agreement and the deal will be finalised once Belgium have got their forthcoming European qualifiers against Kazakhstan and Scotland out of the way.