With a minute or two left of this hugely promising victory for the most callow of England sides Eddie Jones made his exit – no doubt with plenty to ponder. No one in this squad was expected to come into World Cup contention but he may well reconsider after this performance. England took the field with five caps against a star-studded Barbarians side who had 478 and, although they were outscored six tries to seven, 26 points from the fly-half Marcus Smith steered them home. Smith turned down a trip to Argentina for the Junior World Cup for this fixture and it is a decision vindicated on this evidence. His Harlequins teammates Alex Dombrandt, who scored two tries, and Joe Marchant can also consider their chances of featuring in Jones’s wider plans in the coming months enhanced. It must be said the Barbarians threatened to romp to victory – coming from 38-12 down to trail by three points – and it should also be acknowledged that one or two of them, Joe Marler perhaps among them, may have overdone it a touch off the field last week. But that should not take away from the credit Jim Mallinder deserves. Mallinder in effect ruled out the possibility of replacing Jones, should the latter move on after the World Cup, but, taking the reins last week with the Australian keeping a watchful eye on proceedings, he certainly enhanced his reputation given that England, just like their opponents, had barely a week to work together. Smith was the official man of the match but Dombrandt was arguably more impressive. The 22-year-old is in his first season of professional rugby but has been the Premiership’s break-out star and he brought a physicality from blindside flanker that the Barbarians could not live with. Marchant, too, shone at outside centre. Four years ago an uncapped Henry Slade impressed in this fixture and ultimately made Stuart Lancaster’s final 31-man World Cup squad. Asked if any of this squad could do likewise, Mallinder said: “Yes. I think we’ve seen players in that squad who played really well for England, have played for the U20s and won Junior World Cups. All they have done is the best they could possibly do. Everybody had an opportunity, playing for England, being watched and giving themselves a chance and I think there are quite a number of players today who have given themselves a good chance.” Countless handling errors had given the opening exchanges a frustrating stop-start rhythm and, indeed, England the first try. The loose ball was seized on by Johnny Williams, who freed Josh Bassett on the left – the Wasps wing too quick for Filipo Nakosi. The Barbarians responded with a try for their captain, James Horwill, in his final appearance, collecting Colin Slade’s crossfield kick. England added three points with a Smith penalty before Francois Louw’s close-range effort put the Barbarians ahead, but a flurry of three tries in the last eight minutes of the first half put England in command with a 31-12 lead at the interval. The first started with Marchant wriggling through the middle, feeding Alex Mitchell, who showed his pace to streak clear before Simon Hammersley went over – Smith with the final pass. Smith was next over five minutes later, dummying and forcing his way past Richard Hibbard while the third was finished by Dombrandt but owed everything to Mitchell, who picked off an interception to free the Harlequins flanker. They continued the same way after the break – Williams given a try on a plate by Dombrandt, but the Barbarians finally then clicked into gear. Charles Piutau was at the heart of it, bamboozling England’s defence with his mazy running, as Mark Atkinson, twice, and Rhodri Williams scored the tries to bring the Barbarians back into contention. When Dave Heffernan then went over at the back of a driving lineout England were staring down the barrel. Another Smith penalty restored a degree of their calm and a stunning run down the left wing from Marchant eventually led to Dombrandt’s second score which settled matters, even if Taqele Naiyaravoro had the final word in the left-hand corner. England XV Hammersley (Sheedy, 77); O’Conor, Marchant, Williams (Loader, 66), Bassett; Smith, Mitchell (White, 58); R Harrison (Obano, 56), Dunn (Taylor, 62), Painter (Hill, 52), Stooke (Spencer, 68), Beaumont (capt), Dombrandt, Curry, T Harrison (Ellis, 58). Tries Bassett, Hammersley, Smith, Dombrandt 2, Willliams. Cons Smith 6. Pens Smith 3. Barbarians Piutau; Nakosi (Adeolokun, 60), Fekitoa, Atkinson (James, 66), Naiyaravoro; Slade, Webb (Williams, 56); Marler (Schoeman, 50), Hibbard (Heffernan, 50), Afoa (Bealham, 62), Horwill (capt), Vui, Luatua, Louw (Isa, 58), Mata (Messam, 53). Tries Horwill, Louw, Atkinson 2, Williams, Heffernan, Naiyaravoro. Cons Slade 3, James. Referee Nigel Owens (Wal) Attendance 40,230