We at the Booker Prize Foundation were very pleased to read your view that the more literary prizes there are, the merrier (Editorial, 7 June). We’ve always said the Booker prize is as much for readers as it is for writers, and readers are best served by a variety of ways in which to discover books they might love. But I feel compelled to correct a misconception. There are clearly those who feel, as your editorial suggests, that the prize has lost some of its original character by opening up to the world. But that is very different from a loss of prestige. Without wishing to dwell on the obvious comparison to Brexit, the British empire also lost some of its distinctiveness once upon a time, and indeed the world lost its formerly flat character when it was discovered to be round. A variety of opinions about inclusion is welcome – there are knock-on effects to be discussed, and they are being discussed – but it’s shortsighted to fuse progress with “slipping down the cultural pecking order”. We don’t believe in a prize that excludes authors on the basis of their passports any more than we would exclude them based on the colour of their skin. After Tayari Jones won the Women’s prize last week, she emphasised how pleased she was to be awarded a prize “on the international stage”, and noted that “so often, American literature is critiqued for being too insular”. Well, American fiction isn’t necessarily insular but American prizes certainly are. We don’t have to stoop to that. Without borders, literature means something more.Gaby WoodLiterary director, Booker Prize Foundation • Your editorial on the plethora of book prizes starting to eclipse the Booker was useful, particularly in its praise for the Women’s prize for fiction. Might I mention two other prizes? The first is the Bread and Roses Award for Radical Publishing, whose winner will be announced on Tuesday night, and its more recent offspring The Little Rebels Children’s Award which concludes in July. Neither of these prizes offer life-changing sums for the winners, but both share the view that books can change the world for the better as do the authors whose books grace our shortlists and longlists. Both awards were set up by the Alliance of Radical Booksellers to encourage the publication of good radical books for adults and children.Ross BradshawFive Leaves Bookshop, Nottingham • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition