It is 15 years since the Almeida staged Festen, based on Thomas Vinterberg’s film about family trauma and child abuse. I have never forgotten its gloom and glimmer, its slow disclosure and psychological stranglehold. Now the theatre revisits that territory. David Farr has adapted Vinterberg’s and Tobias Lindholm’s 2012 film The Hunt (Jagten), in which a school teacher is wrongly accused of sexually abusing a young girl. In Rupert Goold’s staging the result is electric. You can tell The Hunt will carry conviction from the moment Michele Austin, lights still up, welcomes the audience to her infant school. Her bustling geniality is so authentic that she might be part of the Almeida backstage team. You can see immediately some of the play’s shifting moods, the disturbing preoccupations in Es Devlin’s magnificent design. A dinky little house – simple as a child’s drawing or a garden shed – is perched on a revolve. In darkness it is impenetrable: this is a play about secrets that continually questions whether we can ever know each other. When irradiated with Neil Austin’s lighting (sometimes unsparingly white, sometimes murky), it becomes transparent and rapidly changing: it is a place of wistful innocence, where a small girl perches alone; an angry box in which the members of a hunting lodge roar and stamp; a claustrophobic container for a village; a display case for wounded creatures. Adam Cork’s sound design is threaded through the action, like an echo of anxiety. Even Coward’s most languid lines ring out: you are hit by the drilling intelligence behind the drawl There is a strong tradition of plays about false (or possibly false) accusations brought by children against figures in authority – and the destruction they bring. Lillian Hellman’s The Children’s Hour is also set in a school; Arthur Miller’s The Crucible has always drawn strength from being considered a picture of McCarthyism. Timing gives The Hunt a particular skewering interest. Staged when we have been retraining ourselves to hear the previously disregarded voices of children and women bullied by men in power, the play twists the expectations and sympathy of spectators. It is rare to see child performers of such natural assurance as – on press night – George Nearn Stuart and Taya Tower: he wild and open, she contained and secretive. They encapsulate the two extremes of temperament in the play – and the damage wrought by their parents. Poppy Miller is particularly distressing as a distracted, wilful mother. And in the central role – of a man who has imprinted on his spirit his own father’s love of a solitary life spent on Arctic ships – Tobias Menzies is extraordinary: clenched, calm and unknowable. So what is the transporting feature of Matthew Warchus’s gleaming, bound-for-success production of Present Laughter? The obvious answer is Andrew Scott, proving his wonderful elasticity as an actor. Think of his Hamlet, convulsed with emotion, and of his fugitive performance in The Dazzle – quite apart from his Sherlock-ing and his unholy success in Fleabag. Look at him in the part that Noël Coward wrote for himself: the adored and flattered matinee idol Garry Essendine, doyen of the dressing gown. Essendine may be all posture and persiflage, but he also delivers a kind of truth. His whole point is overdoing it – “Where would you be,” he asks his friends and hangers-on, “if I didn’t show off?” Scott shows off superbly: his arms sweep widely; he swoops on a bon mot like a bird of prey; he spins on the spot. He is also delicate: brushing his forehead at the dread thought of a future toupe. There is more, though, to this triumph than great Scott. By a clever tweaking of gender in one of the satellite couples, Essendine becomes evidently a lover of men. The play gains in feeling as a consequence, with the ripple of an extra secret. You would think that few stage embraces would be surprising these days, but when Essendine clinches with a male visitor (the two of them struggling out of evening wear in a kind of dance) a woman in the audience gasped loudly. Warchus should employ her to exclaim at each performance – she added to the drama. The sourness, or melancholy, of the ending – in which tradition is turned on its head as Essendine pleads with the wife from whom he is separated not to return to him – is underlined, as the couple sit apart in the sinking light. Coward’s original title was “Sweet Sorrow”. There is another winner too: Coward. Even his most languid lines – “There’s something awfully sad about happiness” – ring out: you are hit by the drilling intelligence behind the drawl. Scott delivers, with precision and force, a terrific anti-Sturm und Drang speech about people ensnared in romantic lies. Warchus’s production lets all this breathe, while also neatly emphasising the French farce element – with awkward stopovers continually threatening to burst out behind closed doors. There are a few exclamation marks too many. Rob Howell’s blazingly royal blue set, with its amazed diagonals, over-clobbers the art deco. But Indira Varma beautifully relishes her nonchalant contempt; Sophie Thompson is a vocal escalator, going from squeaking to husky contralto in a comic sentence. Luke Thallon is terrifyingly springy as an avid avant garde dramatist. Present Laughter looks like future West End. Ivo van Hove has adapted four of Luchino Visconti’s screenplays for the stage. His Comédie Française production of The Damned, full of panache and of rhetoric, looks less like a reimagining than a defiance of the odds. I was always aware – as I wasn’t in Goold’s staging of The Hunt – of a director bouncing off a movie. The story of a factory-owning family in 1930s Germany who are variously converted to and destroyed by Nazism is rendered in a series of arresting images but with little momentum. Naked chaps slide erotically through soapy water. Buckets of blood are flung over bodies. Black-and-white documentary film – of the burning of the Reichstag, of munitions factories, of the faces of men and women in Dachau – runs in the background; at one side of the stage a rank of coffins are gradually filled by the cast. The most truly memorable moment shows a woman tarred and feathered going to her wedding, looking like a gull plucked from an oil-choked ocean. Patrolling cameras – a regular Van Hove device – bring fragments of activity into closeup. Every now and then there is a turning of the tables as the cameras scan the audience, implicating us in the action. They do so most obviously when we are instructed that we need to observe and must never forget. Absolutely right of course, but the parallel looks confected here. Star ratings (out of five)The Hunt ★★★★★Present Laughter ★★★★The Damned ★★ The Hunt is at the Almeida, London, until 3 August Present Laughter is at the Old Vic, London, until 10 August