They sit in a field, no drinks on the table, loved up as never before – or so we are to believe. We are expected to call them Boris and Carrie, as though they are people we might know or even like. How much can we be played? All that plays in my head is Grace Jones snarling Chrissie Hynde’s superb lines: “Your sentimental gestures only bore me to death / You’ve made a desperate appeal now save your breath / Attachment to obligation through guilt and regret / Shit that’s so wet. Your private life drama, baby leave me out.” When it comes to our politicians, what should be public and what off-limits? This time the snoopers seem to have been invited in. The last lot of snoopers, who alerted the police to a late-night row, were obviously part of the provisional wing of the Camberwell bourgeoisie. Are people who worry about their neighbours dangerous – even if it turns out their fears are unfounded? Who would intervene if they suspected a potential “domestic”? Well me, for one. Johnson has lived his life the way he has wanted to and if it was in open and consensual relationships, that’s cool. But not much in Johnson’s life is very open right now and I don’t need to rehearse his history here. Others who know him much better than I do have done that. I just don’t forget the time I was with one of his exes, who had twice been pregnant by him, and he ignored her in public (someone more important was there). Nonetheless, this is a private matter. We can go too far perhaps in expecting politicians to be paragons of virtue. What next, “mandatory urine tests”, as Christopher Hitchens once suggested? Perish the thought. We could always be more French about politicians’ private lives. Jacques Chirac and François Mitterrand both had mistresses. We could be merely resigned, as Hillary Clinton was when she said of her husband: “He is a hard dog to keep on the porch.” Women who were considered trash were thrown under a bus. We could say that nothing that happens outside a parliamentary setting is anyone’s goddamned business, and just accept the protection this attitude affords powerful men. If the Tory wannabe PMs had not paraded evidence of their heterosexuality – as if their wives were simply stylish food processors in catalogue kitchens – none of their personal lives would matter. Indeed, Tory “morality” was once clearer on this. Under Margaret Thatcher a man – Cecil Parkinson – might have lost his job after impregnating his secretary, but what came across most strongly was the Tories’ imperious attitude towards single mothers. The real issue is not the chaos of Johnson’s private life but its parallels with the chaos of his public pronouncements, his seeming abandonment of the need to debate, have policies or tell the truth. How can it be that he is afraid of that permanently startled-looking middle manager Jeremy Hunt? Still, Johnson seems to think he will get what he wants, because he wants it. This toddler-like emotional development, applauded as self-belief, masquerades now as rapacious masculinity or strong and stable male genius. Does it actually matter how men treat women in their personal lives? You know what, it does. Hunt floats limiting abortion, Johnson betrays as he breathes. His obsequious lieutenants boast of his charisma, but are unable to answer the simple question of how many children he has. Meanwhile, he shifts in his chair. I don’t get to vote for him; I’m not a Tory member. And I don’t think infidelity is a crime. But rolling back the rights of women is. The separation between private and public is dubious. This man-baby is not fit to lead this country. He trashes everything he touches, from sofas to budgets, but he will have his day. And so will all these dissolute cowards who blabber on about wars and traditions they disrespect daily. Your public life dramas – baby leave me out. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist