Adam Thorpe is a longsighted poet, at home with the ancient and the modern, and with an extraordinary field of vision. In this first-class collection – which repays rereading – he turns a searchlight back to the ice age (in Bolzano, Italy) and to ancient Rome (where he walks in the shoes of Suetonius) and looks back, too, at the English language. In Lingua Franca, he relishes Anglo-Saxon roots – language as a vehicle for history: “The frost and fog of Danelaw, its oafs and their knives / staggered from; the Saxon hog snuffling in its barn, / dung-daggled, furrowing through acorns / in the winter wood. And ice, yonder.” He reminds us that contemporary speech is made up of souvenirs: “Every time we open our mouths / it rushes out in a skein of colour: / entwined ghosts.” He describes himself as a ‘blithe scrivener” but must intend this ironically, for his poems are undeceived and sometimes bleak, even though pepped up by his wry wit. If the English language is blighted as “slaughterers pound up the sand”, the English countryside is being similarly blasted, its meadows “silenced of their quivering lyra, / the tiny throats bunged with whiffs / of cancer and formaldehyde.” Nature is victim to a “chemical sacerdotage”. (sacerdotage is, I guess, his coinage – the “dotage” appropriate in context). In Stuff – a gloriously sympathetic poem – he teaches his French students [Thorpe lives in France] the multitasking meaning of “stuff” before taking off on a wonderful riff about the word that ends with the dream of a stuff-free life: …I would like a hutof bamboo with nothing insidesave a hearth, some hens, the breezeblowing through. Thatwould be enough. A cooking pot.And the only stuff on the shelvesa heap of corn cobs,drying in the smoke. Equally sympathetic is Unperson, about meeting a retired (and, naturally, nameless) Radio 3 announcer who has been sacked. It is a charming portrait of a fellow with the “build of a stork” met on a walk – an “organised hike”. Thorpe strides lightly through the poem, describing his memories of listening to Radio 3, in supportive homage to his walking companion: The long, serious silence of Cage.I tell him how I miss his voice, evenafter all these years: lying in bedor cross-ankled in front of the grate,struggling with an essay or a poem.Spreading toast. Doing nothing. Lifein England, before everything wentfor hire or askew. Toast may get a brief mention but it is ice that is Thorpe’s favoured element and that makes multiple appearances in this collection. But how long can anything be put on ice – including poetry itself? He considers mortality in outlandish forms: a cat’s undisturbed skeleton in a London church (Unburied), the uncanny remains of an ice man (Fit for Purpose), the abandoned corpse of a whale in Iceland (Beached). And there is a moving poem (Hoping) about his mother’s last days, in which he casts her as Hamm and Clov from Beckett’s Endgame. It is a poem that demonstrates how much can be achieved by not overdoing it: the nailfile does so much of the work. Sometimes Thorpe’s vocabulary can detain you (he is to language what a botanist is to flowers). Reading The Alarm, I had to look up gryke (fissure between blocks of limestone), vambrace (piece of armour for the forearm) and plackart (I’m still not sure what it means). It is encouragingly clear that language will not dwindle on Adam Thorpe’s watch. But what will survive of us – if his poems are to be believed – is nothing as consoling as love. • Words from the Wall by Adam Thorpe is published by Jonathan Cape (£10). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99 Hoping the end will be swift, not as slowas my mother’s, say, who joked almost to the end; broken neck in a bracefor months, blind, trapped in Basingstoke’s sore hell of a hospital, the patient careminimal, the tea always cold. Her face was Hamm’s behind the shades, but her jokeswere Clov’s: ‘Things are livening up…’ ‘What on earth is there to keep me here?’A whisky soda on ice was what she craved, and last of all not love but a combof her hair, ‘when push comes to shove’, and her metal nail-file that she laidin her palm like a lifeline, gazing down on it for nearly an hour.