Shares in Majestic Wine jumped after a report that the US hedge fund Elliott Advisors has put in a bid to buy the British retailer’s 200 stores. The move would represent the latest bet on the fortunes of bricks-and-mortar retail from Elliott, after it last week bought the US bookshop chain Barnes & Noble, which will be run alongside Waterstones, the British books chain it bought in April 2018. Majestic is considering selling all of its outlets as part of a radical shakeup of the business under its chief executive, Rowan Gormley, who is aiming to free up cash to pump into online operations under the fast-growing Naked Wines brand. Majestic Wine plc plans to eventually rebrand as Naked – although it is unclear if the Majestic brand would be retained if the stores were sold. In April it emerged that Majestic had appointed Rothschild & Co, the investment bank, to work on options for a sale of part of the business, with an update due to be announced on Thursday. This year Gormley warned of the likelihood of store closures as part of the plans. Shares in Majestic Wine rose by 9.3% on Wednesday after Sky News reported Elliott’s interest, as the winemaker aims for a price tag of as much as £100m for the stores. Elliott would join the British private equity firm OpCapita and Fortress Investment Group, which is owned by Japan’s SoftBank, among the possible bidders for Majestic’s stores. Gormley founded Naked Wines in 2008. The online wine retailer was bought by Majestic in 2015 in a £70m deal. Gormley took over as Majestic’s chief executive as part of the acquisition, and he has since steadily increased the emphasis on the Naked brand. Since its acquisition by Majestic, Naked has more than doubled in size, with the company previously guiding that sales from the division were expected to exceed £175m in the year ending in April. The company has said it has particular growth potential in the US, while it also has operations in Australia. However, the Majestic Wine retail arm continues to account for the majority of revenues for the parent company. Majestic’s retail network made sales of £263.8m in the year to April 2018. As well as the retail outlets, Majestic supplies other businesses, and owns the Lay & Wheeler online fine wines brand. Gormley has previously said: “A transformed Majestic business does have the potential to be a long-term winner” but that “we risk not maximising the potential of Naked if we try to do both”. The retail industry is suffering from unprecedented pressure from the move to online shopping, while British consumer spending has also been weighed down by slow wage growth and Brexit uncertainty. House of Fraser, John Lewis and Poundworld are among the many British retailers which have cut back their store networks or collapsed in the last year. Yet Elliott, which managed $34bn (£27bn) in assets at the start of 2019, has staked millions on the continued success of high street stalwarts in the UK and US. Elliott’s swoop last week for Barnes & Noble, in a deal worth $683m, took retail industry observers by surprise. Elliott has installed Richard Daunt, the Waterstones chief executive, to head both chains on either side of the Atlantic. The two chains will be operated separately. Under Elliott’s ownership Waterstones had already bought Foyles, a previously independent British rival, in another surprise deal in September. A spokeswoman for Majestic Wine declined to comment. Elliott Advisors did not respond to a request for comment.