Another online forum is unraveling over political speech. The knitting community – traditionally viewed as a wholesome, screen-free, apolitical hobby – is entangled in a broader debate about racism and social justice. Ravelry, a prominent online knitting and crocheting platform,banned pro-Trump messaging on its site on Sunday, following a controversy over one user’s craft projects sporting pro-Trump rhetoric including “build the wall” and “Make America Great Again”. But the change on Ravelry is just the latest development in an ongoing conversation about diversity in the knitting community, which came to a head this year with the hashtag #WeKnitToo. Following a culturally insensitive post by one knitting devotee, some people of color created a campaign to showcase their work and increase visibility. Tian Connaughton, a black crochet and knitwear designer who has been on Ravelry since February 2008, said the lack of diversity in the crafting community has long been an issue and is only recently being made more public through these campaigns. Fellow non-white knitters shared stories of facing racism in yarn stores and at fiber festivals and events. “There were stories being shared of the hateful patterns and comments in groups we’re subjected to when all we want to do is take part in and enjoy our knitting and crocheting, the same as white crafters,” Connaughton said. Jamie, a user who asked her last name be withheld to avoid further abuse from people on the site, said she was one of the users who pushed Ravelry to address the problem. “Historically, knitting, like any art, has always been political,” she said. “These problems are not new, but I cannot deny that this presidency and the era we are in now has emboldened people to share hateful views.” Leesa Renee Hall, a writer whose work centers on unpacking unconscious biases, said she has followed the ongoing discussion in the knitting world in recent months, which she called a “racial awakening” not limited to the Ravelry platform. Major companies such as Reddit, YouTube and Facebook have been struggling to police outright racist and racially biased language on platforms in recent years. “The problem with this kind of response is that the issue will undoubtedly pop up again,” she said. “In its attempt to do the right thing, Ravelry is going to create more chaos. In their attempt to jump into action immediately, they don’t work on the underlying biases at hand.” Some knitters opposed to Sunday’s ban have started the hashtag “#MakeKnittingFunAgain” in response to what they see as an overpoliticization of the fibers space. Andy, a Mexican and Venezuelan member of the knitting community, who asked to be identified by first name only due to fear of backlash from the community, said that the change is a welcome one but only a small step in the larger battle of addressing hate speech online. “The phrase ‘I just want to go back to knitting’ is very common, but a lot of us don’t have the luxury of separating what some people call politics from their identity,” Andy said. “A lot of us would like to just enjoy our hobbies without thinking about these things, but that isn’t the world we live in.”