When Luchino Visconti’s movie, The Damned, opened in 1969 it was described as “the Krupp family history as Verdi might have envisaged it.” If Visconti’s film was operatic, Ivo van Hove’s stage version is cinematic: live action is projected on to an upstage screen which also shows documentary footage from 1930s Germany. Played in surtitled French by Comédie Française – making their first visit to Britain in almost 20 years – the result is as thrilling as Van Hove’s National Theatre production of Network. The story traces the rise of the Third Reich through the eyes of a doomed steelmaking dynasty, the von Essenbecks. But Van Hove’s version strikes me as sharper and clearer than Visconti’s in establishing the links between familial decay and Nazi murderousness. While cinematic, it also uses all the properties of theatre. Each death in the dynasty is punctuated by a blast on an industrial whistle and a solemn burial of the body in a line of onstage coffins. A camera even gives us an unnerving corpse-eye-view of entombment. The house lights are then turned up and a camera is trained on the audience as if to suggest the hideous past is capable of re-enactment in the present. The production is filled with startling set pieces. The most chilling shows Martin, heir to the von Essenbeck complex and superbly played by Christophe Montenez, engaging in dangerous games with a young girl. The magnetic Elsa Lepoivre as Martin’s mother stalks the family home like Lady Macbeth and deploys her sexuality as a weapon both with her lover, played with insatiate power-hunger by Guillaume Gallienne, and the family’s Nazi cousin, invested by Éric Génovèse with a cold-eyed calculation. In a famous echo of history we also see Denis Podalydès as Konstantin, the supplanted inheritor of the factories, joining the Brownshirts in a beer-swilling bacchanal only to be mown down by Hitler’s SS. One particular moment, in which the camera tracks Martin’s mother through the labyrinthine Barbican, provokes laughter. Otherwise, this is a riveting spectacle acted by a great ensemble that – aided by Jan Versweyveld’s design, Tal Yarden’s video and Eric Sleichim’s sound – shows a family inexorably destroyed by its complicity with a world-shaking tyranny. • At the Barbican, London, until 25 June.