The suspense is over. A full six years after Royal Bank of Scotland was accused of gouging thousands of distressed small-business customers, we can finally read the Financial Conduct Authority’s definitive account of a shameful chapter for UK banking. Or, since we all already knew the FCA’s independent investigator had found “systematic and widespread” misconduct at GRG, RBS’s restructuring unit, we can learn something more important. Who was to blame? Who will be held to account? Who will find their career in financial services ended by our fearless regulator? The answer is … nobody. In a 78-page report, the FCA did not identify a single individual. Instead, the document was an extended bleat about the inadequacy of the regulatory tools, circa 2008-13, and an exercise in finding reasons not to name executives. This passage gives a flavour: “When we use the term ‘senior management’ in this report it should not be interpreted as referring to a defined set of individuals.” The FCA, it should be said, has a point about the hole in the regulatory system at the time. Commercial lending was not a regulated activity (and still isn’t), even when the business customers are so small that they are more akin to retail clients. And it was only in 2016 that the Senior Managers Regime, which pins specific responsibilities on individual executives at banks, was introduced. If the FCA could not find evidence of outright dishonesty by individuals at RBS or GRG – and it swears it couldn’t – its enforcement powers were limited under the old set-up. Yet the victims of GRG deserved more than an elaborate drawing of the veil and another invitation to claim compensation. The mistreatment was systematic, says the report, because it resulted from the failure “to put in place the appropriate governance and oversight” to manage conflicts between the bank’s interests and those of its customers. But, come on, installing governance safety valves must have been somebody’s job, or at least been a shared responsibility of the board. The entire RBS crew can’t all have been Macavity, the mystery cat. For outsiders, the most alarming part is this: the FCA won’t even say if it could have pursued RBS senior managers if its post-2016 powers had been in place. “This would involve applying a new regime to a historic set of facts and it would not be appropriate for us to make a hypothetical judgement,” explains the report. Not appropriate? Are we supposed just to hope or trust that the FCA will be able to nail somebody in the next GRG-style debacle? It seems we are. Here comes Nelson Peltz, a name to strike fear in boardrooms. The veteran US activist investor has taken pops at PepsiCo and Procter & Gamble in the recent past and now he’s alighted on Ferguson, the FTSE 100 supplier of heating and plumbing equipment formerly known as Wolseley. Peltz’s funds have bought a 6% stake, worth about £730m, and want some action. The specific grumble, it seems, is that Ferguson’s shares are less highly rated than those of US peers. City analysts agree with the analysis - they put the discount at 25%-30%, more than you would expect, given that about four-fifths of Ferguson’s business is in the US. But what’s the remedy? If Peltz wants Ferguson to abandon its London listing and move to New York, that’s not easy. As Unilever discovered, those UK funds that are only allowed to hold UK stocks tend to cling to what they’ve got. A relisting proposal requires a 75% majority, a high hurdle. Indeed, UK investors may conclude that they’ve now got the best of both worlds – a London-listed stock plus a famous US investor broadcasting his view that the shares are too cheap. The best course: let Peltz shout and see if the shares rerate. They improved 6% on Thursday, which is a start. For proper shouting, there’s Sir Philip Green. “These people writing all this shit couldn’t spell 50 quid,” he told the BBC. “They all get jealous. The fact that someone can actually write out a cheque and writes one out, people don’t like it.” For the record, Sir Phil, we did like the £363m for the BHS pension fund. But will you also fully fund pensions at Arcadia beyond this week’s pledges, even if your high hopes for reviving the business don’t work out? Frank Field MP has requested a personal binding assurance and, as far as one can tell, he’s still waiting to see it.