Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has suspended indefinitely efforts to pass a controversial new extradition law, after a week of mass protests and street violence put heavy pressure on the city’s leaders. But in a defensive press conference, the chief executive insisted her only errors were of communication, defending the much-criticised bill as vital to Hong Kong’s security and promising to relaunch an improved version after further consultation. Speaking out after three days of silence, and on the eve of another major protest march called for Sunday, Lam repeatedly described herself as “heartbroken” and admitted that the bill had “caused a lot of division” in Hong Kong. She denied that the abrupt reversal – reportedly made after meeting one of China’s most powerful leaders on Friday – was aimed at warding off further chaos, after hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets to oppose the law. “The decision I made is not about pacifying people or, as some have said, restoring my damaged reputation,” Lam said, repeatedly brushing off questions about whether she planned to resign. Hong Kong was plunged into crisis by government attempts to ram the law through the territory’s legislature. Hundreds of thousands of protesters thronged the city’s streets this week to oppose it, with police brutality and government intransigence adding to public outrage. Opponents say it would fatally undermine Hong Kong’s economy and way of life by allowing both residents and visitors to be sent to China for trial in opaque courts controlled by the Communist party. There was also intense international scrutiny, with the US presidential hopeful Joe Biden the latest figure to weigh in on the showdown, praising protesters and warning officials that the “world is watching”. The extraordinary bravery shown by hundreds of thousands in Hong Kong, marching for the civil liberties & autonomy promised by China is inspiring. And the world is watching. All of us must stand in support of democratic principles and freedom. On Wednesday evening, after the worst clashes in the streets, Lam had doubled down in defence of the extradition bill and criticised protesters who had endured a day of teargas, rubber bullets and police beatings as “spoiled children”. But on Saturday she said she had acted to stop violence escalating. “This is time to restore as quickly as possible calmness in society,” she said. “After the confrontation I saw on Wednesday, if it occurs again there will be more serious [injuries].” She played down the size of demonstrations against the law, and repeatedly defended police use of force, describing the use of batons, teargas and rubber bullets as defensive. But opposition leaders are worried that the shift is a tactical retreat, aimed at buying time to intimidate or demoralise opponents. There have already been reports of arrests of people in hospitals as they sought treatment, and of digital activists. “I think the government is trying to defuse the movement,” said Baggio Leung, an activist and politician who was barred from taking up a seat in the legislature after holding up a sign saying “Hong Kong is not a part of China”. He added that the protest on Sunday would go ahead, and the movement would continue until the extradition law was permanently taken off the table, but he was worried about the chilling effect of mass prosecutions. “We are calling for no extradition bill and no prosecution,” he said. “We fear they will prosecute a lot of protesters, maybe even a few hundred, to try and scare the people.” With the legislature due to go on summer recess in July, any attempt to take up the legislative process again will not be until autumn at the earliest. “[Lam] is buying time for herself and her pro-Beijing pals,” said Kenneth Chan, a professor in the department of government at Hong Kong Baptist University. “The plan aims to reduce turnout at the protest, so the government can wait for a more propitious moment to try again, perhaps after local elections in November, when students will be back at school,” Chan added. Lam and officials in Beijing appear to have decided the political cost of temporary retreat will be less than that of further confrontation. Lam met one of China’s most senior politicians, Han Zheng, in the Chinese border city of Shenzhen on Friday night to discuss the situation, the pro-Beijing Sing Tao reported. Zheng is the central government’s point man on Hong Kong, a vice-premier and one of just seven members of the elite politburo standing committee. Some Hong Kong tycoons have already started moving assets abroad, Reuters reported on Friday, amid concern about the extradition law. It cited financial advisers, bankers and lawyers familiar with the transactions.