It is not that long since pocket money was a handful of loose change handed over on a Saturday morning before being spent at great speed in the corner shop on a selection of luminous sweets. Now, it is increasingly possible that a child’s weekly budget will be handled via a smartphone and purchases made with a tap, instead of coins. Pocket money app RoosterMoney has become the latest player to release a prepaid card for kids, which works by parents loading it with money which children can then spend in shops, on the internet or by withdrawing cash at ATMs. Like other similar cards, the spending can be monitored via smartphone, and safeguards are in place to restrict buying anything inappropriate. Parents can switch the card “off” if necessary and there is no risk of going into debt, as it is prepaid. It is not a surprising development in a society where cash is increasingly coming second to cards as the preferred method of payment for many people. But with children as young as six being targeted by the new way of paying, should parents start their child on plastic? RoosterMoney’s prepaid Visa card operates in a similar way to many of its competitors via an app, with parents, family and friends able to put money on it. The money is divided into various “pots”, according to chief executive Will Carmichael, and whatever is in the “spend” pot can be paid out on the internet, in shops or by withdrawals at ATMs, depending on the parameters parents set. Upper limits on how much can be spent can also be set, and the card can be frozen if necessary. Merchants selling items considered inappropriate for children – such as alcohol, cigarettes, fuel and plane tickets – are blocked and receipts are sent when a purchase is made. Parents will pay a monthly subscription for the card, the amount of which has not yet been set. In a similar vein is nimbl, an app and prepaid card that has been on the market for a few years. Here too parents transfer money to their children’s cards and can invite family to send gifts. Limits on spending are also possible, and gambling sites, casinos, off-licences and pubs are off limits. The monthly fee is £2.49. The Osper prepaid card, backed by TV personality Davina McCall, costs £2.50 a month and works in a similar way. The company says that it is nothing like a credit card in that once the cash is spent, it is gone. The goHenry card, meanwhile, costs £2.99 a month and lets users set savings goals and other features similar to its competitors. It is available for children from age six, the same as the Rooster card, while Osper and nimbl are for children aged eight upwards. Many parents would balk at the idea of giving a child a prepaid card. Indeed, some commentators have questioned whether children that young are able to grasp the mental arithmetic involved in buying when using physical coins and notes, let alone cards. Others see them as an important progression in teaching about money and helping children to avoid debt in later life. “There’s an assumption that kids today are all spoilt and indulged. Actually, child poverty is shockingly widespread. So, helping all children with money, and those who don’t have any, has to be a priority if new generations are to escape the debt trap,” says Martyn James of complaints website Resolver. Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk, says some six-year-olds will be comfortable with using them, while others will need more time. Research has found that differences in self-control can be discernible from as young as four. “This is something parents must reflect on for each child - in particular for children that are naturally more impulsive, six might be too young,” he says. RoosterMoney’s Will Carmichael says that there has been demand for the card from age six but that it is up to parents to decide when the right time is for their child to get a card. Before signing up for a card, a sustained discussion about money is necessary between parent and child. StepChange, the debt charity, says that over two-thirds of the people that come for help are in credit card debt. As a result, it is important to be clear about the message that is sent to children about any sort of card usage, however well-intentioned the aim may be, or how well-monitored the card is, according to spokeswoman Sue Anderson. “To children, these ‘learner’ debt cards may feel like play, yet the money and the spending that sits behind them is real,” she says. “The challenge for parents is to make sure that they consciously use these kinds of tools to help build and nurture their children’s budgeting and money management skills, rather than helping their children develop an early taste for retail therapy.” The Money and Pensions Service, which gives financial guidance, says children begin to learn about money from age three. “Our research has shown a strong link between children receiving regular money, including pocket money, and better financial habits,” says senior policy manager Ann Griffiths. “There are many other simple things parents can do, such as involving children in food shopping choices, discussing choices and responsibilities like paying bills, and showing children money tasks like checking a bank balance.” With debit cards, especially when used for contactless payments, the act of buying something can become less noticeable and “less emotionally painful”, according to Davies – for adults and children. Reflection is therefore vital. “I think it is very important for parents to ensure that spending is only permitted when the child is fully aware of the amount, and after due reflection that this is what they want to purchase. Such cards will make this more difficult, so parental monitoring is crucial,” he says, adding that slowing down impulsive behaviour, and helping to reflect on purchases, would help children spend better. “Functionality to require kids to acknowledge the amount, confirm that they really want to spend this now, and perhaps offer clear examples of what the money could purchase as an alternative, might all slow down impulsive decisions. “We could also consider functionality that requires children to ‘release’ money for larger purchases some hours before actually buying, ensuring that bigger items are not bought on immediate impulse. “As a general rule for parents – independent of the debit card question – the more you can ensure that kids have to wait some time, sleeping on it for example, before making any decision, the more likely it is that the decision will be something genuinely coveted rather than merely impulsive.” While the operators all point out the safeguards that are in place – such as stopping children buying from certain merchants – there are limits to what they can do. Nimbl says that it is not possible to stop their card from being used to buy inappropriate products at retailers such as grocery stores, saying they expect retailers to play their part and check ages. Osper says they rely on merchants correctly classifying themselves so that its blocks can apply. “For example, a pub that serves food can classify itself as a restaurant, so a young person would theoretically be able to buy alcohol there. However, as with all in-person sales of age-restricted items, the merchant has a legal responsibility to ID the person making the purchase,” it advises. Carmichael says a level of comfort can be set by the parents in relation to how responsible they feel their children are. “We make it as safe as we possibly can. Ultimately, if you are unhappy with something that your child is buying, then you at least get oversight, so you know that they have bought it, and you can say: ‘Look, that was stupid of you, you spent a lot on cars, for example, recently, let’s return this’. “That is part of the learning process – and the difference is that it is their spend pot, and once they have spent it, there is no more.” • Research suggests that children who are encouraged to talk about money and have responsibility over their own cash tend to do better with it in later life. • Giving small amounts to children can make improvements to their financial behaviour, illustrating that it is the responsibility, not the amount, that is important. • Many long-term money attitudes are set by the age of seven, so it is important to start talking to children as early as possible. Source: Money and Pensions Service