Toronto police say two people were shot as Toronto Raptors fans packed the city’s downtown to watch the team’s NBA title parade. Police said two people had sustained serious but non-life threatening injuries in the incident. They added that two people had been taken into custody, and the parade was resumed after a short delay. I’m on the roof of city hall and something is happening. People are running including what looks to be cops and security pic.twitter.com/FEbhw88OqI An estimated 1.5 million fans attended the parade to celebrate the Raptors’ victory over the Golden State Warriors last week, the first time a non-US team has won the NBA title. The parade route ended in a square outside City Hall, where police lifted those seeking safety over barricades to help them escape the crush. A child pulled over a barrier and onto a stretcher was among those evacuated. City officials prevented any further entry into the square and shut down several subway stations near the parade due to overcrowding. Toronto’s mayor, John Tory, previously urged every resident celebrate the Raptors’ championship and declared Monday “We The North Day” in Toronto, after the franchise’s slogan. Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, was scheduled to attend, as was the Ontario premier, Doug Ford. Rapper and Toronto native Drake, among the Raptors’ best-known fans, celebrated alongside the players on one of the parade buses. Nicolas Caramanna said the crowd started to get rowdy shortly after he arrived at 9am. “I’m really hot and tired, but I’m going to stick around,” he said. “When else am I going to get a chance to do this?” Many others chose to miss school or work. Fifteen-year-old Cypher Sabanal said his mother let him skip class to attend the celebration. “I actually have exams this week, but being here is worth it,” he said. John Moreira called in sick to work so he could be part of Toronto’s first celebration of this magnitude since the Toronto Blue Jays won the World Series in 1993. “I told my boss I wanted to be at the parade and he said there wasn’t much he could do if I called in sick, so that’s exactly what I did,” the 31-year-old said. “I’m looking forward to seeing the whole team. They all work so hard and deserve all the fans being out here.” The Raptors players were clearly touched by the huge turnout. “It’s been amazing,” Kawhi Leonard, who was named the NBA finals most valuable player, said. “Thank you Toronto, thank you Canada for the support, we did it.” Fans were seen carrying signs imploring Leonard to re-sign with the Raptors. The two-time Finals MVP will be a free agent this summer. Kyle Lowry, the team’s longest-serving member, hoisted the Larry O’Brien Trophy while his teammates smoked cigars. “This is unbelievable,” he said. Full page ad in today’s @StarSports section. Classy move by the Golden State Warriors. pic.twitter.com/XtkYCtDAKq The Warriors were praised after taking out a full-page advert in the Toronto Star to congratulate the Raptors on their victory.