The international cricketer Chris Gayle, who was awarded $300,000 in defamation damages, should receive more for being hurt by the way his win was reported by Fairfax Media, an appeal court has been told. In October 2017, a New South Wales supreme court jury found in favour of the West Indies batsman, who sued Fairfax (now Nine Entertainment) for defamation over articles it published which claimed he exposed himself to a female massage therapist. The four jurors found Fairfax had not established that Gayle had exposed himself to Leanne Russell in the team dressing room during a Sydney training session at the 2015 World Cup. They also found Fairfax was motivated by malice when it published the articles in the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and the Canberra Times in January 2016. In December, the trial judge, Justice Lucy McCallum, awarded Gayle $300,000, but made no extra award for aggravated damages saying he gave no evidence that the hurt and harm he suffered was increased by the malice. On Thursday, the NSW court of appeal heard a challenge by the publisher in relation to the judge’s refusal to discharge the jury, as well as a cross-claim by Gayle over his “manifestly inadequate” payout. His barrister, Kieran Smark SC, said the Herald reported the outcome of the trial with a headline saying “Fairfax considers appeal after jury ‘misled’ in Chris Gayle defamation trial”. It also reported that a Fairfax Media spokesperson said the company was “concerned with the conduct of the trial to the extent that on Friday it sought an order that the jury be discharged and a new trial ordered”. “The very organ he is suing takes the opportunity that should be his moment of vindication to have a swipe at the court and a swipe at him,” Smark said. While Gayle did not return to the witness box to give evidence about the effect on him, Smark said “the presentation would expect to increase the hurt”. Matthew Collins QC, for the media company, submitted the publisher did not receive a fair trial as there had been overwhelming grounds for McCallum to discharge the jury and order a new trial. Gayle’s then barrister, Bruce McClintock SC, had launched a “pretty full-throttled attack” on the credibility of Russell, their key witness, in the closing address to the jury. He accused her of being a liar and suggested she had fabricated her evidence in a bid a bid to get back at Gayle’s teammate Dwayne Smith, who was also in the dressing room at the time of the alleged incident. Collins said McClintock had not asked Russell during cross-examination to respond to those allegations. He referred to other objections about the closing address, saying “cumulatively” the case for discharging the jury was an overwhelming one. The appeal court reserved its decision.