It’s not totally clear when or where Nico was born. The late German singer, model and actor had a complicated relationship with the truth, even when it pertained to the details of her own life – she was most likely born in Cologne in 1938, but there’s a chance it could have been Budapest in 1943. Since her death in 1988 (after suffering a heart attack while cycling on holiday in Ibiza), Nico has been immortalised as a troubled muse. To date, her work has mainly been examined in relation to the men by whom she was surrounded – the Velvet Underground, Andy Warhol and Alain Delon. But a new immersive performance piece debuting at the Manchester International Festival, titled The Nico Project and co-created by the actor Maxine Peake and the director Sarah Frankcom, will attempt to explore the enigmatic femme fatale on her own terms. “I was just fascinated with Nico as an artist and how she portrayed herself,” Peake said in an interview with the Guardian. “How in her later years there was this juxtaposition between her being a very beautiful model and then resenting that beauty.” Peake added: “Everything is so surprising with Nico, she’s so complex and contradictory.” Nico, born Christa Päffgen, is widely known for modelling for Chanel, appearing in Federico Fellini’s La Dolce Vita and singing on the Velvet Underground’s debut album. Less well known, however, is her work as a solo musician. In 1967 she released her debut solo album, Chelsea Girl. Some of the songs on the record were co-written by the Velvet Underground’s Lou Reed, John Cale and Sterling Morrison, but Nico was growing tired of relinquishing artistic direction to men. In Dave Thompson’s book Hearts of Darkness, he writes that Nico said of the record: “The first time I heard the album, I cried. They had destroyed it.” When Peake and Frankcom talked about making a performance piece about Nico, the pair initially considered a biopic. “We decided instead it should be an exploration of her as an artist, but also what it means to be a woman and an artist,” Peake said. The Nico Project, which is described as a theatrical immersion into her sound, centres on the follow-up to Chelsea Girl – The Marble Index, which Nico wrote herself. Peake said she felt like it was the album Nico “was most connected to”. Released in 1968 to poor sales and ultimately relative obscurity, it’s a haunting and difficult avant-garde album, with abrasive vocals and the jarring sounds of a harmonium. What little critical attention it did get over the years, however, hailed it as a masterpiece. In his 1978 essay Your Shadow Is Scared of You: An Attempt Not to Be Frightened by Nico, celebrated rock critic Lester Bangs wrote: “The Marble Index is the greatest piece of ‘avant-garde classical’, ‘serious’ music of the last half of the 20th century so far.” Peake, herself a longtime fan of The Marble Index, said: “We chose to reimagine The Marble Index because that’s the album that felt like she finally got her artistic control on.” Nico had spent the best part of the 1980s living in Manchester – yet another unexpected footnote in the story of her life, and a period Peake was interested in. “Manchester, during that period of the late 70s, early 80s, had a great music scene, but it got hijacked by the men,” she said. “A lot of the women have either been overlooked, forgotten or just couldn’t get the oxygen to get through.” The team behind The Nico Project is all-female, which Peake said wasn’t intentional, but nonetheless felt right. “I could only seem to find male stories about Nico,” she said. “I found it very difficult to get a female perspective on it.” Nico’s own identity as a woman was nuanced. “She wasn’t a woman’s woman,” Peake said. “She said a few times that she wished she was a man, which came from the fact that as an artist she would have been more recognised.” To say Nico was a controversial artist is an understatement. Island Records dropped her after she made racist remarks. She would also perform the German national anthem Das Lied der Deutschen at concerts and include the verses that had been banned after 1945 for their Nazi associations. Peake said that she did not want to shy away from reimagining Nico. “We’re not agreeing with her,” she said. “We’re exploring her and where some of these views came from that she’s alleged to have had.” At the same time, Nico’s turbulent lifestyle bore the scars of addiction and loss. She lived through the second world war; her soldier father died, but it’s not certain how – either in a concentration camp or of shellshock. “She was dealing with a lot of trauma, which is maybe why the truth seems slippery with her,” Peake said. In researching Nico, Peake said she found a complicated and contradictory artist, one whose posthumous narrative has predominantly been constructed by men. “What was the truth with Nico? I don’t know if even she knew what her own truth was.” • The Nico Project is at The Stoller Hall, Hunts Bank, Manchester M3 1DA, 10-13 July and 16-21 July • The Guardian is a media partner of Manchester international festival.