Julian Assange will face a five-day US extradition hearing in February next year, a judge has ruled. The WikiLeaks founder faces an 18-count indictment, issued by the US Department of Justice, that includes charges under the Espionage Act. At Westminster magistrates court on Friday, the chief magistrate, Emma Arbuthnot, ordered that a full extradition hearing should begin on 25 February. Ben Brandon, representing the US, formally opened the case, a day after an extradition request was signed off by the home secretary, Sajid Javid. “This is related to one of the largest compromises of confidential information in the history of the United States,” Brandon told the court. As Brandon ran through a summary of the accusations against Assange, including that he had cracked a US defence network password, Assange, appearing by video link, protested: “I didn’t break any password whatsoever.” Assange, 47, who was dressed in a grey T-shirt, had a white beard and was wearing black-framed glasses, said 175 years of his life was at stake and defended his website against hacking claims, saying: “WikiLeaks is nothing but a publisher.” His lawyer, Mark Summers QC, described the case as “an outrageous and full-frontal assault on journalistic rights”.  WikiLeaks releases about 470,000 classified military documents concerning American diplomacy and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. It later releases a further tranche of more than 250,000 classified US diplomatic cables. A Swedish prosecutor issues a European arrest warrant for Assange over sexual assault allegations involving two Swedish women. Assange denies the claims. He turns himself in to police in London and is placed in custody. He is later released on bail and calls the Swedish allegations a smear campaign. A British judge rules that Assange can be extradited to Sweden. Assange fears Sweden will hand him over to US authorities who could prosecute him. He takes refuge in the Ecuadorian embassy in London. He requests, and is later granted, political asylum. Assange is questioned in a two-day interview over the allegations at the Ecuadorian embassy by Swedish authorities. WikiLeaks says Assange could travel to the United States to face investigation if his rights are 'guaranteed'. It comes after one of the site's main sources of leaked documents, Chelsea Manning, is given clemency. Swedish prosecutors say they have closed their seven-year sex assault investigation into Assange. British police say they would still arrest him if he leaves the embassy as he breached the terms of his bail in 2012. Britain refuses Ecuador's request to accord Assange diplomatic status, which would allow him to leave the embassy without being arrested. He loses a bid to have his British arrest warrant cancelled on health grounds. Ecuador cuts off Assange's internet access alleging he broke an agreement on interfering in other countries' affairs. US prosecutors inadvertently disclose the existence of a sealed indictment against Assange. Ecuador's President Lenin Moreno says Assange has 'repeatedly violated' the conditions of his asylum at the embassy. Police arrest Assange at the embassy on behalf of the US after his asylum was withdrawn. He is charged by the US with 'a federal charge of conspiracy to commit computer intrusion for agreeing to break a password to a classified U.S. government computer.' He is jailed for 50 weeks in the UK for breaching his bail conditions back in 2012. An apology letter from Assange is read out in court, but the judge rules that he had engaged in a 'deliberate attempt to evade justice'. On the following day the US extradition proceedings were formally started. Swedish prosecutors announce they are reopening an investigation into a rape allegation against Julian Assange.  Home secretary Sajid Javid reveals he has signed the US extradition order for Assange paving the way for it to be heard in court. His legal team also said he was challenging the 50-week sentence in Britain for skipping bail he is serving after he spent seven years in the Ecuadorian embassy in London attempting to avoid extradition to Sweden. Assange is accused in the US of soliciting and publishing classified information and conspiring to hack into a government computer. Outside the court, his supporters protested against the UK’s treatment of him. A crowd of around a dozen people held banners, with some chanting “Justice for Julian Assange” and “Defend freedom and democracy.”