Hanging on to a rising balloon presents you with a difficult decision: let go before it’s too late, or hold on and keep getting higher. When Harry Kane injured his ankle in the first leg of the Champions League quarter-final against Manchester City, Tottenham’s chances of ending their season in Madrid on Saturday night seemed to have narrowed to a fine point. Kane has of course been the razor edge and all-round attacking totem of Mauricio Pochettino’s team, with an entire system set up to funnel and shift around him. Yet fast forward two months and in his absence Spurs have become something else in Europe, a team built to feed on speed and counter-thrusts, given teeth by the emergence of Lucas Moura as a highly mobile false-ish No 9; and the established hyper-energetic brilliance of Son Heung-min. That rising balloon has taken Pochettino’s team to the edge of what would be the greatest night in the life of anyone associated with this club. In the meantime Kane has declared himself fit. That familiar ground is within reach, the well-grooved style of the last four seasons ready to be reinstated. How long to keep hanging on? It still seems inconceivable Kane won’t play at some point on Saturday night, the question is whether he will start. This is a complex, nuanced decision, one that revolves around tactics but also personalities. Kane’s absence would leave an imprint on both teams. Most obviously it would leave Liverpool with the only real goalscoring A-lister in either XI. Mo v Harry, Kane v Salah: it is tempting always to see these grand occasions in such binary terms, to style any final as a shootout between the capocannoniere. Never mind that this is so rarely the case. Cristiano Ronaldo is the only man in the last decade to finish as a league top scorer and also score in the Champions League final (twice: one of those an ab-rippling last ditch penalty in a 4-1 win.) Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang shared the Golden Boot with Salah and Sadio Mané in the Premier League this year but between them, Kane and Salah have 101 goals in the last two Premier League seasons and four top-scorer awards out of four including the one just gone. Fine details, a first goal, an edge in finishing: this is often what decides a final. With Kane the decision to play or not to play is about more than just fitness. He is a strange footballer in many ways. A late starter at this level, Kane also feels at times as though he’s rushing towards his own endgame. It has been five seasons now of boom and busted ankles. The physical demands, the sheer will required to bulk up, to increase his speed: this all takes its toll. Each time the return from injury seems to be selflessly speedy. And a rusty Kane does affect the way Tottenham play. When he’s happy with his movement Kane can run in behind a defence. But the team is diminished by a lack of speed at the point of the attack, the way defences can push up and shut down the spaces in which Christian Eriksen likes to ferret about. The fear is that with Kane feeling his way back Liverpool’s three-man midfield will find their own defence pushing closer, giving oxygen to their own pressing game, freedom to spoil and create further upfield. It seems likely Virgil van Dijk would prefer a wrestle with his back to goal to the unusual angles of Lucas’s running, or Son’s pure, uncut speed in possession. The ultimate decision on who starts will perhaps be more about emotion. Pochettino has spoken about the way finals can run on feeling rather than planning and detail. Bringing back Kane requires a change of pattern, a few bumps and sparks as the wheels adjust. But it brings also a sense of certainty, of being unafraid to show your full hand and follow the game where it leads. The emotional power of Kane in the XI, of Kane in the tunnel, of Kane stepping up to take a penalty: Pochettino knows the energy this can spread through his team. As for Salah, there is simply a sense of unfinished business. Those who know him best say Liverpool’s top scorer has more sense of his own sporting destiny than might seem the case from his agreeable public demeanour. Last season’s dead-end of a final did hurt. Neither Kane nor Salah have ever won a major trophy. Salah has lost finals with Basel, Liverpool and Egypt. Kane has played in a losing League Cup final with Spurs. Both are yet to apply that sniper’s eye to the kind of occasion that defines a career, those days where the winners get to jump and down on a lighted box, caught forever in the moment. Both will surely play, one from memory, the other against the memory of last summer. The numbers, the history, the sense of gathering destiny suggest one of them may just have the final say.