“Foreign forces” are trying to hurt China by creating chaos in Hong Kong over an extradition bill that has prompted mass protests in the former British colony, an official Chinese newspaper has claimed. Riot police surrounded Hong Kong’s parliament early on Monday after what had been a peaceful rally attended by an estimated one million people descended into running clashes between police and protesters. Hundreds of thousands had jammed Hong Kong’s streets earlier on Sunday to protest against the bill in the biggest demonstration in years. Critics say the proposed law would allow mainland China to pursue its political opponents in the city, which has traditionally been a haven from the Communist party. After seven hours of marching, organisers estimated that more than one million people had taken part, far outstripping a demonstration in 2003 when half that number successfully challenged government plans for tighter national security laws. A police spokesman said they estimated that 240,000 were on the march at its peak. In an editorial on Monday the China Daily defended the legislation. “Any fair-minded person would deem the amendment bill a legitimate, sensible and reasonable piece of legislation that would strengthen Hong Kong’s rule of law and deliver justice,” it said. “Unfortunately, some Hong Kong residents have been hoodwinked by the opposition camp and their foreign allies into supporting the anti-extradition campaign.” The publication claimed that some protesters had been misled about the proposed changes, while others were trying to promote a political agenda. “Some foreign forces are seizing the opportunity to advance their own strategy to hurt China by trying to create havoc in Hong Kong,” the China Daily said. It did not say who those foreign forces might be. Another Chinese newspaper, the Global Times tabloid, said on Monday Hong Kong opposition groups and their international supporters were “politically hyping up” normal Hong Kong legislative activity. “The Hong Kong SAR government and mainstream public opinion have worked hard for rule of law and righteousness, and will absolutely not give up halfway,” the paper said in an editorial. The extradition bill creates a system for case-by-case fugitive transfers between semi-autonomous Hong Kong and regions with which it does not already have agreements, including mainland China. Critics say the proposed law would legitimise abductions in the city and subject political opponents and activists to China’s widely criticised judicial system. They fear that a pro-Beijing Hong Kong government would not resist requests of a political nature. Foreign governments have expressed concern at the law, warning of the impact on Hong Kong’s reputation as an international financial hub, and noting that foreigners wanted in China risked becoming snared in Hong Kong. Human rights groups have repeatedly cited the alleged use of torture, arbitrary detentions, forced confessions and problems accessing lawyers in China. Since the end of British rule in 1997, Hong Kong has operated under the “one country, two systems” principal, with a legal system seen internationally as its strongest asset. However, many feel the city’s autonomy has been eroded by Beijing’s growing influence. Martin Lee QC, a pro-democracy figure and former legislator who helped organise the protests, told the Guardian: “If we lose this one, Hong Kong is not Hong Kong any more, it’s just another Chinese city.” The bill is due to have its second reading in Hong Kong’s legislature on Wednesday. Reuters contributed to this report