When the finale of the domestic rugby season proves more satisfying than the Champions League final and an Anthony Joshua world title fight, the oft-maligned club game must be doing something right. Never has there been a more enthralling 80-minute Premiership final and nor have any side previously scored five tries and 34 points and still finished the runners-up. The only consolation for a gutted Exeter lay in pushing the best club team in Europe – and perhaps the strongest of all time – so close even Saracens’ proven supermen were not entirely sure how they clinched a second double in four seasons. At 27-16 down with 20 minutes to go, this was a breathless escape to rival Scotland’s Calcutta Cup resurrection at the same stadium in March. How interesting, then, that several of the befuddled Englishmen who blew a 31-0 lead before drawing 38-38 with the Scots are key cogs in a mentally resilient Saracens side who keep refusing to take “Oh no” for an answer. Not for 15 years has any team come from behind to win a Premiership final and the champions’ director of rugby, Mark McCall, revealed it was his senior internationals who supplied the mental turbo-boost that transformed the contest. “Our England players led the charge behind the posts when Henry Slade scored,” McCall said. “They were the ones who were calm, they were the ones who said: ‘Let’s properly go for it now, because we’ve got nothing to lose.’ I thought Owen Farrell and Richard Wigglesworth were masterful in how they controlled the last 15 to 20 minutes.” Having become only the second club since Leicester to collect a European and domestic double on two occasions, McCall admitted he was among those who feared it was not going to happen. As against Leinster last month, adversity simply made his players grow stronger. “We found a way but I’m not sure how. I thought we looked dead on our feet when they scored and it was 27-16. Then we looked like we had all the energy in the world [in] the last 20 minutes. It is amazing what your emotions do to you. You are never as tired as you think.” The ability to win titles the hard way is the calling card of most great champions and McCall continues to show little inclination to swap his present role – “To walk away would be a huge call” – for a national team tracksuit or the kind of hassles now confronting England’s Eddie Jones. The latest is the fitness of Exeter’s Jack Nowell, outstanding until he sustained a nasty-looking ankle injury and departed with the game still in the balance. The World Cup is three and a half months away but it would be a grievous blow all round should the popular Cornishman require a lengthy absence. The ultimate point of difference, though, was the bloody-minded class of Farrell and Maro Itoje and the old-school guile of Wigglesworth after Slade, having grasped the impressive Sam Skinner’s fine offload, stretched over for a spectacular fourth Exeter try. Chiefs fans will look back in anguish at the clear forward pass from Itoje to Vincent Koch immediately after Saracens had regathered their own restart but there was nothing remotely fortunate about Farrell’s pinpoint cross-kick to a leaping Liam Williams in the right corner. Among the other turning points were an agonising handling error by the tireless Matt Kvesic, from turnover possession with men outside him, and two slight lineout malfunctions by Exeter with the pressure mounting. Give Saracens a sniff and, even on their relative off-days, they will generally take advantage. Wigglesworth’s long break, Ralph Adams-Hale’s inspired supporting run and slick hands had already put Sean Maitland over in the corner – Farrell’s conversion was another gem – before the irrepressible Jamie George’s second close-range try with three minutes left secured a fourth Premiership title in five seasons. Even then there might have been a late twist had Sam Hill’s defiant riposte been delivered a second before, rather than after, the clock entered the red. Exeter will bounce back stronger for this experience but their pain was the most intense yet. “That’s probably the worst I’ve ever felt after a game,” said a distraught Slade. “I’ve never cried after losing a game but I’m struggling to get my words out. Just before half-time they were hanging on. You could see it. We had them.” Next season may yet offer some salvation, with World Cup commitments set to sap Saracens’ energy levels and resources. By then, too, investigators will have determined whether the club has breached Premiership salary cap regulations. Saturday’s epic final act, either way, will linger long in the memories of those lucky enough to see it. Exeter Chiefs Nowell (Steenson 70); Cuthbert (S Hill 62), Slade, Devoto, O’Flaherty; J Simmonds, White (J Maunder 66); Moon (Hepburn 47), Yeandle (capt; Cowan-Dickie 47), Williams (Francis 47), Dennis (S Simmonds 69), J Hill (Skinner 70), Ewers, Armand, Kvesic. Tries: White, Ewers, J Hill, Slade, S Hill. Cons: J Simmonds 3. Pen: J Simmonds. Sin-bin Slade 4. Saracens Goode; Williams (Strettle 78), Lozowski, Barritt (capt; Tompkins, h-t), Maitland; Farrell, Spencer (Wigglesworth h-t); Barrington (Adams-Hale 66), George, Koch (Judge 72), Skelton (Rhodes, 49-59; Woolstencroft 70), Kruis, Itoje, Wray (Isiekwe 56), B Vunipola. Tries: George 2, Spencer, Williams, Maitland. Cons Farrell 3. Pens Farrell 2. Sin-bin: Itoje 19. Referee: W Barnes (RFU). Attendance 75,329.