A New York man praised Osama Bin Laden and talked about killing police officers as he plotted an attack on Times Square, one of the most crowded crossroads in the city, prosecutors said on Friday. Ashiqul Alam, 22, from the Jackson Heights area of Queens, was charged with illegally acquiring firearms as part of a murderous plan, federal officials said. Alam was arrested on Thursday after receiving two Glock 19 9mm semi-automatic pistols with their serial numbers stripped off from undercover law enforcement officers, according to a complaint unsealed on Friday in Brooklyn federal court. During meetings with an undercover federal agent, Alam expressed support for the September 11, 2001, attacks on New York, where terrorists flew hijacked passenger jets into the World Trade Center, as well as for the militant group Islamic State, according to the complaint. He also discussed using an explosive suicide vest in an attack. “As alleged, Ashiqul Alam bought illegal weapons as part of his plan to kill law enforcement officers and civilians in a terrorist attack on Times Square,” US attorney Richard Donoghue, whose office brought the charges, said in a statement. Alam is expected to appear in US district court in Brooklyn later on Friday. Alam’s lawyer, James Darrow, said he had no immediate comment. Times Square, in the heart of Manhattan, with its millions of visitors each year, is often called the crossroads of the world, and has been targeted by at least two bombers in recent years, despite the presence of heavily armed police. On 1 May 2010, police thwarted an attempted car bomb in Times Square, defusing a crude device made out of firecrackers and propane gas tanks. A Pakistani-born US citizen pleaded guilty to the plot, admitting that he had received bomb-making training from the Pakistani Taliban and that the group, known as Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, had funded the plot. He was sentenced to life in prison. In December 2017, a Bangladeshi man set off a homemade pipe bomb strapped to his body in a crowded underground pedestrian tunnel near Times Square. The man, Akayed Ullah, was convicted of six criminal counts, including use of a weapon of mass destruction and support of a terrorist organization.