In 2014, as around 2 million Muslims gathered in the Saudi Arabian city of Mecca to perform the hajj, Islam’s largest annual pilgrimage saw the launch of a new practice. Young and devout Muslims standing in front of the Great Mosque and other locations around Old Mecca began posting self-portraits to Twitter. The hashtag #HajjSelfie went viral within hours. While most religious clerics adopted a diplomatic silence on the inevitable arrival of cameraphones during major religious gatherings, a handful of Muslim scholars spoke out. One Jeddah-based scholar said photography contravened the spirit of the hajj. “Taking such selfies and videos defy the wish of our Prophet,” he said, with sincerity. An Islamic Studies teacher said worshippers were ruining their prayers by “humble-bragging”. Faith is a powerful force in the digital spaces that many believe to be agnostic. Islam, like Christianity, Judaism and other religions, thrives on social media. Videos related to religion are the second largest category on YouTube and content about Islam far exceeds that of other faiths. In 2012, more than 5,000 Islamic religious and lifestyle-themed videos were published on YouTube every week. Muslims can now access millions of judgments and fatwas – Islamic perspectives on everyday issues as mundane as the alcohol content of household cleaning products to sexual advice – in dozens of languages. Much of the most popular advice is good-humoured and targeted at digital natives. Increasingly, fatwas are issued by non-experts. Some imams are only half serious when they warn of the dangers of following unreliable advice from self-taught scholars described as “Sheikh Google”. In 2018, women used #MosqueMeToo to share stories of sexual assault and abuse in places of worship Follow Me, Akhi, the debut book by journalist Hussein Kesvani, is a detailed and often witty journey through the online areas where Muslims congregate to ask one another for guidance or broach conversations about thorny issues. According to recent figures from the Office of National Statistics, there are around 3.4 million Muslims living in the UK, about half of whom are under the age of 24. Over a brisk 272 pages, Kesvani delivers a tableau of British Muslims wrestling with subjects ranging from clean eating and marriage to LGBT and gender rights. Just as the digital surges of the last two decades have brought opportunities in some areas of modern life, they have also unmoored Muslims from their neighbourhood mosques. Young British Muslims who once sat through mosque lectures from Pakistani or Bangladeshi imams reciting passages from the Qu’ran now communicate with self-taught liberal Muslim scholars such as Salmaan Saleem, a 48-year-old optician from Birmingham on YouTube channels such as Epic Islamic Lectures. Instead of learning only about prayer, young Muslims now discuss issues of piety and mental wellbeing. Readers who want to learn more about how Muslims organise online are recommended Hashtag Islam: How Cyber-Islamic Environments are Transforming Religious Authority by Gary R Bunt. In his travels around the UK, Kesvani gives three dimensions to a number of characters, including Abu Antaar, a religious zealot and Arsenal fan who left Britain to join Isis in Syria. Follow Me, Akhi contains some thoughtful accounts of extremism, but focuses more on how Muslims have found areas online where counter-radicalisation prospers. Some of the most illuminating research concerns universal aspects of everyday life. Kesvani interviews Muslim women like Saira who use marriage apps like Muzmatch; and Instapoets such as British-Somalian Abdi, who combine messages from the Qur’an with the black politics of rappers KRS-One and Rakim. He also interviews Muslims who have joined alt-right online movements. One area where digitalism has had a knock-on effect in the opinions of Muslims is in conversations about gender roles. Muslim women have responded to sexist behaviour with websites such as Side Entrance, which juxtaposes photographs of extravagant prayer spaces reserved for men with the usually dismal basements set aside for women. In 2018, women used #MosqueMeToo to share stories of sexual assault and abuse in places of worship. Kesvani also writes about how once taboo subjects like abortion are discussed on Tumblr. More than 15 years after the launch of Facebook, even technologists now fear that digital platforms are radicalising attitudes to women and minority groups. While many of those concerns will remain true, Follow Me, Akhi provides an enthusiastic demonstration of how religion and digital democracy can coexist in the pursuit of an informed and liberal ideology. • Follow Me, Akhi: The Online World of British Muslims by Hussein Kesvani is published by Hurst (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99