Six of Change UK’s 11 MPs, including its spokesman, Chuka Umunna, and interim leader Heidi Allen, have abandoned the fledgling party after its dire performance at the European elections. Change UK issued a press release saying it now had just five MPs, who will be led by the former Conservative business minister and anti-Brexit campaigner Anna Soubry. The others remaining are the former Labour MPs Mike Gapes, Chris Leslie, Joan Ryan and Ann Coffey. In a statement, Soubry said: “I’m deeply disappointed that at such a crucial time in British politics our former colleagues have made this decision. “Now is not the time to walk away, but instead to roll up our sleeves and stand up for the sensible mainstream centre ground which is unrepresented in British politics today. “Going forward, the Change UK MPs are as determined to fix Britain’s broken politics as we were when we left our former parties.” None of the departing MPs are defecting immediately to the resurgent Liberal Democrats; but party sources said they expected some to do so in the future. Both Allen and Umunna have been advocating closer cooperation with the Lib Dems. Umunna conceded last week that the party had “made mistakes along the way”, and suggested pro-remain parties should “work together instead of competing”. Change UK, which was initially called the Independent Group, caused a stir in Westminster when it was launched four months ago after the defection of seven Labour MPs. It had hoped to become the catalyst for a major political realignment, attracting a string of other recruits and becoming the rallying point for remainers. High-profile candidates including the former Conservative minister Stephen Dorrell, and the journalists Rachel Johnson and Gavin Esler, joined the party’s list of prospective MEPs. But it has been beset by internal disagreements over both strategy and management, including how closely to cooperate with other parties. Change UK’s leading candidate to become an MEP in Scotland, David MacDonald, stepped aside from the race and recommended voting for the Lib Dems. Two other candidates resigned after offensive social media posts were uncovered. Shortly after the party forms, former Labour MP Angela Smith is heavily criticised for referring to people from minority backgrounds as having a "funny tinge" After renaming itself Change UK, the party gets into a row with petition site Change.org, who release a statement warning it will be "seeking guidance" over the "imitation" of its brand Two election candidates are forced to resign within 24 hours of each other after offensive tweets emerge, including Joseph Russo, the party's top Scotland candidate, writing 'black women scare me' Lead Scottish candidate defects to the Lib Dems a week before European elections MP Joan Ryan implores the audience at the party's Bath rally to look at their palms: 'It's there, the future is in your hands' Party leader Heidi Allen suggests Change UK may not exist at general election. 'Will I stand again [...] as Change UK, in whatever format? Let's hope, depends when next general election comes,' she says In the week before the European Parliamentary elections it emerges that Change UK have become the biggest single political advertiser on Facebook - including spending at least £1,300 promoting Facebook adverts saying it was campaigning to 'remain in the UK' Six of Change UK’s 11 MPs, including its spokesman Chuka Umunna and interim leader Heidi Allen, abandon the fledgling party. Former Conservative business minister and anti-Brexit campaigner Anna Soubry becomes leader. Allen, the South Cambridgeshire MP, was appointed interim leader, but Umunna was still widely regarded as Change UK’s public face. Allen admitted she had considered resigning in the run-up to the European elections. She had suggested voting tactically for the Lib Dems in that poll, a proposal Soubry later called “rather bizarre”. Vince Cable’s Lib Dems positioned themselves as the leading pro-remain party at the European elections, with a punchy “bollocks to Brexit” slogan. The party’s strong performance, scooping up 20% of the vote, followed gains in local elections in May. Change UK, in contrast, took 3%. With Cable stepping aside, both frontrunners for the Lib Dem leadership have suggested they would welcome new recruits, either from Change UK or Labour. Jo Swinson said: “We are now the obvious place for remain supporters to coalesce. I would encourage anyone who shares our liberal values in or outside parliament to join our party and join our liberal movement. Our door is absolutely open.”