“Marta. Amazing. A goal by a genius!” screamed Luciano do Valle – one of Brazil’s most respected football commentators – in September 2007. “There are no words to describe Marta’s goal!” he yelled; but astounding, incredible, out of this world, came close. That goal in the Dragon Stadium: A dream to some, a nightmare to others. First, a nonchalant flick to make Tina Ellertson appear like a befuddled five-year-old hopelessly snatching at a fugitive whippet. Next, a quick change of direction that left the defender Cat Whitehill off balance like a staggering skater. And then a crisp finish to beat the keeper before the remaining defenders cantered into picture like Gold Cup also-rans. The South Americans had demolished USA 4-0 in the semi-finals of the Women’s World Cup, and Marta was applauded off by the Chinese fans in Hangzhou. The USA had come into the match on the back of a 51-game unbeaten run. But after Leslie Osbourne’s own goal, and Shannon Boxx’s red card at the end of the first half, Brazil knew the tie was theirs for the taking. A goal from Cristiane and a brace from Marta did the job. The Brazilians had their revenge for the defeat in the Olympic final in Athens in 2004. Back home the press lapped it up: “Brazil humiliate the USA and are in the final”, the Rio-based newspaper O Globo proclaimed. “Brazil run over the US”, declared UOL Esporte. The New York Times stuck the knife in and described the USA’s performance as a “total collapse”. The Washington Post said it was the worst display by a USA side, but also recognised the opponents’ quality. The result left Brazil on the verge of World Cup glory but facing those perennial party-poopers: the Germans. Despite not going out on Brazil’s biggest channel, a huge TV audience tuned in to watch the final. But it wasn’t to be for the South Americans. Marta missed a penalty when Germany were leading 1-0, and the Europeans ran out 2-0 winners in Shanghai. Marta finished the tournament with the Golden Shoe after scoring seven goals, and the Golden Ball after being voted the best player, but there was no gold medal in 2007. The Brazilian had been voted Fifa World Player of the Year the previous season, so Marta was already carrying the hopes and dreams of Brazil on her shoulders. And, even before the World Cup in China in September, Marta had already achieved cult status in Brazil. Two months earlier, the then 21-year-old had led her side to victory in the Pan-American games in Rio de Janeiro. She had also been voted the best player and finished top scorer with 12 goals. In the group phase Brazil had rolled over Jamaica, Ecuador, and then hammered Canada 7-0. Marta scored five in that game and became the first female footballer to leave her footprints in the Maracanã’s Walk of Fame. The Seleção beat Mexico in the semi-final and cup fever gripped the country. “Brazil fans have discovered women’s football,” said a headline; and they had as 68,000 crammed into the Maracanã to see the hosts crush the USA 5-0. After the match, an emotional Marta opened up. “The final in the Maracanã was a special day for me. [But] we can’t leave women’s football in this situation. There are some great women in Brazil, and they deserve all the support in the world. I hope women’s football improves and that the players can overcome these problems”. Marta remains the face of women’s football in Brazil and her influence on the game in her country has been immense. The sport in Brazil is going through a bit of an expansion and improving all the time. In 2019, there are around 300 professional players. There are now 16 teams in the first division and 36 in the second. The U18 competition has a record number of 24 teams. Something like 3,000 amateurs are getting financial help with grants for education or training and more money than ever is coming into the game. The Brazilian Football Confederation (CBF) ploughs in around £5m annually. With the growing involvement of the major clubs, the market is expected to be worth around £15m in 2020. But all is not well with the Seleção, and women’s football in Brazil still has a very long way to go until it becomes more respected. Some within the game feel that Marta’s relationship with the CBF has always been a bit too cosy and that she is more focused on her own marketing rather than rocking the boat and taking a more hard-line stance for women’s football. On the pitch, Brazil headed to France on the back of the worst run of any national team ever, having lost their past nine games – but they beat Jamaica 3-0 in their opening game after a Christiane hat-trick. Anywhere else at club or international level, the coach Vadão and the football coordinator Marco Aurélio Cunha would have been given the chop long ago. But the pair are still in their jobs. Like the rest of the team, Marta is in poor form, and she was on the bench for the Jamaica game because of injury. But the Brazilian press remains kind. Overall, the player has avoided the same scrutiny, or pressure to deliver, to which the legendary Zico was subject, and that Neymar endures. Marta is now 33 and France might be her last olé. She has been voted the planet’s top player on six occasions. She has picked up a stack of titles though a World Cup winner’s medal has always eluded her. But, even if she comes away empty-handed in France this July, Marta will always be remembered for the goal that “no words can describe,” and a moment of pure magic in the Dragon Stadium. • Jon Cotterill is an expert on South American football. He can be found on Twitter here