After victory on Sunday at the Le Mans 24 hours Fernando Alonso left the Circuit de la Sarthe having joined a very select club. With his win last year at the first attempt, the Spaniard, who is now leaving endurance racing, joins Woolf Barnato and Jean-Pierre Wimille as the only multiple Le Mans winners who remain unbeaten at the race. Alonso leaves on a high, albeit an unexpected one after an unlikely win. Yet for many drivers, among them Britain’s Nick Tandy who won here in 2015, stepping away from Le Mans is almost unthinkable. Alonso may not be there for it but Tandy doubtless will be as the race looks to embrace a new future. Alonso won alongside Sébastien Buemi and Kazuki Nakajima for Toyota, beating their sister No 7 car driven by Mike Conway, Kamui Kobayashi and José María López into second. It was a two-horse race with Toyota, the only manufacturer in the top LMP1 hybrid class, and Alonso’s squad did not have the better of it. The No 7 had been on top for almost 23 hours, with a two-minute advantage when a tyre sensor indicated a front-right puncture. The crew brought the car in, changed the tyre only to find the sensor had been wrong and it was the left rear losing pressure. Another stop ensued and López, who admitted he was in tears, lost the lead and the race. Alonso had the good grace to say the win belonged to the sister car. “It was a shocking race,” he said. “We didn’t have the pace to win the race, the No7 car was quicker than us and we didn’t deserve the victory maybe, but we were lucky.” He did note, however, that he felt he was due some positive racing karma. “On other occasions it took us off some F1 championships and they are tough moments when you are on one side and happy moments when you are on the other side. The good luck was on our side but other races or F1 championships were gone inexplicably and we have to enjoy being on this side.” Quite whether Conway, Kobayashi and López felt that the double F1 world champion deserved this particular piece of fortune seems unlikely. Their disbelief and disappointment was painful to behold. Still, that Alonso is unbeaten is what the record books will show, a feat not achieved for some time. Britain’s Barnato, one of the Bentley Boys, won Le Mans three times between 1928 and 1930, while France’s Wimille won in 1937 and 1939 driving a Bugatti until the war intervened and he went on to serve in the Special Operations Executive against the Nazis. Alonso, if he does not drive the 24 again, will stand alongside them for good but it is a shame that he is not sticking around for further attempts. Both his wins came when Toyota faced no manufacturer competition and were the class of the field. This is changing, however. For the 2020-21 World Endurance Championship season and Le Mans, the ACO and the FIA, as organisers, announced last weekend that new Hypercar regulations would define the top class. It is designed to cut costs, create a level playing field and encourage participation of both prototypes and entries based on road-going production cars. Toyota have signed up and Aston Martin, on the anniversary of their victory at Le Mans for Roy Salvadori and Carroll Shelby in the DBR1 in 1959, announced they will join them with the Adrian Newey-designed Valkyrie. McLaren are already in the process of investigating entry, as are numerous privateers. The prospects of it developing into a strong, closely matched field are good and one where a win may be hard fought across a range of designs. The hope is to revitalise the front of the grid but for Tandy the strength of Le Mans has always been in the depth. “It’s our World Cup final,” he said. “At Le Mans you have all the best teams. The best cars, the best drivers from all over the globe together across classes.” A Porsche factory driver who competes full time for the team in the US Weathertech sportscar championship, Tandy also has class wins at the Daytona 24 and the Sebring 12 hours. In his seventh Le Mans this year he finished third in a highly competitive GTE Pro class and his appetite to return is undiminished. After his overall win in 2015, Tandy was disappointed not to defend the title the following year as Porsche cut their entries to two. He drove instead for them in the GT field. Fiercely loyal to the team whose record as the most successful at the race has perhaps defined the marque more than anything, he just wants to keep coming back to Le Mans and battling for another victory, be it outright or in class. “The desire to win, to compete remains the same,” Tandy said before this year’s race. Enthusiasm for this grand institution reflects that of so many other drivers and the reason why Le Mans will remain of importance long after the furore around Alonso’s participation has faded.