Rarely can this Super League competition point to drama unfolding at both ends of the country at the same time, but at around 4.30pm on Sunday it was hard to know whether to follow events in London or Hull. At one stage it looked as though Hull KR would be four points clear of bottom-placed London by full time. Around 15 minutes later the Broncos had stunned the league leaders St Helens in Ealing and the Robins had capitulated here against the champions, putting both sides level on 10 points at the bottom – and there is surely no doubting now that Rovers are entrenched in the most unlikely of relegation battles. In pre-season nobody had given Broncos a chance of avoiding the drop on their first season back in Super League – some even doubted whether they had the credentials to win a game. But, with five victories under their belt, their surprise win in the capital compounded the misery of Hull KR fans here, who were left to rue another frustrating afternoon. Such was the drama of this game – settled by Sam Powell’s magnificent long‑range drop goal two minutes from time – that it was easy to forget this was Tony Smith’s first game in charge, having been appointed Hull KR coach on Thursday. “There’s a lot to work with,” was his upbeat reflection post-match. London Broncos’ head coach, Danny Ward, was thrilled after seeing the Super League’s bottom club score a dramatic 23-22 win over the leaders St Helens. Morgan Smith’s golden point drop-goal set up the shock of the season as the hosts hit back from an early 12-0 deficit to sink Saints in Ealing. “It was a nerve-wracking game but it was outstanding,” Ward said. “It was certainly the best win of the season and something to build on going forward.” Ward’s opposite number, Justin Holbrook, was pragmatic in his assessment of the body blow suffered by St Helens, who remain four points clear of Warrington. “Credit to them [London]. We know how hard a team they are and they showed it. We’ve got to be better away from home and we weren’t and paid the price in the end. We tried hard, too – with the amount of things we did wrong, we could have really struggled but we got it to golden point, so the effort levels were fantastic from a lot of players. “It wasn’t like we were poor and asking questions about what went wrong. We were right in it to the death. I’m disappointed here – not trying to make it lighthearted – but we weren’t the better side. If we’d have won, it would have just been guts from a side that never gives in.” James Roby and Luke Thompson both went over early for St Helens but Ryan Morgan and James Cunningham hit back to level things up at half-time. Mark Percival nosed Saints in front before Morgan went over again for the hosts, and then Jay Pitts dotted down to swing the pendulum the Broncos’ way. Regan Grace’s 79th-minute score sent the game to a golden point, then Smith settled matters. Press Association Games of this magnitude are so often decided by fine margins, as Powell’s decisive one-pointer proved. But with the game level at 18-18 in the final moments it looked as though Chris Atkin had scored the match‑winning try – before it was disallowed by the referee Scott Mikalauskas. “I’d like to have seen a video referee here because that can make a difference,” Smith said. “We’ve looked at the video and thought it was good. That’s how seasons can be defined.” Smith’s frustrations will matter little to Wigan, though. This has been arguably one of the worst defences of a Super League title, but with victories as narrow as these, perhaps the tide is slowly starting to turn for the Warriors. “Special moments like this can turn seasons around,” the Wigan coach, Adrian Lam, said. Had the Warriors lost here, the Broncos’ victory would have plunged Wigan further into trouble at the bottom, but such is the congested nature of the competition that the Warriors are now just two wins shy of the playoffs. “We play the teams in front of us over the next month and we can run them down,” Lam said. There will have to be further improvement from Wigan for that to be the case, though. The Warriors led 14-6 at half-time here with tries from George Williams, Dan Sarginson and Joe Burgess, and they looked well placed to kick on. Perhaps the Wigan side who won the title last season would have done. However, the withdrawal of Zak Hardaker with a hamstring injury stunted Wigan’s rhythm, and to Hull KR’s credit they were much improved after the break. Within three minutes of the restart Will Dagger had narrowed the deficit, before Ryan Lannon’s superb finish on 54 minutes put the Robins ahead for the first time. By now, news of Broncos’ heroics against St Helens in the capital was beginning to filter through, and that heightened the tension even further – as did Liam Marshall’s try with 14 minutes remaining, levelling the scores at 18-18. Both sides had tries disallowed in the final minutes before, with two minutes remaining, Powell stepped out of the pocket to kick a remarkable long-range drop goal. “Amazing,” was Lam’s description of the match‑winning moment. He was not wrong – but the reaction of the Hull KR players at full time, when they slumped to their knees, underlined just how significant an afternoon this could turn out to be. A change of coach perhaps, but the Robins’ luck remains the same. If that does not change soon, this could be a season that ends in disaster.