Somerset made Surrey feel like they were playing the 2018 version of themselves, as they won their fourth match of the season going 15 points clear at the top of Division One and threatening a second consecutive Champo procession. When they needed a batsman to stand up and make a score in the first innings, George Bartlett’s four-and-a-half-hour 137 proved more than double that scored by any other player in the match. The Overton twins then shared eight wickets in Surrey’s first dig and Jack Brooks knocked over five of the top six second time around. Jack Leach didn’t take a wicket and Lewis Gregory didn’t even play. Somerset have many ways to win matches just now – and Surrey can’t find one. With Hampshire enjoying a week off, Yorkshire played Essex for the right to scramble closer to the second-place team, but a rain-affected draw did neither side any favours. Dom Bess, who a year ago this week was playing for England, made 91 not out and delivered impressive figures of 26–11–45–3 – exactly the kind of performance and Yorkshire were looking for when his loan move went through. Like another spinner picked very young for England a generation ago (Chris Schofield), Bess might be a rather better batsman than bowler, which won’t do much for his England hopes, but might get him back in the Somerset side (as an all-rounder) even if Jack Leach is not selected for the Ashes Tests. Nottinghamshire, vying with Surrey for the “most disappointing season to date” title, must have feared the worse when they were shot out for 97 by Warwickshire, allowing captain Jeetan Patel, who had enjoyed himself with figures of 13.4–7–16–6, to demand his right to have another go straight away. When the Kiwi bagged opener Ben Slater in the ninth over, nobody would have been surprised to see Notts collapse like the Tory vote in the European elections. But the mercurial Ben Duckett, who has barely scored a run since April, and the veteran Chris Nash, dug in and ground out a stand of 199. Despite Patel’s second consecutive Championship ten-fer, Notts scraped a draw, but stay anchored to the foot of the table, Warwickshire the team nearest to them. Liverpool doesn’t produce many cricketers (only Ken Cranston has played for England, though er… Michael Clarke played over 100 Tests for Australia), but Paul Horton brought his Leicestershire side to the city in which he grew up and got away with a draw after following-on. Lancashire’s all-rounders/bowlers who bat got the home side up to 449, with a century for Liam Livingstone, fifties for Steven Croft and Tom Bailey and Josh “Hamilton” Bohannon left marooned two short of a maiden century. But Horton had a couple of his own bowlers who are handy with the bat to call upon, and the splendidly named D Klein (Dieter, since you ask) and Callum Parkinson amassed 119 for the eighth wicket in the first innings, setting up a fourth day 98 overs blockathon (which included 38 maidens) before hands were shaken. Lanky stay top. While Billy Root’s brother was facing a white ball, Billy himself made 229 as Glamorgan crushed Northamptonshire by an innings and plenty. The younger brother never really established himself at Nottinghamshire (though they could do with him now) so dropped and division and moved West for game time and a chance to step out of a long shadow. Since he now has a 113 not out, a 98 and this double ton for his adopted county, the move can probably already be accounted a success. Many county cricket fans will be pleased with that. Dominic Sibley is another player who moved counties for game time, leaving Surrey, where his teenage 242, making him the second youngest English double-centurion (behind WG Grace, natch), weighed heavily around his neck. Sibley has 426 runs opening for Warwickshire this season, his latest effort 87 stretched over 95 overs. With England not short of strokemakers down the order, that might be the kind of stickiness Ed Smith is looking for up top and, at 23, Sibley is also one for the future if given his chance. • This article appeared first on The 99.94 Cricket Blog• Follow Gary Naylor on Twitter