Eoin Morgan bemoaned his England side’s attitude in the field following the 14-run defeat by Pakistan that represents an early setback to their World Cup hopes. Set 349 to win after a sloppy performance in the opening innings, centuries from Joe Root (107) and Jos Buttler (103) were not enough to get England over the line as Sarfaraz Ahmed’s side ended a run of 11 straight defeats and sent their passionate supporters into raptures. Morgan’s pre-tournament favourites next meet a dangerous Bangladesh side in Cardiff on Saturday with one win and one defeat to show for their efforts so far. The captain said: “I don’t think it was that bad a day but fielding-wise it was. “We’ve gone from one of our best performances [against South Africa] to, not extremely bad, but one that has cost us maybe 20 runs and that is a lot in one-day cricket. Wahab Riaz (pictured) bowled 22 balls for no wickets and 40 runs against West Indies. Here, he took out the dangerous Jonny Bairstow early on and then returned at the death to get rid of Moeen Ali and Chris Woakes in the 48th over in a devastating Wasim Akram tribute. Short third man is usually just there to stop the dab going for four, and to fetch the ball when there has been a reverse sweep. But on this occasion it turned into a predator, gobbling up England's best players. Joe Root and Jos Buttler were both caught there as the hosts made the highest-ever losing score at a World Cup. Jason Roy, at mid-off, dropped one of the all-time clangers when he let the ball bounce out of his hands after Adil Rashid had lured Mohammad Hafeez into sending the ball into the sky. Hafeez, then on 14, went on to add another 70. Tuesday: Afghanistan v Sri Lanka Cardiff, 10.30am BSTWeds: South Africa v India Southampton, 10.30amWeds: Bangladesh v New Zealand Oval, 1.30pmThurs: Australia v West Indies Trent Bridge, 10.30amFri: Pakistan v Sri Lanka Bristol, 1.30pm “Fielding is an attitude thing. It’s a matter of taking our stand-off attitude today and getting it back to our positive attitude where we go for everything and create that fearless nature.” While for England it represented their first unsuccessful run chase on home soil since September 2015, Pakistan’s victory once again underlined their mercurial nature after a hammering by West Indies in their opener on Friday. Mohammad Hafeez, named man of the match after top-scoring for his side with 84 and claiming a wicket with his off-breaks, said: “We were all very confident. We practised yesterday very well and we had a good meeting together. It’s a total team effort, I believe. We all know the capabilities we have and we believe in that.” There were stoppages during the doomed run chase as both Root and Buttler spoke to the umpires about the condition of the ball. England had been warned about throwing the ball into the ground during Pakistan’s innings and Morgan claimed the pair were simply checking the same standards were being applied. Morgan said: “Jos was just intrigued to see the ball. When the ball is hit against the LED [advertising] boards it does scuff it up quite a lot so he was just interested to see if one side was rougher than the other, natural or unnatural.” Root added: “I’m not going to get involved. If I go into it I will say something that will get me into trouble.” Despite that coy response, Root was forthcoming about the tournament situation. “Maybe we had left ourselves a little bit too much to do at the back end, but the most important thing now for us as a group is not to panic. “The temptation is to get a little bit tense, but one of our great strengths as a side is sticking to the way we go about things and be as smart as possible. “And the beauty of this format is that I do believe the best four teams over the tournament will qualify for the semi-finals and we’ve got to make sure we play some good cricket in our remaining games. “One thing this side doesn’t do very often is make the same mistake twice and I’m sure the guys will make sure it’s a very different performance against Bangladesh.” Morgan meanwhile was confident he will escape censure for a slow over-rate, despite the first innings ending 19 minutes after the cut-off point.