Donald Trump arrived in the UK on Monday for a three day state visit during which he is scheduled to meet royals, hold talks with Theresa May and join events commemorating the 75th anniversary of the D-day landings. After insulting London mayor Sadiq Khan before landing, the president and his wife Melania were greeted by Conservative leadership hopeful Jeremy Hunt and went on to Buckingham Palace, where Prince Charles walked them across the lawn to meet the Queen. After arriving in the UK on Air Force One on Monday 3 June, US president Donald Trump will be formally welcomed in a ceremony in the gardens of Buckingham Palace. It will be attended by the Queen and Prince Charles. The president will then attend a private lunch at the palace, which is expected to be attended by Prince Harry, but not his wife, who Trump recently described as 'nasty'. Following a wreath-laying ceremony in Westminster Abbey, Donald Trump will join Prince Charles for an afternoon tea at Clarence House. The Queen, Prince Charles and Prince Harry will then host a state banquet in the evening, which will be attended by prominent US citizens who live in the UK, as well as political and civic leaders. On Tuesday 4 June the visit includes a breakfast meeting with Prince Andrew, and then talks and a press conference with prime minister Theresa May at Downing Street. On the Tuesday evening Trump hosts a dinner at the residence of the US ambassador. On Wednesday 5 June Trump will take part in commemoration services in Portsmouth to mark the 75th anniversary of the D-Day landings. The day ends with the Queen formally bidding farewell to the US president. Trump’s entourage will also include two identical seven-seat black armoured limousines nicknamed ‘The Beast’, and a number of presidential helicopters. The president has at his side at all times one of five rotating military aides who carry the nuclear ‘football’ which can trigger a missile strike - equipped with communication tools and a book with prepared war plans. Jeremy Corbyn has encouraged people to join an anti-Trump demonstration on Tuesday. He said the event offered a chance to “to stand in solidarity with those he’s attacked in America, around the world and in our own country - including, just this morning, Sadiq Khan.” We would like to hear from readers around the UK and abroad about the state visit and, if you are in an area Trump is visiting, to find out the mood where you are. We are especially interested to hear from readers who will take part in any protests, or are planning on being in Portsmouth, where D-day commemorations are being held. Share your views and tell us in what way you will be marking the state visit in the form below. One of our journalists may contact you to discuss further and we’ll feature some of your contributions as part of our coverage. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.