New York will stage a massive LGBTQ Pride march on Sunday, as other US cities including San Francisco, Chicago and Seattle also host parades commemorating the 50th anniversary of the clash between police and patrons of the Stonewall Inn that sparked the modern gay rights movement. New York’s march kicks off at noon with 677 contingents including community groups, major corporations and cast members from the FX show Pose. Organizers said they expected 150,000 people to march, with hundreds of thousands more lining the streets to watch. The march could produce record attendance, according to CNN. A smaller Queer Liberation March started at 9.30am at the Stonewall, where patrons resisted a police raid in 1969, and headed to Central Park for a rally. Organizers say the larger Pride event has become too commercialized and too heavily policed. “The annual Pride parade has become a bloated, over-policed circuit party, stuffed with 150 corporate floats,” the Reclaim Pride Coalition said in a statement. “This does not represent the ‘spirit of Stonewall’ in this 50th anniversary year.” Brendan Fay, a civil rights activist who successfully fought a years-long battle for LGBTQ inclusion in the New York St Patrick’s Day Parade, said he would participate in both marches. The founder of the Lavender & Green Alliance, an organization that celebrates Irish LGBTQ culture, told the Guardian corporate participation does reflect progress but Reclaim emphasizes community elders’ grassroots efforts to effect change. “The legacy of Stonewall is about people,” Fay said, “not about corporate participation”. On Saturday, the New York City Pride Run reportedly set a Guinness World Record, with 10,000 finishers in Central Park breaking the previous record of 6,000 for a Pride-related charity event. Flemington, New Jersey, mayor Betsy Driver, considered the first openly intersex person voted into public office in the US, was reportedly set to be a grand marshal of the main parade. The New York police department, which earlier this month apologized for Stonewall, said that there had not been any “credible threats” against the main march. “The LGBTQ community is an essential part of NYC,” said NYPD commissioner James O’Neill. “And during #PrideMonth2019, it‘s the NYPD’s mission – as it is for every large event held in our great city throughout the year – to ensure that everyone can enjoy the festivities safely, free from violence and intolerance. “While there are no credible threats at this time, as always, we ask – if you see something, say something.” The Pride march concludes a month of Stonewall commemorations in New York. The celebration coincides with WorldPride, an international LGBTQ event that started in Rome in 2000 and was held in New York this year. In San Francisco, a contingent of Google employees petitioned the Pride parade board of directors to revoke Google sponsorship over what they called harassment and hate speech directed at LGBTQ people on YouTube and other platforms. San Francisco Pride declined to revoke the sponsorship or remove the company from the parade, but Pride officials said critics could protest Google policies as part of the parade’s “Resistance Contingent”. In Chicago, Lori Lightfoot, the city’s first openly gay mayor, will be one of seven grand marshals.