What were you hoping for?The love child of Louis Theroux, Mark Ronson and Richard Ayoade. Failing that, a plus one for my Cotton-Eye-Joe-themed 30th in a few months. First impressions?Friendly and welcoming. What did you talk about?Irish passports, Brexit, the name Barney, Hong Kong, expats, Wetherspoons, Black Mirror, our slinkier physiques at 20, asylum seekers’ rights. Any awkward moments?When he asked if I had gone on a first date with him before (we hadn’t). Good table manners?Impressive. Best thing about Tom?He seemed genuine and had a great ability to keep all glasses topped up. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes, if the situation ever occurred, which is unlikely (although saying that, Trump’s in power and I’m getting grey hairs in my eyebrows, so anything’s possible). I think they’d like him. Describe Tom in three wordsThoughtful, inquisitive, very good hair. What do you think he made of you?Full-on, with too many hand movements. Did you go on somewhere?No. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have happily gone for another drink and stayed out longer. Marks out of 10?A strong 7. Would you meet again?I don’t think it’s on the cards. What were you hoping for?I was expecting an evening with a total stranger. This was not to be. First impressions?Oh God, we’ve been on a Tinder date before... What did you talk about?How it’s hard to be spontaneous in London, being kind to yourself, our supposed previous date. Any awkward moments?The discussion about whether we had been on a date before. She maintained we had not… I, having been on three Tinder dates ever, and with fairly vivid memories of all three, am certain that we had. Good table manners?Excellent. Best thing about Hannah?She came across as very genuine and happy in herself. Would you introduce her to your friends? I would. Describe Hannah in three wordsFunny, chatty, kind. What do you think she made of you?“Who is this strange man, and why does he think we’ve been on a date before?” Did you go on somewhere?I was dead on my feet, so no. And... did you kiss?We did not. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I was exhausted on arrival, so I wish I’d had a deeper sleep the night before. Marks out of 10?A solid 7. Would you meet again?Only as friends. • Hannah and Tom ate at The Albion, London E2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com