There’s a light drizzle and the sky is grey and puffy. It’s a Tuesday in London. I’m walking down Charing Cross Road in the damp, on the way to the anti-Trump protests and wondering if The Donald himself was right: the protests are fake news, and actually, all the crowds are there to welcome him. That weekend there’d been a bitter skirmish between Trump and London mayor Sadiq Khan (“He is a stone cold loser ” said Trump of Khan), and then on Monday a reception with the Queen, where Trump did the weird hybrid fist bump handshake thing and at dinner wore an ill-fitting white tux. Just after 11am, as I approach the National Portrait Gallery, I hear a huge cheer, whistles, bongo drums and the sounds of thousands of people chanting. My heart and steps quicken – it’s definitely a protest! It’s not fake news, Donald! Trafalgar Square is packed, a sea of people with signs and banners representing everyone from the NHS to the London Underground union. I’m at the protest alone but am keen to make friends. I was going to march with my former landlords, Bloomsbury socialists who always had a lot of Iraq war-era protest placards stacked like kindling in the kitchen corner (“No blood for oil” etc), but at the last minute they couldn’t make it. I go alone, signless. Instead of a placard, I wear a cap that says SLOW in big letters. It could mean anything, but that also means I can align myself with anyone. I survey the crowds, wondering whom to attach myself to. I start the march with climate activists and stand behind a big sign that says “Climate justice.” Our chant is “What do we want?” “Climate justice!” “When do we want it?” “NOW!!” We’re not moving though, because there is some sort of bottleneck ahead. I move sideways and stand with Jewish Voices for Labour - who are chanting “Dump Trump!” and then drift towards a more loose coalition of people holding signs that say “Not even Melania likes him” and a woman wearing a gold crown with a sign that reads “Lock him in the tower”. While shuffling along chanting “Say it loud, say it clear, Donald Trump’s not welcome here”, a wave of emotion hits me. It feels like hope. There’s something about a good protest – all these people from different parts of life and disparate interest groups coming together on a rainy Tuesday – that makes me feel as if we’re connected to a common cause. I march for a bit with the Communist party, then the Hackney and Shoreditch Labour party, but still I’m looking for my people. There is a group I notice who seem a bit out of place. Could they be kin? None of them are carrying placards and they are following a woman wearing a blue baseball cap and an earpiece. What do these people even stand for? I wonder. I march with them for a bit, before the blue baseball cap woman veers off to one side and the group and me stand under a shelter. The woman (their branch leader?) is talking into her earpiece and looks stressed. “The police have asked that we move all our tour groups from Whitehall. It’s not safe,” she says. My new friends are a group on a walking tour that unwittingly got caught in one of the city’s biggest protests. The people in the group are grinning at each other, amused. This is definitely more fun than watching the changing of the guard. “You’ve really experienced something now,” says the tour leader kind of desperately as a group with an anarchist flag marches past chanting “Death to America”. Whitehall is still thick with protesters, and she’s taken them almost to the end of the protest towards Parliament Square, where the baby Trump blimp is expected to fly and a reggae band are playing. The tourists reabsorb themselves in the protest and I stay under the shelter and watch as a skirmish breaks out. It’s not a fight where people hit each other, instead it’s one where people call each other fascists or fuckwits and then film each other on their phones. Suddenly four or five police surround the group. At the centre is a man named Dave who is saying “I like walls! Walls work!” It turns out he is pro-Trump and explaining one of his favourite Trump policies: “A prison wall works well!” Protesters are surrounding him and calling him a fascist (“Hitler would have liked your button!”) but Dave is standing firm. “I think we are the majority,” he says. “But you don’t see that because of the biased media.” He is dismissive of the protest: “You don’t see the passion in people here. Look at them!” But people are passionate – so much so that the police move in and say “Enough, enough, enough!” when things get tense between Dave and the protesters. I approach Dave later and introduce myself. He’s a British nationalist who is with some pals wearing MAGA caps. Dave is very friendly and chatty and calls me “love”, but I decide perhaps we’re not compatible protest buddies. Where are my people??? There are a heap of placards on the side of the road, halfway up Whitehall. They look like pyre wood. I grab one with an anti-racist slogan. I’m down with that. I may not have found my tribe, but I’ve found my placard. • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnist