British theatre is in the process of a massive change. More far-reaching than any I have seen in more than 20 years as the Observer’s drama critic. Accelerating. Overdue. Irrevocable. Welcome. There used to be a template for the artistic directors of theatres. A template about as restricted as candidates for the Tory party leadership. White and male. Obviously. This was so continuous with the default position for power in Britain that for ages it went unremarked. Not any more. At the press conference to announce his opening season as artistic director of the Donmar in April, Michael Longhurst was asked if, as a white man, he now found himself in a minority among new appointees. Yes, he said. “Quite rightly.” The shift from all-maleness has come in spurts, since the beginning of the 2000s, when Gemma Bodinetz took over at Liverpool, and Vicky Featherstone headed up the new National Theatre of Scotland. The end of the whitewashing of British theatre (or, rather, the beginning of the end) came later – but is moving more decisively. Last year was crucial: a series of appointments of people of colour reordered the alphabet of artistic directorships. From Justin Audibert to Matthew Xia. A look at London’s Young Vic, where Kwame Kwei-Armah took over last year, demonstrates what a difference a new theatrical head can make. His task looked hard: his predecessor, David Lan, had run a superb theatre. But Kwei-Armah has already proved there is another kind of superb. His programming has been distinctive and bold, mashing up text with music (a carnival Twelfth Night) triumphantly casting black actors in parts previously considered the realm of white performers (Death of a Salesman), putting on work that merges dance and installation art (Bronx Gothic). The atmosphere in the bar is galvanising. A couple of years ago, the actor Janet Suzman claimed that “theatre is a white invention, a European invention, and white people go to it”. The Young Vic is a living refutation of this. As is Stratford East, a theatre reignited by the dynamism of its new artistic director, Nadia Fall. Fall says: “Diversity is not our endgame. Our endgame has to be quality of work.” So no plays about her “strict Asian” upbringing – any more than Nicholas Hytner’s National Theatre was heavy with dramas about being Jewish in Manchester. Rather, she has brought a buoyant internationalism – and a fresh emphasis on inventive design. Female designers have been in the vanguard of those remodelling the theatre and its workforce: Rosie Elnile and Joanna Scotcher have made Stratford glow. In bringing new looks, new sounds, new subjects to their theatres, the new directors will expand possibilities and audiences – especially if they keep an eye on ticket prices. In the interviews with the new artistic directors that follow, I was particularly struck by what HighTide’s Suba Das says about reaching out to choreographers and tapping into love of standup. It is hard, though, to guess what changes will be wrought: if we knew what the next thing was it wouldn’t be new. The encouraging thing is that as one barrier is tipped over it nudges the next. The Donmar’s 2012 all-women Shakespeares were a turning point. The publicity was about their femaleness but the productions were Trojan mares, shifting the norm: they featured more black, more brown, more short and more round bodies – and more non-RP accents. We saw talent of which the stage had been starved. We’ll see more under these new bosses. Perhaps we’ll even have many more people of colour as theatre critics. Lynette Linton, 29, was born in Leytonstone, east London, and had early ambitions to be a screen actor. Theatre didn’t appeal to her at first, but after joining the National Youth Theatre in her early 20s and receiving encouragement from director Rikki Beadle-Blair, she turned her attention to writing and directing for the stage. Sustained by a job at John Lewis – she worked in the Oxford Street food hall and edited the retailer’s in-house magazine – Linton wrote her first play, Step, which was staged at Theatre Royal Stratford East in 2013. She went on to direct work for the Gate theatre and the Donmar, where her production of Lynn Nottage’s Sweat garnered five-star reviews last December (it transferred to the West End earlier this month). The Bush theatre, in an “incredibly multicultural” area of west London, is renowned as a champion of new writing talent – it premiered early work by writers such as Stephen Poliakoff and Conor McPherson – and as a magnet for diverse audiences. Taking over as artistic director from Madani Younis, who is now at the Southbank Centre, Linton is determined to connect with local communities and open up the building even more to younger audiences and creators. “When I was 15, I wasn’t a theatre person,” she says, “so what can I do to make sure 15-year-olds now feel like they are theatre people?” What three words sum up your theatre?Bold, fresh and west-London (we can pretend that’s one word). Sell theatre to someone who says they’re not the theatre-going type…Do you watch Netflix? Do you go to the cinema? If so, just come a little bit further down the road and see a story live. Because it’s all storytelling. And the liveness of theatre is so exciting. What single thing would improve British theatre?Understanding that community work and “professional” work on the stage are the same thing. The community should be feeding the work on the stage, and vice versa. I always have an open rehearsal room. I invite young people to sit in and learn and be part of it and give their opinions. Who are you making it for otherwise? What show have you seen recently that really made an impact on you?My White Best Friend at the Bunker. It was reacting to events happening that week, and it made me think a lot about theatre’s responsibility to respond to current events. Who or what first got you into theatre?Rikki Beadle-Blair [artistic director of Team Angelica]. I met him through the National Youth Theatre and then came to see one of his plays at Theatre Royal Stratford East. I remember sitting in the box office, feeling a little out of place, and he came over, gave me a hug and a free ticket. I went and watched some of the rehearsed readings he had on in the Angelic Tales season, and that’s when I went “Wow”. I remember coming out of the theatre and standing at the bus stop for half an hour going, “That was really special”. It spiralled from there. I always wonder, would I have found my way into theatre if he hadn’t done that? That fuels my work now. Best production you’ve seen and why?I’ve followed Arinzé Kene’s career for a long time. I remember seeing God’s Property at Soho theatre and really falling in love with it. Watching his progression to [his latest play] Misty has been inspiring, but seeing God’s Property probably changed my life. What can’t you live without at work?Yorkshire teabags. That was the first thing I changed at the Bush – they had PG Tips and I was like, “What is this?!” I have five cups a day; if I’m in rehearsal it’s worse. My tea is very specific. It’s no sugar, incredibly strong, maybe two drops of milk. You have to put the milk in before taking the teabag out, otherwise it loses its taste. That’s very important. What books are on your bedside table?I have just reread Small Island by Andrea Levy, and I’m about to start Natives by Akala. I saw the production of Small Island at the Olivier and I love Andrea Levy’s writing, so I wanted to spend some more time with the book. Hamilton or Hamlet?Hamilton. It’s one of the best things in years. It’s stunning. Who would be your dream person to work with – dead or alive?James Baldwin. He is one of my biggest inspirations and I remember reading his books at university, Giovanni’s Room and Another Country specifically. He made me see the world differently. What should we come and see at your theatre?Strange Fruit by Caryl Phillips (until 27 July). It’s part of our Passing the Baton scheme, where we revive a work by an artist of colour that should be seen. It’s going to be a phenomenal show. KF It is quite possibly the most coveted job in British theatre: running London’s Donmar Warehouse, the boutique Covent Garden theatre that consistently punches above its weight. Following in the footsteps of Sam Mendes, Michael Grandage and Josie Rourke, Michael Longhurst has a huge task ahead of him but the 38-year-old seems unfazed. “And we’re off!!!! C’mon down,” he tweeted as he launched his first season in early April under the banner “important stories thrillingly told” and with an air of getting straight down to business. Born in Bromley in 1981, Longhurst studied philosophy at Nottingham University before training as a theatre director at Mountview Academy of Theatre Arts in London. He made his name with Nick Payne’s Constellations, which transferred from the Royal Court to the West End in 2012. Since then his hits have included Amadeus at the National Theatre, They Drink It in the Congo at the Almeida and Caroline, Or Change at the Chichester festival theatre, then in the West End. His mission is “about making sure the most relevant and important stories are hitting our stage”, he says. “We have programmed lots of new writing and revivals that resonate with where the world is at the moment.” They kicked off last week with David Greig’s prophetic Europe, which explores our complex relationship to the continent. “It’s the 25-year anniversary of the play and it reads like it was written yesterday,” Longhurst says. What three words sum up your theatre?Tiny magical warehouse. It’s a miraculous space – 251 seats in the heart of Covent Garden, and the intimacy just makes for this incredible live experience. It’s always described as an actors’ church because you can see the whites of the eyes and the beads of sweat, and that makes for an electric connection. How would you describe your current audience and what will you do to attract new audiences?The current audience is very loyal and generous and they are up for an eclectic mix of work. In terms of new audiences, we will be continuing the Young+Free scheme, giving free tickets to people under 25, and we’re introducing Donmar Daily Release, which means holding back tickets so that 40 can be released every day for a show one week away. This allows people who can’t book in advance to get access to tickets. How would you sell theatre to someone who says they are not the theatre-going type?I would say that theatre mainlines a hit of the human condition like no other art form. It is the best way to receive a story today. The days of wobbly french windows and French farces are behind us. Theatre is in a time when it is using its form boldly to tell really exciting stories, and there is nothing like the live event of it. Is British theatre for all?Historically, it hasn’t been. I think it is waking up fast and that has to do with artists and directors being accountable for who is represented on our stages and who gets to make and tell those stories. What single thing would improve British theatre?More government subsidy. The return for the economy has been proven. The Donmar receives a 7% subsidy, a very small amount, which is why our fundraising department is so important. Lots of our income comes from philanthropy and sponsorship. What show have you seen recently that really made an impact on you?Death of a Salesman at the Young Vic left me weeping. Wendell Pierce and Sharon D Clarke were amazing. It’s an astonishing play about the hope that parents have in their children and the desire to please parents that children have. That shifting axis of expectation is heartbreaking and the African American lens that Marianne Elliott’s production put on it made me see the play afresh. Who or what first got you into the theatre?I loved panto as a child. Later, it was my English teacher, Mrs Withers, and my drama teacher, Tom Band, at St John Rigby school in Bromley who ignited my passion. It’s devastating that arts subjects are falling off the curriculum. Do you have a mentor or role model?Dominic Cooke has always been a guiding hand and light for me. He gave me big breaks early on in my career at the Royal Court and sage advice on making art and, now, running companies. What are the top three personal skills that you need as an artistic director?Stamina, stamina, stamina. As a freelance director I could obsessively enter the bubble of making a show. At this moment, when I am in rehearsals the building still needs attention and support and funding. Those things don’t go away while you actually make the art. Favourite art form other than theatre?Impossible to answer. But I do love an art gallery. I think plays are kinetic sculptures. I love the design process of the shows: it’s fascinating and magical to me. Hamilton or Hamlet?I’d like to direct both. Who would be your dream actor to work with?There are so many actors I have as crushes it is hard to name just one, but Billie Piper, Olivia Colman, Riz Ahmed – call me. LO’K Suba Das was born in 1984 on a council estate in Ashington, near Newcastle, the son of immigrants from rural India. Twice a week his father, a restaurant worker, would take Das and his twin, Deba, to the library, instilling in the brothers a love of learning that helped propel them to scholarships at Newcastle Royal grammar school and then to Cambridge University. After a postgraduate directing course at Birkbeck College, London, Das started out as assistant director at the Theatre Royal Stratford East, going on to direct at Nottingham Playhouse and the Young Vic, among other venues. Most recently, he was associate director at Curve Leicester, where he oversaw the development of new work. His credits at Curve included Wipers by Ishy Din and Pink Sari Revolution by Purva Naresh. Das made his opera debut in 2017, directing the world premiere of Ravi Shankar’s Sukanya for the Royal Opera. Last spring he joined HighTide, the Suffolk-based theatre company and charity dedicated to discovering and launching new playwrights, which produces festivals in Aldeburgh, Edinburgh and, from 2021, also in Lowestoft. His first major challenge was Waltham Forest council unexpectedly withdrawing its funding for this summer’s HighTide festival in Walthamstow, which meant it had to be cancelled. “It was disappointing but, in truth, a sign of the times,” Das says. “We can no longer rely on traditional sources of funding like local authorities. We need to look for new ways to raise money and new ways of reaching diverse audiences.” Why is new writing important?We look to art to help us understand ourselves and our world, and new, normally unheard and marginalised voices enable us to look at life from unexpected angles. We are in tumultuous times where we are having to ask ourselves who we are as a society and who we are as people. Theatre needs to be part of that. I’m interested in developing not only new playwrights but spoken word artists, choreographers and physical theatre-makers, too. What single thing would improve British theatre?An understanding that diversity, a word that gets chucked around in an affirmative-action kind of way, actually makes great business sense. The more different types of people you can attract the better. What are the top three skills you need as an artistic director?Generosity, because leadership is about what you are comfortable giving away. Flexibility, because, Lord knows, your diary will change on a day-to-day basis. And fiscal prudence. What show have you seen recently that really made an impact on you?Emilia by Morgan Lloyd Malcolm. I hope it will come back and tour. That show [a feminist call to arms with a diverse, all-female cast] needs to be in schools, in youth clubs, student productions – wherever it can reach young people, especially girls. What books are on your bedside table?Playwriting by the late, great dramatist Stephen Jeffreys, which is the most astonishing analysis of the craft ever. He was a genius on structure and character, the nuts and bolts of it, the practical as well as the ethereal. And Beloved by Toni Morrison, the most important book I have read. How would you sell theatre to someone who says they are not the theatre-going type?I would say that if you love going to standup comedy, you love going clubbing, you love going to cabaret and you love going to a gig then, actually, you love theatre. LO’K Charlotte Bennett and Katie Posner, who take over as joint artistic directors at the London touring theatre company Paines Plough in August, met while directing separate plays at York Theatre Royal 10 years ago. Bennett, who grew up in Leeds, had just started her own company, Forward Theatre Project, while Posner, a Londoner, was working for York’s Pilot theatre. “Over time, we became artistic mentors to each other,” says Bennett. “And because we were both working with touring companies, we had lots of big chats about the joys and difficulties of that.” A decade on, with Bennett heading up the new writing department at Soho theatre, and Posner directing shows around the country on a freelance basis, both women had their eye on the top job at Paines Plough. When it came up, they decided to pool their strengths rather than compete. Their mission at the 45-year-old company, which focuses entirely on new writing and has worked with writers such as Sarah Kane, Mark Ravenhill, Enda Walsh, Abi Morgan and Mike Bartlett, will be “championing the unheard and reaching the overlooked”, according to Bennett. Posner adds: “It’s about finding exciting artists who wouldn’t necessarily define themselves as playwrights, and telling stories in unique and brilliant ways to make the industry wake up.” What three words sum up your theatre?KP Everywhere, unafraid, immediate. What is your current audience like and how will you attract new ones?CB Our audience is shape-shifting. Roundabout [the company’s pop-up auditorium] starts in Edinburgh at the fringe and goes on to places like Poole, Salford and Doncaster, so the audience changes with each place. In terms of attracting new audiences, it’s about telling new stories in new ways. Sell theatre to someone who says they’re not the theatre-going type…KP There’s no one size fits all. You just have a conversation with them. “What do you enjoy? What excites you?” I directed a play about football for Northern Stage, and we’d go hang out in pubs in Newcastle and chat to people about what we were doing – and we genuinely saw such a different audience as a result. What single thing would improve British theatre?CB Placing more value on arts in education. With arts subjects going out of the curriculum in schools across the country, it’s sending a message to young people that the arts are not an important part of their lives or career prospects. Which theatre, Britain or beyond, do you most like going to and why?CB Live theatre in Newcastle, because it was born out of a working-class arts movement in the city. There’s no room for ego or pretension, and there’s a real honesty in geordie audiences. Before Margaret Thatcher died, I did a show that contained a quote from her last day in office, saying: “I feel very happy that I’m leaving the country in a better state.” Every night, the audience shouted back: “Fuck off!” It was amazing. What show have you seen recently that really made an impact on you?KP It’s the same for both of us: Misty at the Bush theatre. Arinzé Kene is incredible. Walking into that space and having a visceral reaction to something that grappled with form in an innovative way, it blew our minds. Who or what first got you into theatre?CB My older sister [Helen Bradley, now deputy head of development at Guildhall School of Music and Drama]. She was my role model and still is. After she went to Hull and did a drama degree, I went to Hull and did a drama degree. When she worked at the Royal Court and posted me plays, I duly directed them. That’s where I found my love of new writing. KP The first play I ever fell in love with was Jim Cartwright’s Road. I thought, this has real people, beautiful storytelling and heart-wrenching drama. It all made sense from there. Best production you’ve seen?CB Ruined by Lynn Nottage, directed by Indhu Rubasingham in 2010. I was an usher at the Almeida, so I saw it a lot of times. It was so funny and vibrant and beautiful but also completely devastating and heartbreaking and difficult. It will stay with me for ever. KP Girl from the North Country [by Conor McPherson at the Old Vic]. It was really messy and played around with language in a way that I would probably have been scared to do. It triggered a realisation that, actually, life is messy, and it’s great to see that on stage. What can’t you live without at work?KP Laughter. If you’ve had a terrible day and things are hard, but you can still have a laugh, then it’s OK. What’s your other favourite art form, and does it feed into your work?CB Books and music. When I listen to music it helps me think about scenes or feelings in scenes. KP Music and sound are a major part of how I make work. The world is never silent, so I’m always working to find ways of integrating sounds and music on stage. Who would be your dream colleague or actor to work with?CB Joan Littlewood, the mother of modern theatre. She was always looking for what was modern, fresh and original. KP Maxine Peake. We just saw her in Avalanche and we love her. KF Sean Foley is a proud Brummie, so becoming artistic director of Birmingham Repertory theatre means coming home. It also means he is deeply aware of the importance of the Rep and its 1971 building in the cultural life of the city and the nation. “It’s a historic theatre, the first in the UK to be based in its own building,” he says. “Pre-National Theatre, it was the place Olivier wanted to go and be seen; he trained here along with John Gielgud, Ralph Richardson, Peggy Ashcroft, Paul Scofield – that’s quite some heritage.” Foley made his name as a writer, comedian and actor before turning to directing. He co-founded the Right Size with Hamish McColl, and their stage shows The Play What I Wrote and Do You Come Here Often? became long-running West End and Broadway hits. Other directing credits include Jeeves and Wooster in Perfect Nonsense, which won an Olivier award in 2014, The Ladykillers, Ducktastic and the unloved X Factor musical I Can’t Sing!. He also directed the 2016 comedy film Mindhorn. His predecessor at the Rep, Roxana Silbert (now at Hampstead theatre), left the company in a strong position, having won praise for her promotion of diversity, championing of accessibility and continued nurturing of new writing. Stepping into her shoes is “a massive challenge”, says Foley. What is your current audience like and how will you attract new ones?They are Brummies, so they’ll be smart, self-deprecating and surprisingly sophisticated. Birmingham people have an amazing dry sense of humour; they’re very generous, too. Birmingham has the most youthful demographic in the UK and is actually the most diverse city, eclipsing even London. Yet, essentially, theatre is still a middle-class sport. It’s less well-funded than it used to be, but there’s nonetheless a lot of public money going into theatre, and the end results are only reaching a very small proportion of people. So that should change. And changing it is really about making shows that can appeal to a wide demographic and genuinely engage the local population by doing what theatre has done since time immemorial: telling stories that people can relate to in an exciting way. Which theatre in Britain or the rest of the world do you like going to?I really enjoyed St Ann’s Warehouse in Brooklyn, recently. The vibe was great, there was a very mixed audience, and the show was superb. It was The B-Side by the Wooster Group, which consisted of three actors telling the stories behind an album of chain-gang songs and singing them. It was incredibly moving. Who or what got you into theatre?When I was at Oxford University in the mid-80s, I could not get on with any of the drama societies, so I ended up joining the Oxford Youth Theatre. The people who were running it happened to know this bunch of crazy cats who had just come back from a theatre school in Paris and set up their own company with an extremely pretentious name: Théâtre de Complicité. To get free rehearsal space they were giving workshops. I went to a couple and thought, Ah‑ha, this is different. Do you have a mentor or a role model?Kenneth Branagh has been a massive influence. He directed me in The Play What I Wrote and I’ve worked with him many times since then and learned a lot from him about leading creative projects. He is a brilliant leader. What can’t you live without at work?Coffee and bananas, not necessarily in that order. What’s your other favourite art form and does it feed into your work?Film is a big love of mine. One of my heroes is Billy Wilder. He understood the importance of rhythm, pace and storytelling, all of which are essential elements in the way I direct, especially with comedy. What books are on your bedside table?A Single Man by Christopher Isherwood because I am reading it with my book club; The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin by David Nobbs because I am trying to make a musical out of it for the Rep; and Lowborn by Kerry Hudson because it feels absolutely of this moment. Who would be your dream actor or directing colleague to work with?Buster Keaton and Joan Littlewood. Hamilton or Hamlet?This is a naughty question because you’re asking me to choose between an apple and an orange. The obvious thing to do would be to choose both but I’m not going to do that. I’m going to say Hamlet‑ton. LO’K Born in Sunderland to Egyptian parents, Tarek Iskander lived in Kuwait between the ages of five and 17, returning to England at the outbreak of the first Gulf war. His introduction to theatre came late. He was working as a management consultant at the NHS when, after accompanying his then partner to an audition, he ended up as an extra on Deborah Warner’s 2005 production of Julius Caesar at the Barbican. “Watching one of the best directors in the world, I thought: I could really do that,” he recalls. Iskander went on to co-found the Yard theatre in east London, where he directed two of his own plays including Qudz, “a show very close to my heart about Iraq and the Middle East”. He could only afford to quit his NHS job four years ago, going on to serve as interim director for theatre at Arts Council England. BAC, where he is now artistic director and chief executive, has been staging experimental theatre and testing out works in progress (what it refers to as “scratch” theatre) at its sprawling Victorian premises near Clapham Junction in south London since the 1970s. Iskander has been a regular there for years. “It was a place that always surprised me, where I could see the artists I was most excited about and never really knew what I was going to get,” he says. What three words sum up your theatre?Surprising, unpredictable, pioneering. What single thing would improve British theatre?Having more exchange and dialogue with international work. We are absolute leaders in some areas, such as inclusiveness and diversity, but we would benefit from further exchange, especially around artistic practice. It can come from anywhere – we’ve learned a lot by working with our colleagues in favelas in Brazil – but you have to engage with the world in order to benefit from that expertise. What show have you seen recently that really made an impact on you?Selina Thompson’s Salt has haunted me ever since I first saw it in Edinburgh, and it moved me deeply when I saw it again recently – it’s a remarkable piece of dialogue and conversation. Top three skills you need as an artistic director?You need to be open to possibilities wherever they arise, willing to make tough decisions when necessary, and engaged with what’s happening in the community around you. What can’t you live without at work?Caffeine. It starts with a cappuccino, then becomes really, really strong black coffee by late afternoon. What’s your favourite art form aside from theatre?Recently I’ve really started to get into dance, much more than previously, so I’m finding myself constantly going to dance performances. What books are on your bedside table?I’m reading quite a lot of David Mitchell – most recently Number9Dream, which I think is my favourite of his – and Ben Okri, his poems rather than his novels. Next up is Wolf Hall by Hilary Mantel. Hamilton or Hamlet?Hamilton, because it’s fresh. Who would be your dream colleague?Benjamin Zephaniah, either performing or developing a piece of work, a story that we could really get our teeth into. I’m interested in his focus on ecology and vegetarianism. What should we come and see at your theatre?One by Bert and Nasi (30 September-19 October). I have seen this show twice and it’s that rare combination of hilarious but also deeply profound and moving. KF