In a new attempt to tackle climate crisis, the government is pledging to cut carbon emissions to net zero by 2050. It’s seen as Theresa May’s bid to create a permanent legacy in her final weeks in office. While this target is still too slow, it’s a step in the right direction. Yet just days ago, her chancellor, Philip Hammond, raised concerns about the plan. In a leaked letter to May, he said the bill for moving to a zero-carbon economy would be upwards of £1tn. To caution about costs is a standard Treasury response to anything. But Hammond’s intervention, since he’s on the centrist wing of a party that appears to be moving ever further to the right, is particularly disquieting. If even he doubts that saving the planet is money well spent, what about the rest of his party? It calls into question whether this government can be relied on to reach its green targets. The Committee on Climate Change says cutting greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050 is necessary, affordable and desirable. Here are some of the actions needed to make that happen: • Petrol and diesel cars banned from sale ideally by 2030 and 2035 at the latest. • Quadrupling clean electricity production from wind, solar and perhaps nuclear, plus batteries to store it and connections to Europe to share the load. • Connection of new homes to the gas grid ending in 2025, with boilers using clean hydrogen or replaced by electric powered heat pumps. Plus, all homes and appliances being highly efficient. • Beef, lamb and dairy consumption falling by 20%, though this is far lower than other studies recommend and a bigger shift to plant-based diets would make meeting the zero target easier. • A fifth of all farmland – 15% of the UK – being converted to tree planting and growing biofuel crops and restoration of peat bogs. This is vital to take CO2 out of the air to balance unavoidable emissions from cattle and planes. • 1.5bn new trees will be needed, meaning more than 150 football pitches a day of new forests from now to 2050. • Flying would not be banned, but the number of flights will depend on how much airlines can cut emissions with electric planes or biofuels. So, on what grounds is his scepticism based? The £1tn is based on official estimates that reaching net zero would cost £50-70bn a year by 2050 – about 1-2% of GDP. However, this number includes the investment that would come from both the public and the private sector. So the impression that government would foot the entire bill is just wrong. What’s more, the Committee on Climate Change – the government’s emissions watchdog – is clear that, due to the falling cost of low-carbon technology, reaching net zero would cost no more than the 2008 Climate Change Act had committed us to. Yet there is no mention of this in Hammond’s letter. Ultimately, the Treasury must be the linchpin of the green transition, but this letter shows that this department just does not get it. There was no sense of urgency, no recognition of the imperative to decarbonise and asking whether we can afford to do this misses the point. Yes, there will be costs associated with reaching net zero. We must be honest and open about this. But the key question is whether we can afford not to reach net zero. If the science is right, then the answer is no. The more that global temperatures rise, the more chaos in the system: more devastating hurricanes, record droughts, extreme floods, disappearing coastlines, loss of crops. Climate-related poverty will spread across the world at a scale we can’t even imagine. The cost of this, not just in cash but in human suffering, will far outstrip the cost of transitioning to a zero-carbon economy. Therefore the choice is whether we take action now to achieve the change we need, or sleepwalk into a crisis and throw money at the problem when it will be too late. The green transition presents a huge opportunity. Reducing carbon emissions across the world could unlock up to £2.8tn of investment a year. The global market for low carbon electricity generation is due to expand rapidly in the next 10 years. And the market for low emissions vehicles alone is set to grow even faster each year. The potential to take a slice of this growing pie is clear. Why not invest in taking carbon out of our economy in a way that creates millions of good jobs and lifts living standards? But all of this will require significant government action – from large-scale investment in infrastructure and technology, to incentives to bend markets towards the climate imperative. This simply won’t happen without the government, and the Treasury, making the green transition its core mission – with investment paid for by progressive taxation and effective borrowing. It will mean shifting the mandate of the Bank of England so it can play its part in directing finance away from dirty to clean investment, with fiscal and monetary policy working hand in glove. And it will mean focusing every chancellor’s budget for the foreseeable future on emissions cuts. So whatever Hammond thinks, if the government is to deliver on its 2050 target date, his successors will have to abandon his complacency and get 100% behind it. • Miatta Fahnbulleh is chief executive of the New Economics Foundation