Cardinal George Pell’s lawyer Bret Walker SC has told three judges presiding over his client’s appeal that the timing of Pell’s offending was a “critical matter” in deciding whether his conviction should be overturned. Walker is appealing Pell’s conviction on three grounds, the key one being that the jury came to an unreasonable verdict based on the evidence before them during the trial. Jurors heard that the first offences, which involved Pell sexually assaulting two 13-year-old choir boys after Sunday solemn mass at St Patrick’s Cathedral in Melbourne, most likely occurred on either 15 or 22 December 1996. Pell orally raped one of the boys during this incident and indecently assaulted both of them. The jurors heard Pell offended again about one month later when he grabbed the complainant’s genitals, once again after Sunday mass. But the Crown’s written case to the appellate judges states that 3 November 1996 may have also been a possible date when the first offences occurred, as it had not been established during the trial that Pell was not present at mass on that date. The introduction of 3 November as another possible date was “in itself disturbing ... and should disturb this court”, Walker told Victorian supreme court chief justice Anne Ferguson, court of appeal president justice Chris Maxwell and justice Mark Weinberg. It revealed the Crown’s own “doubts involving the theory that this supposed first event or incident indeed took place on the 15 or 22 of December”, Walker said. “And if it didn’t take place on one of those two dates then the Crown case fails.” This was because the complainant said the second incident – Pell grabbing his genitals – occurred about one month later. “There’s more than a month … well and truly … between 3 November and either 15 or 22 of December,” Walker said. It was in reviewing this timing that the judges should find a “lack of realistic probability of this offending taking place”, he said. Pell, 77, was convicted in December on four charges of an indecent act on a child under the age of 16, and one charge of sexual penetration of a child under 16. In his opening remarks on Wednesday morning, Walker also argued there was a “formidable list” of factors and events that needed to line up for the offending to be possible and the jury would have had to believe every one of those factors had occurred. This included believing that Pell was alone for about six minutes with the boys in the priests’ sacristy completely undisturbed, and possibly with the door open, after mass, he said. If Walker fails to convince the court that Pell’s conviction should be overturned on grounds of unreasonableness, he will fall back on two other grounds of appeal. One being that Pell was not arraigned in the presence of the jury panel; and the other being that Pell’s defence team should have been allowed to show a video animation of its argument during the closing address. The court accepting the appeal on these grounds would most likely result in a retrial rather than his conviction being overturned. Family members and supporters of Pell and the complainant sat in the front row of the court, which was at capacity. An overflow room was opened with a video link to the courtroom to accommodate those who could not get a seat. Pell attended the court in person, brought from the Melbourne Assessment Prison in West Melbourne where he has been held since February when he was sentenced to six years in prison. He dressed in all black and wore his clerical collar, limping slightly as he walked into the court. He occasionally took notes and watched Walker and the judges intently. Four police officers sat behind him. The prosecution’s response to the appeal is being led by senior crown prosecutor Christopher Boyce and assisted by prosecutors Mark Gibson, who led the trial, and prosecutor Angela Ellis. Walker is being assisted by defence barrister Ruth Shann. When prosecutors put their case to the court, they will argue, according to their written submission, that the complainant’s evidence was “not only plausible, it was credible, clear and entirely believable as is reflected in the jury’s verdict”. “The ability of the complainant to so accurately describe the layout and wood panelling of the priests’ sacristy (including the alcove) – an area in which he could not recall having ever seen either before or after this event – was a significant aspect of the Crown case,” the submission states. “It bespoke both truthfulness and reliability. Any inconsistencies in the complainant’s evidence were of little moment and could not have been said to have impacted on his credibility in any material way.” The hearing continues. It is expected to take two days.