Late-night hosts focused on the new fire on the campaign trail as Joe Biden and Donald Trump trade shots, and US relations abroad. Stephen Colbert addressed the latest duel between Trump and Biden. He joked: “Donald Trump and Joe Biden are both in Iowa. Either because it’s the first primary state, or because Kevin Costner needed more old guys to walk out of the cornfield.” In a campaign speech, Biden said his bid for the White House was not about Trump – but he mentioned him 76 times. Colbert found this strange: “The only person talking about Donald Trump more than Joe Biden … is Donald Trump and me.” Biden also said cashiers at Target know more about economics than Trump, to which Colbert replied: “Though, to be fair, the cashiers also know more about foreign policy, labor relations, and how to close an umbrella” – showing a clip of Trump abandoning an umbrella instead of closing it. Trump soon hit back, telling reporters Biden was the weakest candidate mentally. Colbert asked if this attack was wise: “Do you really want to open up that can of worms?” Trump also called Biden a dummy, which prompted Colbert to ask: “Biden? Biden’s the dummy? May I point out only one of you is sitting on Putin’s lap with his hand up your butt?” The Daily Show’s Trevor Noah focused on the blossoming friendship between the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, and Vladimir Putin – and what that means for the US. Russia plays chicken with an American warship, and Vladimir Putin floats Xi Jinping as his new BFF. pic.twitter.com/1s23PrNqUu Noah opened with a segment on a near collision between Russian and US warships in the Pacific. Noah questioned the “accidental nature” of it: “That had to be on purpose. What other excuse is there? Do you know how big the ocean is? You have to really go out of your way to collide with someone. It’s like walking into someone at Ted Cruz’s birthday party. There’s no one else there.” While Trump was in Europe, Putin and Xi met: Xi called Putin his “best and bosom friend” and the pair went on boat rides. Noah said: “So it’s clear China and Russia are really hitting it off, because you only take a boat ride with someone if you really, really like them. Or if they’re enslaving you.” The Chinese army is reportedly joining forces with the Russians coordinating cyber-attacks and running drills together, and Noah pondered what this could mean for the US … by comparing it to the Rocky films. “I mean, America could probably handle China or Russia, but not both at the same time. Like, imagine if in Rocky IV, Ivan Drago was fighting, and then Jackie Chan jumped in the ring to help him.” Seth Meyers also set his sights on the 2020 campaign trail, and reckoned Joe Biden doesn’t have the same appeal without Obama. “Seeing Joe just isn’t the same without Obama there. It’s like going to a concert to see Oates.” In other 2020 news, the Washington governor, Jay Inslee, said the Democratic National Committee ignored his request to hold a primary debate just about climate change. Meyers defended the DNC: “In the DNC’s defense, they honestly have no idea which one he is.” Meyers also said the HBO series Chernobyl has prompted an increase in tourism in Ukraine near the site of the disaster. “And so far, all the Yelp reviews are just actual yelps.” He joked: “Fans who have visited are giving the city three thumbs up.”