If a tree falls in the forest and nobody is around to hear it, did it make a sound? Similarly: if a six-years-on-hiatus boyband release a comeback single without a 90-minute documentary about how difficult it was spending six years in the wilderness being not quite as famous as they were when they were properly famous, have they even come back at all? A question asked and answered by Chasing Happiness (Amazon Prime Video, from Tuesday), in which the Jonas Brothers tell us: hey, we have come back. I mean, it’s not quite as harrowing a story as they’d like you to believe. Happiness charts the Jonas Brothers’ – that’s Nick, a preternaturally gifted musical savant with the voice of an angel; Joe, an electric bolt of charisma with eyebrows you would build an army for; and Kevin, who tries very hard! – rise to fame, the unrelenting pressure of fame once they got it, the difficult breakup, the post-fame, still-famous years spent Figuring Stuff Out, and their difficult collective decision to reunite and become more famous and make more money again. But essentially their story is: they wrote, like, one song and Disney signed them to a lifetime deal, and then they all married beautiful, successful women. The End. Well, it’s more complex than that, but barely. The first half of Chasing Happiness really wants to drill into us the idea that the Jonas Brothers weren’t a fluke, or a result of Disney manufacture, or a gift from God, or any of that; no, they hustled hard to make it to the top. “We didn’t grow up with much,” each brother says, separately and repeatedly, each glossing over the fact that their ex-pastor father plunged $90,000 of his savings into paying for them to tour the country with a band to get their career off the ground. A middle-of-the-doc dramatic moment – where the brothers, dropped from their first label, have to briefly move to a smaller house – is shattered when the cheerful Joe Jonas reveals: “And then the Disney Channel called us and said: ‘We know you need something. We’re going to give you a record deal.’” How do we struggle on in our lives? Do we simply not have the number for the Disney Channel? It’s the current-day footage of the Three Horseman of the Jonas that is most fascinating, though, because they say nothing. Joe, the middle Jonas, seems happiest with his lot, after forming a fun spin-off band and marrying Sophie Turner off of Game of Thrones. You can’t really ask for better than that, can you? Nick is the most tired-of-being-alive 26-year-old ever committed to film. And Kevin – who, even during his peak as a rock star and teen sex icon, still had palpable “dad waiting in a car after karate lessons” energy about him – basically spends his days making pancakes for his children and getting left on read by his brothers. As comeback documentaries go, it’s a suitably flattering portrait of a band looking to tour again. As a documentary of that peculiar moment in the mid-to-late 00s when wearing a tight waistcoat with a long linen scarf was inexplicably fashionable, it’s comprehensive. As an in-depth analysis of how and why the Jonas Brothers ever happened in the first place, it falls sadly short.