As part of its policy of reviving neglected plays by writers of colour, the Bush brings us a rare sighting of this piece by Caryl Phillips from 1981. It turns out, as you would expect from a writer of Phillips’ calibre, to be a work of real substance and even if, at three hours length, the drama is slow-burning, it eventually catches fire. Phillips’ theme is the dilemma of an immigrant family caught between two cultures: cut off from their Caribbean past, they are confronted by the rank hostility of 80s Britain. In the overlong first half we watch Vivian, a hard-worked teacher, coping with a demanding neighbour and the knowledge that her revolutionary 21-year-old son, Errol, has impregnated his white girlfriend. Although Vivian describes her own early experience of ingrained bigotry in a heartrending monologue, it is in the second half that the story fully explodes. When the elder son, Alvin, returns from attending his grandfather’s Caribbean funeral, we begin to grasp Phillips’ point: that the family’s past is not only shrouded in secrets and lies but that they symbolise a generation cut off from its roots while feeling like strangers in an inhospitable land. Aside from the fact that the in-the-round staging renders a crucial piece of climactic action invisible to a section of the audience, Nancy Medina’s production is full of heat and fury and signally well acted. Rakie Ayola endows Vivian with the despair of a modern Mother Courage who, dedicated to surviving difficult times, finds she has lost the love of her sons. As the warring siblings, Jonathan Ajayi as Errol brings out the sexual chauvinism of the political radical and Tok Stephens as Alvin simmers with rage at maternal mendacity. Tilly Steele as Errol’s brutally treated girlfriend and Debra Michaels as a widowed neighbour provide strong support in a complex evening. We expect plays today to be brisker and shorter, but Phillips’ portrait of a family divided against itself and alienated from the surrounding society still rings disquietingly true.• At Bush theatre, London, until 27 July.