Here’s a pitch for a new play: a comedy about a man facing rape and sexual abuse charges. It will be hilarious, promise. A farce. Got a big name attached! John Malkovich, no less. Bitter Wheat, by David Mamet, is in previews at the Garrick in London. Mamet has written some great stuff in his time, but the first review of this new work has not been positive. The playwright has long been fascinated by the “power play” between men and women: I remember sitting through Oleanna, his play about sexual harassment, which came in the wake of the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings. This was the early 90s and we were well into the “PC gone mad and men as victims” mentality. I remember feeling deeply uncomfortable. This year has also seen Steven Berkoff perform his monologue, Harvey, going “where no one dares: inside Harvey Weinstein’s head”. Sorry, I couldn’t make it – I just happened to be washing my hair every night of its run. For these guys I guess rape and harassment is some kind of interesting philosophical exercise they feel they need first bite at. Imagine that Weinstein is actually not that interesting. Imagine that, given the #MeToo movement, women playwrights might do something with this material beyond “dark farce”. For Weinstein remains still unbowed, still at liberty, still paying off his accusers, still supported by some in the industry, still denying all charges, still thinking he can get the better of women. Even Madonna, who says he was “incredibly sexually flirtatious” with her when they worked together. Last week, after the singer said she was glad he had been held accountable for abusing his power, Weinstein gave a toe-curling statement, incorporating many of her song titles, saying that she was “such a maverick it is surprising she conformed to what’s in Vogue” then going on and on, sublimely awful in his lack of self-awareness. This is not farce, it is real life, and the contents of Weinstein’s mind are not as deep or interesting as any of these guys think. They are sordid and ordinary. A real dramatist might grasp this. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist