When Virginia Board found out her favourite band, Fleetwood Mac, were playing Wembley Stadium this month, she knew she had to be there. She was so keen that she was prepared to pay £680 for four tickets, and to travel from Bristol for what she hoped would “be a once-in-a-lifetime experience – something I’d remember forever”. But what happened on the night left her in tears, and ultimately demanding her money back. Board was just one of a number of unhappy punters – there were so many complaints about the sound quality on social media that several news outlets, including Metro and the Evening Standard, ran stories on the issue. Board says when support act the Pretenders started their set, it was clear there was a major problem. “There was a lot of sound reverberation, echoes and just a jumble of instruments. I hoped it would improve when Fleetwood Mac came on, but it didn’t. It was awful and certainly not what you’d expect when you pay £170 for a ticket,” she says. So why do so many stadium and arena gigs seem to be plagued by terrible sound? And what are your rights when it comes to getting a refund? Many of this summer’s biggest concerts – by acts ranging from the Spice Girls to the Strokes – have reportedly suffered from sound problems, with fans flooding social media sites to complain, and some alleging they could barely even make out what was being sung. In some cases the musicians or promoters have effectively admitted there were problems. We are now in peak outdoor gig and festival season. However, sound quality is highly subjective, and this is an area where everyone involved tends to blame each other, so trying to get someone to take responsibility may not be easy. In the case of Board, she immediately complained, and was offered seats in a different part of the stadium but, she says, the sound was little better there. “I sat watching, unable to believe my ears and wondering how the sound guys had got it so wrong. I’ve been to many gigs and festivals over the years – including big stadium gigs – and have never experienced poor sound like this before. It felt like I was listening to it from outside! I couldn’t even make out the words they were singing, or what they said when they spoke between tracks… I have asked for my money back as I feel as though I have been robbed.” Board has complained to Live Nation, the promoter of the show, and to Wembley Stadium. Alexis Petridis, the Guardian’s head rock and pop critic, said in his review of the gig that “the sound at Wembley ... tonight recreates the experience of trying to listen to Fleetwood Mac with your head submerged in a tureen of soup”. So it would appear something may have been amiss. Another gig that allegedly failed to make the grade sound-wise was Daryl Hall and John Oates at the Hydro in Glasgow on 1 May. Tom Donnelly and his 12-year-old son Tommy paid £136 for their two tickets, including fees. But, he says, the sound was “dreadful – there were numerous occasions of feedback. Daryl Hall was constantly complaining to the sound technicians.” Donnelly complained to the firm he bought his tickets from, Ticketmaster, which told him he should contact the Hydro. But the venue told him that “all aspects of the show, including sound, are under the control of the event promoters,” and said he needed to contact the promoter, Kilimanjaro Live. He did, but Kilimanjaro Live told him that while it was aware Daryl Hall “experienced some sound issues” during the show, “all sound and lighting equipment is provided and fully controlled by the artist’s touring production team, not the promoter or venue”. It added: “We are informed the problem was rectified and the concert was able to continue. We will pass on your comments to the artist management.” Donnelly says: “How am I meant to get some sort of compensation for an expensive night out that was my son’s first ever concert if no one will take responsibility?” Complaints about the sound quality at a gig by US band the Strokes in London’s Victoria Park on 25 May prompted the organisers to issue a statement saying that “we regret that a section of the audience didn’t have the audio experience that we expect for them”. Then there were the first gigs of the Spice Girls’ stadium reunion tour, which triggered a wave of complaints. In an Instagram post following the Dublin Croke Park show on 24 May, Spice Girl Mel B appeared to admit the sound quality was poor when she said that “hopefully... the sound will be much, much better” in Cardiff (unfortunately it is alleged that it wasn’t). Consumer advice lawyers have told Money that concerts are no different to any other service and must be provided with “reasonable care and skill”, but promoters will often bat away claims in the hope that the consumer will give up. Citizens Advice makes clear on its website that when it comes to events such as concerts and festivals, “you should complain if there’s a problem with the quality of the sound”. It says you should first contact the ticket seller or venue for a refund. However, consumer law expert Jonathan Silverman from London law firm Laytons says his advice would be to bring a small claim against the promoter rather than the ticket seller. “When you have paid to go to a concert, there is a reasonable expectation that you should be able to hear it. When you have paid £170 for a ticket, that expectation is even greater. If the promoter has failed to provide the concert it promised with reasonable care and skill, concertgoers have the right to be recompensed,” he says. He advises claimants to produce as much “objective” evidence as they can, such as social media posts or press reviews. It would be up to the court to decide what proportion of the ticket price would be payable in compensation, he says. Meanwhile, barrister Richard Colbey of Lamb Chambers warns that the fact that sound quality is highly subjective could make the claim difficult. But he adds: “While I am not aware of any claims being brought in similar circumstances, there seems no reason why concert promoters who can’t get their sound system right shouldn’t be liable to pay damages for such a breach.” Someone such as Board could use the courts’ Money Claim Online service to try to recover the cost of tickets and other losses, he says. Money asked Petridis what he thought about the issue of sound at big gigs. “I think people’s expectations have been raised in line with ticket prices,” he told us. At the same time, he says, there’s been a tendency to cut overheads to maximise profits: “I’ve noticed a distinct reduction in the quality of production and staging at some big arena shows in recent years, which you could view as letting the music speak for itself or just being a bit stingy.” He points out that the most expensive tickets for the Fleetwood Mac shows were £200 each, plus fees, “which is quite an investment for a night out”. Petridis says the sound at outdoor shows is influenced by all sorts of factors, from the weather – “there’s been times at Glastonbury where the wind has literally blown the sound away” – to noise restrictions imposed in residential areas (a bugbear of shows in London’s Hyde Park) to the number of musicians on stage: the more there are, the harder it is theoretically going to be to achieve a decent sound balance. He adds: “It’s a problem I think you’re going to hear more and more about – as revenues from recorded music fall, artists are increasingly reliant on live performances to generate income, and ticket prices are going to continue to spiral.” Live Nation and Kilimanjaro Live were asked to comment but did not respond.