Adam Zampa was likely using hand warmers when cameras captured him putting his hand in his pockets before bowling in Australia’s loss to India. Social media lit up when footage emerged of Zampa fidgeting in his pockets in Sunday’s World Cup game, before holding the ball and walking into bowl. The footage brought about claims of ball-tampering, following Australia’s highly-publicised drama in South Africa last year. But the Australian camp has since clarified Zampa had the small instrument in his pockets, as he has often been seen with during Big Bash games. “I haven’t seen the photos, but I know that he has hand warmers in his pocket,” Australia’s captain Aaron Finch said. “He has them every single game he plays. I honestly haven’t seen them (the images), so I can’t comment too much on it. But I know for a fact that he has hand warmers every game.” Zampa was not under any official investigation and umpires did not raise any concerns on the field. Ball-tampering has remained a talking point at the tournament. Several teams have received unofficial warnings from umpires for balls being bounced on the way back to wicketkeepers, potentially scuffing the leather. Smith and Warner have been met with jeers at all three of Australia’s games since returning to the side from the ban stemming from the ball-tampering dramas last year. Virat Kohli apologised to Steve Smith for the booing and abuse he was copping from Indian fans and told supporters to cheer him in Australia’s 36-run World Cup loss. Australia’s former captain was met with boos when he briefly fielded on the boundary during Kohli’s innings on Sunday, mellowing only slightly when he waved happily at a small section. However Kohli stepped in at the next break in play, pointing to the crowd and his Indian crest and encouraging them to be more positive. “What’s happened has happened like long back, the guy is back, he’s trying to play well for his side,” Kohli said. “Even in the IPL I saw him, it’s not good to see someone down like that, to be honest. I just felt for him, and I told him, ‘I’m sorry on behalf of the crowd’. Because I’ve seen that happen in a few earlier games, as well, and in my opinion that’s not acceptable.” Kohli is the first player to make such a statement to a crowd since Smith and Warner’s returns. It comes despite he, Smith and the Australian side having had at times a fractured relationship on the field. Most notably, the India captain all but accused Smith of cheating in 2017 when he looked to the dressing room before deciding whether to review an lbw decision against India. “We’ve had issues in the past. We’ve had a few arguments on the field. But you don’t want to see a guy feeling that heat every time he goes out to play,” Kohli said. “So just because there’s so many Indian fans here, I just didn’t want them to set a bad example, to be honest. “I felt bad because if I was in a position where something had happened with me and I had apologised, I accepted it and I came back and still I would get booed, I wouldn’t like it, either.”