A brand new concert hall, the first purpose-built arts venue in an Alpine ski village, opened on Sunday night in the Swiss resort of Andermatt with the Berlin Philharmonic and conductor Constantinos Carydis christening the space. The light-filled, flexible hall is designed by British architect Christina Seilern of Studio Seilern. It is part of an ambitious new development for the once-dwindling village that it is hoped will transform it into a year-round cultural destination. The regeneration of the village has been funded by Egyptian property developer Samih Sawiris. Andermatt, which sits 1,440 metres above sea level in the Urseren Valley and 100km south of Zurich, had been in decline since the end of the cold war. The Swiss federal army had a base there that was disbanded once it became apparent that the threat in the 21st century was no longer going to come over the Alps. By 2005, with the last of the military had gone, fewer than 1,000 people lived in the sleepy village. But Sawiris, who visited and was struck by the area’s beauty, decided to invest in grand plans to create not only one of the largest skiing areas in central Switzerland, but also hotels, apartments and chalets, restaurants, new infrastructure, a golf course – and a concert hall good enough to attract the world’s best players. “I have always believed that culture is an essential part of a major destination and that it should be culture of the highest quality,” said Sawiris, whose passion for classical music was nurtured as a student Berlin, where he often saw the Berlin Phil at the Philharmonie. “More than ever, this great art form needs encouragement,” he said, adding that he hoped the concert hall would make “a real contribution” to music in Europe. As a statement of intent, Sunday’s opening concert certainly convinced, with the 45-piece orchestra performing two elegant and shapely late Mozart symphonies that framed thrilling takes on Shostakovich – his chamber symphony in C minor Op 110a and his Two Pieces for String Octet Op 11. So passionately did leader Daishin Kashimoto attack a solo passage that a string broke midway through. (It was deftly fixed by his desk partner while Kashimoto picked up where he had left off on the latter’s violin.) The new hall’s sound is warm and the feel intimate; the space can seat a maximum of 650 and can be reconfigured to accommodate up to a 75-piece symphony orchestra, but seems best suited to chamber music. Its wrap-around glass front fills the space with light, and allows passersby to look down into the hall, whose balcony is at ground level, while those from the balcony can look out to the mountains as well as down to the stage. The music programming will be shaped around three festivals. An autumn three-day event marks a partnership with the nearby Lucerne festival, for which Benjamin Grosvenor, Daniel Harding and the Chamber Orchestra of Europe will be visiting. The winter festival (15-18 January) will celebrate Beethoven’s 250th anniversary, with Daniel Barenboim among the performers. The summer festival in late June 2020 is programmed by the New Generation Festival, a production company based in Florence (where their flagship festival is held in August), run by a trio of young Englishmen: Maximilian Fane, Roger Granville and Frankie Parham. Their events – a mix of crossover artists, opera, jazz, and Steve Hackman’s Brahms vs Radiohead mashup – aim to appeal to a younger audience, with tickets for under 35s priced at 35CHF (£28/€31). Fane, 27, is Andermatt Music’s artistic director and will programme monthly concerts that feature young classical artists. He promised to “create a platform for the world’s finest young rising stars to collaborate and inspire a new generation of audiences”.