Playwright August Wilson believed that to mount an all-black production of Death of a Salesman, or any other play conceived for white actors, would be “to deny us our own humanity, our own history … as black Americans”. Femi Elufowoju Jr, citing Wilson’s words, defends his decision to feature a black family in Tennessee Williams’s classic about sibling love and family dysfunction. There were landed black American families in the 1930s in which this play was set, he states, even those who owned their own slaves. In the light of this, the central mother’s airs and graces, and her boasts of former beaux who were “planters on the Mississippi Delta” take on revised meanings. Elufowoju Jr changes some of the language, too, but more generally, the heritage of this family seems to sit naturally and unobtrusively within the drama, even if this is pre-civil rights America and the “gentleman caller” who comes to dinner is white Irish. In fact, Elufowoju Jr’s dramatisation is, beyond the central inversion, a faithful interpretation in its essence. Rebecca Brower’s design reveals both the inside and outside of a tenement building in St Louis, and the mother – like so many of Williams’s broken women – is the biggest, most mesmerising, presence on stage. Lesley Ewen plays the part with an almost exaggerated flamboyance, in both her bullying love towards her children and the excruciatingly coquettish southern charm she switches on for the gentleman caller. The siblings do not come alive quite so vividly. Naima Swaleh as the “crippled” daughter, Laura, emanates a melancholy interiority, but her emotional vulnerabilities are not sufficiently animated and the impassivity ends up appearing wooden. Michael Abubakar plays the restless son, Tom, with gusto, but his performance is perhaps too amped-up from the start, and the play’s quietly heart-wringing moments all but disappear. What also feels missing is the tenderness between Tom and Laura. There’s not enough connection between the siblings, meaning the emotional tragedy between the two, on which the play’s ending rests, is absent. The drama casts its spell nonetheless, bewitching us with its intensity and quiet torments. This is down partly to the poetry of Williams’s script itself but also to the pace and tension created on stage, particularly in the romance between Laura and Jim O’Connor, who Charlie Maher plays with the winning charm of a 1930s salesman. It is a heartfelt and engaging production, even if it feels surprisingly conventional in spite of its conceptual boldness. • At Arcola theatre, London, until 13 July.