Remind me: where had we got to with Top Gear? Ever since Jeremy Clarkson got sacked for punching that producer – amazingly, more than four years ago – the BBC has struggled to replace, or revive, or reboot the formula that made the show such a storming success. There was the new model with Matt LeBlanc and Chris Evans that didn’t really work. Then they tried a cut-and-shut version – without Evans, but with LeBlanc – but that didn’t really work either. The latest incarnation on BBC Two retains Evans’s replacement, motoring journalist Chris Harris, and partners him with – wait for it – Freddie Flintoff and Paddy McGuinness, the former England cricket captain and the erstwhile host of history’s most execrable game show, Take Me Out. It seems that the producers of Top Gear had developed a casting strategy based on that parlour game where you pull the names of celebrities out of a hat, and everyone keeps saying: “Sorry, I have no idea who this person is.” But you know what? Against all the odds, it works. It gives me no particular pleasure to suggest that some of the original magic of Top Gear has been rekindled by this unlikely trio, but, miraculously, it has. The larky, bad-tempered chemistry that existed between Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond has been replicated in a slightly sunnier form, and with a fresh energy. The old format has life in it yet. The first thing you notice is how young they all look. I mean relatively – they are all in their 40s – but compared with the grumpy, fed-up trio that took their act to Amazon and launched The Grand Tour, Harris, Flintoff and McGuinness look like a bold experiment in youth outreach. And to have not one but two northern presenters seems, in the context of Top Gear, like a stab at diversity. “I genuinely cannot understand a single word you two are saying,” says Harris at the outset. For this series – the 27th – most of the gimmicky short segments have been dispensed with. The Stig is mentioned in passing, but does not appear. There are no celebrity guests. The main event is a junket to Ethiopia, with each presenter driving an approximation of the first car they ever owned: a Ford Escort, a Mini and, for Flintoff, a Porsche Boxster (he was a professional cricketer, after all). The vehicles disintegrate in the manner we have all come to expect. Tempers fray a little in the heat, and the trio take part in some deeply stupid challenges (one of them involves driving while blindfolded), with a chunky knit jumper being awarded to the loser. McGuinness and Flintoff seize every opportunity to remind Harris that he is short. It is as undemanding as ever, although, for a brief moment when Harris demonstrates how to change a tyre without using a jack, I think I might be on the verge of learning something. This new incarnation is, if not exactly politically correct, at least not as aggressively un-PC as it was in the Clarkson days, when every segment seemed to be staged in defiance of the imagined objections of a muesli-eating, Guardian-reading, bicycle-riding straw man. The beauty of Ethiopia is frequently extolled, whereas before it might have served as a backdrop for a borderline racist prank. As if to assert how far the series has moved on, next week’s episode is devoted to electric cars. Try to imagine that happening under the Clarkson-Hammond-May axis. They would have probably just set fire to them, to the cheers of the studio audience. In that old line-up, the banter between the presenters could often feel more like workplace bullying. There was a period when it seemed that Clarkson and May were actively trying to murder Hammond – and there was a brief window when they might have got away with it. In contrast, the insults traded by McGuinness, Flintoff and Harris are barbed, but good-natured. The chemistry between them may be a fabrication, but it is chemistry nonetheless. What they share with Clarkson and his mates is a reliable comic timing. McGuinness may be the only one with “comedian” on his CV, but it is Harris who holds it all together. He has a wonderful deadpan stare, which makes him look angry and hurt at the same time. Top Gear’s great success lay in its appeal to viewers who didn’t care about cars. It was crowdpleasing fare; it went nowhere, fast. On this showing, it’s not going anywhere soon.