“Every blade of grass has its angel that bends over it and whispers, ‘Grow, grow’.” This beautiful line from the Talmud is the epigraph to social activist Hilary Cottam’s book, which argues for a reinvention of the welfare state so that all feel supported and can “live to our true and shared potential”. The postwar welfare state (“an original and brilliant experiment”) is unable to deal with the reality of modern life: it has become a “management state” in which 80% of the resource is spent on gate-keeping. A fundamental change is needed in which “the emphasis is not on managing need but on creating capability”. In 2006 she founded Participle, an organisation that designed and tested ways of enabling people to live “a good life” in the 21st century. For 10 years she worked with social workers, anthropologists and digital experts on experimental programmes that highlighted areas the original welfare state was not designed to address – families locked out of society, the transition into adulthood (the word “teenager” didn’t exist in William Beveridge’s day), modern diseases such as depression, obesity, diabetes and stress, the challenges raised by an ageing population. Working with thousands of participants, they tested solutions aimed not at managing problems but at helping people “to grow their capabilities: to learn, to work, to live healthily and to connect to one another”. Once people were given the means to take control of their lives, they embraced the challenge, made changes and improved their circumstances. She even saved the state money. An inspiring book that highlights the importance of building relationships in society and the need to “keep the human in view”, rather than reducing people to units or caseloads. • Radical Help: How We Can Remake the Relationships Between Us and Revolutionise the Welfare State is published by Virago (RRP £9.99) . To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.