Ten more Democratic presidential hopefuls are facing off at the second night of the Democratic debates in Florida on Thursday night, with a marquee matchup between two frontrunners – Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders. For the candidates on stage at the Adrienne Arsht Center in Miami for the second installment of back-to-back debates that are airing on on NBC, MSNBC and Telemundo, the evening presents a national platform to present their pitch to be the one Democratic challenger to take on Donald Trump in the 2020 election. Sanders kicked off proceedings, launching into his classic stump speech, followed by former vice president Biden, who began with an attack Donald Trump. California congressman Eric Swalwell was the first of the night to attack Biden, saying he was a child when Biden talked about the need to “pass the torch” to young people. As moderators tried to move the discussion on, squabbling erupted, prompting the first stand out line from California senator Kamala Harris: “America does not want to witness a food fight. They want to know how we’re gonna put food on the table.” Thursday’s group is likely to be hoping for the kind of reception the New Jersey senator Cory Booker, Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren and former housing secretary Julián Castro received on Wednesday night, while mustering more star power than the former El Paso congressman Beto O’Rourke was able to deliver. As on Wednesday, the debate lineup reflects the diversity of a party that is increasingly led by women and people of color. On stage, there will be three women – the California senator Kamala Harris, New York senator Kirsten Gillibrand, and author Marianne Williamson – as well as an openly gay man – Mayor Pete Buttigieg. Andrew Yang is Asian American and Harris is black and Asian American. The debate will also include two Coloradans: Senator Michael Bennet, who had previously served as the chief of staff for the other, former governor John Hickenlooper. But even more so than the first debate, the candidates will represent the ideological and generational span of the party. Forty years separate Buttigieg, who is 37, and Sanders, who is 77. Meanwhile, Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist, and Biden, an avowed moderate, will represent the two competing visions for the party and the country. Biden is the best-known candidate in the field and has consistently led national and state polls since he entered the race in April. But he has stumbled in recent weeks, clashing with his rivals over comments touting his civil working relationship with segregationist senators. He also recently reversed his long-held support for a ban on the use of federal money to pay for abortions, a shift his critics said showed how out of touch he was with the modern Democratic party. Sanders has leveled oblique attacks and Biden, who told donors at a closed-door fundraiser in New York earlier this month that he could combat inequality without demonizing wealthy Americans. Under a Biden administration, he told the donors, “Nothing would fundamentally change.” Biden has argued that Trump is an “aberration” and that the damage the president has inflicted on the country during his term in office can be undone if he is ousted. With support from black voters and an appeal to disaffected Democrats in the midwest, Biden believes he can rebuild the multiracial coalition that twice elected Barack Obama as president. Expect the former vice-president to highlight his relationship with Obama, who remains one of the most popular Democrats in the country. Sanders, by contrast, has called for a political revolution, championing progressive policies that would transform the US economy. His political influence is reflected in the Democratic field, where two candidates on stage on Wednesday night raised their hand in support of a key pillar of his Medicare for All healthcare proposal that would eliminate private insurance companies. For all the attention that will surely be heaped on the field’s heavyweights, the evening offers an opportunity for Harris to break out. Despite a strong entry into the race, the California lawmaker has struggled to stand out in the way she was able to during contentious Senate hearings with Trump appointees on Capitol Hill. This could also be a big night for Buttigieg, who soared from near-anonymity to the top of the Democratic field. But he has faced sharp criticism for his handling of a fatal shooting of a black man by a white police officer in South Bend. No one has ever jumped from mayor to president and Thursday could be his opportunity to demonstrate that he has the experience and leadership for the nation’s highest office. It could also prove to be a make-or-break moment for Kirsten Gillibrand, whose campaign has underperformed. Then there are the flamethrowers and wildcards. Yang has gained an online following around his proposal for a universal basic income. Hickenlooper, meanwhile, has attracted some attention by going after Sanders’s support for socialism. He also has a habit of making awkward comments, like when he revealed during a CNN town hall that he once took his mother to see a pornographic film. The first 10 Democratic candidates to take the stage on Wednesday covered a range of topics, including healthcare, immigration, climate change and guns. Those candidates were: Warren, Booker, Minnesota senator Amy Klobuchar, Castro, O’Rourke, Hawaii congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard, Washington governor Jay Inslee, New York mayor Bill de Blasio, Ohio congressman Tim Ryan and former Maryland congressman John Delaney.