There were five senior men’s internationals played at the weekend, but British readers may have missed out on this cosmopolitan extravaganza. Three of the fixtures were held in Sydney, one was in Auckland and one was in Jamaica. None were played in Europe. The NRL have finally realised that international rugby league is a product they can sell – but only when it suits them. Sadly, the Super League has yet to engage with this concept. In the highest profile fixture, Benji Marshall made his first international appearance in seven years, wiped away tears during the anthem and helped New Zealand beat Tonga 36-14 in front of an extraordinary crowd in Auckland in the opening game of the new-look Oceania Cup. Samoa beat Papua New Guinea 24-6 in game two. The Cook Islands remain in contention for the World Cup after their victory over South Africa in Sydney, where Fiji were too good for Lebanon. What is most important is that these games took place. If the NRL were to clear three weekends every year to focus on Origin, around 300 NRL players would be available to play internationals. There could be two or three full cards of NRL players in action for their countries on Origin weekends, with only the Australia players on NSW and Queensland duty. With the NRL’s support, the new Oceania Cup could grow into an elite – and eventually revenue-driving – competition. Done right, the NRL could create the equivalent of two or three extra rounds – and that is serious TV and ticket revenue for all concerned. However, until the NRL has standalone weekends for all Origin games, so players do not miss any club action, the international game will struggle to gain the status it requires to reach the next level. Europe needs the same. The only internationals on the continent last week were wheelchair (England did well to draw their series away to world champions France), students (the Four Nations in Edinburgh) and women (Italy beat Serbia). In a situation not helped by their breakaway from the RFL, the Super League decided against a mid-season break. With no England games coming up this autumn, Wayne Bennett preferred to meet his prospective Great Britain staff and players rather than have a match. Next year, the Super League should match the NRL rep weekend and help promote an international smorgasbord. The 2020 European Championship could kick off in June, with France v England, Wales v Scotland and Italy v Ireland. To ensure the stars take part, the RFL and Super League should work with the other European nations to pool more resources and enhance the players’ experience – and incentivise clubs to encourage their players turn out for teams other than England. The current system does the opposite. Of course, it is all down to brutal economics. The RFL are believed to pay England players about £10,000 a game, which is more than a month’s wages for some of the younger internationals. Scotland players might get £500 a game at a World Cup, the same for the whole of a European Championship tournament. I would be surprised if Wales and Ireland are much different. That’s not much compensation for a part-time player who has taken a couple of weeks off work to play. And it’s peanuts if the people paying your £250,000 salary don’t want you to play. This goes a long way to explaining why several young Irish internationals have accepted a place in the England system and why Regan Grace and Morgan Knowles were made unavailable to Wales for the Euros last autumn, which they won regardless. The Celtic nations usually lose money by playing low-key internationals, as their Pacific counterparts did until the NRL realised what could be done with so much familiar talent and unconquered markets. Grow these tournaments, turn the games into events and the money will arrive to propel them. The NRL is addressing this, slowly. The average NRL wage is around $400,000 (£220,000) with top stars on three times that. Kangaroos are paid $20,000 per Test and Origin pays $30,000 a game. Bear these figures in mind if you criticise NRL players for opting to turn to Australia rather than remain with a second-tier nation. At times, international rugby league is still a bizarre cottage industry, a ma-and-pa operation dealing with millionaire talent. It will remain so until more than three countries can offer suitably impressive experiences to elite players – and bring with them the corporate interest and broadcast deals that will help the whole thing take off. The challenge for the countries below the top three is to create an experience and culture that attracts everyone, regardless of their background and expectations. Only then will we see an end to highly respected Super League coaches telling their players to withdraw from major tournaments and players preferring to go on holiday than represent their country at a World Cup. That can’t be right. Clearing my late father-in-law’s house, I came across a pile of old Guardian newspapers. One from February 1982 included Paul Fitzpatrick’s report on Barrow beating Featherstone: “Barrow may have only an outside chance of winning the Slalom Lager Championship but they are one of the form teams in the first division.” We are unlikely to see those heady days again but Barrow’s shock win at Featherstone last Sunday could go a long way to keeping them in the second tier. It hardly had them dancing in the streets of Furness, but the 38-16 stuffing of a Fev side vying for second place was remarkable given that Barrow had won just three of their previous 17 games. With nine league games to go, second-bottom Barrow are among five clubs fighting to avoid the second relegation place now separated by just three points, including former world champions Widnes. I’ve spent the last fortnight up a mountain in Mallorca, where Catalan is the official language. Most nights I caught the half-hour sports news on the TV channel 3/24, which never once mentioned rugby, let alone the Dragons’ latest woes. It did, however, have a daily segment on the Cricket World Cup! With an introductory jingle accompanying images of former winners, it was presumably paid for by the ICC and the content provided for free to any station that wanted it. I very much hope the Rugby League World Cup will be doing the same in 2021. There was widespread praise for Wayne Bennett’s decision to appoint Salford coach Ian Watson and London Broncos boss Danny Ward as his two assistants for the Great Britain Lions tour this autumn. They are two of the brightest young British coaching talents in the top flight and are happy to learn from The Guru. Ward, 39, won just the one international cap – for the Lions against the Kangaroos when he was at Leeds – and Watson, 42, has a wealth of international experience, having played 30 times for Wales. They join Irish physio Dave O’Sullivan and his assistant, former Scotland fullback Matt Crowther, on Bennett’s staff. Given what Watson and Ward have achieved with severely limited resources, it would be a surprise if they were both still at their current clubs next season. Encouragingly, Betfred have extended their sponsorship of Super League until the end of 2021. Let’s hope they are not getting too good a deal. Betfred are expanding into the US, despite losing £40.7m last year. With their revenue up 15%, the Done family could still afford to pay themselves a £10m dividend. They could buy half of Super League with that. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook