Some weeks ago, my mother had a bad fall, which left her in a coma and in intensive care. My daughter, who is two, saw the aftermath, with my mother on the floor, bleeding badly. I was with them both at the time. My daughter was very upset. In addition, my wife had given birth the day before, so my daughter now has a baby brother who is getting a lot of attention, although she appears to be very fond of him. The effect of all of this is that my daughter is now reluctant to do even routine things that might involve a small amount of danger, such as having a bath. She is afraid for other people, too. She is wary at the top of a flight of stairs. At times, she also goes quiet and, asked what is wrong, will say something like: “Granny fell down the stairs.” The accident clearly plays on her mind and has left her fearful. My wife and I have encouraged her to talk and haven’t shied away from discussing my mother’s accident. We have reassured our daughter that her grandmother is getting better and that we are here to protect her. This has so far had little positive effect. I am so sorry to hear about your mum’s fall, although congratulations on the new baby. What a lot of conflicting emotions for adults to contend with in such a short space of time, let alone a toddler. I talked through your problem with Alexandra de Rementeria, a child psychotherapist (childpsychotherapy.org.uk). She explained that your daughter has “come up against two of life’s hardest lessons: that we are mortal and that we can be usurped, in quick succession. Worry is an entirely normal response to this too-sudden disillusionment.” Your daughter’s reaction to these intense life lessons is to be expected, although it is distressing for you, on top of your own worry about your mother and all that comes with a new baby. De Rementeria explained that children get their confidence to do things, such as walking down the stairs, by observing adults do it. But now that confidence has been shattered. Again, this is normal. It shows she feels safe to show you she is scared and expects you will help her with it – which you are doing. Be patient and, little by little, her confidence will come back. You are doing all the right things, listening to her and reassuring her. But, in the short term, you may need to break some things down for her. Try putting just a few inches of water in the bath, or sitting on the stairs when you go down. But only for a while. We can all regress when afraid. As far as the new baby is concerned, De Rementeria said it would be useful (when the time comes) to “make room for your daughter to acknowledge the full range of her feelings about her brother”. If you say something like: “He’s lovely, but can be rather noisy/demanding, can’t he?” it can teach your daughter that she may have conflicting feelings about the baby: that she may love him but also feel intensely annoyed or jealous. This is another useful lesson: that we can have feelings about a person that seem like opposites. De Rementeria also said that you may need to reassure your daughter that thoughts, even negative ones, cannot make things happen, which is something that children often fear. Include her wherever you can, and also try to spend one-on-one time with her, even if it is just a few minutes at bedtime. You sound very caring and also, if I may say, a bit of an overthinker (me, too). De Rementeria said something that may help you, as it did me. She said a life without stress isn’t desirable for children because “we need some stress to develop”. This, she explained, is how we learn what we are capable of and who we are. Allow your little girl space to talk, and answer her questions. Respond to what she asks (no more) factually and simply. Saying: “It won’t happen again” may not appease her; you may need to run through what to do if someone else has a fall, as her grandmother did (or whatever her worry is). Finally, do not be afraid of her fear. De Rementeria says: “Worry that does not overwhelm is not harmful in itself, and learning that worry can be managed is a very important and helpful lesson.” • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.