As a simmering Sebastian Vettel stalked into the room where the top three drivers in a grand prix wipe away their sweat and prepare to mount the podium, the only vacant seat was one under a large portrait of another Ferrari driver, a hero of the past. As well as being the man who gave his name to the circuit on which the Canadian Grand Prix had just been held, Gilles Villeneuve remains a symbol of motor racing at its most daring and flamboyant. Villeneuve was killed in 1982, halfway through his fifth season with the Italian team. He never won a world championship but Enzo Ferrari placed him alongside Tazio Nuvolari as the greatest of all those who had driven for him. Like Ferrari, the fans loved him for the way he allowed his emotions to show in his driving, for the way he would tear into the pits on three wheels, refusing to accept defeat, and – most of all – for the legendary duel with René Arnoux at Dijon over the last two laps of the 1979 French Grand Prix, the epitome of no-quarter wheel-to-wheel combat. “He’s off! He’s off! And he’s on again!” Murray Walker’s commentary that afternoon 40 years ago could have been transposed to Montreal on Sunday as Vettel’s mistake between turns three and four on lap 48 took him off the road, on to the grass, and back on to the asphalt in front of Lewis Hamilton, who was forced over the outside kerb as he braked to avoid hitting the Ferrari at around 120mph. Hamilton had been stalking Vettel all race, never more than a couple of seconds behind the leader, and pulling himself up to within a second – DRS range – when his adversary briefly left the track. Until then the final 20 laps had promised a classic battle for the chequered flag. But the news that the stewards had given Vettel a five-second penalty meant Hamilton just needed to stay close to secure the victory, which was how it turned out. Vettel’s subsequent tantrum was by no means the first of his career. Nor was Sunday’s mistake his first under pressure and no one would have been more aware of that than Hamilton. In motor racing, where overtaking is seldom easy, pressuring an opponent into making an error is a legitimate practice, one to which Vettel has proved himself vulnerable in the past. Nevertheless the instinctive reaction of those who have competed in the sport at the highest level or watched it for a long time was virtually unanimous. “The function of stewards is to penalise flagrantly unsafe moves, not honest mistakes as a result of hard racing,” Mario Andretti, the 1978 F1 world champion and a man of almost unequalled experience, tweeted soon afterwards. “No joy in watching this race, two champions driving brilliantly, will end in false result,” said Nigel Mansell, the champion of 1992. Damon Hill, who won the title in 1996, had a slightly more nuanced view: “My personal belief is that he could have left more room but … there was enough doubt to let them carry on.” Alex Wurz, a driver of more recent vintage, commented: “Was it sketchy? Yes. A penalty? Not in my view.” Yes, Vettel made a mistake, and Hamilton was obstructed as a result, but in regaining the track the German did nothing untoward. When his car came back off the grass , the instant bite of his 900-horsepower engine on the asphalt created a moment of oversteer which he could correct only with a touch of opposite lock on the wheel and a lot of throttle. Had he backed off to let Hamilton through, his car might have gone off in any direction, and probably into the wall. Those accusing him of premeditation may consider the words of Wurz, who noticed from the on-board footage that Vettel’s helmet did not move to look into his mirror until after the steering correction. For a champion, Vettel occasionally does stupid things, after which he tends to blame everyone else. Nine years ago in Istanbul he drove into the side of Mark Webber while trying to overtake his Red Bull teammate, costing them a one-two finish. In Baku two years ago, while Hamilton was leading the field behind the safety car, a petulant Vettel drew alongside and banged into him. Hamilton called that “a dangerous precedent for kids coming into the sport”. Sunday’s incident was not one of those. This was not an act of spontaneous aggression directed at an opponent. It was not Ayrton Senna bringing go-kart tactics into F1, taking revenge on Alain Prost by running him off the road at Suzuka in 1990. It was not Michael Schumacher first turning his crippled car into Damon Hill’s path in order to preserve his chance of winning the title in Adelaide in 1994 and then, in Jerez three years later, barging into Jacques Villeneuve with a similar intention. Among the stewards of Sunday’s race was Emanuele Pirro, a five-times Le Mans winner who started 37 F1 grands prix. He will have examined all the available evidence in the 10 minutes it took him and his colleagues to make their decision. Like VAR in football, the advent of punishment by stewards for indiscretions on the track was not universally welcomed. Given the way today’s drivers behave in cars and on tracks that insulate them from the consequences of their mistakes, it is not going to go away. But this time they got it wrong and Vettel, who is also halfway through his fifth season with Ferrari and desperate to win a title with the team, was the victim.