What were you hoping for?A man with integrity, a great sense of fun, a passion for carbs, and loyalty, courage and honesty. First impressions?In the best possible way – an absolute sweetheart. Charismatic, fun and totally himself. What did you talk about?Standard first-date chat – interests, background, ambitions, travel stories and, obviously, why we were both on a blind date. Any awkward moments?The odd but brief lull in conversation. Good table manners?Excellent, and a speedy drinker, which is a win in my book. Best thing about James?He is very comfortable in his own skin in a totally non-arrogant way. People can have an abundance of charisma and chat, but unfortunately be full of hot air. Would you introduce him to your friends?Oh, absolutely. James would be a hoot. They would definitely prefer him to me. Describe James in three wordsFun, loyal and... showbiz. What do you think he made of you?Definitely crazy bag man. For mundane reasons I was out of my flat all weekend and was swamped with bags. Other than that, hopefully adventurous, fun, kind, loyal. Did you go on somewhere?No. And... did you kiss?I would never kiss and tell, but for the purposes of my intrigued (or bored) readers: no kiss. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Nothing. Marks out of 10?A highly respectable 8. Would you meet again?We probably have different outlooks and are at slightly different stages, but you never know until you try. What were you hoping for?I wanted to go in with an open mind. First impressions?Quite handsome and well dressed. He went in for a hug straight away, which I thought was nice. What did you talk about?Our jobs couldn’t be more different, so it was really interesting talking about how our days differ. Any awkward moments?When we said we didn’t want dessert the waiter misunderstood, and appeared with a spread of cakes and scones. Adam doesn’t really like sweet things. Good table manners?No complaints. Best thing about Adam?He’s really inquisitive and has a dry sense of humour. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes! Describe Adam in three wordsConfident, intelligent, well-dressed. What do you think he made of you?He seemed interested in what I had to say and I made him laugh a few times, so that’s good. Did you go on somewhere?No, but we walked together to the station. And... did you kiss?A quick kiss on the cheek. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I probably would have chosen a more savoury sharing menu. Marks out of 10?A solid 7. Would you meet again?Yeah. I’ve just sent a text asking if he fancies date number two, so... stay tuned! • James and Adam ate at Momo, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com