The BBC has announced that it has invested £150,000 in a podcast series that will attempt to cash in on the trend for “hopepunk”. Based on the assumption that we are living in mercilessly dystopian times, it is a genre that offers a softer alternative for fraught millennials: optimism delivered as powerfully as possible through acts of kindness and “consciously chosen gentleness”. It is generally considered the opposite of “grimdark”, which is also a thing. But if you can’t wait for this buoyant new podcast, I have good news: we are already awash in hopepunk, whether you knew it or not. Here are 10 of the best series to get into: A sitcom that exists purely to explore the practical functions of ethical utilitarianism, arguing that even the most flawed human beings are capable of change with the right guidance. Also quite funny. Beset by channel switches, talent departures and the colourful off-screen lives of the judges, GBBO is almost hopepunk despite itself. Nevertheless, this sweet, creme-patissiere-topped show is still one of the warmest, most emotionally inclusive programmes on TV. Pretty much the hopepunk manifesto made flesh. This is a makeover show that operates from a standpoint of total empathy. During every episode, layers are peeled off, truths are uncovered and tears are shed. All the Queer Eye men are hopepunk figureheads. Even Antoni. Dating shows have a tendency to become gussied-up meat markets, but Dating Around is rare in that it rewards human connections. If a contestant acts with any entitled self-interest, they are roundly condemned. A series about a flesh-eating zombie may not sound particularly hopepunk, but dig past the gory premise and you are confronted with an endlessly optimistic sitcom about a couple who are able to work through their differences with love and patience. The first series of Parks and Recreation was a disaster because none of the characters seemed to like one another. But then everything clicked and it became a workplace comedy about the value of interconnected aspiration. (And the joys of bullying one specific colleague, but we should probably overlook that bit.) For many, Sense8 was a slog. But for those who endured, it blossomed into an important treatise on empathy as a superpower. Superficially not very hopepunk at all because scenes of whales mournfully carrying their dead offspring around aren’t particularly hopepunk. However, look at the scene where the production crew broke ranks to save hundreds of doomed penguins, or the overall message of humanity’s climate responsibility, and suddenly we are back on a much more hopepunk keel. In this year’s SNL finale, the cast-member Pete Davidson broke away from a rap about Game of Thrones to extoll the virtues of Netflix’s septuagenarian hopepunk comedy-drama Grace and Frankie. Two-thirds of the way through, DJ Khaled popped up to underline its popularity: “Grace and Frankie / They’re different, but they’re friends / It’s a nice show”. Doctor Who has always been hopepunk in spirit – it’s essentially a series about a non-violent crimefighter, after all – but its most recent series was its most hopepunk yet. Not only is the Doctor a woman, but a tried-and-true social justice warrior at that. Try to imagine Colin Baker revisiting the partition of India. You can’t, can you?