It happened again. Parliament was offered a clear route to take back control, and it promptly handed the ball back to the government. Late Wednesday afternoon, by a margin of 309 votes to 298, MPs decided not to commandeer the parliamentary timetable in order to legislate against no deal. The first thing to stress here is that parliament has not decided to back no deal. It has not given the government carte blanche, and it certainly hasn’t resolved not to enact legislation in the future. Rather, MPs have decided, on this occasion, to reject what many saw as an opposition power-grab, and certainly what many Conservatives view as an affront to the constitution. Our all-important conventions dictate that ministers, not the opposition or backbenchers, run the legislative agenda. There were plenty of reasons MPs did not back Labour’s motion. The government (at least under the current prime minister) has not signalled its intention to leave the EU without a deal, the deadline is still four months away, and many Tory loyalists will have decided not to rock the boat. Some feared the lack of clarity in Labour’s intentions (Brexit secretary Steve Barclay duly cautioned against a “blind motion”), while the whips reassured others that this was not their last chance to prevent a crash-out. And of course, MPs will have many other opportunities to seize control of parliamentary time before we reach the precipice. Consider which MPs filed through the lobbies. Although 10 Tories did vote with Labour today, many other sympathetic remainers stayed loyal. Two former ministers who earlier this year resigned to prevent no deal, Alistair Burt and Sarah Newton, voted with the government, as did Jo Johnson, who resigned to back a new referendum. Furthermore, a few committed supporters of a people’s vote, such as Labour’s Jo Stevens and Julie Elliott, and ex-Change UK MP Angela Smith, did not record votes. This was neither a definitive victory nor the final word. There will always be numerous lines of defence against no deal. A prime minister has to want it and their cabinet has to back it. Then they must ensure they retain the confidence of the House of Commons. After that, MPs will still pursue legislative options to prevent the cliff-edge, as they did on Wednesday. The Speaker has indicated that he will allow them to do so and, if necessary, bend parliamentary rules to facilitate it. As we approach the October cut-off point, MPs may grow more assertive. And yet. Even committed optimists on the remain side have to acknowledge the dangers. No-deal Brexit remains extremely unlikely but not impossible. Some MPs will not have the bravery to vote against their own side. Recent electoral results have also spooked some Labour MPs from leave areas into hardening their Brexit support. Although only eight Labour MPs opposed their party’s motion, too many others abstained. But really all this tells us is that MPs don’t know what to do. Even Labour’s referendum-sceptics hate no deal, and not many Tory moderates find the idea of medicine shortages acceptable. At the end of a disappointing day, we are stuck in the familiar paralysis which rules out every option. The only question which really matters – whether MPs would, in the end, choose no-Brexit over no-deal – was neither asked nor answered. Soon it may have to be. • Jonathan Lis is deputy director of the thinktank British Influence