This year, Glastonbury festival coincides with a momentous anniversary. It is 50 years since the Stonewall riots, when the boozers at a New York gay bar decided that they had been hassled one too many times. When the cops raided it, they fought back. That night sparked the modern LGBT rights movement – which some may say took a while to arrive at Glastonbury. It wasn’t until 2007 that gay culture found full-throated expression, in the shape of the NYC Downlow, a meticulous recreation of a sleazy 70s gay club, complete with drag queens, go-go dancers and even a darkroom round the back of the speakers, for those who would like an intimate moment soundtracked by pulverising house music served up by DJs including Midland and Eric Morillo. In the 12 years since, it has become the highlight of the Block9 area, a haven of after-hours partying. On Sunday night, the Downlow is due to mark the Stonewall anniversary with a show by the performer Jonny Woo, who promises 60s drag, a communal listen to Judy Garland’s Over the Rainbow (Garland’s death a few days earlier was said by some to have triggered the riot in 1969) and a moment in which he will say: “It’s 50 years; we’ve come this far. Look at the rights that you have and the sacrifices that people made, the lives lost, the shit that people went through, and remember the work that still needs to be done.” There may also be a surprise performance by a pop star: Kylie Minogue and Miley Cyrus are rumoured; both are due to play the Pyramid stage earlier in the day. “It’s about finding that moment in the madness where we come together for a minute, do a big show and then get off our tits,” says Woo. NYC Downlow is a space where queer culture is celebrated, says its co-creator Gideon Berger. “Our music, our culture, our identity – the Downlow is trying to create a space for that to be revered.” There’s another side-effect, too, he laughs: “Hot straight trade in the darkroom.” The retro ambience pays homage to a golden age of gay creativity, but it also serves as a reminder of more repressive times. “The Downlow aims to repoliticise gays,” Berger says. “It’s about saying: ‘Come on then – we’ve got a good thing going here, but look at our brothers and sisters being stoned to death or pushed off buildings in the rest of the world.” It is also a reminder that, as well as good times, nightspots have provided refuge and community to gay people going right back to Stonewall itself – safe spaces that are more necessary than ever, with backlashes against the gains of the LGBT movement never far away. “Nightclubs are political spaces,” says Woo. “You’ve got permission to express yourself, chill out and forget what society tells you are the acceptable ways of behaviour. If you come to Downlow, you can chuck that out of the window.”