We are writing to express our deep disappointment at the unwarranted smearing of the work and achievements of UCL provost Michael Arthur in Peter Wilby’s recent profile (The UCL provost who ‘doesn’t shirk the need for change’, Education, 4 June). As the article highlights, UCL is thriving in size. But, much more than this, it is thriving in research excellence, public contribution and global significance. It has risen to be one of the very best universities in the world, featuring among the top 10 universities across global league tables – a tremendous achievement for a public university. And Michael Arthur can take much credit for this. Steering a university of the size, complexity and prestige of UCL, with a £1.5bn budget, is no mean feat. It is disappointing, therefore, that Peter Wilby appears to have based his entire article on the views of a small, anonymous portion of our large and diverse academic body. It must be added that Wilby’s treatment of Tim Hunt’s notorious sexist comments is remarkable for a newspaper committed to gender equity. None of us are perfect. But Michael Arthur is a man of integrity and hallmarks of his leadership have included commitments to increasing equality and diversity, improving the student experience, enhancing a neglected estate and to academic excellence. These values and successes deserved to be recognised.Professor Piet Eeckhout Dean of the UCL Faculty of LawsProfessor Mark Emberton Dean of the UCL Faculty of Medical SciencesProfessor Becky Francis Director of the UCL Institute of Education (IOE)Professor Graham Hart Dean of the UCL Faculty of Population Health SciencesProfessor John Mullan Interim dean of the UCL Faculty of Arts and HumanitiesProfessor Ivan Parkin Dean of the UCL Faculty of Mathematical and Physical SciencesProfessor Alan Penn Dean of the UCL Faculty of Built EnvironmentProfessor Geraint Rees Dean of the UCL Faculty of Life SciencesProfessor Sasha Roseneil Dean of the UCL Faculty of Social and Historical SciencesProfessor Alan Thompson Dean of the UCL Faculty of Brain SciencesProfessor Nigel Titchener-Hooker Dean of the UCL Faculty of Engineering Sciences • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition