The rehabilitation of David Warner continues apace – as does the World Cup after the deluge. At a mercifully dry Taunton Warner struck his second World Cup century, which guaranteed Australia a total that was just enough to see off Pakistan, who offered an exasperating mixture of charisma and chaos. At the end of an entertaining contest Aaron Finch’s side won by 41 runs though they had a few anxieties along the way. Australia are not yet at full throttle, and are too dependent on their big players, but they are on course for the semi-finals. Understandably put into bat owing to the combination of a tinge of green on the pitch and thick clouds above it, they amassed 307 thanks to their opening batsmen. They might have scored 50 more but could only muster 51 for six from the last 10 overs with Mohammad Amir (five for 30) their chief tormentor. Despite that hiccup Australia had enough firepower to control the game, even though Pat Cummins (three for 33) and Mitchell Starc (two for 43), who returned at the end to take vital wickets, provide too high a percentage of the ammunition. Like several teams in this tournament, there is a considerable gulf between the star bowlers in the Australian side and the auxiliaries. Warner had clearly done some valuable work since playing against India at the Oval when, by his standards, he crawled along. In all probability this was done not in the nets but in conversation with Ricky Ponting and Justin Langer. Here Warner appeared calm, rather than careworn, positive rather than perplexed. An early boundary flicked off his hip was a reminder – to himself and the bowlers – that he still knows how to bat. The square cut was in good working order too and there were no hesitations when running between the wickets with his familiar partner, Finch. So within five overs Warner was nervelessly on his way, albeit in testing conditions. Unsurprisingly there was movement available for any pace bowler who could maintain the sort of line and length that is suitable for a Test match. Unfortunately for Pakistan at the outset Amir was the only man to fulfil those criteria, although Wahab Riaz bowled effectively later in the innings. Amir beat the bat frequently without finding an edge. Most often Finch was at the other end when this happened. The Australia captain remained unmoved, phlegmatically determined to press on, especially after he was badly dropped at slip by Asif Ali on 26 off the bowling of Wahab. Whenever the bowlers allowed, Finch seized on the wayward ball, crunching the first six of the day to square leg off Shaheen Afridi, who was profligate in his first spell, which had to be restricted to two overs. The pair had added 146 together in 22 overs when Amir returned to dismiss Finch, who badly miscued a drive to extra cover. Even so Australia seemed certain to acquire a monumental total, which amounts to anything over 350 in this tournament. Warner, while batting with far greater fluency than at the Oval, was still measured in his approach and he ensured he notched three figures without too many dramas, a landmark that he celebrated extravagantly in front of a surprisingly silent crowd – the majority of spectators were supporting Pakistan. Warner departed for 107 from 111 balls; Glenn Maxwell delivered his customary cameo of 20 from 10 balls but somehow the innings spluttered to a halt thanks to the excellence of Amir and an Australia tail who were rusty. In this era 308 is gettable and for a while Pakistan were on course despite losing Fakhar Zaman, a feast or famine batsman, for a duck.Imam-ul-Haq dug in against Starc and Cummins alongside Babar Azam and Mohammed Hafeez to take Pakistan to 136 for two. Then four wickets fell for 24, including that of the dangerous Hafeez, who contrived to hit an ugly full toss from part-timer Finch straight into the hands of Starc on the midwicket boundary. Not all the boundaries at Taunton are miniscule. At 160 for six Pakistan seemed out of the game. Yet Hassan Ali and the irrepressible Wahab not only kept Sarfaraz Ahmed company, they also did the bulk of the scoring via an array of mighty strikes, six of which sent the ball over the boundary. At 264 for seven with a partnership of 64 threatening Australia and Cummins already bowled out, the game was back in the balance. Now Starc intervened. Australia reviewed for a catch behind and a spike determined Wahab had to go; Amir was bowled off the inside edge second ball and a Maxwell throw hit the stumps with Sarfaraz stranded to finish the game in a rush. Australia exchanged high fives with as much relief as celebration. Warner said: “I played the way I know I can play, which was awesome. It’s great to be back and part of the team. I was always coming back – if selected.” He was also eager to acknowledge the support of his family and wife. “She’s been my rock.”