Do I really need a separate knife for veg, meat, fish and so on, or will just the one good kitchen knife do?Erica, Box Hill, Surrey It depends mainly on whether you want to keep your fingers attached to your hands, Erica. Chef Mark Birchall, whose restaurant Moor Hall near Ormskirk in Lancashire was last week voted the UK’s best at the annual National Restaurant Awards, likens his knives to a toolkit: “No one reaches in and picks out the same screwdriver for every DIY job, do they?” he says bluntly. “You just can’t fillet a fish with the same knife you use to chop parsley.” But that doesn’t mean you have to go to town on the knife collection, Birchall says. “You need a short, stiff knife [AKA a chef’s knife] for general everyday stuff, from chopping veg to trimming a rack of lamb, for example. A long, flexible blade for boning meat and filleting or skinning fish. And a serrated one for bread.” If you want to push the boat out, “a paring knife is handy for prep and peeling, but it’s not essential”, he adds. The big drawback is cost – Birchall favours US brand Mac (from about £90 for a basic chef’s knife), Japanese Missono (£150-plus) or a reliable German marque such as Wüsthof or Henckels (£80-100) – but he reckons a comparatively cheap Victorinox (from about £24) will do the job just as well: “You’d be surprised how many chefs use those day-to-day.” He says that the type and brand is less important than a knife that’s properly sharp and feels comfortable in the hand – and that applies to a domestic kitchen as much as to a professional one. “You’re far more likely to slip and injure yourself with a blunt knife than a scarily sharp one.” As for comfort, that’s more personal preference: “I don’t like a chef’s knife that’s too light, especially if I’m stood there chopping for hours at a time. You end up gripping it too tightly and end up with terrible hand-ache.” Some of the cooks in Birchall’s kitchen keep 10 or more blades in their knife rolls: “Chefs can get a bit obsessive about them,” he laughs, “but most only ever use those three main types, no matter how many they own. A lot of it’s just willy-waving.” Talking of knife spods, food writer Tim Hayward has penned an entire book on the subject, called Knife – well, obviously (the paperback edition came out at the end of last month). It’s a love letter to the kitchen knife in general and to his own extensive collection especially. Hayward has a particular soft spot for Japanese knives, on both aesthetic and practical grounds. “They have this special vegetable knife, an usuba, a sort of long, narrow chopper,” he says, “because the way they traditionally cut veg, there’s no need for a sharp point. They also have dedicated knives for fish [deba and yanagiba] and meat, the gyuto or ‘cow blade’.” But even Hayward, who runs Cambridge bakery Fitzbillies as a sideline to the day job, agrees that there’s no need to go overboard: “If you want to take the skin off fish fillets, it’s a good idea to have a knife with a flexible blade, and if you’re cutting through bone or cartilage in meat, you’ll need a cleaver, but with those two exceptions, for a western cook, a decent 8in or 10in chef’s knife will do just about everything else.” And anyway, the notion of combining knife styles in a single blade is catching on even in Japan: “They now make a knife called a santoku, which means ‘three strengths’,” Hayward says. “It looks much like a western chef’s knife and is considered suitable for all three food types: veg, fish and meat.” He won’t reveal how many blades he owns, but it possibly rivals John Lewis’ kitchen department. And, at the end of the day, it’s up to you (and your budget) whether you choose to hop down that particular rabbit hole. • Do you have a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.