Adam Kay is sending a copy of his bestselling memoir about life as a junior doctor, This Is Going to Hurt, to all 330 Conservative MPs ahead of their vote on the new Tory leader, to remind them of how leading contender Jeremy Hunt “left the NHS in tatters” after his stint as health secretary. Hunt, who is now foreign secretary, has pitched himself as the “serious leader” the UK needs in the Conservative party leadership race, arguing that he is the best negotiator to deliver Brexit. Kay said he was sending his memoirs to MPs because he “wanted to remind those ‘honourable friends’ with any honour quite what those in the health service actually thought of those ‘negotiation skills’ Mr Hunt has been boasting about’. Speaking on Wednesday, Kay said: “If a week is a long time in politics then the 11 months since Jeremy Hunt left the NHS in tatters must be a generation ago. Much as I don’t want to be complicit in a world where we have prime minister Johnson, I can’t sit back and watch Hunt’s record on health go somehow unmentioned.” Hunt, who was health secretary between 2012 and 2018, clashed with junior doctors in 2015 and 2016 over a new contract that sought, among other things, to extend doctors’ normal working week hours to include Saturdays and weekday evenings from 7pm until 10pm. The bitter dispute led to strike action across the NHS. “It was his actions – forcing an unfair and unsafe contract on the junior doctors and then leading a misinformation campaign when they fought against it – that led me to dig out my junior doctor diaries and have them published,” said Kay, lambasting Hunt as “the biggest villain of them all” for “hacking back at NHS funding, driving overworked staff to breaking point, leaving us with over 100,000 vacancies, then watching unflinchingly as his actions saw every imaginable waiting time soar, from ambulance call-outs to oncology appointments.” A former junior doctor, Kay left medicine in 2010 and is now a comedian and author. He ends his 2017 memoirs with an open letter to Hunt, challenging him to work a shift alongside junior doctors. “Palliate a cancer patient; watch a trauma victim have their leg amputated; deliver a dead baby,” Kay writes. “Because I defy any human being, even you, to know what the job really entails and question a single doctor’s motivation. If you knew, you would be applauding them, you’d be proud of them, you’d be humbled by them, and you’d be eternally grateful for everything they do. The way you treat junior doctors demonstrably doesn’t work. I strongly suggest you seek a second opinion.” After This is Going to Hurt hit the top of book charts, and readers began sending copies to Hunt, the then health secretary invited Kay in for a meeting, at which the pair discussed the junior doctors’ dispute, the number of junior doctors leaving their jobs and the rise in infant mortality. It did not go well. “He admitted he’d failed to communicate properly and said how deeply he regretted that strikes ever took place. My turn. I asked him: ‘If you could go back in time, what would you do differently?’” Kay wrote in the Mirror. “He insisted he wouldn’t change anything he did at all, so I guess we have rather different ideas about ‘regret’.” On the staffing crisis, Hunt denied to Kay that there had been a significant increase in junior doctors leaving the profession. “I offered the latest official statistics showing only half of them now continue after their first two years, a huge change from past years. ‘I don’t recognise those figures.’ he said. About official figures,” wrote Kay. The initiative follows a tweet from Kay earlier this week in which he asked his followers: “How much is it going to cost me to send a copy of This Is Going to Hurt to every Conservative member who might vote for Jeremy Hunt?” When many offered to crowdfund the gesture, Kay decided that there were “much better uses for charitable donations” and that he would fund sending a copy to the 330 Conservative MPs himself. Each copy will include a note from Kay that reads: “I realise you have some big decisions to make, so I thought you could do with some light reading.”