Who are the biggest frauds and charlatans: Donald Trump, or his erstwhile Republican opponents? In the different political universe of four years ago, when Trump’s odds of clinching the Republican nomination were judged to be 1%, everyone – including members of the Grand Old Party – could ridicule and excoriate this reality TV tycoon as an absurd clown. Who can forget the bitter primary contest when Ted Cruz flamed him as “a pathological liar”, “utterly amoral”, “a serial philanderer” and a “rat”? “Why would we trust him in the White House?” he asked. Or what of the bitter tirades of Marco Rubio, who denounced Trump for turning “the most important election in a generation into a freak show”, called him a “con artist”, an embarrassment, who attacked his “dangerous style of leadership”, and pleaded for Republican voters to “end this lunacy”? They all capitulated. Everyone is entitled to change their mind when the facts change. But no facts changed about Trump Then there’s the Republican Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, who suggested that Republican colleagues fearful of losing their seats should break with Trump, declaring: “We’ll drop him like a hot rock.” Or the former House speaker, Paul Ryan, who correctly described comments by Trump as the “textbook definition of racist”? They all capitulated, of course, every single one. Everyone is entitled to change their mind when the facts do. But no facts have changed about Trump: he remains a pathological liar, a conman, utterly amoral (dismissed by Trump as fake news), and the Republican establishment – as tawdry and venal as it is – knows all this. But Trumpism became a convenient vehicle with which to slash taxes for the rich, to deregulate, to attack even the modest reforms of Obamacare, and to undermine environmental and consumer protections and workers’ rights. The “freak show” described by Rubio serves a purpose: it provides a distraction, as the author Naomi Klein has noted, from Trump’s actual political agenda. To paraphrase Theresa May, in her first prime minister’s questions: “Remind you of anybody?” Donald Trump’s mini-me, Boris Johnson, is in the ascendant: the Tory crown is his to lose. But his colleagues know he’s an incompetent, a man who cares only for himself, who was fired twice – by a newspaper editor and a party leader – over allegations of dishonesty. A former adviser to Michael Gove recalls how, in meetings, “he was never prepared”, that “he could never focus”, that he was “an embarrassment”, and that “nearly everyone who worked with him says the same”. When Amber Rudd memorably declared, “You can’t trust him to take you home at the end of the evening,” it seemed she was simply summing up the private thinking of many of her colleagues. That hasn’t stopped her allegedly attempting to strike a pact with him, of course. Tory MPs know Johnson is a farcical choice for prime minister. But they are also desperate. They fear a Labour party that will overturn an economic and political consensus constructed by Margaret Thatcher four decades ago, and they see the rising tide of Farageism lapping at their feet. They have concluded that the normal rules of politics have been abandoned; and that the mass politics of a second Corbyn general election campaign can only be answered with a guy who gets spontaneous requests for selfies on the high street. The Republican party is now the Trump party, and the Trumpification of our own Conservative party beckons too. Just as Trump was, we were reassured, basically just a bombastic New York Democrat, Johnson, it’s claimed, is really just a “one nation Conservative”. Let’s get real here about a man who called black people “piccaninnies” with “watermelon smiles”; who wrote of “tank-topped bumboys” and declared that if equal marriage was permissible, why not a union “between three men, as well as two men, or indeed three men and a dog”; who edited the Spectator when it published an article declaring black people had lower IQs than whites, who joked about cleaning the dead bodies from Libya to turn it into a tourist resort; and who compared Muslim women to bank robbers and letterboxes. Johnson, in truth, will say or do anything he thinks is to his own political advantage. He knows the remaining Tory party membership is Ukip in exile; and he knows the Tories’ electoral chances hinge on winning back those voters who have defected en masse to the hard-right Brexit party. A key ally will be Jacob Rees-Mogg, an ultra-reactionary opponent of LGBTQ rights and abortion who seems to attract unpleasant, sinister supporters. We can expect a Johnson government to rely on bigotry and demagoguery: both will build support for a no-deal exit from the EU and deflect from economic policies that will only benefit Britain’s elites. Some Tories will privately consider it all terribly vulgar, troubling even – but they will go along with this dangerous show, just as Trump’s arch-nemeses in the Republican party did. The Boris Johnson circus, like Trump’s, will prove the ultimate distraction: much of the media, which goes giddy at the knees at his every absurd pronouncement, will indulge where they should scrutinise. As an increasingly authoritarian brand of rightwing populism consolidates its grip on power, Johnson will be its slapstick front man. And so back to a version of my initial question. Who are the biggest frauds and charlatans: Johnson, or the Tories who will help impose him on Britain, despite knowing how dangerous he is? • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist