Of course they booed David Warner when he came out to bat, and he will have to get used to that. And in the quiet moments one could catch occasional catcalls on the wind too, cries of “Oi! Warner...” Up on the balcony of one of the flats at the Ashley Down Road End there were a couple who had come dressed, you guess, as sheets of sandpaper. Only from a distance one might have confused their homemade outfits for a couple of chips, or perhaps a pair of Weetabix. Had Warner eaten his that morning? He did not bat like it. This was his first proper international match since he made his comeback and he marked it with one of the slowest, most deliberate innings of his career. The last time these two teams met, in the 2015 World Cup, Warner played one of the great hell-raising innings, a barn-burning 178 off 133 balls, five sixes, 19 fours and, for the Afghans, a thousand indignities. They conceded 417. Warner took their hero, the irrepressible Hamid Hassan, for 40 runs off 22 balls, thump, four over square leg, thump, four over mid-off, thump four down the ground, thump, thump, thump. “The boys were surprised at how quick that fella bowled,” Warner said later. He had obviously been impressed, then, just not so much that he was able to remember the fella’s name. Four years later Australia’s captain, Aaron Finch, warned that this was a different Afghan side from the one they beat back then. But watching Warner play, it did not feel as if it was Afghanistan who had changed. In 2015 Warner flogged 20 runs off the first six balls Hamid bowled to him. This time he played out a prim and proper maiden. It was only the 15th time Warner has done that in his one-day career. He did it for the 16th soon afterwards, too. It was the first time he has ever played out two maiden overs in a single ODI innings. It was all the more conspicuous because of the way Finch was laying into Mujeeb ur Rahman at the other end. He hit him for 24 off his first 12 balls. Hamid was bowling well, though, better than Rahman. Like Warner, Hamid has missed a lot of cricket in the last few years. He has had so many injuries it is a surprise he is still playing at all. But he managed to get back for this World Cup, which, he says, will likely be the last cricket he plays. Here at Bristol he managed to find, from deep down inside, the same sort of pace that he had back in 2008, when he was a superstar kid just out of tape-ball cricket. He is still wearing the headband and has the Afghan flags painted on his cheeks, but he is a little thicker around the middle now, and his hair has turned pepper grey. He was bowling fast here, though, up around 90mph on a line tight on Warner’s off-stump. In Hamid’s third over Warner fenced at a ball that slid across him and edged a catch through to slip. But Rahmat Shah dropped it. The ball rolled on for four, the only one he conceded all day. After that chance Warner became even more cautious. He was so self-restrained it was as if he was taking the mickey out of himself. He blocked a lot, tipped singles this way and that, bashed the occasional four and generally batted with a monkish asceticism that matched his bushy new beard. His fifty took him 74 balls, which made it the slowest of the 32 he has scored. In the end he fetched up with 89 off 114 balls, which was enough to make him the man of the match. Warner said later that he had felt nervous about the comeback. And while one would not necessarily have guessed it from listening to him talk – he sounded much the same as ever – you could see a change in the way he played. It felt as if Warner wanted to prove a point, to himself, and everyone else, as if he wanted to show he was going to curb his own aggressive instincts because that was what the team needed. Odd thing was they did not, really, since they won at a canter anyway. If he goes on like this, he will likely make a lot of runs this summer but will be a lot less entertaining to watch, too.