Youcef Belaïli fired Algeria into the last 16 of the Africa Cup of Nations with the only goal of a bad-tempered 1-0 victory over Senegal in Cairo. There was particular frustration for Liverpool’s Sadio Mané, whose call for a second-half penalty fell on deaf ears as Algeria’s physical approach proved the more effective method at the 30 June Stadium. Algeria threatened to score twice in the first half, with Edouard Mendy making a diving save to keep out Belaïli’s free-kick in the 17th minute. In stoppage time Baghdad Bounedjah, moments after heading wide, had a shot parried wide by Mendy. Belaïli opened the scoring shortly after the break with a powerful shot from the edge of the box following a rapid Algerian attacking move. Mané then thought he had earned a penalty when he was challenged by two Algerian defenders, but the referee was not interested. Raïs M’Bolhi came to Algeria’s rescue with a convincing stop from a M’Baye Niang shot as time ticked away with Senegal continuing to push hard – but Mané could only head over the bar at the end. Algeria are guaranteed to top Group C, while Senegal will face Kenya in a battle for second place. The Harambee Stars came from behind to defeat local rivals Tanzania 3-2 in Thursday’s late game. Tanzania got off to a flying start as Simon Msuva tapped in, before Michael Olunga equalised with an acrobatic finish 39 minutes in. Kenya were level for just 60 seconds, with Mbwana Samatta finding the bottom corner to put Tanzania back in front. Johanna Omolo headed home from a corner to bring Kenya level just after the hour mark, and Olunga settled a thrilling contest with a fine finish from the edge of the penalty area. Earlier, tournament debutants Madagascar took a giant stride towards the next round when Marco Ilaimaharitra hammered home a late free-kick to beat Burundi 1-0. They now have four points from their two Group B games and even if they do not finish in the top two places, Madagascar look well-set to at least get one of the four best third-place slots for progression to the last 16. After holding Guinea to a 2-2 draw in their opener, Madagascar went one better with their first-ever finals victory. Ilaimaharitra, a midfielder, blasted in the winner in the 76th minute after Burundi had given away a free-kick on the edge of their area. Burundi looked the stronger side after taking off their struggling captain, Saido Berahino. Fiston Abdul Razak sent a header just wide in the 64th minute and four minutes later a Gaël Bigirimana free-kick was saved. Ilaimaharitra then broke the deadlock against the run of play and might have scored a second two minutes from time, but Burundi keeper Jonathan Nahimana saved well. It was the second straight loss for Burundi, after a 1-0 defeat by group leaders Nigeria. Madagascar finish the group stage against Nigeria on Sunday,while Burundi face Guinea.