The protests blaming the BBC for ending free TV licences for the over-75s have neatly fallen into the government’s trap (Report, 11 June). As with local government closures of libraries and Sure Start centres, the blame has been outsourced from its origin. Gordon Brown introduced the scheme as part of support for poorer pensioners before the triple lock was introduced. That has seen pensioner incomes rise much faster than other welfare recipients. The Conservative government, as part of its austerity programme, decided to dump the cost on to the BBC and now the ire is directed at the broadcaster, particularly by media organisations that see it as a rival, envy its funding or dislike its even-handed approach to reporting, calling this “socialist”. Having enjoyed a free licence for some years, I am delighted that it will now be restricted to those, unlike myself, who are less well off. Sadly, even this will impose a reduction in BBC funding. Looks like a win-win for the government, which gets off scot-free, indeed benefits from the reduction.Michael MillerSheffield • How supine of the BBC to be so willing to act on behalf of the government in ending the free television licence for pensioners, except for the very poor. Having decided to break the election promise to continue with the scheme during this parliament, ministers decided the best course was to subcontract doing that to the BBC. They knew the people they were dealing with. And with the Tory leadership contenders urging income tax cuts, one can be sure the money saved by the government will not help the millions of children living in poverty or deal with the number of dilapidated school buildings, all of which should shame every Tory MP.David WinnickLondon • It’s little wonder the BBC “faced fierce criticism” over its decision to make most over-75s pay the licence fee. Arguing that this was the “only way to avoid closing channels and making substantial cutbacks” is the most feeble of excuses, especially when the corporation’s history of profligacy is taken into account. Alternative ways include imposing a salary cap on all its presenters and managers and insisting on a strict policy of no tax avoidance. Why there is a need to pay obscene amounts of licence-fee payers’ money to presenters of sports-highlights programmes, pundits and newsreaders escapes me, especially when there is so much kudos to be gained by working for the national broadcasting company. Similarly, why the BBC has to pay over one hundred of its managers more than the prime minister is equally bewildering.Bernie EvansLiverpool • With what exquisite irony the BBC announcement on the licence fee was made. Last week, the D-day commemorations were held and the media used old people as fodder for feasting on the event. Those with secure incomes, such as senior politicians, senior military personnel, royals, clergy, celebrities and TV presenters, lined up to be seen with these men and women, praising their fortitude, bravery and patriotism, their value seemingly beyond words. Yet by Monday they were not even worth £154.Pam RoudSomersham, Cambridgeshire • The free TV licence for the over-75s has been a social benefit for which they have had to make an application. If the same benefit can be achieved by those entitled making an application for pension credit, surely they will now be encouraged to take that step and take up all of their due benefits. This may cause some pain to the Treasury, of course, but also no doubt a little smile of satisfaction at the BBC.John ReynoldsCollingham, Nottinghamshire • What’s next – the bus pass?Joe RossLewes, East Sussex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition