Stop all the clocks, cut off the fro-yo machine: The Good Place, the smart but silly sitcom that has reliably wrung laughs out of the afterlife, will definitively end with its upcoming fourth season. But this is not the usual story of a cherished but underperforming show being cancelled too soon by an uncaring network. Confirming the news on Twitter, creator Mike Schur took great pains to point out that wrapping up his existential sitcom after four seasons was entirely a creative decision, one that he had been contemplating since The Good Place got its first renewal from NBC. If there was a diabolical temptation to try to artificially extend the lifespan of a life-affirming comedy that has burned through plotlines and premises with often anarchic glee, Schur has apparently remained steadfast. (“We don’t want to tread water just because the water is warm and pleasant,” is how he put it.) In a TV landscape that seems wilder than ever, going out on your own terms with the full support of your network – season four of The Good Place will consist of the usual 13 half-hours plus an hour-long finale, bringing the final episode count to 53 – is unusual. For a long time, the commercial imperative was usually to try and keep even so-so US sitcoms on life support until they reached 100 episodes, the magic milestone where they could be profitably packaged up and resold to other channels to run in syndication. That was the aim as recently as 2012, when Charlie Sheen’s post-Two And A Half Men project, Anger Management, was given an unprecedented – and arguably unwarranted – 90-episode renewal order after its first season. Even now, most sitcoms aspire to achieve a blissful yet lucrative state of limbo, a point where the main players have become both familiar and beloved but their physical and emotional situation remains essentially static so the show can trundle on for as long as possible. The reigning heavyweight champs are Friends, currently enjoying a buzzy second life on streaming, and The Big Bang Theory, which recently brought the curtain down on a 12-season, 279-episode experiment in parcelling out painfully incremental character development. Schur, a veteran of Parks & Recreation and Brooklyn Nine-Nine, seemingly cut to the chase with The Good Place by setting it in actual limbo. On paper, it is a sitcom seemingly custom-built to facilitate endless reboots, with its four flawed humans – boozy scammer Eleanor (Kristen Bell), uptight educator Chidi (William Jackson Harper), entitled socialite Tahani (Jameela Jamil) and amiable doofus Jason (Manny Jacinto) – waking up in an idealised pseudo-paradise, a candy-coloured slice of heaven that can be customised and restarted at will. Even after going on the run across various dimensions and earthly realms in seasons two and three, all four are now back where they started, preparing to run yet another version of The Good Place simulation. In the afterlife, time is a meaningless concept so this thing could theoretically last for ever, right? The difference is that Schur and his team of writers have made character growth their focus, crafting a properly serialised story punctuated regularly by gripping cliffhangers. Whatever dimension they are in, the Good Place cast are never in stasis: as well as the four human souls struggling to be better people, there is also dapper Michael (Ted Danson), a formerly all-powerful cosmic being who is the architect of the Good Place, and his loyal AI assistant Janet (D’Arcy Carden), a hyper-advanced help-bot evolving at breakneck speed but visibly struggling to process emotions. It is a sitcom that has turned Seinfeld’s “no hugging, no learning” mantra inside out, with heartfelt displays of affection and unexpectedly entertaining lectures in moral philosophy. Season three may initially have had a bit of a wobble but overall it has been an exhilarating journey. In keeping with the show’s deeply moral core, Schur’s pre-emptive announcement feels like a kindness, giving hardcore fans a few months to come to terms with the reality of their favourite show ending. It also comes at a time when the topic of endings has been at the forefront of the cultural conversation. Deadwood has had its unexpected last ride. Fleabag has neatly tied things off after two exemplary seasons. And the dust has finally settled in Westeros, albeit leaving most viewers with the slightly aggravated feeling that despite taking two years to come to the screen it all ended up being a little rushed. Of course, Schur was also responsible for engineering one of the most audacious plot twists in recent TV history at the end of season one of The Good Place, so perhaps this is all just groundwork for another rug-pulling reversal. But, like Ted Danson, he seems like an impeccably nice guy. So he wouldn’t do that to us. Would he?