A couple from Oxford have been spared jail after they were convicted of funding terrorism offences by sending or attempting to send money to their Muslim convert son while he was living under Islamic State in Syria. John Letts, 58, an organic grain farmer, and Sally Lane, 57, who formerly worked in marketing and book publishing, defied police warnings when they sent or attempted to send £1,723 to their son, Jack Letts, now 23. The couple knew they were breaking the law, the jury was told. In one message, Lane told their son: “I would go to prison for you if I thought it gave you a better chance of actually reaching your 25th birthday.” The judge sentenced them to 15 months’ imprisonment suspended for 12 months. Jack Letts converted to Islam at 16, and travelled to Syria in 2014 when he was 18. His parents claimed he was not a jihadist fighter but acting as a translator living in a civilian area of Isis-controlled territory. The prosecution had argued that the couple “did not want to hear the truth”. “Parents turning a blind eye to the obvious is not a defence. Saying they wanted to help Jack is not a defence. They are not above the law,” Alison Morgan QC, prosecuting, told the jury at the Old Bailey in London. She continued: “Their desire to help their son cannot come before the need to protect the public. “Once Jack Letts made the decision that he did to follow Islamic State to Syria, and live in Islamic State territory, and to defend its ideals and goals, the normal parenting rules for what you can do to help your child change.” The couple’s “complete refusal to accept the reality that all those around them could see” had led to their prosecution. The couple claimed their son’s life was in danger because he wanted to leave and the money was intended to get him out of Syria. “That was the price we had to pay, and if that was the price we had to pay, then we were going to do it,” Lane had told the court. A jury deliberated for nearly 20 hours to find the defendants guilty of one charge of funding terrorism in in September 2015 but not guilty of the same charge in December 2015. Jurors were discharged after they were unable to decide on a third charge relating to an attempt to send money in January 2016. Lane and her husband will be sentenced at a later date.