Like many people who have seen those images of birds eating plastic atop giant islands of rubbish, I’ve become deeply concerned about waste. So for clothing, books and general household things, I head straight to secondhand stores. But if I’m honest, this shopping choice isn’t solely driven from an environmental standpoint. Between my career choices of social work, freelance writing and depression-related unemployment (the trifecta of financial success!), I’ve always been a bit … skint. If you regularly frequent op shops you might have noticed two distinct groups of customers: trendy young people searching for vintage threads while vaguely appropriating working-class culture, or people a bit down and out needing a warm coat. I tend to straddle the two categories. Over the years I’ve tried to make secondhand shopping fun and it has become a hobby of mine. I try on sweaters while secretly re-enacting a shopping montage from a 90s romcom while Shania Twain plays in my head. (Let’s go girls). And lately I’ve started visiting these stores regardless of whether I really need anything because I’ve become hooked on one element of it all: the tiny historical items left behind by previous owners. I love excitedly reaching into the pockets of a trench or trouser – will I find a treasure? More often than not it’s a tissue, but sometimes I find a gem. Not an actual gemstone, but a treasure nonetheless that offers an inkling into the previous owner’s life. I’ve become captivated by these tidbits accidentally left behind that reveal tiny hints about total strangers. Grocery lists, receipts and once even a long letter within a book (“Laura honey, it’s Robert … ”). The letter appeared to have been left on the dashboard of Laura’s car from a hopeful friend wanting to atone for some sort of mistake. I read and reread the letter, savouring the perfect handwriting and desperately wanting a conclusion I knew I’d never get. These small items – essentially rubbish – become precious gifts and my mind creates stories, desperately trying to assemble a puzzle from only one or two pieces. A faded receipt can trigger a dozen questions. Why did this person buy so many jugs of milk in October 2007? Was it for baking? Did they have several cats? Were they an eccentric retiree who bathed in only the finest organic milk? It grants me permission to be nosy. I purchased this coat fair and square, I’m allowed to gleefully fossick in the pockets and see what I find! It’s not weird! I love this part of thrift shopping almost as much as taking home a bargain. After all, it’s different from peering between curtains at my neighbours with tiny binoculars. Isn’t it? It’s fun, if not a little peculiar, to form connections with other people in this way even though they’ll never know about it. These mementoes create tangible reminders about human nature and sometimes remind us of our similarities (pasta sauce is a very common stain, and pet hair will NEVER leave tweed). Accidental keepsakes unintentionally left behind almost feel like secret diaries, or even clues. Who was Robert? Was he worthy of forgiveness? Did Laura ever contact him, or just bury the note in a book and forget about it? I’ll never know, but it’s fun to daydream. A former colleague once made a disgusted face when I mentioned that most of my clothes come from secondhand stores. She yelped, “Doesn’t it creep you out that it may have belonged to a dead person?!” Honestly? No. Seeing the face of a tired older woman dropping off armfuls of men’s suits at the Salvo’s does, of course, make my heart twinge. It’s also just the reality of life. At 30, I can’t be certain what mark I’ll leave on the world, but it will most likely be a small one. People will forget my name after a while, especially if I don’t have children, and I’m OK with that. Perhaps my only legacy will be a grocery list buried deep within the pocket of a trouser leg, reminding myself to pick up broccoli. A receipt from the chemist when I’ve wandered in for my prescription and walked out with six anti-ageing skincare products I suspect don’t actually work. Or maybe just a scrunched-up tissue that will resemble the face of the person who buys my coat, long after I stopped needing it, and reaches into the pocket. And there’s something oddly reassuring about that. Deidre Fidge is a writer whose work has appeared on SBS Comedy, Junkee, the ABC and the Sydney Morning Herald