Richard Ratcliffe has embarked on a hunger strike in solidarity with his wife, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, the British-Iranian woman who on Saturday began her third such protest against her continued imprisonment in Iran. Zaghari-Ratcliffe had vowed to take action if she was still in jail on the their daughter Gabriella’s fifth birthday, which passed on Tuesday. Gabriella was almost two when Zaghari-Ratcliffe was arrested on charges of espionage during a family holiday to Iran in April 2016. Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who denies the charges, told her husband in a phone call on Saturday morning that she was beginning a hunger strike to demand her unconditional release. Ratcliffe immediately decided to join her and on Saturday afternoon began a fasting vigil outside the Iranian embassy in London, where he plans to stay until his wife’s strike ends. “Nazanin is determined to show the Iranian authorities that enough is enough,” Ratcliffe said. “She was quite calm on the phone, if nervous. My job is to serve as an amplifier and not let her strike pass unnoticed.” Zaghari-Ratcliffe went on hunger strike for six days in 2016 when she was put in solitary confinement for eight months without access to a lawyer, and did so again in January this year. She ended her second strike when her demands to have specialist medical assessments were met after three days, although she still has not received treatment for any of the diagnosed medical problems. It will be Ratcliffe’s first strike: “I had promised Nazanin that I wouldn’t let her go through a strike alone again.” His demands to the Iranian authorities are for his wife’s immediate release; an immediate visit by the British embassy to check on her health; and a visa for him to travel to Iran if her release is not granted. He has not seen his daughter, who was arrested for espionage along with Zaghari-Ratcliffe and now lives with her grandparents in Tehran, for 1,185 days. Gabriella, a British citizen who was born in London, has since forgotten how to speak English. Ratcliffe said he would like to bring her home to London before she is due to start school in September, but will only do so with the agreement of his wife, who cherishes her short prison visits with her daughter and, Ratcliffe said, has been feeling very “emotional” in the run-up to her birthday. He had taken a few changes of clothes with him to the embassy, he said, but was hoping the couple would not have to strike for weeks. “I would not want this to be a long hunger strike, but I want it to be clear: this is not a game. One of the reasons for me joining Nazanin is so that the Iranian authorities don’t just think: ‘OK, we’ll just wait a few days and this will pass’. Because of course you can’t see Nazanin on hunger strike, locked as she is behind the prison gates. Whereas you can see me.” He said he was not expecting to be freed in two days’ time. “My experience of watching her hunger strikes is that the Iranian authorities are fairly battle-hardened. I think they will try to wait it out and see how serious it gets. But Nazanin is giving them a clear message: this cannot go on,” he said, then repeated: “This just cannot go on.” On the subject of the Tory leadership candidate Boris Johnson, who in 2017 made misleading statements about Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s work which were seized upon by the Iranian regime, he said: “Knowing the prime minister, whoever it is, would be a slight advantage to not knowing them. Obviously, there’s baggage. Clearly, mistakes happened and at points I got annoyed that mistakes were denied. But also, there’s more going on than just what Boris said in that select committee as to why Nazanin is still being held in prison. There’s a reason why we are camped in front of the Iranian embassy.” He and the families of other British citizens who have been imprisoned abroad wrote to all the Tory leadership candidates on Wednesday asking them to make a commitment to protect British citizens overseas better as a policy priority, but have not yet received a response from any of them.