Neil Woodford is refusing to waive fees for investors trapped in his flagship fund, despite calls by MPs and Britain’s financial regulator to scrap an estimated £100,000 in daily charges. Woodford has come under growing pressure since Nicky Morgan, the MP and chair of the Treasury select committee, called on the embattled fund manager to waive fees for thousands of investors while the Equity Income Fund remains suspended. The Financial Conduct Authority chief executive, Andrew Bailey, said on Tuesday he agreed with Morgan and that Woodford “should consider very seriously … his position. “However, from our point of view, we need him to manage these assets now more than ever because his job now is to get this fund back into a position where there can be orderly trading,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. But Woodford has refused to budge. A spokesperson for his investment management firm said: “The company will continue to charge the fee as the fund remains actively managed and we focus on repositioning the portfolio.” Woodford, one of the City’s best-known stock-pickers, gated his flagship fund last week after being flooded with demands from investors wanting to withdraw their cash in the wake of a series of poor market bets. Also speaking to the Today programme on Tuesday, Morgan said: “Others have suspended taking fees and I think Woodford should too, for the sake that I think that it’s something like £100,000 a day potentially in fees. “I mean that is a huge amount of money and as I say there are investors who have put often, sometimes, their life savings or certainly money needed for important investments [in the fund]. And they’re watching that value drop.” James Anderson, manager of Scottish Mortgage, a FTSE 100 investment trust, also said it was “completely wrong” that Woodford was not waiving fees while dealings were suspended. He said fees are “one of the ethical issues that are under your control”. Funds supermarket Hargreaves Lansdown, which sold and promoted Woodford products, announced last week it was dropping its platform fees for clients affected by the suspension. Hargreaves said it was not fair to charge customers while they were barred from trading. But Hargreaves will face renewed scrutiny after the FCA said it would take another look at “best buy” lists including the broker’s Wealth 50 ranking of favourite funds. That list featured Woodford’s Equity Income Fund up until its suspension last week. Bailey said: “We look at how funds construct these best buy tables, and the principle is that they should be impartial, they should do it thoroughly, and they should make sure it’s done promptly in the sense of (being) up to date. And as I’ve said, we will look at these again, to ensure that they and indeed others, it’s not just a point about Hargreaves … have abided by those principles.” The FCA boss also hit out at Woodford’s dealings in Guernsey. The fund manager floated some of his private company investments on the Guernsey stock exchange earlier this year, allowing him to comply with EU rules that limit the proportion of unlisted or illiquid investments to no more than 10% of assets. While Bailey said that while the move was “allowable” and “within the rules” he did not agree with Woodford’s tactics. “I’ve said publicly I don’t think it is right, I think investors should be able to determine where their assets are held,” Bailey said. Bailey will face Morgan’s Treasury select committee on 25 June, where he will be grilled over the Woodford suspension. Morgan wrote to Bailey on Monday, asking him to publish details of his contact with Woodford and to confirm whether the City watchdog was planning a formal investigation into the events that led to fund’s suspension. She said the debacle raised concerns that the FCA may have been asleep at the wheel as the fund manager tumbled into crisis.