Lewis Capaldi’s first experience of Glastonbury was performing to 60,000 people. This figure comes as news to him, backstage at the Other stage on Saturday afternoon, shortly after his set. “It’s too many people, innit?” he says. What would be the optimum number? “One thousand? I have no clue what I’m doing. I feel that I’m very much out of my depth.” One thousand might be a more fitting number for an artist whose debut album was released only in May. But Capaldi’s rise this year has been stratospheric: Someone You Loved has become one of the year’s biggest-selling singles, while Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent has been the No 1 album for five of the past six weeks. Capaldi seems a bit stunned by it all. He is even getting recognised, forcing him to don a disguise of hat and sunglasses to watch Stormzy’s headline set on Friday. “I’ve always found that I’ve got a bit of a plain face,” he says. Before this weekend, the 22-year-old Scot had never been to Glastonbury: first he was too young, then he could not afford a ticket. He struggles to describe the experience of performing: “I wish I had more words. It was so, so mad. It was the first time I almost cried on stage – I got a bit teary towards the end there.” Preparations had been limited to a rehearsal, a secret set on the BBC Music Introducing stage on Thursday and an appearance with Bastille on the Pyramid stage on Friday. “I just went on, did my warmups and stuff, as usual. But I don’t think you can prepare for that sort of thing anyway. “I was kind of foolishly treating it as ‘just another festival’, but then you go on and you’re like: ‘This is not just another festival, it’s 60,000 people.’ There’s just something about it – you watch it on TV for so long. It’s more than a festival.” The famously self-deprecating singer did his best to strip the occasion of any gravity, with “a big silly entrance”, as he calls it, that referenced Noel Gallagher’s recent observation that “music is fucking wank at the moment. Who’s this Capaldi fella?” Capaldi embraced the criticism by appearing on stage in an Oasis-style parka that he removed to reveal a T-shirt featuring Gallagher’s face inside a love heart. (Gallagher’s daughter, Anaïs, later tweeted: “I want to be @LewisCapaldi when I grow up.”) “To get slagged off by Noel was, for me, a real life-affirming moment,” says Capaldi. Would he like to slag off anyone in return? “That’s not really my move. Ask me at the end of the year.” It did take a moment to change gear, from “comedy entrance” to “gig of your life”. “It was all a good laugh, then I realised: ‘I’ve got a gig to play here’ … I wasn’t prepared for that many people. The first half-minute was a bit nervy.” Nick Cave has said that, as a performer, he is a “front-row man”, singing to those in the audience closest to him, while Bono is a “back-row man” – where is Capaldi directing his energy? “Just kind of looking at the sea of it … I’ve never had to play to that many people. I’m still kind of working out who I’m fixating on.” Next year, assuming he isn’t booked (“Well, we’ve done it now, innit?”), he intends to return to Glastonbury for fun. “I’d love to come back. Put that in!” Shall we record that he will do it for free? “Erm, I’ll do it for less. But, if not, I’ll be here as a punter. This has given me the camping bug again. I’m like: ‘I just want to be in a tent, loving it.’” It is a lot less comfortable than backstage, though. “Not if you’re drunk enough. As long as you bring your own loo roll, you’re good.”