The Czech Republic could witness its biggest political protest since the fall of communism when an estimated 100,000 people gather in Prague on Tuesday evening to demand the resignation of the prime minister, Andrej Babiš. Demonstrators will crowd into Wenceslas Square, the scene of euphoric rallies 30 years ago that ushered in the Velvet Revolution and ended communist rule in the former Czechoslovakia. It will be the latest in a series of anti-Babiš rallies, and organisers say attendance will be boosted by the leaked disclosure of a preliminary European commission auditors’ report accusing the Czech leader of conflicts of interest over his ties to a sprawling industrial conglomerate, Agrofert, that receives large EU subsidies. Babiš, 64, who became prime minister in 2017 and is the country’s second richest man, has repeatedly said he will never resign. After police recommended in April that he face fraud charges over alleged misuse of EU funds, he responded by sacking the justice minister in his coalition government and installing a close ally, Marie Benešová. Babiš has been the subject of four mass rallies in Prague and other cities in the past six weeks. A rally in Wenceslas Square two weeks ago attracted at least 50,000 people. This time protesters are expected to fill the entire square, and organisers will install a bigger sound system to reach the larger audience. Mikuláš Minář, a spokesman for A Million Moments for Democracy, the group organising the protests, said thousands of people were coming from towns and villages across the country, and he pledged to organise even bigger gatherings in the coming weeks if necessary, possibly moving to bigger venues to accommodate the rising numbers. Babiš’s opponents say the EC audit appears to uphold a complaint by Transparency International that the prime minister is breaking conflict of interest rules by retaining effective control of Agrofert despite supposedly putting it into a trust. “Mr Babiš is the beneficial owner of the Agrofert Group companies and, since February 2017, of the two trust funds, which he fully controls, and therefore has a direct economic interest in the success of the Agrofert Group,” the report said. It said his government functions were “compromised” by his involvement in budget decisions affecting Agrofert, and the Czech Republic could be forced to repay millions of euros in subsidies. David Ondráčka, the director of Transparency International in the Czech Republic, predicted Tuesday’s protest would be a “nail in Babiš’s political coffin”. He said: “He cannot survive this public pressure and these EU reports. He knows that the EU budget and the Czech budget will no longer serve as an ATM where he can pick up whatever he needs. He will never surrender easily but with mounting public anger, smart opposition moves and proper institutional pressure I believe he will no longer be prime minister.” Babiš has dismissed the accusations as an “organised plot”, rejected the commission report and pledged to get its findings changed. He has also belittled the protests against him. Minář claimed the prime minister was privately rattled by the protests. “I have internal information from people close to him that we are a big problem for him and that he’s nervous,” he said. “He is in a corner. You only have to have seen his press conferences in the last two weeks to see he is worried.”