The famed City stock-picker Neil Woodford has experienced another blow, as a decision to block investors from pulling cash from his flagship fund sparked a share price fall in his listed fund and a number of other companies in which he is a key investor or sell his funds. Woodford’s Patient Capital Trust Fund, which is listed on London’s FTSE 250 index, tumbled as much as 20% in early trading before recovering slightly to trade 10% lower at 68p a share. The investment group Hargreaves Lansdown, which has directed the investments of thousands of its clients into Woodford funds, was the biggest faller in the FTSE-100, down 4% at 2138p. Another key supporter, the wealth management company St James’s Place, also fell. Among companies in which Woodford is a big investor, the construction firm Kier was down 6% at 154p, NewRiver REIT, a property investment business, was down 5% and the Stobart Group infrastructure firm was down 2.2%. Investors were spooked by news on Monday that Britain’s best-known fund manager had suspended trading in Woodford Equity Income Fund, barring thousands of investors from pulling out their cash for at least 28 days. Investors are still believed to be on the hook for fees of up to 1.7% despite the suspension. Woodford was forced to temporarily close the equity income fund after investors started to jump, pulling out at least £187m in May alone. Those redemptions contributed to a total £600m decline in the value of the fund last month; it shrank in size to £3.7bn, compared with a peak of £10.2bn in May 2017. A request by investor Kent county council to pull more than £263m from the fund on Friday is believed to have prompted the ban on redemptions. The local authority said there was a unanimous vote of its pension committee to redeem its investment last week after news of the fund’s dramatic drop in value. But the sudden suspension blocked the council from withdrawing the funds, which account for about 4% of its £6.4bn pension fund investments. The council said the suspension announcement was unexpected. “Kent county council is disappointed that, as a major investor in the fund, we did not receive this prior notification,” it said. “The council is committed to seeking the best outcome and could still seek a managed redemption in order to maximise the benefits for the pension fund.” Experts say Woodford has been stung by his optimism about smaller domestic stocks, which have underperformed after the Brexit vote, prompting investors to pull their cash. Almost £40m was slashed from the value of his 20% stake in Kier on Monday, after a profits warning sent shares in the construction and services group tumbling. He has also backed a number of unquoted investments, which can be difficult to turn into cash when investors decide to pull out. Despite the poor performance, Woodford paid himself and his business partner Craig Newman nearly £37m in the 2017-18 financial year. The investor exodus is an embarrassment for Woodford as he marks the five-year anniversary of the launch of his eponymous fund. He built his reputation during his 26 years at Invesco Perpetual where he controlled assets worth £33bn. The City regulator fined his former employer £18.6m in 2014 for exposing investors to too much risk. Invesco Perpetual confirmed that funds run by Woodford were among those that had breached investment limits between 2008 and 2012. Hargreaves Lansdown has now removed both the suspended equity income fund and Woodford Income Focus Fund from its Wealth 50 list of favourite funds. The income focus fund is still open for redemptions and Woodford’s patient capital trust is still trading. Emma Wall, the head of investment analysis at Hargreaves Lansdown, said Woodford’s Patient Capital Trust had clearly been affected by the “negative sentiment around the suspension” of his flagship fund, but noted that the underlying value of patient capital had not changed. “There are other factors at play which make UK companies not that attractive at present,” she said, pointing in particular to political uncertainty. Woodford did not respond to requests for comment.