The breakup of the troubled travel company Thomas Cook has moved a step closer after it said it was in talks with the Chinese conglomerate Fosun International over selling its tour operator business. Following media reports, the 178-year-old travel company, which is fighting for survival under the weight of a £1.25bn debt burden, confirmed it was in “discussions with Fosun following receipt of a preliminary approach”. “There can be no certainty that this approach will result in a formal offer. However, the board will consider any potential offer alongside the other strategic options that it has, with the aim of maximising value for all its stakeholders.” The news pushed Thomas Cook shares up 24% to 18p in early trading. Later they were still up 10% at 17.78p. A year ago, they were changing hands at 114.2p. The tour operator business made revenues of £7.4bn last year and served nearly 11 million customers in the UK, Scandinavia and the rest of Europe. It includes 566 high street stores in the UK which employ a large chunk of Thomas Cook’s 22,000 workforce. More than half its holidays are sold online. Fosun is the company’s largest shareholder with an 18% stake; it bought the holiday resort chain Club Med in 2015 for €939m (£834m). Thomas Cook put its German airline Condor up for sale earlier this year but Fosun cannot bid for it because it is not based in the EU. Fosun first invested in Thomas Cook, Britain’s oldest package holiday firm, in 2015 and is building some of its hotels in China as part of a joint venture. Thomas Cook has received several bids for its airline, including from Lufthansa. Three weeks ago, the private equity firm Triton Partners made an offer for its entire northern Europe business, which comprises the tour arm and airline in Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark. Thomas Cook was forced to secure fresh funds of £300m from its lenders to stave off a cash crunch last month after it ran up a £1.5bn loss in the first half. The loss was caused by a £1.1bn writedown on its package holiday division MyTravel in light of weak trading. The company said then that it had sold only 57% of its holidays, largely due to British customers postponing travel plans for this summer because of Brexit uncertainty. This has sparked a price war in the holiday sector, which has also hit rival Tui. Neil Wilson, an analyst at the online trading firm Markets.com, said: “Sadly, it rather looks like Thomas Cook will be carved up in some fashion or other. This may not be a bad thing – clearly managing this large, complex holiday business proved daunting. But selling off the various bits of the business is likely to be even more complex.” In 2012, when Thomas Cook was in a major crisis, it was forced to sell hotels and part of its airline to raise money, and carried out a rights issue to shore up its balance sheet the following year. The company dates back to July 1841 when a cabinet maker, Thomas Cook, offered a one-day rail excursion at a shilling a head from Leicester to Loughborough.