Iran has held back on its threat to make its first breach of the nuclear deal and may be waiting for the outcome of talks with EU powers, China and Russia in Vienna. At the talks on Friday the EU countries will set out plans to kickstart trade between Tehran and the bloc, one of the Iranian preconditions for sticking with the deal. Iran had threatened to break the 300kg limit for low-enriched uranium stockpiles on Thursday, but experts at the UN’s International Atomic Energy Agency said the progress in increasing the stockpiles had been slower than expected and the limit may not be reached until the weekend. Iran was said to be adding to its stockpiles at a rate of 1kg a day and could have sped up the process if it had wished to do so. There was little mention of the stockpile limit in the official Iranian press. The EU powers are expected to unveil a plan to set up a multimillion-euro credit line to kickstart a trading mechanism known as Instex designed to help EU businesses trade with Iran while avoiding US Treasury sanctions. It is not known if the announcement of the relatively modest credit line will be enough to assuage Iran, which has been impatient regarding what it considers to be Europe’s failure to meet its commitments under the deal, known as the joint comprehensive plan of action (JCPOA). The EU has said it has been engaged in laborious legal work to set up Instex, and it is not yet able to identify companies that definitely wish to use the mechanism. Under the joint comprehensive plan of action signed in 2015, Iran is only permitted to produce low-enriched uranium. This is uranium that has a concentration of 3%-4% of the isotope U-235. This isotype is a fissile material, which is capable of sustaining a nuclear fission chain reaction. At this low level of enrichment, it can be used to produce fuel for nuclear power plants. Iran is permitted to stockpile 300kg of it, at an enrichment level capped at 3.67%. A bomb needs uranium that is up to 90% enriched. Iran’s atomic energy agency has said production of enriched uranium has been quadrupled. The more that uranium is enriched, the faster it is to enrich it further. Iran argues that it is no longer bound by the cap because of the withdrawal of the US from the agreement, and the reimposition of economic sanctions Donald Trump. The expected size of the credit line may disappoint Iran, but European officials say technical meetings about Instex’s progress were held last week in Tehran in a serious and good-natured atmosphere. The Iranian restraint may reflect pressure from the three EU states warning that they will not stay committed to the nuclear deal indefinitely if Iran takes other steps to breach the deal’s terms. The EU countries have said they cannot tolerate a “less for less” arrangement in which both sides reduce their commitments to the deal. The JCPOA is not a treaty or a legally enforceable document. Calls for Iran not to break from the deal despite heavy US economic sanctions were made repeatedly by diplomats including from Russia at a meeting of the UN security council on Wednesday. Iran’s UN ambassador, Majid Takht Ravanchi, said the EU three “must either prove their goodwill by taking timely, adequate, serious and practical steps to preserve the JCPOA, which is now in critical condition, or, along with the US, accept the full responsibility for any possible consequences.” The US special envoy on Iran, Brian Hook, one of the leading architects of the sanctions regime throttling the Iranian economy, was meeting European counterparts in Paris on Thursday. The EU will be trying to discover whether the US will react to Instex with sanctions, even though it is primarily aimed at easing trade in humanitarian goods. Some of the diplomatic action will shift to the G20 summit in Japan, where the French president, Emmanuel Macron, will lead calls for all sides to de-escalate the crisis. At the summit, which formally starts on Friday, Macron is also likely to press Donald Trump to clarify his negotiating objectives, since at times the US has appeared to focus purely on a renegotiation of the nuclear deal signed by Barack Obama in 2015, and at others it has tabled wider demands including an end to Iranian interference in Yemen, Syria and Iraq. On Thursday, Iran’s foreign minister Javed Zarif warned Trump that any belief that he could stage a short with Iran was an illusion, adding that misconceptions could lead to military conflict. In a tweet Zarif said: “Sanctions aren’t alternative to war; they ARE war, adding: “‘Obliteration’=genocide=war crime. ‘Short war’ with Iran is an illusion. Whoever begins war will not be the one ending it. Negotiations and threats are mutually exclusive.” In July 2015, Iran and a six-nation negotiating group reached a landmark agreement known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that ended a 12-year deadlock over Tehran’s nuclear programme. The deal, struck in Vienna after nearly two years of intensive talks, limited the Iranian programme, to reassure the rest of the world that it cannot develop nuclear weapons, in return for sanctions relief. At its core, the JCPOA is a straightforward bargain: Iran’s acceptance of strict limits on its nuclear programme in return for an escape from the sanctions that grew up around its economy over a decade prior to the accord. Under the deal, Iran unplugged two-thirds of its centrifuges, shipped out 98% of its enriched uranium and filled its plutonium production reactor with concrete. Tehran also accepted extensive monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which has verified 10 times since the agreement, and as recently as February, that Tehran has complied with its terms. In return, all nuclear-related sanctions were lifted in January 2016, reconnecting Iran to global markets. The six major powers involved in the nuclear talks with Iran were in a group known as the P5+1: the UN security council’s five permanent members – China, France, Russia, the UK and the US – and Germany. The nuclear deal is also enshrined in a UN security council resolution that incorporated it into international law. The 15 members of the council at the time unanimously endorsed the agreement. On 8 May 2018, US president Donald Trump pulled his country out of the deal. Iran announced its partial withdrawal from the nuclear deal a year later. Saeed Kamali Dehghan, Iran correspondent Macron has called for “little gestures” to help defuse the crisis. “Tensions are growing and for me the first element is that there is no exit from the framework. The second thing, and I will discuss it with the president [Trump] tomorrow, is to do everything to avoid a military escalation,” he said. “I had a conversation with President [Hassan] Rouhani [of Iran] a couple of days ago and I indicated that any exit from the accord would be an error and any signals in that direction would be an error.” The crisis has taken on a military dimension in the past month, with Washington and London blaming Tehran for attacks on ships in the Gulf, and Iran shooting down a US drone. Iran denies blame for the ship attacks and says the drone was in its airspace when it was struck, an assessment with which Russia concurs. The US is due to announce further sanctions this week on Iran’s chief diplomat, Javad Zarif, the foreign minister, in a move that will be seen in Europe as undermining diplomacy.