The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood, read by Elisabeth Moss (Random House) Moss, who does such a brilliant job portraying Atwood’s heroine Offred in the TV adaptation, dons the robe and bonnet once again to narrate this 1986 feminist classic. Her breathy but sharp delivery draws you into nightmarish Gilead from the get go. Flights by Olga Torkarczuk, translated by Jennifer Croft, read by Clare Corbett (Audible) Currently an Audible exclusive, this audiobook of the 2018 Man Booker International prize winner is read beautifully by Corbett, who captures the playfulness and grace of Tokarczuk’s writing across a range of stories about 21st-century travel and human anatomy. Mortimer & Whitehouse: Gone Fishing by Bob Mortimer and Paul Whitehouse, read by the authors (Blink) Like Jaws, here’s a story that isn’t really about the fish. In the audiobook, Mortimer and Whitehouse natter on in the most enjoyable, natural way about mortality and friendship, with plenty of off-page asides and affectionate nitpicking. Stay Sexy and Don’t Get Murdered by Georgia Hardstark and Karen Kilgariff, read by the authors (Orion) If you love the My Favourite Murder podcast and don’t mind missing out on the few pages of family and pet photos in the book, this is the option for you. (Though Audible does provide a bonus PDF.) This memoir-cum-life-guide from the two women is delivered with their trademark sass, some parts recorded in front of a live audience. Gentleman Jack by Anne Choma and Sally Wainwright, read by Eva Pope and Erin Shanagher (Penguin) This tie-in biography accompanies the rompy BBC drama about Anne Lister, a remarkable 19th-century figure who documented her life through prolific diaries and fearlessly explored her lesbian sexuality. The audiobook includes unpublished journal extracts decrypted from Lister’s code for the first time by Choma and Wainwright, the creator of the BBC series. Lanny by Max Porter, read by Annie Aldington, Clare Corbett, David Timson and Jot Davies (Faber) The chorus of voices at the heart of this beguiling and strange book, ostensibly about the disappearance of a small boy from a commuter village, are brilliantly brought to life by this cast. On the page, Porter shows his cacophony of voices through experimental typography; if you think you might struggle with that, this audiobook is for you. Chase Darkness With Me by Billy Jensen, read by the author (Audible) This memoir is currently an audiobook – and Audible – exclusive, with a print version to follow in August. Exhausted by his career as a journalist, Jensen decided to focus on reporting cold cases – then began solving them himself. His accounts of his cases and his methodology are utterly fascinating. One for any true crime fan. Airhead by Emily Maitlis, read by the author (Penguin Books) The Newsnight presenter reads her memoirs with her usual dignified delivery, but with just enough emotion to make this worth downloading. Her amusing, internal asides during interviews with Simon Cowell and Bill Clinton have something wonderfully gossipy about them. A Portrait of the Artist As a Young Man by James Joyce, read by Colin Farrell (Audible) Some have argued that Joyce is best enjoyed read aloud; and Farrell shows off his acting chops in this new interpretation, his lilting tones suiting the musicality of Joyce’s writing perfectly. My Sister, the Serial Killer by Oyinkan Braithwaite, read by Weruche Opia (Whole Story Books) Shortlisted for this year’s Women’s prize for fiction, this darkly funny tale, about a young woman dealing with her sister Ayoola’s taste for murdering boyfriends is sharp as nails. Opia’s performance is light and fresh, her handling of Braithwaite’s comic dialogue particularly vibrant. How to Be a Woman by Caitlin Moran, read by author and cast (BBC) This abridged dramatisation of Moran’s bestselling book about her feminist education is read by a full BBC Radio 4 cast, with scenes from her life acted out with verve. Still extremely funny, and made even more lively by the cast.