The Russia painted by Natalia Goncharova died long before she did. Goncharova passed away in Paris in 1962, at the age of 81, by which time the gaudy, vibrant popular culture of the peasant society that fascinated her was long gone, deliberately destroyed decades earlier by the forced “collectivisation” of agriculture by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. That lost culture hits you straight away in Tate Modern’s entrancing resurrection of Goncharova’s genius. The first things you see are not her works but popular prints, bold textiles and a country woman’s costume. Her art enthusiastically embraced these flowery, bright influences. In fact she went so deep into Russia’s traditional arts that some of her own works can be mistaken for folk products. Her 1912-13 image The Lives of St Florus and Laurus is a comic-strip portrayal of two Byzantine saints, stonemasons who dedicated their artistic skills to God. Goncharova shows them performing miracles and being buried alive, in images straight out of a Russian icon. In her 1910-11 triptych Christ the Saviour, the big central face of Christ is a homage to the mystical 14th century Russian artist Andrei Rublev. This is Russian modernism, but not as we know it. Goncharova and her lover Mikhail Larionov were the dynamic duo of the Russian avant garde in the years preceding the first world war. In 1913, Goncharova had a smash-hit one-woman show in Moscow, the first time any Russian modern artist got national attention. She paraded the streets in “futurist” makeup with slashes, scars and crosses all over her face. Yet it doesn’t take long to notice that Russians in 1913 had a very idiosyncratic idea of what futurism was. Far from the jagged, restless celebration of speed that the Italian futurist movement celebrated, the paintings gathered here from Goncharova’s sensational solo exhibition are poetic reveries on an older, seemingly eternal world. In Hay Cutting, a peasant swings a scythe while two boys carry freshly cut hay. All wear white smocks that contrast with a green forest beyond. Goncharova abstracts these stark shapes and colours: the peasants are strongly outlined in black, their faces primitive ovals. In Picking Apples, young women in white enjoy a picnic as they collect fruit under the trees, their simplified forms sharpened against a pink sky. It’s like a scene from Chekhov, reimagined by Matisse. It quickly becomes clear that modernism in Russia on the eve of the first world war had almost nothing in common with the image of the Soviet avant garde we still lap up in the west. Really, we’ve no excuse any more for equating early Russian modern art with the abstract propaganda of Tatlin’s tower or El Lissitsky’s red wedge. The museums of Moscow and St Petersburg are full of modernist paintings of viking ships and Orthodox churches. Goncharova was the co-leader, with Larionov, of this folkloric avant garde. There was nothing naive about her project. Her generation were in direct contact with the latest art from Paris, for some of the most extravagant collectors of Parisian modern art before 1917 were Russian. This show includes Picasso’s 1909 early Cubist painting Queen Isabeau, an example of the modernist masterpieces already in Russian collections in Goncharova’s time. Picasso was reinventing art by embracing influences Europeans considered “primitive” – from gothic sculpture as here to masks from Africa and Oceania. That cult of the primal set Goncharova’s mind on fire. Looking closer at the photograph of her with futurist face paint, her scarifications are reminiscent of African masks – or how she may have imagined them. Yet she didn’t need to look to Africa for such so-called “primitivism”. She found the raw and passionate all around her in the Russian countryside. In her most ambitious work, Harvest, she infuses figures inspired by icons and church frescoes with a stark orange flesh colour, reminiscent of Matisse’s Dance. That’s no coincidence. Matisse painted his red-bodied dancers in 1910 for the Moscow art collector Sergei Shchukin. Goncharova painted Harvest in 1911, but she relocates the primal energy of Dance into the middle ages. A naked woman rides a two-headed monster straight out of the Book of Revelation while peasant feet tread out the grapes of wrath. Russia was on the edge of an upheaval of biblical proportions and Goncharova’s paintings knew it. Her depictions of modern city life are fraught with unease and terror. The City, painted circa 1911, shows towering monolithic modern apartment blocks with a factory chimney belching black smoke into a sky already crowded with aeroplanes. At the base of this colossal cubistic nightmare walk tiny people. In Factory (Futurist), one of the massive tubular chimney stacks filling a sky of restless fragments lowers like the barrel of a howitzer. Goncharova’s art is full of passion for the people – but they’re not a homogenous urban “proletariat”. Her Russia is diverse and unpredictable. Paintings here from her 1913 exhibition include a depiction of a Jewish neighbourhood and a black female nude. In 1916, she and Larionov went to Paris to experience the heart of modernism first hand. After the Revolution, they had no reason to go home. In exile, she survived by turning her flaming dreamscapes of folk life into brilliant fashion designs. Her drawings for the House of Myrbor in Paris translated peasant culture into jazz-age chic. Right through this exhibition I imagined a soundtrack of Russian modern music. Like Goncharova, Igor Stravinsky and Sergei Prokofiev mixed modernist dissonance with folk sources. In the final room, Stravinsky’s music actually does ring out as you explore Goncharova’s designs for the Ballets Russes. Here among costumes that recreate the raw colours and fairytale creatures of peasant art is Goncharova’s brilliant cubistic landscape of a Ukrainian village, created as a set design in the 1930s. In real life, in 1932 and 1933, millions of Ukrainians were dying in a famine caused by Stalin’s agricultural policies. Many Ukrainians see it as genocide. Goncharova’s ballet set, like all her work, is not escapist nostalgia. It’s an attempt to save an entire world in all its colour and fervour from the tragedy of Russia’s 20th century. • At Tate Modern, London, from 6 June until 8 September.