It took a shooting barrage for Golden State to overcome the Raptors, 106-105, to clinch Game 5 of the NBA finals. It was the Raptors’ game to lose. The Warriors came out to a smoking-hot start, then lost Kevin Durant to a soul-draining achilles injury and Kevon Looney, a key piece of the rotation, who re-aggravated a fracture in his chest. Toronto didn’t claim their first lead until there were five minutes left to play. Kawhi Leonard went supernova, channeling the inner Michael Jordan persona that has now become ubiquitous when discussing his combination of macho-ness, machine-ness, and clutch-ness. Leonard went on a scoring tear. This was his for-the-ages moment. He poured in 10 straight points, decimating the Warriors lead and putting Toronto up by six with two minutes to play. The crowd was electric; Canada set to win its first major North American sports title in 26 years. And then ... nothing. Raptors coach Nick Nurse called a puzzling timeout that drained all of the energy from the building. As sports consumers, we’re prone to casting the result retroactively through these moments. A timeout is good when the team goes on to win. It allowed them to gain focus and re-engage, to switch on, we say. It is bad when that team loses. It sapped them of momentum, allowed their opponents to draw up their best plays, stuff like that. But this decision was objectively awful. It only gets worse the farther we step away. The Warriors went on a 9-2 run post-timeout to clinch the win. Klay Thompson hit two clutch three-pointers and Steph Curry added one of his trademark, off-balance, bonkers threes to put the Warriors up by one and seal the victory. Steph Curry buries the clutch game-tying triple in #PhantomCam! #StrengthInNumbers #NBAFinals pic.twitter.com/DVtP9kN9pd Curry and Thompson have now each made at least five three-pointers in the same NBA finals game four times. No other duo in NBA history has more than one such game. When their team needed them most, they both delivered – Curry had a miserable shooting performance in the second half leading up to that shot. Shooting at that level, nobody can live with the Warriors. Plenty went wrong for Toronto on Tuesday night: they were sloppy with the ball; Pascal Siakam struggled. But Nurse’s decision to take a breather while Kawhi was rolling may have cost the Raptors a championship. As with any NBA finals, the outcome will be decided by stars. It’s over to Leonard to drag his team over the line on the road in Game 6 or at home in a Game 7. Leonard is the perfect post-season player: an elite defender who can create his own shot. He has a unique combination of footwork and strength. Defenders bounce off him. Ball handlers cannot scoot around him. He can rampage to the rim, pull up from three-point land or get to his favorite spot, rising and hitting deep two-point jump shots. What look like difficult shots – and are the bane of basketball’s analytics world – become a 50-50 shot. A good shot. Durant was that guy for the Warriors. They needed Durant to fell the Cavaliers in back-to-back finals last year and the one before. He can score in isolation from anywhere on the court. Nobody this side of Inspector Gadget has the wingspan to encroach on Durant as he rises to shoot. It’s the ultimate playoff weapon. In the postseason defenses get better: that’s why those teams are still hanging around in May and June. The motion-filled offenses that are so jarring and alluring in the regular season can bog down. Toronto’s defense flustered Milwaukee’s pace-and-space goodness in the Eastern Conference finals. The same was true of the Clippers against the Warriors. They made things muggy and stole a couple of games despite being overmatched. It’s not that ball movement offenses don’t win in the playoffs – it’s quite the opposite, in fact. It’s that motion offenses cannot win alone. You need stars. At some point, the other team is going to play intense, engaged, solid defense. The shot clock will dwindle. Someone needs to put the ball on the deck, get to their spot, and make a bucket. Kawhi is that weapon for the Raptors. The Warriors lost theirs for the series. Curry is at his best when the Warriors open up the floor: spinning off pin downs, slipping into open space in transition, and playing his unique style of catch-and-shoot offense. Klay Thompson is much the same. Curry cannot consistently rise up from two-point range and hit off-balance twos or drive to the basket; he’s not big enough. Once you hit June, it’s not about the shots you want, it’s the shots you get. With Durant off the floor, the shots Curry and Thompson get are significantly worse. The Raptors remain favorites for the series. There’s little to no chance that Draymond Green and DeMarcus Cousins hit a combined three three-pointers in Games 6 or 7. Together, they outshot Siakam, Kyle Lowry, Danny Green, and Serge Ibaka in Game 5. The Warriors as a team nailed 47% of their threes, including 11 in the first half. The Raptors shot just 25% from deep. It’s unlikely they’ll be so poor from deep moving forward, and the Warriors won’t have the bonus of Durant, who was three-for-three from deep before his injury. Everything lines up for two mammoth Leonard showings – one might be enough. Kawhi has the highest winning percentage of any player in NBA history. If we held a draft today for players you would want on your team for Game 7 of a finals series, Kawhi would be the sure-fire number one pick. Golden State proved once again they are battlers, champions. Players dropping like flies. Their rotation thin and overmatched. Coach Steve Kerr has had to toggle between a lineup that cannot defend and one that cannot create enough space or shooting to score. And yet they damn near led Game 5 wire-to-wire, on the road, in a do-or-die game, against an elite team with the hottest player in the sport right now. Knocking them off, even without Durant, is going to be hard. Curry and Klay and Draymond aren’t relinquishing the title without a fight. Toronto will have to take it. Back to Oakland we go. One final game at Oracle. What a scene it will be.