A reality TV star has urged people to be “a little bit nicer, a little bit kinder” after an inquest concluded that her friend and fellow contestant Mike Thalassitis killed himself in March this year. Montana Brown appeared alongside Thalassitis on the ITV2 programme Love Island and remained close to him after the series ended. Speaking outside North London coroner’s court after a verdict of suicide was recorded, Brown said it was “important to let his memory live on”. “It’s such an awful world that we live in. It’s just nice to be nice.” Thalassitis, 26, a former lower league footballer, hanged himself on 16 March after leaving notes for members of his family, the inquest heard. He was a contestant on the 2017 series of the show, and appeared on the E4 programme Celebs Go Dating the following year. His profession recorded by the inquest was celebrity. Thalassitis’s body was found by a jogger in a park near his home in Enfield, north London, on the morning of 16 March, the inquest heard. PC Emma Clauson, one of the officers on the scene, told the inquest she had found a black notebook containing “a diary, letters and positive thoughts”. The notebook also contained a number of letters addressed to family members, she said. Their contents were not revealed but Andrew Walker, the senior coroner, said the letters “clearly set out his intention that his life should come to an end”. Toxicology reports showed he had consumed alcohol and cocaine, while traces of prescription drugs including antidepressants were also detected. The cause of death was recorded as cerebral hypoxia and hanging. His parents, Andy and Shirley, brother Nick and other family members were in court for the inquest, later paying tribute in a statement to their “wonderful son and brother”. In a statement read by Dave Read, Thalassitis’s manager and agent, the family thanked wellwishers “for their kind messages and support during this very difficult time”. “Today’s inquest concluded the sad news at the loss of our beautiful son and brother... Mike was a wonderful son and brother and will be dearly missed.” Thalassitis was the second cast member of the programme to die by suicide, following the death in June 2018 of Sophie Gradon, who appeared on the show the year before him. In April, a coroner ruled that she had also killed herself. Their deaths and that of a former contestant of ITV’s Jeremy Kyle show have led to intense scrutiny of the care given to those who appear on reality shows, and led to ITV vowing to offer more support to contestants and their families. The current series of Love Island began earlier this week, its first episode concluding with a tribute to Thalassitis. Brown declined to answer questions about the support offered to contestants, but said: “I think it’s important when someone dies in this way that you don’t give up on the memory. I think a lot of people are scared to talk about it, but it is important to let his memory live on. “I have definitely changed the way that I live my life and I urge others to do the same.” • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.