The top government official in charge of no-deal Brexit planning has quit just as the chances of crashing out of the EU appear to have increased. Tom Shinner, 33, director of policy and delivery coordination at the Department for Exiting the EU, was in charge of coordinating the domestic policy implications of Brexit across government departments to ensure a smooth exit from the EU. His departure comes as industry leaders are questioning whether the UK will be as prepared for no deal in November, which lead contender to be prime minister Boris Johnson says will happen “do or die” unless the UK gets a new deal in Brussels. As fears in Ireland grow over the increasing likelihood of no deal, there have also been changes to key personnel in Dublin with two senior members of the Brexit team moving on. It is understood that Shinner is leaving the civil service altogether to go into the private sector. His departure comes hot on the heels after Karen Wheeler, the official in charge of “frictionless” Brexit border planning including emergency plans for Dover and Northern Ireland in the event of no deal, left her post in Her Majesty’s Revenue & Customs. A former aide to the ex-Brexit secretary David Davis once said Shinner was so pivotal to no-deal planning that if he left his job Brexit would not happen. “There is actually a Mr Big of no deal in Whitehall, very clever and very well paid, who was so integral to the process we joked that if he was hit by a No 53 bus on Parliament Square, Brexit wouldn’t happen!”, former Conservative Party MP Stewart Jackson wrote in the Times in an article sources said was a reference to Shinner. DExEU said Shinner’s departure would not affect the “high standards” of delivery at the department as no-deal planning had been so advanced ahead of 29 March, the original Brexit Day, with work continuing apace. In a statement to the Guardian, it said: “Tom Shinner joined the department when it formed in July 2016 and since then has led the teams coordinating across Whitehall the government’s domestic policy and delivery preparations to leave the EU. “He will hand over after three years in post, and later this year will leave the civil service to take on a new opportunity in the private sector. “Careful succession planning has been put in place to ensure the department maintains its high standards of delivery.” Last month Joe Owen, the Institute for Government’s Brexit programme director, predicted that “many of the 16,000 civil servants working on Brexit will now be looking for a change of scenery”. In Dublin two of the most senior members of the Brexit team at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade are leaving, denting operations ahead of a possible no deal, which the Irish taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, thinks is now looking more likely. Rory Montgomery, the second secretary general at the department, who was the overall lead of the EU division and Brexit, is retiring while Ronan Gargan, the director of the EU-UK unit, is moving to Hungary to become Irish ambassador. Gargan was one of the key personnel involved in the daily behind-the-scenes Brexit work in Brussels and in Dublin and his departure has been described as a big loss by insiders. A spokesman for DFA said: “As part of the normal posting diplomatic rotations within the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, a number of people will be moving on from their current roles and taking up new positions or retiring.”