Almost halfway through 2019, it has felt, sometimes, like a breakthrough year for climate action. Given the rapid emergence of social movements across the world calling for climate justice, this often previously sidelined issue has become a international conversation. But the harsh reality of the challenge at hand re-emerged as the “leader of the free world” attempted to position the United States – one of the largest greenhouse gas emitters – as clean on climate, in an extended exchange with Prince Charles during his state visit to the UK. To contextualise, this comes in the wake of an Orwellian rebranding of hydrocarbons as “freedom molecules” and “freedom gas” by the US energy department ahead of a major export drive. Battlelines have been drawn around climate action in the US, with the Democratic primary campaign defined by candidates declaring their support for Green New Deal-style policies. Such is the strength of feeling that the issue has become a litmus test of contenders’ viability for the presidential nomination for 2020. With polling on such legislation indicating majority support among both Democrat and Republican voters, it’s clear that climate action can become a unifying issue as ordinary people seek solutions to the crisis, even as politicians of the right complain. A strong current of concern around climate breakdown was evident among UK voters in the European elections Here in the UK, there’s also potential for climate action to unite people, regardless of party allegiances. The year 2020 could see the debut of the 26th Conference of the Parties (COP26), the decision-making body of the UN framework convention on climate change, on home soil. Recent polling suggests about three-quarters of adults in the UK see climate change as the biggest crisis facing humanity today, yet only 5% feel ready to tackle it. The UK’s bid to host COP26, the largest since Paris 2015, provides a unique opportunity to tackle the crisis and drive forward a progressive and radical climate agenda – but it will require real climate leadership from the UK government. COP26 could be a defining moment for the UK – we could establish a national identity through leadership on the climate crisis, bringing unity out of our confused and divided politics. The potential for COP26 to act as a unifying event should not be understated. Whichever side you fall on in the Brexit debate, the issue has become so divisive that it has seemingly shattered Britain’s two-party electoral dominance and drawn divisions right across the country. The EU elections were seen by many as a de facto referendum on Brexit, yet a strong current of concern around climate breakdown was evident among voters in the UK, and across the continent. This was evidenced by a surge in support for candidates taking a strong stance on climate; policies and antidotes to the crisis such as a green new deal have rapidly emerged at the top of the agenda. The movement for a green new deal in the UK – driven from across the political spectrum – is pushing for widespread change to restructure the economy along environmental and social principles. These include the promise of secure and meaningful work in renewable industries as part of a “just transition”, massive investment in economically disenfranchised areas and communities that have suffered from oppression, and protection of the natural world. After years of financial hardship and an economic model failing to work in the interests of the majority, the principles behind a green new deal have widespread support. When asked whether they supported the concept, 68% of those polled by YouGov viewed it favourably. In 2008, the Climate Change Act cemented the UK’s place as an international climate leader. Since then that narrative has stuck, though arguably undeservedly so. Recent accusations of creative accounting in carbon data and the unearthing of vast sums used to fund offshore high-emissions industries are testament to that. It’s about time we stepped up and earned our reputation. Breaking from our colonial, self-serving legacy, the UK has a chance to be a positive catalyst for climate justice across the globe, by pushing for ambitious, radical, legally binding measures to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions. We must take this opportunity to become true climate leaders and use our influence to push for the kind of targets that place equal value on the lives of those in the global south as those in the north. The principles of a green new deal could be just the uniting force the country needs to achieve something truly remarkable. • Jake Woodier is a climate campaigner and organiser with the UK Student Climate Network