 What were you hoping for?My only hope was to have a nice time and maybe come away with a good story. First impressions?I was relieved he wasn’t the guy who had walked past me minutes earlier. My second impression was that he seemed lovely, if a little nervous. What did you talk about?His work, Twitter, and the peaks and troughs of Nadine Coyle’s career. Any awkward moments?Discovering he follows a group of my friends on social media, though this didn’t make me awkward: it was just surreal. Good table manners?Exquisite. Best thing about Adam?He can hold a conversation really well, and seems to be genuinely passionate about his job. Would you introduce him to your friends?He already knows of some of them through the power of the internet, so why not? Describe Adam in three words?Friendly, warm and talkative. What do you think he made of you?Probably that I have too much to say for myself. Did you go on somewhere?No. And... did you kiss?Momentarily, yes – largely for the purpose of this question! If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?Obviously to feel that spark would have been ideal. But all things considered, I had a very nice time. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I’d be happy to run into him as a friend. What were you hoping for?A fun evening meeting someone new. First impressions?That he was fashionable, friendly and engaging. What did you talk about?Travelling, New York, Lizzo and steak. Any awkward moments?Prior to Gary arriving I thought the waiter was my date, and greeted him very warmly until I was informed that he was a member of staff. Good table manners?Very good – we were able to successfully split tuna steak and duck breast. Best thing about Gary?He seemed intelligent, personable and was able to hold a good conversation. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes – we seem to have a lot in common and they would probably get on. Describe Gary in three wordsTalkative, outgoing and fun. What do you think he made of you?Chatty, gin-loving – and hungry. Did you go on somewhere?No, we stayed until the restaurant closed, then went our separate ways. And… did you kiss?He took me by surprise by initiating one after the meal. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?More of the desserts and free gin. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?We seem to be attending a lot of the same events, so we may see each other as friends. • Gary and Adam ate at Chapel Down Gin Works, London. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.