Few things are likely to bring me to the table quicker than food that is not only citrus-sour but hot and smoky, too. Those bringers of sourness – the citrus juices and vinegars, tamarind paste and yogurt – become all the more enticing with the introduction of a little heat in the form of ginger and mustard, or chilli and garlic. Add to that the deep charred notes from the grill and you’ve got me. Earlier in the week, I made a marinade for some aubergines I planned to toast on the griddle. The tartness of lime juice and tamarind was softened with a pinch of palm sugar – the hard, butterscotch type that comes in a tub – then I spiked it with chopped red chillies and a soft paste of crushed ginger. To exaggerate the sour notes I made a dressing for them with yogurt and a sharp green apple, pimped with a splash of white-wine vinegar, then they met the hot bars of the kitchen griddle, their flesh crisped, their edges singed. We ate the aubergine with a dish of rice cooked with coconut milk and cardamom. Hot-sweet-sour got another outing in a much-loved cake this week, too. A polenta cake, basted with a syrup of lemon and fresh ginger. Ideally, I should have doubled up on the syrup quantities, keeping a jugful back to pour over the cake as we ate, an afternoon treat that would have needed spoons as well as fingers. Cut the aubergines into slices or wedges, as the fancy takes you. There will, I assure you, be much smoke, so switch on the extractor or open a window. Better still, cook them outside on the barbecue. Arm yourself with a palette knife to gently prize them from the bars of the griddle. If you prefer, rather than the sour-apple dressing, make a dressing of olive oil, lime juice and coriander leaves.Serves 2 lime juice 100ml (about 2 limes)ginger 30gfish sauce 3 tsppalm sugar 4 tsphot red chilli 1hot green chilli 1tamarind paste 4 tspgroundnut oil 2 tbspaubergines 300g For the apple yogurt:mint leaves 12apple 1, smallwhite-wine vinegar 2 tbspnatural yogurt 200ml Squeeze the lime juice into a mixing bowl. Peel and grate the ginger and stir into the lime juice. Pour in the fish sauce then stir in the palm sugar until dissolved. Finely chop the red and green chillies, removing the seeds if you wish, then add them to the marinade with the tamarind paste and groundnut oil, combining the ingredients thoroughly. Cut the aubergines in half lengthways then into wedges as you might a melon. Now cut each wedge in half. Put the aubergines into the marinade, turn to coat and set aside for a good half hour. During this time they will soften a little. Next make the apple sauce. Finely chop the mint leaves and put them in a small mixing bowl. Grate in the apple – it can be as coarse or fine as you wish – then stir in the white-wine vinegar and yogurt. Cover and set aside. To cook the aubergines, heat a cast-iron griddle (and switch on the extractor). Place the aubergines on it and leave to brown on the underside. Turn, loosening them with a palette knife and brown the other side. Keep the heat low to moderate to make sure they are cooked right through – they must be fully tender. Serve the aubergines, hot from the griddle, with the apple yogurt sauce. A useful bake that keeps well in a cake tin or in kitchen foil. I own up to using this as a dessert, serving with a half-and-half mix of whipped cream and mascarpone sweetened with a little icing sugar and a trickle of syrup from the ginger jar.Serves 12 butter 225gcaster sugar 225glemons 2preserved ginger in syrup 75gself-raising flour 150gfine polenta 50gground almonds 70geggs 4crystallised or preserved ginger 12 slices, to decorate For the syrup:lemon juice 125mlcracked black pepper ½tspwater 125mlicing sugar 75gfresh ginger 50g Set the oven at 180C/gas mark 4. Line a deep rectangular cake tin, approximately 24 x 34cm, with baking parchment. Cut the butter into cubes, place in the bowl of a food mixer fitted with a paddle beater and add the sugar. Cream together until the mixture is pale, light and fluffy, scraping the sides down with a rubber spatula. Finely zest the lemons and chop the ginger, then add both to the mixture. Mix together the flour, polenta and ground almonds. Beat the eggs with a fork and add to the butter and sugar, a little at time. If it curdles, add a little of the dry ingredients and continue beating. Stir in the dry ingredients with a large metal spoon. Scrape the mixture into the lined baking tin, smooth the surface and bake for 35 minutes until risen and lightly firm to the touch. Remove from the oven. Make the lemon and ginger syrup: put the lemon juice in a small saucepan, add the pepper, water and icing sugar and bring to the boil. Finely grate the ginger and stir into the syrup. Remove from the heat. Spike the surface of the cake all over with a wooden or metal skewer then pour over the syrup and let it soak in. Cut the cake into 12 equal pieces. Decorate the top of the cake with ginger slices. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater Greenfeast: Spring, Summer by Nigel Slater is out now (4th Estate, £22). To order a copy for £16.99, go to guardianbookshop.com