You don’t need to spend much time on Twitter to know that the surest way to upset certain people is to challenge their preferred version of events, but if you want to watch those people, by and large white, male Anglo-Saxons, explode in real time, the social media site does provide a ringside seat. The historian Hallie Rubenhold made headlines last week when I interviewed her at the Hay festival about her book The Five, a biography of the victims of Jack the Ripper, and about the response to it from so-called Ripperologists – those obsessive devotees of the most famous unsolved murders in history who gather in murky forums to play amateur detective. But the fact that she has been the target of sustained vicious and personal attacks since before the book was even published will not be news to anyone who follows her on social media, where she often posts examples of the most egregious abuse. Rubenhold has been accused of suppressing facts and ignoring sources to suit her ‘feminist agenda’ Her offence is daring to return to the historical record and challenge the long-accepted view that the Ripper’s victims were all sex workers. In three of the cases, there is no evidence to suggest that they were professional prostitutes, and convincing reasons to believe that they were not, but the sexualisation of the victims has become part of the legend. Rubenhold has been accused of suppressing facts and ignoring sources to suit her “feminist agenda”, apparently out of a desire to appropriate the Ripper’s victims for the #MeToo movement, even though she began her research long before #MeToo took off. Ripperologists have devoted lengthy blog posts and podcasts to attacking her research and her credentials and compared her to the convicted Holocaust denier David Irving. Every GCSE student knows that sources can be open to interpretation and that there will always be particular groups invested in keeping those interpretations fixed. With the Ripperologists, it almost certainly comes down to good old misogyny: the belief, seen in one contemporary letter to the Times, that these were “bad” women who deserved their fate. Rubenhold’s book quotes the judge in the 2008 “Suffolk Strangler” case, who instructed the jury considering evidence against the serial killer of sex workers to put aside their “distaste” at the victims’ “lifestyles”, an extraordinary echo of the same sentiment, 120 years after the Ripper murders. Rubenhold said she had anticipated that kind of reaction – though not the scale of it – but the most unexpected attacks have come from women accusing her of “whorephobia”, simply for revisiting the facts and concluding that they don’t add up to the received view. People come to feel a sense of ownership over particular figures, filtering or ignoring inconvenient truths that don’t suit their version of the narrative, and it can be seen as deliberately provocative even to attempt a retelling of their stories from another angle. Hilary Mantel was criticised by Catholic bishops for Wolf Hall’s unflattering fictional portrayal of Thomas More – an actual saint – as a peevish, dogmatic torturer of heretics, an interpretation that served to balance her more sympathetic view of Thomas Cromwell. But Mantel is a novelist and creative artists have more licence to challenge the established version of history – at least in the UK. (Not so much in Turkey, where a novelist such as Elif Shafak can face criminal prosecution for allowing a fictional character to refer to the Armenian genocide.) Jack the Ripper is neither a hero nor a saint, but some Ripperologists feel that his enigma lends a macabre glamour, and to shift the story away from sex to the more mundane Victorian social issues of poverty, homelessness and addiction, as Rubenhold has done, is to interfere unforgivably in a narrative they feel belongs to them. Now, any attempt to redress the balance is attacked as serving a “politically correct” agenda and online agitators can find a Twitter mob ready to hurl accusations of manipulating facts to suit their identity politics. In 2017, Mary Beard was subjected to a torrent of racist and misogynist abuse for suggesting, based on available evidence, that Roman Britain was more racially diverse than it is often presented. She was also accused of being a bad historian for not engaging in “debate” with her trolls. Most historians are accustomed to criticism and dissent from their peers and colleagues. The danger is that online pile-ons such as Rubenhold and Beard experienced might deter thinner-skinned writers from tackling certain subjects or personalities. Now, more than ever, we need to be bold in revisiting what we think we know about the past, unearth the unheard voices and defend the facts, so that the record becomes more than just one opinion pitted against another. • Stephanie Merritt is a novelist and critic