Instant communication, mainly email, is preferred by most readers who want to bring a matter to the attention of a readers’ editor. But a small proportion of them still send letters through the post, and as well as a rich variety of stationery, handwriting and home printer typefaces, they showcase what might be called the slowness effect. Emails and phone calls naturally relate mostly to very recently published material and to the most prominent and controversial issues of the day. These communications may be formulated in anger or exasperation, and sent with haste that is evidenced by typos and misspellings (which don’t matter, so long as colleagues and I can understand the gist; the important thing is that readers are engaged and reacting). The entirety of one letter comprised two famed lines: ‘This is the way the world ends / Not with a bang but a whimper.' Letter writers are generally different. They mull. The topics they choose often suggest considerable time spent reflecting. And the issues they raise frequently have nothing to do with recent Guardian coverage of news and current affairs. Many of them too are very practical. They seek, mostly in the affectionate tone of a friend trying to cajole a change of mind, some adjustment to the Guardian. It might be physical, like larger type for easier reading; or intellectual, such as a new editorial direction on this or that issue. Some letters are engagingly enigmatic. Recently I was asked to note that when UK Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn left his house on his bike one day “some weeks ago”, he appeared to cycle the wrong way down a one-way street. That was all the letter said. Safety alert? Metaphor? You decide. Foreboding and forestalling are entwined themes. The courteously addressed entirety of one letter comprised two famed lines from TS Eliot’s The Hollow Men: “This is the way the world ends / Not with a bang but a whimper.” Another reader proposed that as climate changes and raises sea levels and erodes coasts, the solution is to deepen all major rivers, and many minor ones, by one metre. A different correspondent foresaw a new ice age for Britain, Canada and parts of the US. Letter writers often have ideas to share, such as this one, received after some UK parliament votes about Brexit and in the lead-up to European parliament elections: “I’m afraid I don’t have the stamina needed to pursue my proposal to the full – so I offer it, free of charge and without copyright entanglements: Can we now start the ABY party? It stands for Anyone But You and its aim would be the deselection of every currently sitting MP, even those who kiss babies and help old ladies over the road.” And this from a reader surveying the crowded field of Conservatives jostling to replace Theresa May as prime minister: “No reference has been made to the fact that the post could be a job-share.” I recall an editor who multiplied every letter the newspaper received by 10. He reckoned the other nine were half-composed by readers of firm opinion and intent, but they fell away at points such as the search for notepaper, envelope, stamp or catching the post. A readers’ editor receiving more than 30,000 communications annually from people around the world cannot reply personally to all of them. But, letter writers, be assured that your contributions, and your time, are appreciated. • Paul Chadwick is the Guardian’s readers’ editor