Cindy ShermanMasks, disguises and film fantasy abound in Sherman’s hugely influential art of self-invention.• National Portrait Gallery, London, 27 June – 15 September. Wild and MajesticThe “discovery” of the Highlands in the Romantic age is the theme of this hike through cultural history.• National Museum of Scotland, Edinburgh, 26 June – 10 November. Yorkshire Sculpture InternationalThe county that produced Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore celebrates their living legacy in modern sculpture with shows that explore the idea of “truth to materials”.• Hepworth Wakefield and other venues, 22 June – 29 September. David SmithThe highlight of Yorkshire’s sculpture festival is this survey of the great American sculptor who paved the way for minimalism and Richard Serra.• Yorkshire Sculpture Park, 22 June – 5 January. Jeff WallOne of the most intelligent photographers around continues his explorations of the nature of narrative in art.• White Cube Mason’s Yard, London, 28 June – 7 September. Philip IV of Spain by Diego Velázquez, circa 1656The ruler of a vast Spanish empire that encompassed the New World seems to be decaying before our eyes in this far from flattering royal portrait. Philip IV is melting. His flesh sags, his eyes droop; even his moustache seems fixed into place by an undertaker for his funeral. His air of immense sadness suggests he knows the mess he’s in. Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown – and like one of Shakespeare’s tragic kings, Philip seems to sense the futility of it all. Perhaps that’s why he let Velázquez reveal his melancholy condition in this extraordinary masterpiece of disillusion.• National Gallery, London. Just Looking, Just Checking on You, 2019, by Lucy JonesThe British artist’s cerebral palsy makes painting a huge physical effort, yet her unflinching self-portraits rival any Hockney. Why has the art world previously overlooked her? Read our interview here. Turner prize nominee Helen Cammock flunked art at school Blind Berlin gallerist Johann König has written a “coming out” memoir Pelicans changed the world Council housing is back, and it’s beautiful The Serpentine Galleries chief resigned Laure Prouvost wants us Britain to dig itself out of Brexit Donna Ferrato took a powerful stand against domestic abuse … and you can see her work at PhotoEspaña The Jarman award shortlist was announced Free Range celebrates artistic talent from UK universities Junya Ishigami’s Serpentine Pavilion has been interfered with … while a trippier pavilion is heading to LA Can a Timothy Spall film do for Lowry what he did for Turner? Frida Kahlo’s “voice” is not her own Cold War Steve is having a busy Time Queer artists of colour are a minority within a minority Tasmania’s Dark Mofo is, inevitably, a wild ride … and Jimmy Cauty is doing his bit for bleakness Berlin’s Alexander Haus has been restored Barcelona has built a tribute to Samuel Beckett Shanghai still has space for religion … while we met the workers who built the city Amsterdam is celebrating its Bicycle Architecture Biennale Evgenia Arbugaeva’s heart melted in the Arctic We toasted one actor for her art Ozgan Bilkin observed Turkey through the seasons Fatboy Slim likes smileys A French gallery was filled with fakes George Voulgaropoulos went west in Sydney To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign