Jeff Goldblum is soundchecking, but as far as he’s concerned, his performance has already begun. He fields audience questions on his extremely loud outfit – yes, those are zebra-patterned trousers – and flirts outrageously with Kate, a TV runner who comes on to ask him a question about the set and ends up getting roped into singing La Marseillaise with him. His mic gets cut off amid the stage preparations, so the crowd respond with chants of the Jurassic Park theme. Flags featuring Goldblum iconically reclining in The Fly and “Life finds a way” quotes float in front of him. The set itself also turns out to be as much about affable banter as jazz, “a new form of music that’s driving all the kids crazy”, according to Goldblum. Between songs, there is a quiz where the audience have to call out famous film quotes (Titanic splits the crowd between “paint me like one of your French girls”, “I’m the king of the world” and, er, “ICEBERG!”), and a bit where Goldblum canvasses the crowd on where they’re from. “Sunderland?” A single man yells affirmation. “Any Geordies?” “Fuck off!” the Sunderland man shouts back. Goldblum trades in all this back and forth with supremely, even mythically winning charisma, and his twinkly charm is parlayed into swing numbers with his band, the Mildred Snitzer Orchestra. There are smooth runs through numbers by Sarah Vaughan, Herbie Hancock and Charles Mingus. Vocalist Annie Ellicott blends coquettishness with cool on renditions of Sonny & Cher’s The Beat Goes On and Nat King Cole’s Straighten Up and Fly Right; the LA lounge lizard-y vibes are ramped up by organist Joe Bagg, and Alex Frank is a fantastically dextrous double bassist. Special guest Sharon Van Etten gives Irving Berlin’s Let’s Face the Music and Dance a wondrous, sexy, almost gothic intensity. Goldblum himself plays the piano like a man driving an unfamiliar hire car away from an airport, peering at his sheet music and poking experimentally at chords. But he is game enough to admit his own frailties. “I’m known for the glissando,” he says wryly; he relies on cascading note runs, one-note solos and vamping chords rather than virtuosity. But his magnetism is its own instrument. As his band close out with the Jurassic Park theme, the crowd at the West Holts stage has swelled massively, everyone basking in a beam of starlight.