The greatest cricketers obsess over their game with a motivation to be the best they can be. They squeeze out every ounce of skill and fitness which helps them approach matches with an unbreakable mentality, knowing every part of preparation has been covered. They throw themselves at every conceivable practice and game scenario to absorb, learn and build experiences to lock away in the memory bank. When they are faced with these situations again they then instinctively know what to do. Away from the playing field, though, I was reminded last week that even the greatest cricketers fall into two types. During the Edgbaston Test I had a chat with Kumar Sangakkara, a man who by his own admission never imagined he would play cricket for his country and rather stumbled on it by accident. Being enrolled late into university he spent two years living at home, training and playing cricket. The way he explained his early opportunities was that it wasn’t a big deal to be a dropped and, initially, he wasn’t too worried if he was selected or not. He had a philosophical and pragmatic view on cricket from such an early age and said he would happily have found another passion if things had gone differently for him. It surprised me that a player who scored more than 17,000 runs over 15 years of an international career was so at ease with his future. I dug a little deeper and learned that, once he had committed to treading the path, he was meticulous with his preparation – but it was important to find balance. I could empathise with him in this respect. It was necessary for me to have other things going on in my life to take the pressure off what I was doing on the pitch. I was still as obsessive about my game as the next person but it was important to get away. If Sangakkara was one of those cricketers who extended their careers by creating balance, there are also those such as Steve Smith, who live and breathe everything the sport has to offer. This is the type of player who, when they aren’t playing or training, are watching and talking about it. They are down at the local club helping out and, even when there is an opportunity to try something else, there is a gravitational pull towards bat and ball; they are helpless in the desire to be near to it, guilty in the knowledge that their attention strayed for a split second. There is no right or wrong way to be but for this type of cricketer it can be a harrowing prospect when the very thing you obsess over is taken away from you. With Smith, I had sympathy for a guy whose life seemed so all-consumed by a game which in a flash was taken away from him. On his journey he had created a safe haven where he was the boss and the game was his sanctuary. But a year’s ban after the events in South Africa for his role in the ball-tampering scandal would lead to sleepless nights, depression and feelings of worthlessness. An elbow injury could have been the last straw and could have led the man himself to question, for the first time, whether he wanted to carry on playing. What would he go on to do? With cricket his sole purpose would anything else truly fill the void? Perhaps, if other interests had beckoned outside the game, we might have lost one of our generation’s greatest cricketers for good – although presumably to the benefit of his peace of mind. The greatest stories are not lone incidents but often long tales of trial and tribulation. In last month’s World Cup final England had plenty of individual journeys with one, that of Ben Stokes, at the heart of it all. The paths of Stokes and Smith had intertwined in India in March, when both were on a journey to redemption for different reasons. Stokes was then six months into his comeback after returning to the England fold having being acquitted of affray following a late-night incident on national duty. While they were team-mates in the IPL I asked Ben during an interview whether he would offer Steve advice on how to bounce back from a turbulent time, and perhaps the feeling of letting the team down. He said he would happily talk to him if asked. I’m not sure if it ever happened but no doubt Smith witnessed the way Stokes went about his business during the World Cup, culminating in one of the most thrilling sporting performances in the final as they defeated New Zealand. Smith has now had his redemption and it is moments like these which underpin the capacity of humans to overcome their darkest hour. Have they learned from it? Yes, absolutely – it seems beyond improbable that we might see either man caught in the same circumstances. Will the public forgive them for it? Forgiveness is difficult when it goes against the principles of what you stand for but it is the greatest empowerment of all if you can allow yourself to do so. I hope the cricket world will afford that to them. The players will also understand that this kind of affirmation is not just earned by runs or wicket, it is by the willingness to quietly rebuild the example you set, from the first brick. It can be hard for the public to envisage the end result of these building blocks – people tend to see only the incidents rather than the wider picture – but I feel both of these men are on the way to creating something bigger and better than they might have had their paths not been interrupted. Much like the regrettable incidents in Bristol and South Africa respectively, the World Cup final and the first Ashes test at Edgbaston are lone incidents in what I imagine to be two truly fascinating journeys of two supreme talents when we look back at them in years to come.