Acting is the most curious profession. What kind of actor gets tasked with simulating throwing up in a pub fireplace while playing a drunken, out-of-focus Mike Ashley at the denouement of a reconstructed corporate bonding bender? One who needs to change his agent, is my guess. In Sports Direct: Secrets of the Mega Sports Factory (Channel 5), there were multiple out-of-focus Mike Ashleys, like my worst nightmare, or like a knockoff Being John Malkovich with bad lenses. There was little Mike as a blurry teen, taking in the vista of his native Maidenhead. The voiceover told us he was lean, mean and had a beautiful dream of blowing off this yawnsome burg and making his first million. There was an older, thinner Mike playing out-of-focus squash, evoking the period when he tried and failed to become a squash professional. Instead, his parents lent him £10,000 to set up a sports shop, which today is a 500-shop empire filled with bargain basement kit supplied from a Derbyshire warehouse you could see from space. Thereafter, it was bald acting blurs with beer guts in ill-cut suits who interpreted Ashley. His business model initially involved buying up sports brands you thought dead – Lonsdale, Donnay – and shifting manufacturing operations to Asia, where the newer brands that had crushed them had already relocated, thus cutting labour costs and making them profitable anew. The idea was that customers would get suckered into Sports Direct by promises of Adidas, Nike and Puma, then have a nostalgic pang over an old brand that had been reborn at knockdown prices. This ingenious business model explains why on so many Sunday afternoons, you might find yourself queueing with a Slazenger racquet, Lonsdale sports bra and Karrimor jockstrap when you only came in for discount trainer socks. Then, underpaid till staff would inquire if you would like to buy a bag for your sports tat and charge you £1 for a pint-sized Sports Direct mug to add to the horror show. Social media memes of this huge mug thrived, some joking it was so big that if upended, it would cause a flood. Hilarious. Who were the biggest mugs in succumbing to Britain’s charmless answer to Ryanair’s Michael O’Leary, a man whose mission was to dress increasingly unfit-for-purpose Britons in – be still, irony – sportswear? It was you, you fools! And, to a lesser extent, me! Channel 5 played footsie with this ripe idea of mugging off a nation by having an ident of a Sports Direct paddling pool deflating as we cut to commercials for no doubt equally pitiful consumer goods. Nice gag. We never heard from the Asian workers who keep Britons in lurid footie tops and ostensibly must-have flip-flops. Instead, we heard from the heroic undercover Guardian reporter Simon Goodley, who blew the lid off the Derbyshire warehouse, exposing zero-hour contracts and Dickensian work practices. As staff left the satanic gulag at the end of their shifts, they were told to roll up trousers and turn down waistbands to make sure they hadn’t been amplifying their genitals with tubes of shuttlecocks. Staff were not paid during these humiliating searches, which meant – if you extrapolated – their already tiny remunerative packages often fell below minimum wage. Ashley played the ignorance card before MPs over such disgraces, grinning like an irresponsible foetus throughout. Curiouser than the actors were the talking-head industry watchers with implausible-sounding surnames and jobs, such as the shopping vlogger Megan Gamblin and the consumer journalist Harry Wallop. They explained, using obviously made-up words such as “athleisurewear”, how Ashley lost his Maidenhead and became a FTSE 100 player. They told how he bought up Newcastle United and eviscerated it (cut to a scarcely coherent Sun football reporter who, abducted – or so we must suppose – by the Toon Army cult at birth, told us how Ashley’s stewardship meant he didn’t believe in anything any more). Now Ashley is attempting the last of his barmy trifecta. That involves buying up failing high street stores – Debenhams, House of Fraser – and turning them around. He has failed with the former, and if he succeeds with the latter, Wallop will change his name to something even more unlikely. Meanwhile, he has a side bet: to transform Sports Direct into the Selfridges of sportswear, largely, Gamblin told us, by targeting women who wear makeup while working out, and who – understandably – want to run without their mascara running perpendicular to their forward motion. Good luck with that, laughing boy. When the real Ashley appeared in shot, it was inevitably a disappointment – a beached whale on the Baudrillardian desert of the real outperformed by his out-of-focus simulacra. But don’t feel sorry for him. It is those who played Ashley who really suffered. Their CVs are compromised by interpreting someone who typifies Britain’s industrial, sartorial and moral decline.