Tideway Village is just four houseboats on the Thames in Vauxhall, home to around 20 people, but with its flowering shrubs, trees and plants, and a self-watering system, it forms an appealing bankside community right in the heart of London. David Waterhouse, 67, founded it nearly 20 years ago on what was a derelict site, a dumping ground for supermarket trolleys and scrap metal. A former sailor and ship’s carpenter who grew up in Surrey, Waterhouse moved on to an abandoned barge, won planning consent and licences, and set up services including water and electricity. We are at the mercy of whoever owns the ground rent of the development alongside us. And we have no real security beyond that In 2010, however, the developer St James proposed a wholesale overhaul: it would get rid of the boats, and the people living there, and replace them with a floating garden, part of an imposing riverside residential development designed by Richard Rogers’ firm. For three years, Waterhouse fought the eviction. His campaign included an e-petition, a statement of support from Boris Johnson (then mayor of London) and a protest outside Wandsworth Council’s offices. Waterhouse even dressed up as the Milk Tray man to lobby the developer in its head office at the Berkeley Group. Eventually, Waterhouse won: he convinced the developer that the vibrant houseboat community could be a local attraction in its own right, bringing customers to the new shops, restaurants and cafes. “People see the boats and want to come in and see what’s going on,” he says. “It’s regarded as a plus now.” Another developer, Barratt Homes, even asked the Tideway Village residents to participate in a promotional film to help sell nearby flats. “A really ironic twist,” he says. Despite the success, Waterhouse is troubled by the experience. “It shouldn’t be necessary to go through all that and three years of stress in order to survive,” he says. Worse, the future remains uncertain: at any time, the developer could sell the freehold, and the fight could start all over again. “We are at the mercy of whoever owns the ground rent of the development alongside us,” he says. “And we have no real security beyond that.” It is a situation faced by most houseboat communities, who may own their boats but not the moorings, and therefore have no legal right to stay. Unlike owners of houses or apartments, houseboat owners have no security of tenure: although they pay council tax, energy, water and insurance bills, they do not have the same statutory rights as other tenants. As a result, they have little redress when the owners of moorings propose to increase fees or develop the site. “Over many years, layers of statutory regulation have protected residential tenants from what would otherwise be a very unequal relationship by granting them rights against their landlord or by limiting the landlord’s rights as owners of the home,” explains Amanda Burge, head of dispute resolution at international law firm Hamlins. “The legal relationship when a boat owner moors a boat at a mooring is usually a completely different one and so the statutory regulation simply does not apply. “The situation faced by houseboat owners is not dissimilar to the one faced by mobile home residents – but while there is legislation designed to provide some protections to them, there is nothing at all that is designed to apply to residential houseboats.” The story is played out on moorings across the country. At Chelsea Reach, Burge is helping houseboat owners fight a court battle against Chelsea Yacht and Boat Company (CYBC), which runs their moorings. A historic community that dates back to the 1930s, Chelsea Reach has a charm all its own: the tidal flats between Battersea Bridge and Lots Road attract wildlife including cormorants and herons, and the community was the setting for Penelope Fitzgerald’s Booker prize-winning novel Offshore, as well as a popular film and TV location; the Peter Sellers film The Naked Truth and the 1970s television series The Sweeney both filmed scenes there. Three years ago, however, new owners of the moorings proposed to triple the cost of the licence. The boat owners claim the company is in breach of its agreement with the Port of London Authority, which they say allows CYBC to charge maintenance and mooring fees but not a licence premium. CYBC told Guardian Cities the charge was based on “independently assessed fair market value”, that the moorings were not under threat, and that any new boats would be “characterful, well maintained and sensitive to the area”. Back in 2011, on the Isle of Wight, after new owners terminated their licences, boat owners in Bembridge Harbour argued that their houseboats qualified as “dwelling houses” under the Housing Act. Their High Court appeal was unsuccessful: the law states that a house must be attached to land, and the court ruled that the houseboats were chattels – movable property – and therefore not eligible for protection under the law. I spent a fortune on doing it up. I walked away with nothing. Not a single solitary penny Janet Just’s houseboat was not movable property at all: her home, like some others in the harbour, rested on wooden platforms and was not seaworthy. She had been living in Bembridge Harbour since 1988, and when the new owner demanded that the houseboat owners buy leases to their plots, she couldn’t afford to pay. The plot was sold at auction and her boat was demolished after she lost the court case. “It’s heartbreaking,” she recalls. “I spent a fortune on doing it up. I walked away with nothing. Not a single solitary penny. “You can live 30 or 40 years on a boat and then someone comes along and says if you don’t pay xyz we’re going to evict you. And that shouldn’t be possible,” she says. “The landing craft had been non-floaters for 50 years. They were attached to all mains services and paid council tax like any other house. They had been doing so for a lot longer than many houses in Bembridge.” Her neighbour in the harbour, Christopher Mew, took a sledgehammer to the interior of his houseboat after they lost the legal action, destroying the wooden fittings in order to stop the bailiffs taking his property. Many tenants in houses and apartments rent under an Assured Shorthold Tenancy, which gives them various rights, although not to complain or contest the rent; tenants with an assured periodic tenancy can challenge a rent increase. Houseboat owners, however, have no such regulations to rely on when it comes to mooring. Nevertheless, the government says it has no plans to introduce new legislation protecting them any time soon. A spokesman for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “Owners of houseboats have their rights fully protected under the Consumer Rights Act 2015, and the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) can take action to address unfair terms in contracts.” Many houseboat owners, however, say those controls are ineffective. Meanwhile, the number of houseboats is rising: Canal and River Trust data shows the number of boats in total in London has increased by 84% since 2012, as the cost and scarcity of regular housing rises, too. Waterhouse believes the lack of legislation is holding back the possibility of not just low-cost housing but the broader recreational use of the Thames. He has bought a bargeyard in Rotherhithe that he says he is unable to develop for houseboat moorings, because the lack of security for tenants is deterring investment. “It could become a wonderful marina village and we can’t do it at the moment for two reasons. One is the fact that we would have to raise the money to put in the infrastructure, and you can’t raise money from a bank very easily because you don’t have any security of tenure from the Port of London Authority,” he says. “The second element: you can sell off moorings before or when they become available to finance that development, but nobody is going to want to do that if they’ve got no security of tenure on the mooring they’re buying. It has a complete knock-on effect. “If you want to create investment, to provide good-quality relatively cheap accommodation in London, there is fantastic opportunity for it,” Waterhouse adds. “It’s the last bit of landscape that doesn’t have proper legislation to help it become what it could.” Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter