It is a casting as hotly anticipated as Strictly, but with less sparkle and prurient speculation on potential couplings: the new Great British Bake Off lineup has been announced. That said, this year’s bakers are so young that the tent could well become a canvas-covered Love Island. With seven contestants in their 20s and the oldest, HGV driver Phil, a mere 56, the average age is 31, making it the youngest season by far. Will the delicate GBBO soufflé rise without the magic ingredient: older bakers? Previous seasons have seen contestants in their 60s and older triumph over patisserie pretenders young enough to be their grandchildren – but also, more importantly, bond with them in the loveliest way over split crème pat, deflated choux and Paul Hollywood’s ludicrous posturing. With its multigenerational flapping over pie crust and oven temperature, GBBO paints a picture of Britain we recognise: all ages and ethnicities, prey to anxiety and fond of a bun or six. So, while we prepare to fall in love with this year’s bunch (because we will; we always do), let’s remember some of Bake Off’s older heroes. Seemingly lost in a delightful world of her own, Val danced as she baked, claimed her cakes “sang” to her and dropped almost everything without ever losing her beatific smile. Since leaving GBBO, she has received a personalised message from her hero, Ed Sheeran, and remained friends with gloriously laidback Selasi (33), which is exactly as it should be. The Alan Bennett of baking, Howard combined endearingly dry humour with a highly relatable anxiety at uncooperative dough and mystery technicals. He faced the (entirely accidental) theft of his custard (who could forget “Custardgate”) with stoic dignity. A titan among bakers. Indefatigably perky scouser Flo threw herself into baking after her husband of 48 years died of leukaemia. Despite creating a spectacular watermelon illusion cake, she was eliminated in week three of series eight, but proved the best revenge is ... well, rapping, with a slick performance of Rapper’s Delight on the sister show An Extra Slice. Bake Off legend and series three finalist Brendan’s gentle manner masked a steely determination and spectacular precision. Whether oiling his forearms to stretch strudel dough, wielding a set square and tape measure with the rigour of a Cern physicist, or crafting an exquisitely romantic biscuit bird house, Brendan set the standard for grace under pressure while often clad in fleece. Series five featured unflappably brilliant winner Nancy (60) and Diana Beard (69) doing terrible things to Iain’s baked Alaska, but retired naval officer Norman Calder and his lumpen, no-nonsense, eminently achievable baking captured our hearts. Overcoming his suspicion of pesto and decorative flourishes, Norman’s biscuit showstopper “Zulu Boats at Dawn” sounded like a problematic 50s film, but was basically triangular ginger biscuits on a blue base. Peak Norman, that.