Boris Johnson was accused of not doing enough to reverse years of health underfunding as he gave details of how an extra £1.8bn will be spent on NHS infrastructure and equipment. Downing Street released a list of 20 hospital projects that will benefit from a £850m upgrade programme, honouring a promise that Johnson made in his first speech as prime minister less than two weeks ago. The rest of the £1.8bn will be spent on other NHS capital projects in England, with Scotland set to receive £180m, Wales £110m and Northern Ireland £60m in line with the standard formula for giving equivalent funding to the devolved administrations. The money, which is in addition to the long-term spending increase for the NHS announced last year worth an extra £20bn by 2023, will lead to the NHS’s capital budget rising by 30% this year. On Monday, Johnson will publicise the announcement on a visit to Lincolnshire, one of the most pro-Brexit areas in the country, suggesting that the prime minister is determined to be seen to be honouring the promise on the Vote Leave bus in 2016 to use savings from Brexit to deliver an extra £350m a week for the NHS. This slogan was widely regarded as dishonest because it significantly overstated the UK’s contribution to the EU and ignored mainstream economic forecasts that Brexit would result in lower growth and hence less money for the NHS. In a statement about the NHS before his visit, Johnson said: “With our doctors and nurses working tirelessly day in day out, this treasured institution truly showcases the very best of Britain. That’s why I made it my immediate task to make sure frontline services have the funding they need to make a real difference to the lives of NHS staff and, above all, of patients.” Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary said the announcement – which will do nothing to quash speculation that Johnson is preparing for an early election – did not go far enough. “Tory ministers have cut over £4bn from NHS investment budgets with continued smash-and-grab raids, resulting in crumbling hospitals, faulty equipment, substandard mental health facilities and the cancellation of cancer diagnosis appointments,” he said.“When our health services continue to be cut and the NHS struggles with a shortage of 100,000 staff, this announcement falls significantly short of what’s needed to provide patients with the quality, safe care they deserve.” Judith Jolly, a Lib Dem health spokeswoman, said Johnson’s announcement could turn out to be meaningless given his willingness to contemplate a no-deal Brexit. “When a no-deal Brexit hits government finances by an eye-watering £90bn, Boris Johnson’s pledge will not be worth the paper it’s written on,” she said. Ben Gershlick, a senior economist at the Health Foundation, a healthcare charity, said Johnson’s announcement was welcome, but well short of what the NHS needed. “While the prime minister might be looking forward to cutting the ribbon at a new hospital ward, years of underinvestment in the NHS’s infrastructure means this extra money risks being little more than a drop in the ocean,” he said. “Even after this additional money, there remains a major risk to the quality of patient care posed by deteriorating facilities, out of date infrastructure and a shortage of equipment. There is a £6bn maintenance backlog in trusts alone, of which over £3bn is ‘high or significant risk’, meaning that it is likely to be causing major disruption to services and impacting significantly on patient care quality and safety.” Nigel Edwards, the chief executive of the Nuffield Trust, a healthcare thinktank, said: “This is a welcome down payment on the staggering £6bn needed to clear the backlog of NHS maintenance but it will only be a fraction of what it would cost to really upgrade 20 hospitals. Nobody should expect shiny new hospitals in their towns any time soon.” Prof Derek Alderson, the president of the Royal College of Surgeons, welcomed the additional investment but said the announcement was “like an absent landlord saying he’ll mend the shower, but the broken toilet, damp walls and dodgy electrics will have to wait. “The NHS maintenance backlog bill stands at £6bn. Today we have £1bn towards that, but the question is how long it will take for the money to reach the frontline.”