‘Be wild, be weird, be wonderful, and take the feeling of love and community here and spread it far and wide,” Rou Reynolds of hardcore/electronica band Enter Shikari tells Leeds festival, having a Woodstock moment. The twin-site former rock festival turned annual post-GCSE blowout hasn’t turned into a hippy happening, but it does feel markedly more environmentally, socially and politically conscious this year. Recycling bins are everywhere. The scorching heat underlines the climate crisis message in the Extinction Rebellion films broadcast from the stage. Frank Carter and the Rattlesnakes create a safe space for women crowd surfers and “celebrate” Boris Johnson with I Hate You. Otherwise, seven stages host every genre from metal to dance to grime, although Skepta-championed newcomer Bakar wins over the Festival Republic tent by packing indie, punk, doo-wop and more into songs that are indefinably soulful. Women make up half of the audience but are still chronically under-represented, especially on the main stage, although Charli XCX’s catchy, biting pop gets the whole field bouncing. Dave Grohl conquered Reading with Nirvana in 1992, but his Foo Fighters certainly know how to headline the festival – this is their fourth time doing so. Normally creaky stadium rock indulgences – call and response routines, singalongs, a drum solo – work brilliantly because they’re delivered with a knowingly raised eyebrow, all the hits and blistering hard rock. Grohl’s duet with teenage daughter Violet on My Hero is truly lovely. The frontman’s wildest rock fantasies couldn’t have scripted a man randomly buzzing the crowd on a gyroscope during Learning to Fly or performing Queen and David Bowie’s Under Pressure with a Freddie Mercury lookalike plucked spontaneously from the audience. It’s obviously a kind of magic. But the 1975 are the first headline act to grab the zeitgeist, as angry new single People issues a punky rallying call to apathetic youth (“We are appalling and we need to stop just watching shit in bed”), before the set otherwise settles into trademark INXS-style pop-funk. Endearingly earnest frontman Matty Healy explains why he flouted Dubai’s strict laws to kiss a male fan (“It’s not me that needs to change, it’s the world”) and stands respectfully as his band musically accompany a Greta Thunberg speech on the climate emergency (it’s the first track on their forthcoming album) to rapturous applause. The story of the weekend, though, is that of 17-year-old singer Billie Eilish. Initially booked to play the Radio 1 tent, her booming popularity brought a hurried shift to the main stage, where her late afternoon slot draws a vast crowd comparable to that for Arctic Monkeys’ debut here 13 years ago. With her green hair and graffitied clothes, the American looks more climate protester than mainstream pop star but clearly has the voice and talent to be anything she wants. She requests the crowd to “jump like kangaroos”. Her 40-minute, 13-song set covers subjects from sexuality to self-loathing and careers from sub bass rap to jazzy piano ballads. She leaves the field in triumph, a superstar and headline act in every aspect apart from her position on the bill.