If Bolton Wanderers were to fold, it would be devastating. In provincial towns, the football club is at the centre. Also, there are jobs at stake and I remember what it felt like in the great times: the sense of euphoria and positivity that was sent through the town can’t be overestimated. To lose that would be tragic. I first went to see Bolton after being asked to take my younger brother to a football match. This was in 1978, I was coming up 14, it was under duress and yet I decided I quite liked it and have been a fan ever since. It was a cup game against Arsenal – my dad wasn’t into football, so we did it of our own volition. But it was a boy’s thing then really, which sounds daft now, so I didn’t go regularly until I moved to London, which was a bit random. I got a season ticket in 1994 and started coming back up to Bolton, when the club still played at Burnden Park, before we moved to the new stadium in 1997. On a match day it was certainly vibrant and alive but Burnden Park was rough and ready: it was the old days, standing on the terraces: you thought you’d got yourself a good spot, then somebody would plop themselves in front of you. Then there were all the stanchions blocking the view. People can have rose-tinted spectacles about the past but I was so happy that we moved because there were no proper facilities there. My favourite player is not actually one who would jump out to most: I really liked Gudni Bergsson, though there were so many that came through in that period: Jay‑Jay Okocha, Youri Djorkaeff, Ivan Campo, Fernando Hierro – just unprecedented times. You thought how on earth has Sam Allardyce – who was manager from 1999-2007 – persuaded these people to come to Bolton but he did. That was great but the Bruce Rioch era, from 1995 to 1998, was really good for me as well because that was built up from more UK‑based players so it felt more local. It wasn’t all glamour, not people at the end of their career – we were cultivating our own people. But now I just feel really worried sick; it’s all a bit surreal. Who is to blame? It goes back further than Ken Anderson, who has been owner since March 2016. To me, Anderson is definitely to blame but the writing was on wall when it was Phil Gartside, chairman from 1999 to 2015, to be honest. There didn’t seem to be any checks and balances, it was a closed shop, nobody got to know what was going on behind the scenes. It felt as if they just ruled everything between them, and you just think: where on earth did the money go? All those seasons in the Premier League, where did it all go? You just can’t believe we’ve ended up in the situation where we are. It was bad management and kicking the can down the road, and not investing in the future, not being frugal. Anderson should have been nowhere near our football club. He’s got a track record – he was banned from being a company director for eight years, but the EFL sanctioned it. It was just ridiculous – he shouldn’t have been allowed anywhere near it, as I said from day one. Some sections of the fans thought we’d been saved by someone coming in at the last moment when we’d been in court and we were going to be wound up in 2016. People talked like he was the savour but look at his track record – I always felt it could only go one way. Sure enough, three and a half years later it has. I rate the chances of survival now at 50-50. But I don’t think it is in anyone’s interest for the club to go into liquidation, so I just hope at the 11th hour a deal is going to be done. • Maggie Tetlow is a Bolton fan and a board member of the supporters’ trust