A woman who has accused Jeffrey Epstein of sexual assault on Wednesday filed a lawsuit against the financier’s estate, Epstein’s former associate Ghislaine Maxwell and three unnamed staff members who worked for Epstein in New York, according to a court filing. Jennifer Araoz, the plaintiff, filed her lawsuit in a New York state court in Manhattan. She had said in an interview on NBC last month that she had been recruited outside her New York City school to spend time with Epstein, and eventually give him massages, when she was 14. Araoz, who is now 32, said that she was later raped by Epstein when she was a teenager in 2002. Multiple women have accused Maxwell of enabling Epstein’s sex trafficking ring by either recruiting them directly or scheduling visits to Epstein’s home. Maxwell, 57, the daughter of the late press baron Robert Maxwell, has repeatedly and vehemently denied allegations of involvement in a sex-trafficking network run by Epstein, who was awaiting trial in a New York prison when he apparently killed himself on Saturday. The three other unnamed people in Araoz’s lawsuit include people who allegedly worked for him and another “recruiter”. In a statement on Wednesday Araoz said: “Many of you know some of the details of my story. The legal complaint we have filed today speaks to that in more detail.” She said the lawsuit was “my first step towards reclaiming my power”. “Jeffrey Epstein and his enablers stole from me, they robbed me of my youth, my identity, my innocence and my self-worth. “While I am angry that Mr Epstein’s death means that he will never personally answer to me in the court of law, my resolve to pursue justice has only strengthened. “Today I am starting to reclaim my power.” Araoz’s case was not mentioned in the sex trafficking indictment filed against Epstein last month but her attorneys told NBC News that she has since cooperated with the FBI and federal prosecutors as part of their investigation of Epstein. The lawsuit is one of the first actions initiated under New York’s new Child Victims Act, which enables victims of child sex abuse to bring civil cases against alleged abusers for the next year, regardless of when the abuse took place. After this year, victims will have until the age of 55 to file civil suits. While Araoz’s lawsuit states that she never met Maxwell personally, it alleges that the Epstein associate “conspired with Epstein in the implementation and maintenance of his criminal enterprise which, in turn, victimized Ms Araoz”. The lawsuit alleges that Maxwell hired “recruiters”, scheduled appointments with Epstein and intimidated potential witnesses. In the aftermath of his death, accusers expressed anger that Epstein would not face them in court. They sought reassurances that authorities would continue investigations into others who might have been involved in a trafficking ring that targeted young girls for sexual abuse. The investigation of Epstein appears to be escalating, with the FBI raiding Epstein’s private island in the Caribbean this week. William Barr, the US attorney general, said on Monday that “any co-conspirators should not rest easy. Victims deserve justice and will get it.” Maxwell’s lawyer did not immediately respond to a request for comment Wednesday morning. There have already been ramifications for staff at the New York jail where Epstein was found dead. The US justice department said on Tuesday that two guards assigned to watch Epstein have been placed on leave and the warden temporarily reassigned. Epstein was in the jail awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 800-273-8255. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. In the US, Rainn offers support for survivors of sexual abuse or assault on 800-656-4673. In the UK, the National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In Australia, support is available at 1-800-RESPECT, or other places listed here.