Regarding Miles Davis’s 10 greatest albums as listed by John Fordham (G2, 2 August): I was surprised by the omission of the 1964 live album My Funny Valentine. The long title track, with its brooding intro, is one of Davis’s finest. When I become famous and get invited on to Desert Island Discs, this will be the track I save from the waves. I’d better get a move on.Geoff Lavender (aged 73)Chichester, West Sussex • How refreshing to read a true description of the city I was born in (Wrong side of the tracks, 30 July). Most articles refer only to Clifton and its upmarket culture. Such contributions are presumably written by alumni of Bristol University and private schools. By opening a campus nearer the real Bristol, the university will benefit – and those who think we all live a hip life near the suspension bridge will be confronted with reality that this a deeply divided city with appalling pockets of deprivation and a totally inadequate infrastructure.Jane GhoshBristol • There is no need to go as far as Germany to experience a useful solution to the problem such as their nette toilette (Letters, 3 August). Our excellent town council in Frome has been running a similar scheme for some years now. It may of course help that all the members of the council are genuinely independent, so no political negotiation was involved in achieving and continuing with the idea. I’m sure they would be only too willing to advise other councils how to do it.Marjorie MorrisFrome, Somerset • Our new PM would certainly see a twinkle in the eye of the bust on his desk if he used his position to persuade the trustees of the British Museum to return the Elgin marbles (Journal, 27 July).Peter JohnsonPetersfield, Hampshire • The recommendation in Australia, apart from using a tick-removal tool, is to freeze them off using a product from the chemist for the removal of warts and skin tags (Letters, 3 August). The little buggers are simply frozen to death and fall off.Michael McPheePerth, Australia • I’d like to add the Clevergreen Festival, first held on 20 July in Brighton, and to be repeated next year (Festival-goers swap drink and drugs for wellness highs, 3 August). Wellbeing and eco-friendly living were at its core and the whole event was volunteer-led and entirely trouble free.Diana MorganChichester, West Sussex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition