When Gauhar Siraj woke on Monday, he realised something was about to happen. He’d travelled to Kashmir for a wedding, and tension had been building all week. Then in the morning: “Bam, there’s a curfew, internet is cut, telephone lines are snapped, you can’t make any kind of communication,” he says. Outside, access to main roads in Srinagar, the largest city in Indian-administered Kashmir, had been blocked. Hours later, the Indian government announced the most radical change any government has suggested for Kashmir since the region joined the Indian union. It would revoke Kashmir’s special status and divide the state in two. The move immediately angered Pakistan, which also claims Kashmir, and provoked warnings from China, which holds a thinly populated area in the disputed region. In Kashmir, people watched the news unfold on TV, the only source of information, and began to meet on the streets in residential areas, where some movement was still allowed. “Because the internet was down, telephones were down, so people congregated in small groups everywhere within the residential areas … There was this apprehension that things are going to get worse because this is what India does,” said Siraj, who spoke to the Guardian after flying to Delhi on Monday night. Concerns had mounted over the last week as a series of government orders leaked to the media began to provoke panic. One told Indian Railways staff in the Kashmir valley to stock enough dry rations to last four months and forecast a “deteriorating situation”. An extra 10,000 troops were sent to the already heavily militarised territory, prompting fears Delhi might be about to remove Kashmir’s special status. Rumours intensified further when, in an unprecedented move, the government curtailed a Hindu pilgrimage to a Himalayan cave shrine – a 45-day trek that about 300,000 people had embarked upon since July. Pilgrims and tourists rushed to the airport and several governments, including Britain’s, warned against all travel to Jammu and Kashmir. The Indian government cited security risks and said it had found evidence of attacks planned on pilgrim routes, but analysts questioned whether the action had been proportionate. Curfews and evacuations continued to be imposed on hospitals and educational institutions in Kashmir over the weekend. Prominent political leaders met to raise concerns over the possibility that Delhi might be preparing to remove Kashmir’s autonomy. Hours before the Indian home affairs minister, Amit Shah, addressed parliament, the leaders were placed under house arrest. The Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) has repeatedly promised to end Kashmir’s special status, and, after the prime minister Narendra Modi’s landslide victory in the May elections, the party had control of the lower house of parliament, where it was predicted the proposals would be passed. The scrapping of special status has long been a demand of the BJP’s Hindu nationalist support base. Analysts say Delhi may be attempting to assert itself regionally, as Pakistan gains favour with the US, which is seeking Islamabad’s cooperation in furthering a peace deal in Afghanistan. Siraj said some were banking on Trump to intervene, or for a case to be brought to the international court of justice. People believe things will get worse but they are not afraid, he said. “Things have changed. The next generation of Kashmiris, they are different, they don’t take anything lying down,” he said. “Their fear even of death has significantly lessened.”