Prep 20 min Cook 1 hr Makes 16 3 aubergines 1 small garlic clove, peeled and finely grated1 tbsp tahiniExtra-virgin olive oil250g Greek yoghurt2 lemons, one zested, both cut into wedgesSalt and black pepper4 spring onions, trimmed and finely slicedA few sprigs mint leaves, finely sliced1 large egg100g self-raising flour1 tsp baking powderOlive oil Heat the grill to medium. Pierce the aubergines all over with a fork and grill for around 30-45 minutes, turning three to four times, until charred, tender and cooked through. Alternatively, you can do this on the barbecue or gas hob, which will give the aubergines a fabulous smoky flavour, and they will cook much more quickly. Meanwhile, make the dressing. Add the garlic to a mixing bowl, add the tahini, a couple of tablespoons of olive oil and a little of the yoghurt, then mix until smooth. Whisk in the rest of the yoghurt and a squeeze of lemon juice, and season to taste. When the aubergines are ready, and cool enough to handle, halve them, then scoop out the flesh into a large mixing bowl. Mash until you have a relatively smooth puree. Add the spring onions and mint to the mixing bowl of aubergine. Add the lemon zest, season well, then mix in the egg, self-raising flour and baking powder. Pour a thin layer of oil into a large frying pan and put on a medium heat. Fry tablespoons of the mixture for around four minutes on each side, until golden all over; drain on kitchen paper. Spoon the tahini yoghurt on to a serving plate, top with the hot fritters and finish with the remaining lemon wedges. Prep 20 minCook 5 minServes 4 2 courgettes, trimmed and peeled into ribbons2 fennel bulbs, trimmed and peeled into ribbons½ bunch dill, finely chopped1 heaped tsp dijon mustard2 lemons, juicedExtra-virgin olive oilSalt and black pepper2 heaped tbsp capers, drained200g fresh peas, podded 70g pea shoots70g feta (optional) Put the trimmed courgettes and fennel in a large bowl of iced water and keep to one side. Put the dill in a small mixing bowl with the mustard and the juice of one and a half of the lemons. Whisk in four tablespoons of oil and season generously. Taste and add extra lemon juice, if you like. It needs to be punchy, so that when it coats the veg, it stands out. Put a small frying pan on to a medium heat and drizzle with a little oil. Fry the capers for a few minutes, until golden and crisp. Spoon on to kitchen paper to drain a little. Drain the shaved veg and toss with the peas and pea shoots. Toss through the dressing and crumble through the feta, if using. Serve straight away, scattered with the crispy capers and any remaining dill. Prep 30 minMarinate 2 hr+Cook 20 minServes 4 2 tbsp olive oil3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped1-2 red chillies, seeds removed, finely chopped1 bunch flat-leaf parsley, leaves picked, stalks finely sliced1 x 400g tin chopped tomatoesSalt and black pepper20 large king prawns, shells on2 red onions, peeled4 tomatoes2 tbsp red-wine vinegarA few sprigs mint leaves 200g feta2 pinches pul biber Put a medium-sized pan on a low-medium heat, pour in the oil, then add the garlic, chillies and parsley stalks. Fry for a few minutes, until the garlic is light golden, then add the chopped tomatoes. Half-fill the tin with water, swirl and add to the pan. Season well, bring to a boil, then cook at a rapid simmer for 10 minutes, until rich and thickened. Leave to cool completely, then pour into a large, non-reactive container. Butterfly the prawns, stir into the tomato sauce, cover and put in the fridge. Leave to marinate for at least a couple of hours. When you’re ready to grill the prawns, ideally on a barbecue, prepare the rest of the veg. Cut the onions into quarters and separate some of the petals, then cut the tomatoes into quarters. Thread the marinated prawns on to skewers, alternating with the tomato and onion quarters. Put the remaining marinade in a small saucepan and cook down for a few minutes, adding a splash of water if need be. Stir in a tablespoon of the red-wine vinegar and season to taste. Roughly chop the mint and parsley leaves, and toss with the remaining tablespoon of vinegar. Grill the prawn skewers on a high heat until cooked through and charred – four to five minutes. Spoon the cooked sauce on to a platter, arrange the prawn skewers on top, crumble over the feta and sprinkle with the pul biber and finish with the dressed herbs. Prep 15 minCook 10 minServes 4-6 650ml pomegranate juice2 tbsp pomegranate molasses100g honey225g caster sugar3-4 tbsp rose waterFor the sesame brittle75g sesame seeds1 pinch sea saltSeeds from ½ a pomegranateUnsprayed rose petals, to serve (optional) Pour the pomegranate juice into a saucepan and stir in the pomegranate molasses, 100ml water, the honey and 100g of the sugar. Put on a low heat for five minutes, stirring until the honey and sugar have completely dissolved. Remove from the heat, stir in three tablespoons of rose water and leave to cool completely. Taste and add a further tablespoon, if you like. Churn in an ice-cream machine, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Alternatively, pour the mixture into a tray, freeze for three hours, take it out of the freezer, then use a fork to crush and churn the crystals. Return to the freezer for an hour, and repeat several times until you have a smooth sorbet. Meanwhile, make the sesame brittle. Line a baking tray with greaseproof paper. Put a large frying pan on a medium heat and scatter in the sesame seeds. Toast until lightly golden, then add the remaining sugar to the pan in an even layer. Gently melt the sugar, swirling the pan to encourage it to dissolve evenly, until it is golden and liquid. Quickly pour it on to the greaseproof paper, sprinkle with sea salt and leave to set. Serve the sorbet scattered with pomegranate seeds, shards of sesame brittle, and some rose petals, if you like. Tuck in straight away. • Taverna (Square Peg, £25) by Georgina Hayden is out now. Order a copy for just £22 at guardianbookshop.com ⁃ The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US.