On the jacket, Churchill-whisperer Andrew Roberts extols this book as a cure-all for postcolonial melancholy: “Everything you’ve heard about the supposed evils of British imperialism will be turned on its head by Jeremy Black’s thoughtful, informed, and intelligent analysis. If you happen to be British, the shame you’ve been taught to feel about your forefathers’ work will be transformed into a genuine and lasting sense of pride.” Apart from Roberts, there are ringing endorsements from Niall Ferguson and Michael Gove, as well as a theologian from Oxford who lists reading history books as one of his hobbies. Black offers “a defence of Empire”, we are told, and “anyone who wants to engage on the imperial front of our current culture wars would benefit by arming themselves with this compact book”. Imperial Legacies is a product of its time. It is not that long ago that Jeremy Hunt proudly proclaimed that “Britain has been shaping the world for centuries and we’re here to stay”, later elaborating that “Brexit Britain’s destiny is to walk tall in the world”. Jacob Rees-Mogg’s Victorian fantasy – a book savaged by critics – is a similar recent example of this wistful invocation of a past that never was to guide the project to make Boris Johnson’s Britain great again. In 2019, empire nostalgia veers erratically between delusions of past grandeur and persecution complex: Britain is at the same time a global power and a heroic underdog, single-handedly holding off the barbarians, whether Zulus, Nazis, immigrants or the EU. This is, one suspects, the real concern with “criticism” of the British empire: to even suggest that the civilising mission might have been an essentially racialised project, or that the British could be quite as brutal as, say, the Belgians in Congo, is to challenge a particular narrative that so many people still hold dear. Ultimately, this is not about the past but the present, it is not about facts but feelings, and is not about history but identity. Black himself admits as much when he states that: “Blaming imperial rule … is in part a strategy designed to create a new public identity … by integrating … immigrant communities as an aspect of a rejection of the past.” As in the rest of his copious oeuvre, Imperial Legacies is unencumbered by much in the way of research and instead of a bibliography we are offered what looks like a list of holiday destinations There is a legitimate case to be made against empire-bashing; the work of Shashi Tharoor, for instance, is in some ways problematic – empirically and analytically. In the heady atmosphere of Britain’s current crisis of identity, we are in desperate need of sober and nuanced interventions in the debate on empire and its legacies. Unfortunately, Black contents himself with fighting off an array of increasingly implausible straw men. If this is indeed a culture war, he joins the fray armed with little more than a strong commitment to Whig history. Like the rest of his copious oeuvre, Imperial Legacies is unencumbered by much in the way of research and instead of a bibliography we are offered what looks like a list of holiday destinations. For Black, Anglo-American exceptionalism is not a concept to interrogate but a truth. With strong echoes of Ferguson, he argues that criticism of the British empire is really a proxy attack on the US, essentially motivated by leftist politics and historically unsound. Whether by “criticism” Black is referring to critical historical scholarship, postcolonial nationalist narratives, campus activism or something else is never quite clear. He appears to view history as a sort of zero-sum game with only a finite amount of criticism available: takedowns of the British empire are accordingly deemed disingenuous if they do not also address the moral shortcomings of the Ottoman, Mughal or Qing empires at the same time. And since slavery still exists today, racism is – he thinks – culturally ubiquitous, and as corruption and civil war are supposedly rife in former colonised countries, he concludes that such critiques are essentially misguided. This fails to acknowledge a crucial distinction: while the brutality of the British empire may not have been historically unique, the way that it is still celebrated today as essentially a force for good perhaps is. In one of his key examples, Black argues that the Amritsar massacre of 1919 must be viewed in the context of the Indian army’s assault on the Golden Temple during Operation Blue Star in 1984 – despite the fact that the only thing the two events share is that both occurred at Amritsar. One was a callous massacre of an unarmed gathering, the other was an all-out attack on a heavily fortified position held by armed militants. To Black, the conclusion is nevertheless clear: the violence of postcolonial states somehow offsets that of Britain’s empire. Black’s method of contextualisation thus turns out to be nothing more than an elaborate exercise in whataboutery. Historical comparisons can be useful and illuminating, yet here they act as distractions and serve no other purpose than to relativise the atrocities and oppression of the British empire to the point of whitewash. In fact he rails against any historical parallels that make Britain look bad, including the comparison between its concentration camps in South Africa during the second Boer war and those of the Nazis, or the use of “gulag” to describe internment camps for Mau Mau in Kenya during the 1950s. In between the predictable rants about railways and the rule of law and “political correctness gone mad”, the reader is also presented with more outlandish propositions: Britain should be credited, Black intones, for preventing a civil war in India between 1911 and 1937, an era when China was ravaged by conflict and political turmoil. Elsewhere, he appears to suggest that Churchill could not have been a racist given that he bombed the Nazis during the second world war. Because he seems to perceive criticism of the empire as serving the insidious purpose of erasing pride in Britain’s imperial past and thereby paving the way for mass immigration and multiculturalism, Black and his fellow nostalgics should be regarded as expressing rightwing identity politics. They are themselves indulging in what he describes as the “cult of the victim”. It is the same fear of erasure that manifests itself in the debate over statues of imperial figures, most notably that of Cecil Rhodes at Oxford, even though it should be obvious that historical knowledge or memory does not physically reside with such monuments. Whether the removal of statues actually achieves real change in the way people think about the past is a different matter. But there is very clearly a sense of what Paul Gilroy has described as postcolonial melancholy. Considering the now-famous YouGov poll from 2014, according to which 59% of the 1,741 people asked expressed the belief that the empire was something to be proud of, it is somewhat difficult to recognise Black’s claims of marginalisation in relation to public opinion. The more important problem with this poll, however, was the basic premise that the empire is something that can simply be evaluated as “good” or as “bad” – as instilling “pride” or bringing “shame”. Such an approach to history is as profoundly misleading as it is popular. Yet as long as the empire is discussed only in reference to the moral balance sheet, we cannot even begin to come to terms with the imperial legacies that continue to (mis)shape our world today. • Kim Wagner’s Amritsar 1919 is published by Yale. Imperial Legacies: The British Empire Around the World is published by Encounter (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.