Two articles in Wednesday’s Guardian highlighted the problems of disaffected young people. Neil Basu (Greater social inclusion vital to fight extremism, says counter-terror chief, 7 August) talked of the common themes that characterise the more “malleable”: high anxiety, lack of confidence, education etc. In your Society section (‘If I hadn’t come here I would be in a jail cell’, 7 August), a young man tells how he was transformed from a “naughty, obnoxious teenager” into a widely respected leader of activities by being involved in a community farm in south Wales. The project is facing a £200,000 subsidy cut because the local authority cannot afford to fund it any longer. Many similar projects face similar problems and the threat of closure; they are probably more effective in turning young people’s lives around than 20,000 extra police on the streets. I was involved in a very successful project to teach disaffected (male) teenagers to ride horses. The outcome was a group whose self-esteem and general behaviour improved greatly. These mainly urban projects should be encouraged and properly supported by the government if they have any interest in helping vulnerable young people. Alison HarrisHarrogate, North Yorkshire • Huge praise to assistant commissioner Neil Basu, senior national coordinator for counter-terrorism, for his intelligent assessment of the sources of, and solutions to, home-grown terrorism. It is refreshing to hear such a senior public servant asserting that “more social inclusion, more social mobility and more education” are more powerful than “all the policing and state security apparatus put together” and that people need a stake and a voice in their society. This is not just in combating terrorism (or crime generally), but in low educational attainment, obesity, some mental illnesses and life satisfaction we need more of these things. This requires political will, investment, staffing, reduction in inequalities, progressive taxation and less family poverty. We await other senior figures coming out to admit that their services “are dealing with the symptoms and we need to deal with the root causes”. Speaking truth to power does not have a good record but shouted out loud on many fronts by high-profile figures might just get through. Either that, or wait for the disciplining and gagging of Assistant Commissioner Basu as a warning to others who might follow his example.Prof Carl ParsonsLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition