Michael Adams edged out David Howell for the British championship last weekend as the pair, who are separated by a whisker in the global live ratings, both finished unbeaten with 7.5/9 and 7/9. The rising North London talent Ravi Haria, 20, drew with both Adams and Howell and shared third with Richard Palliser on 6.5/9. Jovanka Houska, the England No 1, retained the women’s title, incorporated within the main event, with an excellent 6/9. Adams’s seventh championship came 30 years after his first, at age 17 and still the record youngest, at Plymouth 1989. Last week’s victory was at Torquay, and the Cornishman always plays well in his native West Country. Adams did have favourable pairings in the final two rounds when the colour allocation gave him White in both, allowing him to display his impressive skills with his invariable 1 e4 against the 1…c6 Caro-Kann of Richard Pert and the 1…c5 Sicilian of Stephen Gordon. These seven championships have put Adams within striking distance of the records of Jonathan Penrose, who won 10 titles between 1958 and 1969, and Henry Atkins, who won nine between 1905 and 1925. Penrose was a college lecturer and Atkins a school headmaster, both with limited time for tournaments, while Adams was ranked world No 4 at his peak and reached a global final in 2004. Even at 47, Adams could still hope to win another four titles, but that is unlikely to be his priority, and as for the record gap between first and last championships, he will not even think about it. Sammy Reshevsky had 33 years between his first and last US titles, Roddy McKay 42 years between his first and last Scottish titles, and Howard Williams 43 years between his first and last victories in Wales. Perhaps the most significant results at Torquay were achieved by a quartet of players aged between 17 and 20 who made their best showings yet in the championship. Ravi Haria already has one GM norm and missed a second by just half a point after escaping in the final round when GM John Emms, in a winning position, blundered at move 29. Among those tied for eighth place with 5.5/9 in the field of 54 were Matthew Wadsworth,19, and Jonah Willow and Borna Derakhshani, both 17. Wadsworth, like Haria, already has his first GM norm and impressed when he drew with the world No 1 woman, Hou Yifan, in the Oxford v Cambridge match earlier this year. Willow, from Nottingham, is an ambitious talent who plays in many tournaments and also hones his skills online. Derakhshani, who won in attacking style against GM Chris Ward, was an Iranian until he was banned for playing an Israeli in the Gibraltar Open, while his sister Dorsa, who now lives in the US, was banned for not wearing a hijab. Fide, the global chess body, publishes a monthly league table of countries showing the top 100 players in each and listed in order of the rating average of their top 10 players. England are ranked 11th, and almost all the higher placed nations have considerable state support. However. English chess is also ageing, and the 100 players include only four millenials. The picture will be brighter if the successful Torquay quartet continue to progress rapidly, but to advance from 2350-2450 where they are now to 2600+, the level of the England Olympiad team, is a big ask. 3631 Na3-b5-c7-a6-b8-c6-a5-b3-c1.