Sadiq Khan’s support of the Fabian Society proposal for a new slavery museum in London (Report, 12 August) and Kehinde Andrews’ opinion piece (A new slavery museum will have no impact on racism, theguardian.com, 13 August) reflect the difficulty in addressing past injustice and its impact on modern-day life. We need a more ambitious approach to understand how Britain’s economic development and racial prejudice were the direct result of empire. It quite literally changed the faces of our own country, the West Indies, North and South America. What is required is an Institute of Empire & Commonwealth – a combination of museum and research institute that teaches all Britons about our imperial past, its modern-day impact and the countries of the Commonwealth ahead of the 75th anniversary in 2024. My late father opened the Commonwealth Institute with the Queen in the 1960s as a platform for wider understanding. We now need an institution that teaches all Britons about how our country was economically transformed on the backs of people from across Asia, Africa and the West Indies – and how religion, education and science helped justify the situation with racial theories that sadly echo through our own age. The impact of divide-and-rule policies across vast swathes of the world are still felt in contemporary tensions. If the Home Office had a better understanding of our own history, scandals like Windrush might not have occurred. Rather than another slavery museum, an institute that informs and educates Britons of all racial origins could be a crucial first step in true racial healing.John ArmahLondon • Property is the foundation of economic inequality, and its inheritance perpetuates a past where one class owned another as property. As Kehinde Andrews points out, the “owners” of enslaved people “were paid reparations in the largest government bailout in history”. It should be feasible to follow that money, then reverse and increment the reparations based on family and corporate wealth directly accrued from the transatlantic slave trade. Peter McKennaLiverpool • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition