Police in Northern Ireland have arrested two men after at least two people were stabbed, leaving one critically injured, near an unauthorised republican bonfire. The suspects, aged 21 and 28, were detained early on Friday morning on suspicion of offences including causing grievous bodily harm with intent. They were arrested in the New Lodge area of north Belfast where hours earlier a crowd of youths had attacked riot police. Footage posted on social media showed a man in a black anorak wielding a large knife and wading into a melee of youths. He appeared to stab at least one person several times before walking away and brandishing the blade aloft. “We are aware of footage circulating on social media and this will be examined as part of the wider investigation,” said Ch Insp Kelly Moore. An 18-year-old man who was stabbed in the back is being treated in hospital. His condition is described as critical. A 39-year-old man stabbed in the arm and hip is also receiving treatment. His injuries are not thought to be critical. A third man was struck by a crossbow and also stabbed but refused hospital treatment, the Irish News reported. Police accused dissident republicans of orchestrating violence by staging a standoff over the bonfire. The event commemorated the anniversary of the internment of republicans in 1971, an event that galvanised IRA recruitment at the height of the Troubles. On Thursday afternoon police had attempted to facilitate the bonfire’s removal by a private removals company contracted by local authorities. Youths, some masked, responded with a hail of bottles, bricks, fireworks and other projectiles that injured three officers. The officers withdrew, leaving the crowd to light the bonfire later that night as planned. At a press conference, assistant chief constable Alan Todd accused ringleaders of using women and children as human shields, obliging police to withdraw to reduce the risk to innocent bystanders. Mark Lindsay, the chair of the Police Federation for Northern Ireland, said the standoff produced ugly scenes reminiscent of the past. “They are disgraceful and unacceptable.” Sinn Féin said the community did not want the bonfire, calling it a health and safety hazard. “It has been built by antisocial elements, who torture this district throughout the year and many of whom are well-known,” said Gerry Kelly, an ex-IRA bomber who is now an Sinn Féin assembly member. Sinn Féin and other political parties also condemned a separate anti-internment republican bonfire in Newry that included signs with the names of David Black and Stephen Carroll, respectively a prison officer and a police officer murdered by dissident republicans opposed to the peace process.