As opening games go, Manchester United will have to be happy with this one. They won, their new signings all seemed to have fun and Ole Gunnar Solskjær was noisily serenaded by all four sides of the ground. Sure, there was the impertinence of José Mourinho, in his new role in the television studios, suggesting that Manchester City’s B team would stand a better chance of winning the Premier League. Yet this was the fifth season in a row United have won their first game and the last time that happened in the top division was 1910 – the very year that Old Trafford opened for business. Not that anyone should be getting too carried away just yet or, indeed, thinking Mourinho might have been wrong. A 4-0 winning margin does not quite tell the full story, particularly when taking into account a first half in which Chelsea’s players often gave their opponents the run-around, hitting the woodwork twice as well as creating all sorts of danger. Ultimately, though, it turned into a chastening experience for Frank Lampard, taking charge of his first match as Chelsea manager. Marcus Rashford, in particular, profited from Chelsea’s shortcomings in defence, opening the scoring with a first-half penalty and then racing away to put in the third goal little more than a minute after Anthony Martial had doubled United’s lead. The indignities for Lampard were stacking up and he had to endure the now familiar “sacked in the morning” chant after Daniel James confirmed United’s second-half superiority late on with a debut goal, eight minutes after coming on as a substitute. Yet the more pertinent song, perhaps, came a few minutes earlier when the Stretford End made it clear what they thought of Graeme Souness, the long-term critic of Paul Pogba. Pogba had just supplied the best pass of the match to dissect the entire Chelsea defence, resulting in Rashford sprinting through the middle to slip the ball past Kepa Arrizabalaga and make it 3-0. Pogba also supplied the decisive pass for James to score with a deflected shot and, on this evidence, maybe even Souness might be forced to concede that the French World Cup winner can bring more good than bad to this club. Pogba was the last player to leave the pitch, staying back to applaud the section of the Stretford End that has not always ushered him down the tunnel so warmly. It felt strategic as if he wanted to repair some of the damage from having said he wanted to find another club. The second half was a strange capitulation on Chelsea’s part because the paradox of this game is that for long spells they passed the ball with more clarity. They certainly had the better of the opening 45 minutes but still found themselves behind due to Kurt Zouma’s mistimed challenge bringing down Rashford just inside the penalty area. It was a straightforward decision for the VAR officials and, though Kepa dived the right way, Rashford’s penalty was a mirror image of the one he scored so memorably against Paris St-Germain last season – struck powerfully, to the goalkeeper’s right, and still rising as it hit the net. Until that point Lampard must have been encouraged by the adventurous approach of his team. Tammy Abraham, spearheading their new-look attack, had flashed a 20-yard shot against David de Gea’s right-hand post. Mason Mount, operating in the number 10 role (albeit wearing number 19) looked determined to show he could flourish at this level,having spent last season on loan to Derby County in the Championship. Pedro had one of his better games and Ross Barkley was quick to support Abraham when the team broke forward. United, in comparison, needed the opening goal to bring them alive and even then Chelsea had enough chances to feel aggrieved to be behind at half-time. Emerson, in particular, was unfortunate with a rising left-footed shot that beat De Gea but flashed off the crossbar. Aaron Wan-Bissaka’s saving tackle on Barkley drew an almighty cheer from the home crowd and Harry Maguire, another debutant in United’s back four, certainly won his fair share of headers on a day when Solskjær did not even include Chris Smalling, Phil Jones or Marcus Rojo among the home team’s substitutes. Overall, however, the opening hour was not easy whatsoever for United’s new defence and they rode their luck at times. Chelsea were just too naive, perhaps, to make it count – too open, too wasteful in attack, too obliging with their marking. There is also a great statistic from the Premier League era that shows United have never lost any of the 280 games when they have had a half-time lead on their own ground (winning 264 and drawing the other 16). More and more it is also becoming evident how Solskjær intends to line up his attacking players this season. Here, he started with Andreas Pereira just behind Martial, in the most advanced position. However, there were times when Jesse Lingard, who began on the right, exchanged positions with Pereira whereas Martial and Rashford did the same on the left. Martial has taken on Romelu Lukaku’s number nine shirt and he certainly finished like a number nine when Pereira swung over the cross for United’s second goal. Pereira had justified his selection. Scott McTominay did, too. Maguire and Wan-Bissaka can reflect on a satisfactory start (Maguire-watchers will also have noted the move for the fourth goal began with him dispossessing Abraham on the edge of his own penalty area). James looked euphoric and Old Trafford, by the end, felt like a contented place. They even sang Mourinho’s name, eliciting a wave from their former manager.