In the end, it took an act of God to stop Jofra Archer. A thick bank of black cloud blew over the Grand Stand at a quarter-past-seven, and in the twilight of Sunday night, the umpires rightly decided that it was all of a sudden so dark that the Australian batsmen couldn’t safely face him anymore, if they ever could safely face him at all. Archer had already hit Marnus Labuschagne, Tim Paine and Matthew Wade earlier in the day, and that was in bright sunlight. So Archer slapped on his hat, and turned his back from the crease, then strolled off to field at mid-on, despondent. Force majeure. Who knew there was a superior force out there? Archer bowled 44 overs in this match, and by the time they were over he’d proven himself to be the most lethal fast bowler in the world. On Sunday he cracked open the Australian second innings, had David Warner caught at slip, Usman Khawaja caught behind, and, later in the day, removed Paine too. But it wasn’t just the wickets. Archer has hit 19 batsmen in the body and head in the short time he’s been playing international cricket. Right now he’s averaging a strike every 10 overs or so. His bowling’s not just a test for Australia’s batsman, but for the way the game handles these blows, too. There’s an old story about Australia’s coach, Justin Langer, from back in 2006. It was his 100th Test, a match against South Africa at the Wanderers in Johannesburg. Facing the very first ball of the first innings, Langer turned away from a bouncer from Makhaya Ntini that caught him smack on the back of his helmet. Langer retired hurt, and in hospital later that day he was diagnosed with a concussion, and warned he wouldn’t be able to bat again in the match. One doctor even said that another blow to the head could be fatal. Langer spent the next three days in the hotel, feeling sick and sorry for himself. On the fifth day, Langer decided he was well enough to travel in. Australia were 248 for six at the start of play, and needed another 45 runs to win. By the time the last pair came together, they were still 18 away. It was then that their captain, Ricky Ponting, came in from the balcony and found Langer, in his whites, with his pads, helmet, and arm-guard on, running laps around the dressing room. “There’s no way I’m letting you do it,” Ponting told him. Langer insisted: “I’ll be alright.” They went back and forth, until Ponting finally told him he’d forfeit the match rather than let him bat. In the end, Brett Lee and Michael Kasprowicz won them the game anyway, so no one will ever know how it would have played out. Players, fans, and pundits are conditioned to think the admirable thing to do after being hit on the head is carry on That story came to mind again late on Saturday night, in that 10-minute spell when Steve Smith was back in the Australian dressing room at Lord’s, 80 not out, and insisting that he was ready to go back in. “We asked him over and over again,” Langer said that evening. “I asked him behind closed doors two or three and times and in front of the group. What else do you do?” Of course Smith wanted to go back in. Any good Australian batsman would. They grow up on stories about Dean Jones batting in the heat in Chennai, Steve Waugh scoring a century on one leg, and, yes, Langer ignoring the doctors’ warning at the Wanderers. Smith had passed all three sets of tests the medics use to diagnose concussion. But then, Cricket Australia’s own statistics show that in 30% of the concussions suffered in cricket the symptoms are delayed until hours after the event. That’s why they repeat the testing. At Lord’s in 2015 Chris Rogers retired hurt 48 hours after he was hit on the head by James Anderson because he found, all of a sudden, that “the Grand Stand started moving” when he was out in the middle. This time, Smith woke up with a headache, feeling dizzy, dozy, and in a fog. The night before, when he resumed his innings, he’d batted like he was lost in one, too. He started with a yahoo over mid-wicket against his very first ball back, bowled by Chris Woakes, who beat him, in his very next over, on the inside and outside, before dismissing him lbw, leaving a ball that went straight on. Cricket is still figuring out how to best handle all this. The Langer story shows the game’s come a long way in a short time. But it may still have further to go. Those new protocols will need to be continuously monitored, just like Smith’s injury was. One clear change the ICC should make is to bring in independent match-day doctors at all internationals, men and women who can make the decision about whether or not a player is fit to resume batting. Australia’s doctor, Richard Saw, seemed to handle this incident very well according to the protocols, but so long as he’s an employee of the team there’s always going to be uncomfortable conflict of interest there, too. Beyond that, there is a wider problem to work on, one everyone who loves the game needs to address. Right now, all us players, fans, and pundits are conditioned to think the admirable thing to do after being hit on the head is carry on batting. We’re still applauding players for their bravery when we ought to be chastising them for their foolishness.