The chief executive of IAG, the owner of British Airways, has urged pilots threatening summer strikes to accept BA’s “generous” pay offer, adding that he remains optimistic that a deal can be reached to avoid disruption for holidaymakers. Willie Walsh, a former airline pilot and union negotiator turned airline boss, said he was not involved directly in pay negotiations but advised pilots to accept an 11.5% pay rise over three years. “I’ve had experience on both sides of the negotiating table. If I was on management’s side I wouldn’t have made such a generous offer and if I was on the union side I would have grabbed it,” he said. “I flew for 18 years so I understand the pressures of the job. I’ve always been impressed by the professionalism of BA pilots and I remain so. By any measure, it’s a fair offer and people would say it’s a generous offer in the context of other pay awards that are being discussed in the UK.” Talks with the pilots’ union Balpa are continuing in an effort to stave off strikes that could begin this month if the union gives two weeks’ notice of a walkout. IAG, the product of a £5bn merger between British Airways and Iberia in 2010, cheered investors by reporting rising revenues and better-than-expected profit for the first half of the year, including the crucial summer period. Despite rising fuel costs, an 8% rise in sales to €12bn (£11bn) helped IAG deliver pretax profit of €1bn in the first half, broadly flat on the same period last year after stripping out a €620m pension-related benefit that boosted the 2018 figures. The second quarter was particularly strong, with a good Easter period helping drive pretax profit up nearly 20% to €921m over the three-month period. The earnings beat stock market expectations, sending shares in IAG up almost 5% to 433p. IAG said it had not set aside any money to cover the £183m fine issued by the Information Commissioner’s Office over the theft of its customers’ data. “It is British Airways’ intention to vigorously defend itself in this matter, including using all available appeal routes should they be required,” the company said. It said the final level of the fine could not be “reliably estimated” until it had exhausted all avenues to have the penalty reduced. Walsh said he was not concerned at the prospect that passengers would be afraid to fly in the Boeing 737 Max despite the aircraft’s involvement in two fatal crashes in Indonesia and Ethiopia. IAG has ordered 200 of the aircraft, which is grounded while Boeing makes upgrades that require approval from global regulators, but is not due to receive them until 2022 at the earliest. Walsh said he had no concerns about it, having personally tested upgrades of the aircraft’s software on a flight simulator. “This will be the most scrutinised tested aircraft that’s ever flown, by a combination of regulators, which is reason for everybody to be comfortable.” he said. “Having flown the simulator and spoken to Boeing, I’d not have any hesitation getting on the aircraft and I would fly on it.” Analyst Mark Simpson at stockbroker Goodbody said IAG’s financial performance was strong when taking into account difficult market conditions. “Given all the uncertainties over global growth and Brexit, this looks to be a very strong statement by the company and implies that forward bookings are trending well,” he said.