Birmingham City added to Nathan Jones’s misery with a comeback win over Stoke City at St Andrew’s. The visitors looked like they were heading for their first victory of the season after Liam Lindsay opened the scoring just before the hour mark but two goals in the space of three minutes turned things around as Lukas Jutkiewicz levelled things, then 16-year-old substitute Jude Bellingham’s deflected effort ensured Birmingham earned the points and Stoke stay bottom with a single point. Bellingham, at 16 years and 38 days broke Trevor Francis’ 49-year-old record to become the club’s youngest ever scorer. Newly-promoted Charlton continued their unbeaten run this season with a 2-0 away victory at Reading, which moved them up to second. Loanee Jonathan Leko netted his first in the Football League, before Lyle Taylor converted his fifth goal of the season from the spot. Derby have still not won since the opening day of the season after conceding three first-half goals at Brentford. Bryan Mbeumo got the first, then Ollie Watkins added two more, his second coming after teammate Henrik Dalsgaard had blocked his original effort on the line. Five goals were shared between West Brom and Blackburn before the break at The Hawthorns. There were no goals in the second half, as the hosts won 3-2. Bradley Dack put Blackburn ahead after making the most of a mistake in the defence to slip home from inside the area. West Brom bounced back as Matt Phillips, Jake Livermore and Grady Diangana put the Baggies in control, with Bradley Johnson reducing the arrears on the stroke of half-time. Huddersfield are still winless after Luton came from a goal down to win 2-1, with James Collins cancelling out Terence Kolongo’s opener, before Andrew Shinnie sealed victory with a curling effort from just outside the area. Striker Jordan Hugill scored twice for QPR at Sheffield Wednesday to earn a 2-1 victory. Steven Fletcher converted from the spot for the Owls, before Hugill struck twice from close range. Bristol City 2-2 Middlesbrough,Birmingham 2-1 Stoke, Brentford 3-0 Derby, Leeds 0-1 Swansea, Luton 2-1 Huddersfield, Millwall 1-1 Hull, Nottingham Forest 1-1 Preston North End, Reading 0-2 Charlton, Sheff Wed 1-2 QPR, West Brom 3-2 Blackburn, Wigan 0-0 Barnsley Sunderland’s season suffered its first blow at Peterborough, where they conceded two goals and two players were sent off. Marcus Maddison struck two goals, either side of a Josh Knight finish. First Luke O’Nien saw red for an off-the-ball incident involving Posh’s Ivan Toney, before Charlie Wyke picked up a second booking to get his marching orders. For the fourth successive game Bolton conceded five goals, on this occasion at Gillingham, where Olly Lee struck twice on his debut. Later on Saturday, Bolton confirmed Keith Hill as their new manager. Ipswich are top of the table after a simple 3-0 win over Shrewsbury, who played most of the game with 10 men after Shaun Whalley was sent off. Southend are still pointless this season after a 3-0 reverse at the hands of Rochdale, who can thank Ian Henderson, Aaron Morley and Lucas Camps for the points. Six goals were shared at the Kassam Stadium including two in injury-time as Oxford United and Coventry City picked up a point each. The hosts battled back from two goals down before Callum O’Hare found the back of the net in the 91st minute, but there was still time for Elliot Moore to equalise. Accrington 2-1 MK Dons, Blackpool 1-1 Portsmouth, Burton Albion 2-0 Bristol Rovers, Gillingham 5-0 Bolton, Ipswich 3-0 Shrewsbury, Lincoln 2-0 Fleetwood, Oxford Utd 3-3 Coventry, Peterborough 3-0 Sunderland, Rotherham 1-1 Tranmere, Southend 0-3 Rochdale, Wimbledon 0-0 Wycombe Ryan Bowman’s fifth-minute strike was enough to secure Exeter’s win over Mansfield and retain top spot. Forest Green goalkeeper Joe Wollacott had a day to forget, firstly gifting the opener to Newport’s Padraig Amond, then getting himself sent off for bringing down Tristan Abrahams. Ryan Haynes completed the win late on to put Newport second. Just behind them are Crewe, who beat Bradford City at home thanks to goals from Charlie Kirk and Tommy Lowery. Stevenage were denied their first win of the season when Joe Ironside converted an 85th-minute penalty for Macclesfield. Propping up the Football League are Scunthorpe, who went down to a single goal from Carlisle’s Ryan Loft. Crawley 1-0 Cheltenham, Crewe 2-1 Bradford City, Exeter 1-0 Mansfield, Forest Green 0-2 Newport, Northampton 3-1 Plymouth, Oldham 0-1 Colchester, Port Vale 1-0 Cambridge, Salford City 1-1 Leyton Orient, Scunthorpe 0-1 Carlisle, Stevenage 2-2 Macclesfield, Swindon 3-1 Morecambe, Walsall 1-3 Grimsby