British Airways has drafted in almost 100 extra staff to deal with a flood of complaints from customers trying to rebook flights and chase refunds in the run-up to next month’s pilot strikes. The airline said it had about 730 staff handling thousands of calls and social media messages after customers were told their flights would be affected by pilot walkouts on 9, 10 and 27 September. About 640 customer service workers usually handle queries on a normal day. A number of passengers received emails from the airline on Friday mistakenly telling them their flights were affected. Many scrambled to arrange alternative flights – only to learn hours later that the email was sent in error and their original travel plans were unaffected. Customers who were expected to fly on strike days have been given the option to rebook or receive a full refund but BA said customers affected by the email error would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. When an airline starts cancelling or delaying flights for more than three hours, passengers are entitled to compensation of €250-€600 (£230-£550) under EU rules. The cause of the problem has to be under the airline’s control and not an ‘extraordinary circumstance’. Lack of planes/staff, flight overbooking, a strike by airline staff or an IT failure are all considered to be within the airline’s control – so compensation is payable. Passengers on cancelled short-haul flights – up to 1,500km – are entitled to €250 or £230. For flights of 1,500km-3,500km, passengers are entitled to €400, and €600 for the longest flights (more than 3,500km). Compensation is also payable if the plane is delayed. The payments are the same but only kick in when the plane has been delayed three hours for short flights or four hours for the longer trips. The delay is calculated against the time the plane was due to arrive. Passengers are also entitled to ‘assistance’ under the EU rules. Short-haul passengers should receive food and water after two hours. Mid-distance passengers get help after three hours, while long-haul passengers receive it after they have been held in the terminal for four hours. If the delay is overnight, passengers should be provided with hotel accommodation but this often does not happen. This assistance should be provided irrespective of whether the delay is the airline’s fault. The airlines have fought these compensation rules since they were introduced and passengers have had to go to court to get their money. The airlines frequently blame delays on events outside their control. Freak weather events or a last-minute strike by air traffic controllers are deemed to be outside their control. A lack of planes or staff is not. The rules only apply to EU-based airlines or all flights that start in the EU on non-EU based carriers. What will happen after Brexit is not yet clear. Miles Brignall Numerous passengers said they were struggling to get through to customer services after the pilot walkouts were confirmed on Friday. It came after BA failed to settle a long-running dispute with the British Airline Pilots’ Association (Balpa), with the union calling for a 11.5% pay rise for members over three years. BA said it received more than 60,000 phone calls and 52,000 Twitter messages over the bank holiday weekend, when it had 500 customer service staff on hand. Adam French, a consumer rights expert at Which?, said: “BA must urgently get its act together and ensure that anyone whose flight is cancelled is rerouted, regardless of whether it is with a different airline or not. “The airline also needs to do right by passengers who spent hundreds of pounds on new flights when they were wrongly told that their original flights had been cancelled and make sure they are not left out of pocket.” The company was deluged with Twitter messages, as customers complained they were missing weddings, holidays and honeymoons as a result of the strikes. One customer tweeted that they had been unable to use the online booking system in the three days since the pilot strike was confirmed and were unable to get through to BA customer service by phone. “Shame on you,” the user said. @British_Airways is the worst. 3 days since the #bastrike announcement, the online booking system is still down and I cannot get through the BA customer service (in any country) to rebook. Shame on you. “I’m up to over 30 call attempts. Just get cut off. Ironic that it’s your 100th birthday as your customer service is straight from the early 20th century,” another complained. A BA spokesperson said: “We’re extremely sorry that some of our customers are having difficulties trying to rearrange their flights. Our teams have been working tirelessly to help as many of our customers as possible in these unprecedented circumstances. “Our teams have been providing our customers with as many options as possible, as quickly as possible, including a full refund or rebooking to a different date of travel or airline.” The Civil Aviation Authority has been in contact with British Airways over how it has dealt with customers affected by cancellations. “[We] are seeking an explanation to confirm how it complied with its rerouting obligations to consumers,” said the regulator’s director, Richard Stephenson. Customers should be offered reimbursement for cancelled flights, alternative travel arrangements that included flights on other airlines or a new flight at a convenient date , the CAA said. “We also expect airlines to proactively provide passengers with information about their rights when flights are cancelled.” The authority said passengers who were mistakenly told their flights were cancelled should not be left out of pocket and that any reasonable cost of rebooking flights should be claimed from British Airways.