Neil Warnock’s Cardiff returned to the division with a 3-2 defeat at Wigan. Joe Ralls’ expert finish put the Bluebirds into a 20th minute lead before Wigan’s Josh Windass missed a penalt. Undeterred, Wigan equalised and then took the lead after goals from Michael Jacobs and Windass. Omar Bogle equalised against his former club, but Lee Evans’ whipped finish settled a hugely entertaining match. Fulham also came back to the Championship with a bump, losing 1-0 to Barnsley at Oakwell. QPR started their season in scintillating form while Stoke manager Nathan Jones will have worries about their performance in a 2-1 home defeat. Jordan Hugill scored an eighth-minute opener before Eberechi Eze’s calm finish doubled the advantage. When Sam Clucas scored 12 minutes from time, a Stoke comeback looked on but never materialised. Newly-promoted Charlton’s 2-1 win at Blackburn came via goals from Ben Purrington and Lyle Taylor, either side of an own goal from Dillon Phillips. Sheffield Wednesday had goalkeeper Keiren Westwood dismissed for clattering into Reading winger Mo Barrow, but escaped with a 3-1 away win. Their final goal, scored in injury time by Lucas João, came as Reading chased a second equaliser after Yakou Méïté had earlier levelled Kadeem Harris’s opener. Sam Hutchinson, scoring on his birthday, had headed Wednesday into the lead. Steve Cooper’s reign as Swansea manager started with victory despite Hull’s Kamil Grosicki scoring a third-minute goal. The match turned around after half-time when Borja Baston and Mike van der Hoorn got on the scoresheet. An 18th minute header by Birmingham’s Kristian Pedersen from outside the box was enough to secure victory against Brentford, while Jed Wallace’s 33rd minute goal meant Millwall beat Preston 1-0 at the Den. In the late game, Aro Muric endured a nightmare Nottingham Forest debut, with the goalkeeper at fault for both goals as they lost 2-1 at home to West Brom. Barnsley 1-0 Fulham, Blackburn 1-2 Charlton, Brentford 0-1 Birmingham, Millwall 1-0 Preston, Reading 1-3 Sheff Wed, Stoke 1-2 QPR, Swansea 2-1 Hull, Wigan 3-2 Cardiff, Nottm Forest 1-2 West Brom While Bury’s troubles prevented their game with MK Dons going ahead, this week’s financial rescue allowed Bolton to play. They had six debutants in their starting XI at Wycombe, including James Weir, Preston loanee Josh Earl and Harry Brockbank, whose signings were announced after the starting team had been named at Adams Park. The visitors’ unfamiliarity with each other was betrayed by Paul Smyth’s 56th minute goal, which followed chaotic defending. Adebayo Akinfenwa set up Fred Onyedinma for Wycombe’s second. Coventry’s tenancy at Birmingham’s ground, St Andrew’s, opened with a 1-0 victory over Southend. Zain Westbrooke scored the winner in the 51st minute. Ipswich’s first match in the third tier since 1957 began with a 1-0 win at Burton, courtesy of an 11th minute goal from Luke Garbutt, on loan from Everton.Promotion favourites Sunderland could not manage more than a 1-1 draw with Oxford, and required a Lynden Gooch penalty to level Tariqe Fosu’s goal on debut for his new club. Rochdale surged into a 3-0 lead at Tranmere but had to hang on for their 3-2 win, a comeback halted by Aston Villa loanee Rushian Hepburn-Murphy’s 90th-minute red card. Blackpool 2-0 Bristol Rovers, Burton 0-1 Ipswich, Bury P-P MK Dons, Coventry 1-0 Southend, Doncaster 1-1 Gillingham, Lincoln 2-0 Accrington, Peterborough 1-3 Fleetwood, Shrewsbury 1-0 Portsmouth, Sunderland 1-1 Oxford, Tranmere 2-3 Rochdale, Wimbledon 1-2 Rotherham, Wycombe 2-0 Bolton Leyton Orient fans paid tribute to the late Justin Edinburgh, the manager who led them to promotion last season, throughout their home game with Cheltenham. Josh Wright’s 68th minute goal was celebrated with a shirt bearing Edinburgh’s name. Cheltenham striker Luke Varney was dismissed for a second bookable offence soon after that and he was followed into the showers by Rohan Ince, red-carded for foul and abusive language. Salford City got life as an EFL club underway with an impressive 2-0 home defeat of Stevenage. Emmanuel Dieseruvwe got both goals in front of a crowd that included co-owner Paul Scholes, the first coming after a Scott Wiseman cross set up Dieseruvwe for a close-range finish. Forest Green’s green zebra-print home kit, made from bamboo hemp, may well have dazzled Oldham into submission during their 1-0 defeat. Ryan Bowman’s late goal earned victory for Exeter and denied last season’s escapees, Macclesfield. Ryan Lowe’s Plymouth sit top of the table after winning 3-0 at Crewe, while the only goalless game of the day came as Bradford fought out a stalemate with Cambridge. Salford City 2-0 Stevenage, Bradford 0-0 Cambridge, Carlisle 2-1 Crawley, Colchester 1-1 Port Vale, Crewe 0-3 Plymouth, Exeter 1-0 Macclesfield, Forest Green 1-0 Oldham, Leyton Orient 1-0 Cheltenham, Morecambe 0-2 Grimsby, Newport 2-2 Mansfield, Northampton 0-1 Walsall, Scunthorpe 0-2 Swindon