Those familiar with 24, the jeopardy TV series in which Kiefer Sutherland as Agent Jack Bauer is tasked with saving the world by any means necessary, will have had flashbacks. An Armageddon Clock has been installed at Conservative campaign headquarters counting down the time to Brexit by day, hour, minute and second. Another digital timepiece is to be installed in the prime minister’s office. This is one of several theatrical props intended to supercharge the atmosphere. As if the stakes were not already vertiginous, they are being raised further as a conscious act of government policy. After a rummage down the back of the Treasury’s sofa, Sajid Javid declares that he has found another £2bn to add to the £4bn-plus already committed to contingency planning for a crash-out Brexit. It is very doubtful whether that extra money can be sensibly deployed in the short time left before the end of October. To the government, announcing the money was the most important thing, making it one of the most expensive press releases in the history of political propagandising. We are told that Michael Gove is chairing daily meetings of the XS committee, the “war cabinet”, to supposedly “turbocharge” preparations for no deal. And more than £100m will be consumed by one of the country’s “biggest ever public information campaigns” to warn everyone what they have to do to prepare for the worst. Who is all this Armageddon theatre designed for? Which audiences are expected to be influenced by making a drama of the crisis? The ramping up of fears that we are careering towards a no-deal Brexit has certainly made an impression on currency markets, where the pound has been sold down to its lowest level since the immediate aftermath of the shock of the referendum result in 2016. Companies are becoming more terrified that the menace of no-deal Brexit is a real one. The trade body representing car manufacturers warns that there is an “existential threat” to the health of our largest goods industry, which accounts for the employment of a million people. The National Farmers’ Union forecasts the mass slaughter of cattle. Some on the Johnson team purport to be pleased that sterling is plunging, industry is quaking, farmers are frightened and nerves are shredding. They claim it as vindication of a strategy designed to convince everyone that a no-deal Brexit is a serious prospect, not just an expensive bluff so transparent that the EU will see through it. European leaders don’t need an Armageddon Clock to tell them that we could be under 90 days away from a calamity Brexit. Mr Johnson is refusing to open negotiations – he has yet to even deign to meet them – until the EU concedes that the withdrawal agreement is dead. The EU is relentless in its insistence that they can’t be reopened. Neither side is budging. I expect you’d like to hear that this is posturing for public consumption while private backchannels have been quietly opened between Number 10 and European capitals to begin a conversation about finding a way forward that avoids disaster. I’m afraid I can’t give you that consolation. I’m told by those who should know that the prime minister’s envoys to the EU are simply repeating in private what he is megaphoning in public: there will be a crash-out Brexit if Europe does not blink. As he points the country at the cliff edge and depresses the accelerator, does prime minister Johnson have any idea where this will end? It is a mistake to think that he does. No one knows what he is really up to, including himself. In one breath, he tells us that this is “do or die”; in another, he sets the odds on a no-deal Brexit at “a million to one”. He has to know that there is a strong possibility that it will mean an autumn general election. The least credible message from Number 10 is that it is not contemplating this outcome. The Vote Leave band has been reunited in Downing Street and the Cabinet Office ready to reprise the tunes that took it to a narrow win in 2016. We now have a government dominated by the frontmen of the Leave campaign and populated with its strategists. They gained their reputations not for their achievements at governing, but for their abilities at campaigning. What they did in the referendum they will seek to repeat at the election that may very soon be upon us. They will try to remobilise and reunite the coalition of voters that delivered them victory three years ago. That coalition fractured during Mrs May’s prolonged and futile effort to find a Brexit deal that could secure the approval of parliament. If enough of it can be glued back together and marshalled behind the Tories, this offers what is probably their only plausible path to victory. Our recent Opinium poll did not locate a majority in the country for any one Brexit outcome. It did find 45% of respondents agreeing with the proposition that, if the withdrawal agreement can’t be renegotiated, Britain should “go ahead with Brexit on 31 October even if it means leaving with no deal”. And 45% is enough to win a parliamentary majority in the British system, especially if the opposition is fragmented and the alternative candidate for the premiership is extremely unpopular. Mrs May tried a more tepid version of this strategy at the outset of her “I will deliver Brexit” election in 2017. This backfired for many reasons. She was a campaigner so hopeless that she could not sell water to a man dying of thirst. Labour’s face-both-ways position worked then, as fudging does not now, and Jeremy Corbyn successfully encouraged voters to think about issues other than Brexit. The few Tory gains made from Labour in Leave territories such as Mansfield weren’t enough to compensate for the losses suffered by the Tories in strongly Remainer constituencies such as Battersea. Those who think that Mr Johnson can succeed where she failed do so on the basis that opinion around Brexit has become more intensely polarised, that he is an infinitely superior retail politician to Mrs May, his campaign team is much sharper and Mr Corbyn’s reputation has so decayed that he cannot repeat his expectations-surprising performance in 2017. This Tory strategy for winning an election makes some very big and risky assumptions. One is that the gains harvested by the Conservatives at the expense of Labour among Leave-supporting voters will outweigh Tory losses in Remain-supporting constituencies. Nearly every top Lib Dem target is a Conservative seat, while Scottish Nationalists are hoping to scalp Tory MPs north of the border. The other perilous assumption is that Nigel Farage’s party will fade away or fold up. The leader of the Brexit party is enjoying being the object of renewed attention and displays no signs of wanting to retire again. He declares that he does not trust the prime minister and he has a bitter history of mutual loathing with Number 10’s chief strategist, Dominic Cummings. One lesson from the Brecon & Radnorshire byelection is that the Brexit party doesn’t have to do all that well – it polled barely a double-digit share on Thursday – to hurt the Tories. If the Conservatives could have added the Brexit party vote and that of Ukip to their tally, they would have held the seat with just over half the vote, rather than narrowly lose it to the Lib Dems. They’d hope to put a harder squeeze on the Brexit party in a general election, but couldn’t be absolutely confident. All the hazards of this strategy will be multiplied many times over if an election takes place after 31 October. In one scenario, we would still be in the EU, breaking the Tory leader’s “absolute commitment” to his party that Britain will be out “under any circumstances” and hugely boosting the Faragists. In the alternative scenario, Britain has tumbled out of the EU without an agreement. That is no longer a threat or a promise. The countdown has reached zero and no deal is a reality. Even in the less chilling versions of a crash-out Brexit – the ones that don’t involve supermarket shelves being stripped bare by panic-buying and children dying for lack of life-critical medicines – I wouldn’t want to be a prime minister trying to make a case for his re-election when the country has just suffered a big economic shock and the currency is collapsing. My suspicion is that the Armageddon Clock isn’t really there to count down the seconds to Brexit day. It is there to remind Boris Johnson how long he has left before it becomes too late to avoid his own doomsday. • Andrew Rawnsley is the Chief Political Commentator of the Observer