Britain’s television industry has found a new champion – or, rather, enabled an existing one to step forward. Dorothy Byrne is head of news and current affairs at Channel 4 and not someone who has cultivated a public profile. Her barnstorming speech at the Edinburgh television festival on Wednesday will have made many in her audience wonder why not. This MacTaggart lecture was hardly a love letter to TV or journalism. It reflected on the sexism she has experienced throughout her career at length. But it did something else even more important, which was to issue probably the strongest challenge so far regarding the dramatic recent reduction in access to politicians granted to news programmes and reporters. Journalists are not always eager to draw attention to difficulties which can be viewed as a symptom of failure or decline. Ms Byrne went on the offensive, calling on interviewers to be tougher about calling out politicians’ lies. But her fiercest ire was reserved for the party leaders she called “cowards”. Theresa May’s longest Channel 4 interview of her prime ministership lasted seven minutes. Neither she nor Jeremy Corbyn did a major broadcast interview at all in the run-up to May’s European elections. But the first four weeks of Boris Johnson’s premiership have plumbed new depths. Not only did he refuse to participate in Channel 4’s Tory leadership debate, he has not yet given a major TV interview or press conference. Instead, he has made a two-minute policy statement and delivered a 13-minute monologue on Facebook Live – the latter laughably named “The People’s Question Time”, even though all the questions were voiced by Mr Johnson and not one other voice was heard. Starting in the US near the start of this century, and more recently in the UK, “mainstream media” (or “MSM”) has become a term of disparagement used by critics on both right and left for businesses seen as representing established interests. Of course, it is true that media owners are not neutral or objective players. In the UK, television news is governed by impartiality rules but our press is fiercely partisan, predominantly towards the right, and it is important that people understand this. But the current undermining of public trust in media, fuelled by President Donald Trump’s attacks on “fake news” and now mimicked by the UK government, goes far beyond scepticism or challenge. When research shows 72% of people in Britain believe television news to be accurate, it is right to be angry that Mr Johnson spurns it in favour of a union-flag-bedecked turn on Facebook. The media landscape continues to shift dramatically, with young audiences getting almost all their news elsewhere. But public service broadcasters still have a vital role to play in holding politicians and other public figures to account. The relentless pace and intense scrutiny of the 24-hour news cycle has made the jobs of politicians much harder. The adversarial style of British political journalism, while it mirrors our politics, can be off-putting. But for the nation’s leaders and would-be leaders simply to refuse to talk to journalists is no kind of solution.