Samsung will launch various models of its latest Galaxy Note 10 flagship smartphone in New York on Wednesday, hoping to woo its biggest fans with new stylus and camera features. The original Galaxy Note introduced the concept of the big-screen smartphone in 2011, cementing Samsung as a key player in the market. Recent Note models, however, have struggled to differentiate themselves from Samsung’s other flagship smartphone line, the Galaxy S. According to several credible leaks and sources that spoke to the Guardian on condition of anonymity, the new Samsung phones will come in two major versions, the Note 10 and Note 10+, as well as 5G-enabled models. Samsung is looking to rekindle its fanbase with more powerful stylus features – a long-time differentiator of the Note series – new camera features and long battery life. The Note 10 is the smaller and cheaper of the new phones. It has a 6.3in (16cm) screen that fills almost the entire front of the device, save tiny bezels at the top and bottom of the display and a selfie camera that pokes through a hole in the centre of the top of the screen. The more expensive Note 10+ will have the same design, but with a giant 6.8in screen that eclipses the 6.7in Galaxy S10 5G as Samsung’s biggest top-end smartphone for 2019. A 5G version will also be released in certain markets, in a similar way to the introduction of the Galaxy S10 5G. Time to level up. Galaxy Unpacked on August 7, 2019. #SamsungEvent pic.twitter.com/2CtFPjFCAr All Note 10 versions will feature Samsung’s upgraded S Pen stylus, which in addition to precision drawing and pointing on the screen, will have new air gesture controls first introduced last week with the Galaxy Tab S6. Users of the Note 10 models will be able to scroll through photos by flicking the stylus left and right in the air like a wand, and zoom in and out by twirling it in a circular motion. Other motions are also available. These gestures are in addition to the use of the button on the S Pen as a remote for taking photos and other functions introduced with the Note 9 last year. All the Note 10 versions will also have a triple camera system on the back of the phone, which mirrors that found on Samsung’s more expensive S10 models, including a standard, ultra-wide and 2x telephoto lens. The Note 10+ is also expected to have a depth-sensing camera similar to the time-of-flight sensor on the S10 5G. All Note 10 models will have USB-C fast charging, wireless charging and wireless powershare for charging other devices from the back of the phone, matching other top Samsung models. The Note 10 smartphones are expected to be Samsung’s first top-end models to remove the fan-favourite headphone socket in favour of a USB-C to 3.5mm dongle. Given the majority of the high-end market has already removed the headphone socket, this will likely be the nail in the coffin of the analogue port. Best smartphone 2019: iPhone, OnePlus, Samsung and Huawei compared and ranked