More than £90,000 has been raised in just 24 hours to support the family and widow of PC Andrew Harper as detectives continue to question 10 suspects including a 13-year-old boy. The 28-year-old officer, who got married four weeks ago, died from multiple injuries after being dragged by a van while investigating a reported burglary in the village of Bradfield Southend, Berkshire, on Thursday night. Thames Valley police said they arrested 10 suspects – all males aged between 13 and 30 – at a nearby caravan park within an hour. They were granted an extra 36 hours to question the suspects. A fundraising page set up by the Thames Valley Police Federation, which represents rank-and-file officers, had raised more than £90,000 by 8pm on Sunday. PC Harper’s family and widow, Lissie, with whom he had been due to go on honeymoon in a few days’ time, will decide how it is spent. “We confront danger on a daily basis. We know there is a risk when we put on the uniform but we do so as we are proud to protect the public,” the page reads. “Sadly on very rare and horrendous occasions a colleague makes the ultimate sacrifice, we will ensure that heroism is never forgotten.” Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, the home secretary, Priti Patel, described the officer as a “hero” and said the country must to do more to recognise the sacrifice made by those in policing. “PC Harper began his policing career as a volunteer police officer. He was the very best of British policing,” she wrote. “The bravery he showed by heading towards danger to protect the public is extraordinary. He is a hero.” She said she had instructed the Home Office to “urgently explore” what it could do to better support the families of police officers who were “seriously injured or worse by cowardly criminals”. Grieving colleagues laid floral tributes at the junction of Ufton Lane and Lambdens Hill, where Harper was killed. Some could be seen embracing and one wiped away a tear from her cheek. One tribute, accompanied by an image of Harper smiling with a friend, said: “Harps, I am truly gutted. A great cop, a great man, a great friend. There will always be a part of my heart missing now. RIP mate, love you. Chef, Sarah and Harry.” John Campbell, the chief constable of Thames Valley, said on Friday that Harper joined as a special constable in 2010 and became a police officer a year later, serving in the Roads Policing Proactive Unit based at Abingdon. Campbell said Harper was a “highly regarded, popular member of the team”, adding: “Everybody I’ve spoken to about Andrew talked about the incredible personality he was, what a fantastic police officer and what a great friend and man he was, and he’ll be sorely missed by everybody.” Country roads near the Four Houses Corner caravan park were closed on Sunday as police scoured ditches for evidence near the site where the suspects were arrested.