Louise Doughty is a novelist, playwright and journalist. Her 2010 novel, Whatever You Love, was shortlisted for the Costa novel award and the Orange prize, while her bestselling novel Apple Tree Yard was adapted by the BBC into a four-part drama starring Emily Watson and Ben Chaplin. Her most recent novel, Platform Seven, tackles suicide, coercive control and life after death. Platform Seven features a dead protagonist. Why did you want to tell a story from the perspective of someone who has died?I grew up in a small town in the East Midlands, so going back home to see my parents has always involved changing trains at Peterborough. It can be a really bleak station on a cold winter’s night, and I used to have a joke that when I die and go to purgatory, I’ll find myself trapped on Peterborough station. So I decided to have a novel with the ghost of a woman who was trapped there: it’s a transitional place. She’s a lost soul. What were the challenges in having a dead protagonist?I was really intrigued by the technical challenge. For a start, you have to work out what your ghost can do. Can my ghost pass through walls? Are they a poltergeist? I decided early on that I wanted her to be able to read people’s minds because as well as her story, I wanted the novel to be an ensemble piece: she is also the omniscient narrator of other people’s lives. One of the central themes in the book is coercive control. What made you want to write about that?I was interested in writing about a relationship where there was no physical abuse but a huge amount of manipulation and psychological abuse, and how that could be just as potent and deadly. And trying to convey the ways in which very ordinary men, who people think of as good blokes, can be abusive in ways that are so subtle and all-pervasive that even the recipient mistrusts her own perceptions of it. What research did you do?I think everybody has been in or come close to a relationship like that, and if you’re lucky you get out early not because you necessarily fully understand what’s going on, you just know something doesn’t feel right. I think that by-and-large women are still raised to mistrust their own instincts if a man presents as eligible. Coercive control was criminalised in 2015, and yet by the end of 2018 the vast majority of cases had been dropped without charge. Why do you think that is?Women who’ve been subjected to it for many years might not seem reliable: they don’t trust themselves, their stories may be inconsistent, they may have mental health problems, which after decades of coercive control is almost inevitable. It’s the same for a lot of crimes against women: the focus is still on the behaviour of the victim. There’s got to be a seismic shift. When did your love of writing begin?Very early on. I was often accused of having an overactive imagination as a child and I was an avid reader. I used to fib to my mum, saying I was going out to play with the other kids and actually having a book in my pocket. I’d built a den on the waste ground at the far end of the housing estate where I grew up and I would hide there and read. I wrote a novel when I was 11; I even cut out cardboard covers because I wanted it to be a hardback. And I spent a lot of time in the local library. It made me into a writer. I remember spending a fair amount of time in wardrobes hoping to get through and see a talking fawn So you didn’t grow up in a bookish household?Not at all. My dad left school when he was 13, my mum when she was 15 or 16, and my brother and sister and I were the first generation to go to university. My parents were from very working-class backgrounds but my father did have a real bee in his bonnet about education and self-improvement . What were your favourite books as a child?I was into fantasy and science fiction. I loved the Ursula K Le Guin Wizard of Earthsea books. Fantasy at that age is about pure imagination, and what those books showed me is that the whole world is at your fingertips if you write. And before that, the Narnia books: I remember spending a fair amount of time in wardrobes hoping to get through and see a talking fawn. Which writers have most influenced your own writing?In terms of contemporary fiction, Margaret Atwood, Michael Ondaatje and Toni Morrison. Also 19th-century writers: the Brontë sisters in particular, and Dickens. The idea of the big, fat complicated story is what’s influenced me most. Which genres do you most enjoy?Story-driven literary fiction: a really good writer telling a really good story. Are there any you avoid?I can’t bear any sort of romantic fiction: anything soppy or chicklitty or girly. It brings me out in hives. I’m not saying I don’t write about romance or relationships. But I want those people to have complex lives. It really annoys me in a book if people don’t have jobs or never worry about the gas bill. Is there a book or author you always return to?I would read anything by the Norwegian journalist Åsne Seierstad – she wrote The Bookseller of Kabul and One of Us, about the Anders Breivik killings. She’s a really good long-form journalist. And Janet Malcolm – I’m a big fan of hers. Which literary figures – dead or alive – would you most like to meet?The Brontës, but they can leave Branwell at home. I’d like to tell Emily that even though Wuthering Heights got really bad reviews and was compared very unfavourably with Jane Eyre, now people consider it superior. And I’d like to beg her not to destroy her second novel. What books are on your bedside table to read next?Top of the list is Rife: Twenty-One Stories from Britain’s Youth, which is an anthology edited by Nikesh Shukla and Sammy Jones. Also Bernardine Evaristo’s Girl, Woman, Other. I’m reading Elif Sharak’s 10 Minutes 38 Seconds in this Strange World at the moment and loving it. And Will Storr’s The Science of Storytelling because I’m interested in how the human brain invents and consumes narrative. • Platform Seven by Louise Doughty is published by Faber (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99