The ever-insightful late Toni Morrison once famously said: “If there’s a book that you want to read, but it hasn’t been written yet, then you must write it.” The publishing industry’s appendage to that is: “And even if it has, write it anyway.” This week, it was announced that Hillary Clinton and her daughter Chelsea will publish The Book of Gutsy Women – about the women who have inspired them and are “leaders with the courage to stand up to the status quo, ask hard questions, and get the job done”. Over the past few years, a slew of similar books has attempted to fill the yawning gaps left in recorded history regarding women’s contributions. Elena Favilli and Francesca Cavallo’s Good Night Stories for Rebel Girls and its sequel taught girls to aspire to something more than tiaras and coma-kisses. Books aimed at adults such as 100 Nasty Women of History, the Forgotten Women series, Bloody Brilliant Women and A History of the World in 21 Women inspired but also educated, focusing on the many pioneering women who were rubbed out of school textbooks. There are several more titles dedicated to the strides many wondrous, hitherto invisible women have made in specific fields, countries, and time periods. The Little Leaders children’s series, for example, profiles “bold black women” in history. On the surface, it may be tiresome to see another edition added to the canon. But it is interesting that, despite the increasing number of these titles, how little crossover there is in the women selected to be profiled. For every odd repetition of Malala Yousafzai and Frida Kahlo, you would, if you bought a copy of each of these books, still stumble across women you have never heard of, simply because there are so many who have been erased from history. Publishing is, notoriously, a bandwagon industry, jam-packed with doppelgangers and duplicate titles, but the continued popularity and production of books on forgotten heroines signifies a real hunger to hear about the other half of history. The number of pages that continue to be filled demonstrates just how actively women have been sidelined in historical storytelling. In our attempts to document “herstory” through them, it will probably take hundreds of years before we are even close to evening out the balance. You could add another few hundred years on top of that for the time it will take to document the stories of the most sidelined – all the women who were not white, upwardly mobile, heterosexual and able-bodied. The incessant focus on women who live up to a “kick-ass” or “bad-ass” label may feel like a pain in one to some – after all, just like men, women want the freedom to be utterly mediocre and then be heralded for it many years after their deaths – but I’d rather them be “gutsy” than silenced.