No gimmicks, promises Zoë Coombs Marr: no message, no arc, no politics. We know her best as “Dave”, the fictional sexist standup whose meta comedy shows secured her an Edinburgh comedy award nomination – and a Barry award in her native Australia – three summers ago. Then there was Wild Bore, an absurdo-feminist performance-art caper taking theatre criticism to task. From this brand of art about art, she now resiles – or so she tells us – with Bossy Bottom, her first standup show as “herself” for seven years. Suffice to say, the gimmickry embargo lasts about a minute and a half, in a show that delights in upending expectations and scrambling modes of comedic presentation. We’re in the kind of territory mapped out by Jordan Brookes, another comic who continually shifts the ground under his audience’s feet. It’s an enjoyably dizzying experience, although Coombs Marr’s tricksiness and heavily ironic performance style can’t quite distract from the occasionally thin material beneath. Nor from her compulsion to make comedy about comedy. One section discusses heckles Coombs Marr has received: some mistaking her satire for sexism; one branding her “bi-phobic adjacent”. Another re-enacts the routine of the chauvinist comic who inspired Dave – undermining Bossy Bottom’s status as a departure from Coombs Marr’s recent work. There’s stronger material on her queer feminism – her confusion at the connection straight people make between sex and babies, her inability to tell white men apart. It’s pleasingly outrageous stuff, delivered with the kind of stare that says: I’m just kidding – or am I? The same spirit animates her restless tampering with standup convention, as she essays a DIY version of hi-tech stadium comedy and repeatedly restarts the gig. That last device could have been pushed further: I had visions of a standup version of Caryl Churchill’s Blue Heart, a whole show consisting of deviating false starts. But this is still a fizzing hour of comedy: ironic, restlessly silly and subversive, and delivered by a comedian who couldn’t perform a straight hour of standup if she tried. At Monkey Barrel Comedy, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.