An 11-year-old Liverpool fan met Mo Salah after he knocked himself out running into a lamp-post as he tried to keep up with the footballer’s car. Louis Fowler and his 10-year-old brother Isaac had been waiting outside the club’s Melwood training ground in the hope of seeing one of their idols when they spotted Salah’s Bentley pulling out on Saturday afternoon. As he ran after the car to try to get the Egypt striker to wave back at him, Louis collided with a lamp-post and landed unconscious on the floor with a broken nose. Neighbours reportedly brought the two boys back to the street where they live, just opposite the training ground, and their stepfather called for an ambulance. Meanwhile, Salah, who saw the accident, turned his car around and returned to check on Louis. He hugged the brothers and posed for pictures with them as dazzled neighbours looked on. Their stepfather, Joe Cooper, posted the pictures on social media and thanked Salah. He said: “Thank you for coming back to check on my boys after Louis KO’d himself trying to get a wave! “He loves you so much and the pain went away instantly when you came to give them a hug. A nose reset worth well worth it he said. You are a top man and a true gent!” Louis was taken by ambulance to Alder Hey children’s hospital, where his nose was reset. Speaking to the Liverpool Echo, Cooper said: “We live just opposite Melwood and the two boys have been spending their holidays trying to get pictures of their heroes. “Mo Salah was one of the last ones to come out and the boys were waving at him in a bid to catch his attention. “Unfortunately Louis went straight into a lamp-post while running after the car and busted his nose when he hit the floor. “He’d seen one of the boys had hurt himself and he had the decency to drive back into the close to check that he was OK.” Cooper said: “It was a touch of class on Mo Salah’s part to turn round and actively come looking for the boys. “He was really apologetic and saying sorry for something that wasn’t his fault,” he added. “Mo Salah is their hero and the boys were made up.” Salah was one of the scorers during Liverpool’s 4-1 win against Norwich in the first game of the Premier League season on Friday.