“I wonder if we are stuck in bad movie plots we make ourselves,” says Magsalin, the character at the centre of Gina Apostol’s thrillingly imagined and provocative inquiry into the nature of stories and the unfolding of history in our collective consciousness. The remark is made in one of many terse conversations she has with an American film-maker, Chiara Brasi, who has come to the Philippines to shoot a movie based on her father’s experience in the 1970s of making a film about a notorious massacre of 1901. Magsalin reads Chiara’s script and objects not just to the accuracy of certain details and the viewpoints it adopts, but to the very motivation behind it. A Filipina translator and mystery writer on her first visit to her home country after many years in New York, she decides to put things right by writing her own script. In this jostle for primacy, narrative strands collide, history doubles back on itself, characters real and imagined merge into one version of events, only to be pulled apart again by Magsalin’s constant interrogation of Chiara’s – and her own – understanding of the history of the Philippines. As we follow the two women’s competing ideas on how and why we retell history, the question of whose version should take precedence gives way to a meditation on whether that story – or indeed any other – can make any real difference to our lives. At the heart of the novel lies the massacre of 30,000 Filipinos by American troops in Balangiga, in retaliation for the killing of 30 American soldiers in an uprising of nationalists (the notion of “insurrection” and the negative connotations of being an insurrecto as opposed to a freedom fighter is just one thing Magsalin objects to in Chiara’s script). One of these so-called insurrectos is the real life figure Casiana Nasionales, who becomes the protagonist in Magsalin’s script; the fictional Cassandra Chase, an American who photographed the bodies of the murdered Filipinos, figures prominently in Chiara’s version. Who is the true protagonist? Which of the writers has the stronger claim to historical and cultural authenticity? To some extent the novel is tackling the issue of cultural appropriation, but it never ventures close to anything like a crass attempt at resolution, instead using the complexity of its narrative and thematic structure to hint at the difficulty in understanding the confluence of history, power and the individual. None of it is designed to be easy for the reader, and the organisation of the novel constantly gives the impression of being in search of something that lies just beyond the grasp of total comprehension. “An abaca weave, a warp and weft of numbers, is measured but invisible in the plot. Chapter numbers double up. Puzzle pieces scramble. Points of view will multiply. Allusions, ditto.” In describing her film script, Magsalin is also describing the novel we are reading – a conscious articulation of the way Apostol is trying to reconfigure how we think of the historical novel. Insurrecto’s concern lies chiefly with the women’s motivations behind the telling of these stories rather than the detail or plotlines of the actual narratives. “The story Magsalin wishes to tell is about loss,” we are told quite plainly, and in this telling, “Any emblem will do”. But through the snippets of her experience, artfully yet movingly distributed through the novel, we learn more than enough to figure out that Magsalin’s motivations are not just political. “A poor and underfed student from the provinces,” Magsalin’s departure from her home country is expressed as an act of freedom, but her prolonged separation from the Philippines creates an anxiety within her that proves difficult to explain. Why was she unable to return, even when her mother was dying? Several times she recalls her mother’s last phone call. “Do not come home … I understand,” her mother says, but like Magsalin herself, we don’t fully comprehend the reasons for her staying away, and the novel’s energies hint at a deep-seated need to strip away the layers of the exile’s relationship with home and family. Loss and the inability fully to grasp what it means, or how grief can be healed, similarly lie behind Chiara’s movie project. She is haunted by the messiness of her parents’ marriage and the death of her film-maker father when she was very young. She can’t decide how her own movie will remember him: she wants to resurrect him but in the end, he still dies. In the disconnect between the aloof, designer-clad Chiara of today and the vivid portrayals of her as a child in the 70s that we gain through her mother Virginie’s eyes, Apostol reveals a lifetime of pain and estrangement that ultimately mirrors Magsalin’s. • Tash Aw’s We, the Survivors is published by 4th Estate. Insurrecto is published by Fitzcarraldo (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.