Ever get to that stage where you seem to be spending all your time and energy just putting things off? You know you should get stuff done but you find yourself weighed down by the tyranny of your to-do list. And, of course, the more you put something off, the larger the looming shadow it casts. This is particularly insidious when it comes to dull-but-essential tasks, such as admin. And if you’re running a small business, it can be even harder to discipline yourself, especially if you’re working on your own or from home. Moreover, the burden of business admin can feel particularly oppressive, sapping your ability to focus on growing your company. The internet is full of life hacks and tips to help you break this cycle of inertia. But all-too-often the suggestions feel like just another thing to add to your to-do list. Likewise, techniques for improving your time management can sometimes seem a bit, well, time-consuming. Happily, however, there are a number of quick-and-easy tips that you can implement immediately – whether it’s advice for beating procrastination, resisting unhelpful impulses or countering your phobia of finances. For instance, when it comes to tackling the urge to check your social media, try thinking about how bad you’d feel in the near future having failed to complete the task at hand. Or if you’re trying to avoid procrastinating, tell someone else your intended goals for that particular day. This will make you feel more accountable – after all, it’s harder to break an intention that you’ve declared to others than it is to break a promise that you’ve made to yourself. There are also practical techniques for tackling some of the peskier admin tasks that tend to linger on people’s to-do lists – such as nailing your tax return, managing your web presence, and getting the correct kind of business insurance. 1. Beat procrastinationProcrastinating doesn’t mean you’re workshy. It’s more likely to mean you’re just trying to stop yourself from feeling bad – either because you have to do something you’d rather not, or you’re worried you won’t be able to complete the task. So, try to focus on the positive outcome instead. 2. Control your impulsesIn a world increasingly governed by instant gratification and the addictiveness of our smartphones, the ability to control our impulses is essential to getting things done. But try to think of this as a two-stage process: first, resist the temptation by making it harder to act on that initial urge – for instance by locking your phone in a drawer so you can’t check social media. And, second, maintain that resistance by consciously forming new positive habits. 3. Overcome your financial phobiaAdmin avoidance can stem from a general anxiety about financial literacy. According to Brad Klontz, a financial psychologist and author, one way to combat this is to find yourself a financial mentor: “A great way to challenge your beliefs is to find someone who’s a step or two ahead, pick their brains, and become a student of their money mindset.” 4. Tackle time managementOne simple trick is to try to become more aware of the value of each moment. “Remember every task comes with a cost,” says podcaster and author Ellen Hendriksen. “Be mindful about what task you are choosing to spend your time on, because that is time not doing other tasks.” 5. Find your flowBeing “in the zone” or achieving a “flow state” can give us the focus and energy to perform at our best. One trick is to insulate yourself from tasks that might otherwise distract you by scheduling time in the week to do all the bits of admin that would otherwise intrude. 6. Tooling yourself upThe popular idiom holds that a bad worker always blames their tools, but perhaps the opposite is also true: a good worker will always give them credit. Having the right kit helps you signal to yourself your intention to do a job well. In short, if we have good tools, we’re more likely to look forward to using them. 7. Nail your tax returnAdopt so-called “microproductivity” methods by breaking this annual round of torture into a series of smaller tasks. These can then fit into those little moments of spare time we occasionally find ourselves with. For instance, try to view each figure that you need to obtain as a distinct task to be completed on its own. 8. Manage your web presenceOne byproduct of ramping up your web presence is you can be inundated with demand that you can’t meet. “You turn your advertising off then,” says Jimmy McCann, head of digital strategy at Search Laboratory, which helps clients with online advertising. “It would also be worth having an overflow network to pass stuff on to and get a kickback.” 9. Prepare a loan pitchSometimes a business needs a cash injection – whether it’s for upgrading equipment or premises, or just a bridging loan to help with a short-term cashflow problem. However, asking for money and demonstrating an ability to repay it can be stressful and time-consuming. Try to minimise the anxiety and avoid the possible pitfalls by being realistic about your projections – that way you can give a solid timeframe for repayments. 10. Get insuredIt can be tempting to put off taking out business insurance. It can linger at the bottom of your to-do list because of the complacent attitude that “it won’t happen to us”. Part of the problem is that many people don’t appreciate the sheer number of possible hazards that exist in the workplace and their potential fallout – whether from accidental damage, disruption or injury. Often, it’s the anticipated complexity of sorting out cover, rather than the cost, that puts people off. But getting the right cover can be simpler than you’d think. For expanded advice on how to overcome common obstacles to getting things done, go to theguardian.com/whats-stopping-you