In what amounts to a vicious, third-degree burn, video footage recorded by the Brazilian journalist João Henrique Marques suggests all trace of Neymar has been removed from the Paris Saint-Germain club shop, although the Brazilian’s more deluded fans could conceivably argue the player is simply so popular that everything bearing his name and image has sold out and staff can’t keep up with demand. The striker’s next destination remains unclear, but the maelstrom of speculation surrounding his future continues to swirl. With both Real Madrid and Barcelona duking it out for his services, le10sport in France says PSG would quite like to get the Catalan club’s striker Ousmane Dembélé in part exchange. Meanwhile in England the Sun reports that Real Madrid will stop hitching their skirts at the Manchester United midfielder Paul Pogba if they’re successful in signing the Brazilian and will offer PSG their pick of James Rodríguez, Isco, Raphaël Varane or Marcelo as a sweetener in any deal to bring him to the Bernabéu. Marca reports that Leo Messi has privately pleaded with his old pal to return to Barcelona, while Neymar’s potty-mouthed sister Rafaella goaded PSG fans who protested against her absent brother during PSG’s season-opener against Nimes by taking to social media to say “You’ll win nothing without him, fuckers”, in a Tweet that has since been deleted. In slightly more edifying transfer tittle-tattle, Tottenham Hotspur are so concerned about losing Christian Eriksen to one of Europe’s elite clubs they’ve offered to more than double his weekly wages from £80,000 to £200,000. Real Madrid and Juventus remain interested in the Danish pocket dynamo. Still a free agent following his release from Spurs this summer, blue-eyed Spanish striker Fernando Llorente could be off to Napoli, who are also trying to sign the Mexican winger Hirving Lozano from PSV Eindhoven. Internazionale are finding Mauro Icardi difficult to shift, even though the Argentinian striker has no shortage of admirers. Napoli and Roma are believed to have cooled their interest due to complications involving image rights, but the player’s wife and Mrs 15%, Wanda Nara, is still listening to offers from Monaco and Juventus. Meanwhile in Germany, Icardi’s Inter team-mate Ivan Perisic rocked up to Bayern Munich’s training ground for a medical yesterday, ahead of inking his £4.6m loan move to the German champions. Ahead of Celtic’s finely poised Champions League third qualifying round second leg against CFR Cluj in Glasgow on Tuesday night, Neil Lennon says James Forrest is not for sale despite interest from Zenit St Petersburg. In the market for a new left-back following the sale of Kieran Tierney to Arsenal, the Daily Record claims Lennon is mulling over bids for Hull City’s Stephen Kingsley or Rosenburg’s Birger Meling. At Ibrox Steven Gerrard is interested in signing the winger Ryan Kent from Liverpool, while his Hearts counterpart Craig Levein is in need of a tough-tackling midfielder with 100,000 miles on the clock and may sign Glenn Whelan, a free agent following his release from Aston Villa. Still without a club since being released by Swansea City, Wilfried Bony is keeping himself in shape by training with the League Two side Newport County. And finally, Everton have announced the sale of the winger Henry Onyekuru to Monaco following a two-year spell that the 22-year-old Nigerian spent out on loan at Anderlecht and then Galatasaray, without ever making an appearance for the Toffees. 