My notes are full of question marks. In a retreat from their previously playful work, this new show from Barrel Organ is bewildering and uninventive. Pitching fiction as fact as it combs through conspiracy theories, it is baffling in a deliberately inane way. Three people sit at a desk recording their notes as they piece together what they believe is the truth behind the famous 1932 photograph of men having lunch at the top of the Rockefeller Centre. Rose Wardlaw, Azan Ahmed and Shannon Hayes comb over details, searching for the gaps, then filling them with slivers of information until their story suits them. Speculation escalates until they’ve talked themselves into belief of association with the mafia, secret societies, assassinations and the space race. The actors perform as themselves. A ball of stress, Wardlaw is in control of the clipboard and the conversation. Something’s not right, she says. What is it hiding? What are they missing? The desire to believe in these stories stems from lack of control: they want to believe in something bigger so the world’s chaos will make more sense, but when a breakthrough comes it lacks the thrill of the chase. Psychologically this stands, but on every other level the shifts in tone are spelled out. They do so much detective work, there’s nothing left for us to figure out. Piecing the theory together is a clever exercise in story-building, but not a particularly engaging one to watch. Jack Perkins’ text relies on mumblecore and minuscule reactions, which the cast do very well, and Dan Hutton’s direction is nuanced but muted. It becomes more exciting when one of them reaches the limits of what they are willing to believe, and the direction takes a slightly feral turn, though a slice of the violence feels careless. In their previous shows Nothing, Some People Talk About Violence and Anyone’s Guess How We Got Here, Barrel Organ always seemed five steps ahead, their slippery tricksiness part of the allure of their work. But in Conspiracy, they are catching up with us. I can’t figure out what I’m supposed to care about. I comb through my own notes. Something’s not right. What are they hiding? What am I missing? • At Underbelly Cowgate, Edinburgh, until 25 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews