With a snap general election on the horizon, the campaign machinery is moving full speed ahead. As leader of the Women’s Equality party, for the past few weeks I have been speaking to leaders and strategists from across the political spectrum in an effort to stop us from crashing out of the EU. That means I’ve been privy to the jostling that is currently taking place as the mainstream parties iron out their game plans for winning votes and seats. What I have seen doesn’t fill me with confidence. A focus on yesterday’s polling data, the minutiae of legislative process and plans to unveil big name candidates without big ideas behind them will only get us so far. Because standing for election should mean just that: truly standing for something. People across the country may soon be reluctantly opening their doors to enthusiastic canvassers ready to explain why a vote for so-and-so is the surest means of delivering Brexit. Or avoiding Brexit. Or securing a better Brexit deal. Those voters who are willing (or eager) to accept no deal have a relatively straightforward choice ahead of them, but for those who want something better, the options are cloudy at best. While Labour and the SNP cosy up to each other, the Liberal Democrats, Greens and a sprinkling of independents are at the centre of efforts to create a coalition of smaller parties – all, it seems, ignoring the fact that we do not stand a chance of stopping a disastrous no-deal Brexit unless we are on the same side. Jeremy Corbyn’s plans for an all-party “tactics” meeting to prevent no deal are a good first step. However, they will mean nothing if the parties involved cannot put party political advantage aside in the longer term to ensure the greatest chance of victory in the election that would certainly follow. Because most of all, right now, we need politicians who recognise that this is a time of national crisis, and who recognise the unique opportunities for change and realignment that such a crisis presents. Whatever happens with Brexit is only the beginning of a long process of pulling our fractured nation back together. What comes afterwards will shape the future of our country for generations, so it is on us to design a future that those generations will actually want to inherit. It takes cooperation and the participation of people from across the political spectrum to effect real change So how can this work? Well, the Lib Dem surge offers a real chance to take previously unwinnable seats from the grasp of Conservative Brexiteers. Labour MPs who support remain should be offered cover by any alliance because we need an economy that works for the many, not the few. Without Plaid and the SNP no alliance can represent the interests of the UK as a whole. The Green party should be given the chance to gain additional seats because we need politicians who are truly committed to reversing the climate crisis. All parties should stand with the Women’s Equality party to oust violent, misogynist MPs, sending a signal that abuse, harassment and violence are not and will never be tolerated. And we must all work together, because we cannot win this election while we are divided. This is an opportunity for a new kind of collaboration, for a real alliance that fights to improve life for those who have been left behind: for women, for minorities, for deprived communities and, by extension, for the country as a whole. Together the parties need to give voters the chance to vote for something out of self-interest, but also something that will benefit everyone else too. The Women’s Equality party has advocated for a new style of collaborative politics since our founding. We are the only party to offer affiliate membership (so that people who are already a member of another party can still join us), because we believe that sharing ideas and opening conversations makes us stronger. We are the only party that invites others to steal our policies, because we are convinced that solving the problems we face is more important than owning the solutions. And we are the only party that is non-partisan in our appeals, because we understand that it takes cooperation and the participation of people from across the political spectrum to effect real change. Never has that spirit and practice of collaboration been more necessary than now. Ever since the referendum, debate has raged about how the nation came to be so divided and what we can do to pull ourselves back together. But if parties can’t commit to working with those they agree with, let alone those from the other side of the aisle, what hope is there? I would urge the other parties – if they truly want to create that better future – to look up from the game of chess they are currently engaged in, clear the board and reimagine the game altogether. Because a political vision that stops at self-interest does a disservice to us all. • Mandu Reid is leader of the Women’s Equality party