James Acaster strongly believes that 2016 was The Greatest Year for Music of All Time. If this sounds random, then know that there’s slightly more to the story. Best known for eccentric, meandering standup shows with brilliant titles like Cold Lasagne Hate Myself 1999, and a run of acclaimed Netflix specials, Acaster had an annus horribilis in 2017. Over 12 months, he broke up with his girlfriend, parted ways with his agent, and his mental health suffered, all while the world seemed to be imploding with Trump, Brexit and wall-to-wall celebrity deaths. And so, naturally, Acaster decided to invest in no less than 366 albums from the year before, kickstarting what he describes in his new book as “a mild distraction [which] gradually grew into an obsession that ultimately changed my life”. Perfect Sound Whatever, out now, is the tale of Acaster’s new record collection, his personal challenges, and how he made it through to the other side. Here he selects five songs that saved his life, from skittish Japanese electronica to yodelling. Music to make you “love … or laugh”. “I liked this one so much I named my book after it. It’s by an American singer called Jeff Rosenstock who’s been in tons of ska and rock bands, and it’s about how ‘perfect[ion]’ is something that no one will ever achieve, and how it’s not even really a thing. That was something I’d never really thought of until I heard the song; I definitely struggled every time I didn’t get something exactly right – or just got something wrong. I’d really beat myself up about it and feel guilty. I dragged myself through the mud, a lot of the time. I didn’t even know that that was what the song was about at first, until I put it on when I was filming my [Netflix] comedy specials and properly listened to the lyrics. I was feeling anxious that they weren’t going to be any good, and it made me feel relieved, and a lot less stressed. Do I think Jeff should be more well-known? I wouldn’t want to fling him towards the audience of Britain’s Got Talent or something, so – for his sake – let’s not make him too famous.” “I’d seen [US rapper] Noname’s mixtape Telefone on loads of the Best of 2016 lists but I didn’t really bother listening to it. When I did eventually get round to it I was like, “Oh I’ve been such an idiot!” I used to judge records by their covers, and I just didn’t like the front cover of her album, the skull drawing. I don’t do that any more, though – I’ve got some great albums with ugly covers now. I love how she talks about so many universal experiences, and how she’s really vulnerable and open with her feelings. It’s a summery album, but there are also topics like police brutality and abortion in there. On this track, I love this line she slips in just before the chorus – she just sort of squeezes it in: ‘I wish I was a kid again … ’ I don’t wish I was a kid again, but sometimes adulthood is still a bit daunting, and that thought does enter your head in the same fleeting little way that she sings it.” “Foodman is a Japanese experimental electronic artist, and his track Mid Summer Night really transformed my music taste. Nothing’s in time with anything else, and it’s a bit all over the place, but something about it really works. I love the feeling of the trembling, skittish drums that are off on their own; they get called ‘sloppy drums’, which a lot of drummers don’t like because it’s actually the illusion of sloppiness and it’s actually really hard to get right. I would have disregarded this kind of music as noise before I started listening to all of these albums, but I got really into it. I’ve always thought electronic music had to be either slick, highly produced stuff or a weird, impenetrable mess, but with this I found something in the middle. I’m not into clubbing. I wasn’t going out and listening to dance music, so I didn’t have that experience. I feel like I should maybe go to [London club] Fabric at least once, though.” “You might know Kevin Abstract from Brockhampton, who are a kind of rap boyband with tons of members. They make quite topical music and they each have a load of different viewpoints. It’s nice to have that encapsulated in a group. Still, I don’t know how you’d schedule band practice – I struggle enough trying to hang out with one person. Empty’s the first track from Abstract’s solo album, American Boyfriend: A Suburban Love Story, which I’d say has a kind of ‘updated 90s’ feel to it. Here, he’s mostly rapping about his boyfriend but also his mum, and feeling conflicted about being accepted by certain people but not by others. It’s such a catchy song. There’s a lot of intelligent stuff going on in there, but it’s not heavy handed. It’s a bit like Kanye West and those other artists who’ve made mainstream music a bit more inventive again.” “Out of all the songs that I listened to from 2016, this was the one that I loved the quickest upon listening to it. I just fell in love with Adam Torres’s voice – it’s really high-pitched, almost like a yodel. You’ll either like it immediately or you’ll laugh. I interviewed him and he was exactly as you’d imagine from his music: he lives in Texas among all of this sprawling empty space, and the only things in his town, Driftwood, are a post office and a graveyard. I like to hear music that’s a bit traditional but done in a non-traditional way. I also really like Awo, which is an album by a Black Sabbath-type math-rock album by an Ethiopian band called Ukandanz. What unexpected record would I make? I’d probably collaborate with Slowthai. We’ve grown up in similar places – he’s from Northampton, I’m from Kettering – we both like hip-hop, and we both seem to have a sense of humour. I’d happily reach out.”