I’m writing this from a damp Edinburgh flat, having abandoned my comfortable London life for a month at the fringe, which is like a month-long freshers’ week, but with finals every day. My show Invisible, about life at an age when the world ghosts you, came about because I turned 50 and didn’t like the cut of Yann Moix’s jib – the French author said last year that women over 50 are invisible and too old to love. (I’ve spent my whole life trying to be invisible to men like him.) According to popular imagination, we fiftysomethings variously: clog up the employment pipeline, are grumpy, don’t have any (good) sex, wear statement jewellery/high-waisted trousers (delete according to gender), are unfit, are not tech savvy, and are grey-haired and tired. We like gardening (I live in Camden with a garden the size of a pillowcase. I mow away more when I shave. That’s a joke: I don’t shave.) We spend our kids’ inheritance funds on Saga holidays and buy porcelain dogs from Sunday supplements. Since turning 50, I have been targeted with online ads for menopause nighties, incontinence pants and stairlifts. The Ageist Britain report published this week focuses on people in their 30s being most guilty of ageism and disparaging remarks: “Old fart”, “little old lady”, “bitter old man” and “old hag” were, researchers found, the most used ageist phrases on social media. Other common terms included “ladies/gentleman of a certain age” – at least call me a little old “woman” of a certain age. Yet casual ageism is rife across the board. Apparently it’s fair game to have a pop at millennials for prioritising avocados and flat whites over property purchases. Greta Thunberg has her share of detractors for many daft reasons, one of them being her age (neatly countered by Caitlin Moran this week). It comes down to the same thing: no one likes to be stereotyped or underestimated. With life expectancy increasing, 50 no longer represents a landmark of old age and ultimate demise. Over-50s are not fading away from life – not only because we don’t bloody want to but because few of us can bloody afford to. Contrary to popular belief, we are not all splashing out on cruises: there has been a significant increase in over-50s living in rented accommodation, and pensioner poverty has risen. Nicole Kidman declared war on ageism in Hollywood, and I’m declaring war on it in the comedy industry. I got into comedy aged 45 and it’s a world dominated mainly by men and under-40s, particularly those who have “made it” through TV/radio and major tours. The live club circuit is diverse, and meritocratic to a degree, but when it comes to higher-profile gigs it’s harder for older acts to break through, in particular older female acts. Some of the biggest talent agencies do not sign new comedians over 40, and certainly not those over 50. Despite having done a couple of episodes of an older-skewed panel show (QI), it’s hard for me to move on to other shows. I have been told explicitly I’m too old to appeal to the 16-34 audience that the TV industry obsesses about, because of course people hate seeing anyone who’s not like them on screen (it’s why Love Island is exclusively watched by twentysomething hotties). Maybe this is karma for my previous life as a television executive. I worked on MTV’s The Real World, one of the first reality shows, back in the early 90s and then some years later on Geordie Shore and Ex on the Beach. It’s fair to say I was a big part of the problem now biting me in the arse. Nor is radio exactly gagging to break new 50+ talent. They’ll keep you on if you’ve been kicking around long enough – but I’ll be dead before I’ve been kicking around long enough. “Nevertheless, she persisted” is the feminist mantra born in response to a load of men in the US Senate voting to silence senator Elizabeth Warren. I have one more week of Invisible left in Edinburgh and nevertheless will persist. Whatever happens, it’s been worth it. Yesterday I was fortunate enough to be offered comedy tips from a young guy whose mates tell him he should try standup. And then there was the male audience member who told me: “You don’t need the bit about mansplaining. You’re funny without that stuff.” That’s the best joke of the fringe. • Cally Beaton is a comedian, speaker and performer and her show Invisible is on at, Assembly George Square Studios, 5.10pm every day until 26 August