When faced with tribulation, Glaswegian males often feel compelled to reach for humour. This can seem inappropriate, brutal even, but it’s not intended as such. It’s a psychological reflex and one to which we have become genetically predisposed. I feel that much of this stems from decades of fighting adversity when death and sickness were the most persistent neighbourhood pests. To make light of them was to make a statement to your community that you wouldn’t be defeated by them. Besides, if these twin impostors were intent on becoming a part of the local fabric for a while, then best to apply some emotional cosmetics rather than make everyone else miserable. In time, all of them would be expected to take their turn. I always advise debutants at a Glasgow funeral to keep their ears open. Thus, they’ll be treated to a crash course in Glaswegian humour and come to an understanding of one of its greatest charisms. Here, you will see men talking very quickly out of the sides of their mouths between puffs of cigarettes held artfully between thumb and middle finger. As liquor begins to dilute the tension, stiff handshakes give way to manly hugs and nieces and nephews fill their boots with the jingling swag of the occasion. Nor can the deceased expect to be spared the vitriol merely on account of being dead. Soon, all their delinquencies and infractions are discussed, but gently and with something approaching love. This is part of a healing for the living where old wounds are finally dressed and unreconciled debts cancelled. Alongside death and physical suffering, we also like to joke about religion, sex and conflict resolution, mainly as a means of masking our inadequacies in such endeavours. Each of these feature heavily in the sharpest dramas inspired by the look and feel of Glasgow and its people, such as My Name Is Joe; Just Another Saturday and Orphans. It’s almost impossible to make a film or drama featuring Glasgow that doesn’t make you laugh. As liquor begins to dilute the tension, stiff handshakes give way to manly hugs and nieces and nephews fill their boots with the jingling swag of the occasion Four years ago, it was my turn to apply the cosmetic wit when I had a heart attack at 30,000 feet on a plane to Australia to visit my daughter, Clare. Not long afterwards, I made a deal with the editor of these pages that I would only address my brush with mortality if I could do so lightly and while lampooning the Glaswegian inevitability about having your fate handed to you in an aircraft with “getting you there” emblazoned on its side. Astutely, this slogan didn’t add “dead or alive”. I also wanted to acknowledge the role that speculative lifestyle choices had played in my airborne drama and to record my appreciation for the staff at Melbourne’s St Vincent’s Hospital for making my first stay in a medical facility a pleasant one. In characteristically forthright Aussie style, my consultant said he couldn’t believe his luck that he had been handed a real (if barely alive) manifestation of the fabled “Glasgow effect” that blights the lives of working-class, west of Scotland males and that had featured in his tutorials to final-year medical students. Thus I was pleased to fill his boots with an exaggerated account of the challenges of living on the edge and provide my tuppence-worth for medical research just short of actually dying. The great Glaswegian playwright Peter McDougall, who wrote Just Another Saturday, once told me of his concerns for a close friend whom he hadn’t seen for a while. He called his friend’s mum who put his mind at ease by telling McDougall that her son had merely encountered “a wee touch of leukaemia”. Thus inspired, I duly began to refer to my “wee cardiac issue”. The adjective “wee” is often deployed by Glaswegians to reduce a crisis to something manageable. Others might call this denial. And so, thanks to the Australian (and Scottish) health service, four years and a few lifestyle tweaks later, I find myself making this trip to the other side of the world once more. This is partly to complete my first rudely interrupted visit but it’s also to spend time with Clare, who was recently diagnosed with B-cell lymphoma cancer. Others who have experienced the savage reality of a child with cancer will know that no amount of humour can mask the pain. It didn’t stop me trying at first. I told Clare that when she had recovered we could go together to a theme party as Mr and Mrs Glasgow, she with her cancer and I with my dodgy heart, but it didn’t really work. In those few nights, four years ago in a Melbourne critical ward, I quickly came to terms with the distinct possibility of death with gnarly and reliable tools: you recite your Hail Marys; forgive your enemies; seek their forgiveness in return and entrust your fate to the Almighty and the skill of the doctors, thankful that you were permitted to live a little. Not so when the fate of a much-loved daughter hangs in the balance. How do you deal with the possibility of this beautiful young woman’s death just at the point when the world is opening up for her? Happily, Clare’s results have been encouraging and, although she is by no means out of the woods, fear has been replaced by optimism. Last week, we scaled a peak together in the stately Grampians region of Victoria. Each step of mine was swaddled in sweat and gratitude at being spared to be able to attempt such an undertaking; each of hers bathed in the joy of renewed possibilities. It was the happiest moment of my life. Not that you’d have caught me showing it, naturally. • Kevin McKenna is an Observer columnist