Kyle Sinckler still needs to deliver off the bench in Cardiff on Saturday but England’s tighthead is already responsible for the week’s best punchline. It came on Monday as he recalled the joy he felt as a 10-year-old watching the 2003 World Cup final. “I remember watching Jason Robinson tearing it up and wanting to be Jason Robinson. Then I looked in the mirror and I thought I’d probably go with Jason Leonard.” Why England tend to be reluctant to make Sinckler available for media interviews is a mystery. Not only is the 19st (120kg) Harlequins prop the most improved player in Eddie Jones’s squad but he is a total natural at entertaining an audience. This week, for example, it came up in conversation that his mother, Donna, still works 12-hour shifts in a police call centre near Hammersmith. “You think Eddie’s a tough taskmaster? Mama Sinckler, mate. I tell you, she put me in my place.” For all these reasons and more the 26-year-old is a priceless south-London diamond, albeit one with the occasionally excitable rough edge. There will be those who focus solely on the difficulties he endured the last time he crossed the Severn Bridge, when Warren Gatland identified him beforehand as an “emotional timebomb” and later suggested he had “a few demons to deal with”. Given Sinckler had to be abruptly replaced after conceding two quick-fire penalties and grabbing the Wales captain, Alun Wyn Jones, around the neck at a maul, it was not his finest hour. But hang on. In that same Six Nations contest, his defensive stats were outstanding and, without him on the field, England conceded two late tries to lose 21-13. Fast forward to August and he is among the first names on England’s squad list. Already a Lion – selected by Gatland, no less – he is everything a modern Test prop should be: strong, fast, dextrous and committed. The fact he can also talk a good game, as his predecessor Leonard used to do, makes him even more valuable. Then there is his London upbringing and the encouragement he gives to city kids who might not instinctively feel that rugby is for them. Where Sinckler grew up in Furzedown, between Tooting and Mitcham, is not a postcode stuffed with Twickenham debenture holders. Until he arrived and helped set one up, Graveney school did not have a rugby team. Nor was his junior club, the splendidly named Battersea Ironsides, awash with enthusiastic recruits at the time. “When I was there, we’d struggle to get 15 players on the field. At times we’d be borrowing players from the other team to play for us. Now I understand it’s got the biggest minis section in the country. So we’ve come a long way. I’m proud of the club and where it’s going.” By the time he finishes, Sinckler will also have done much to shatter the lazy old stereotype about English rugby being purely a sport for posh white boys. To his credit, it is a topic he is keen to embrace. “The more rugby puts itself out there in different communities the more diverse it’s going to be. I think rugby could still do a better job in attracting different kids. In the area I’m from you can teach a guy to pass and kick and play rugby but you can’t teach someone to be strong as an ox or as fast as they are or have that edge in mentality. They just need the opportunity. “I was lucky. I got taken down to Battersea Ironsides and tried to make the most of it. In this current climate, especially in south London, a lot of those kids don’t have that opportunity. That’s why there are a lot of things happening with knife crime and stuff. They’re just bored. They haven’t got anything to do. When I was a kid I had rugby, football and cricket. I did kick boxing, weightlifting – I was always busy.” On that front little has changed. Sinckler still likes to keep active - “I’m not very good at just sitting around” – and, in his spare time, performs the roles of defence and forwards coach for Guildford RFC in National Three. Professionally, he will be anything but idle in the coming months. Jones has picked only two specialist tightheads in his World Cup 31, which means Sinckler is liable to feature in every game his side play in Japan, assuming he stays fit. Having played in all three Tests on the 2017 Lions tour of New Zealand, the prospect of two pool games in four days next month does not daunt him. He has already crammed so much into the last two years that, to him, it effectively feels “like 20 years” since that eventful Lions series. “This past year there has been some big highs and lows. Australia at home, the All Blacks where we narrowly missed out. International rugby is like a rollercoaster. When you win it’s the best feeling in the world but when you lose you have the whole weight of expectation of the country on your shoulders. We feel it more than anyone.” Never more so than with a World Cup round the corner. Sinckler is poised to win his 23rd cap, still a fair way short of Leonard’s record England tally of 114, but there is still plenty more in the tank. “Especially in sport – more so than any other industry – you can’t stand still and give yourself a pat on the back. If you do, someone will come in and take your place. There will be a lot more tightheads and a lot more players playing after we’re done.” Players with that kind of down-to-earth attitude are a coach’s dream. If Sinckler can avoid getting sucked into unnecessary on-field distractions, Jones will love him even more. Even in defeat in Cardiff last March – “He’s a young player on the way up. Look after him” – the boss was swift to protect his No 3. Back at Battersea Ironsides, either way, they care only that he is one of their own. “When I go down to hand out the end-of-season awards it’s carnage! There are kids hanging off my legs and all sorts. That’s what it is about.” Both England and Quins are fortunate to have him.