Danny McGuire will not have much time to indulge in any of the usual post-retirement benefits given how he will be thrust into a new role as Hull Kingston Rovers’ head of recruitment next year but before then there is still one more battle for one of the modern game’s most successful players to win. McGuire’s illustrious 16-year spell as a Leeds player saw him hoover up eight Super League titles and two Challenge Cups but, while his former teammates and fellow greats Kevin Sinfield and Jamie Peacock ended their playing careers with a Grand Final victory in 2015 (bar Peacock’s brief return for Hull KR in 2016), McGuire will spend the final six weeks of his battling for survival with the Robins. “It’s not where you want to be spending your last few games before finishing,” the 36-year-old Yorkshireman says. “You want to be up at the top challenging for honours, especially when you’ve been there before, but I’m trying to make the most of the situation. I truly believe there’s a lot of potential here moving forward but we have to get over the line. I’m relishing the challenge like I have with any other in my career.” The break for last week’s Challenge Cup semi-finals has allowed all five of the sides split by a solitary win at the bottom the chance to regroup before the run-in. For McGuire it also granted him a moment to appreciate the significance of what the final six games of the season represent for him. “I’ve had a bit of time to reflect it’s my last few games as a player and it’s very emotional,” he says. “It’s scary, too, knowing there won’t be another game after that, but I do know it’s the right time. There have been moments I’ve questioned it but then I’ve played games this year and not been able to walk properly afterwards. When you’ve only ever played rugby since a young age, it’s tough to comprehend that it’s ending.” McGuire concedes he is fortunate to have comfort in knowing what he will do next. Having rejected a role back at Leeds on their coaching staff next year, he will head up the Robins’ recruitment department. That came as a surprise for a player who is still regarded as a legend at Headingley but it is clear McGuire has an eye on a long-term rebuilding job in east Hull. “It’s important for sportsmen – and probably rugby players in particular – to have some sort of continuity and I’m quite lucky in that regard,” he says. “It’s a passionate club, with passionate people and we have the potential to go on and be successful. “The playing side of things takes up all my time at the minute but I’ve been doing bits behind the scenes already. Mentally I’m ready to finish – and physically I want to be able to still play in the garden with my kids for years.” The eight wins Hull KR have accrued would ordinarily be enough to secure survival. By the end of Sunday’s meeting with Castleford they could be anywhere between eighth and bottom given results elsewhere. Crucially for McGuire the arrival of Tony Smith, his former coach at Leeds, gives him confidence they can withstand this chaotic relegation dogfight. “The place needed a freshen-up and Tony has been great,” he says. “We’re confident without being complacent because nine years out of 10, you’d be safe by now.” McGuire’s former Leeds and Great Britain teammate Gareth Ellis came out of retirement for Hull FC this season 18 months after hanging his boots up. Ellis held an off-field role at Hull before being lured back to playing: could McGuire do the same? “Definitely not,” he says, laughing. “I don’t think even a crazy offer of money would tempt me. I’m ready to play some golf and rest the body up – but not before one last hurrah here.”