The condition of a six-year-old boy allegedly thrown from a 10th-floor viewing platform at Tate Modern in London has improved slightly but he remains critically ill, the Metropolitan police have said. A 17-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder after the incident on Sunday afternoon and remains in custody. The child, who was found on a fifth-floor roof, is in a London hospital. His family were being supported by police, the Met said. “Officers continue to work hard to establish the circumstances of yesterday’s incident,” it said. The suspect had remained with members of the public at the Tate after the incident. There was nothing to suggest he was known to the victim, the police statement said. The mental health of the teenager is one line of inquiry. Officers were called to the gallery at about 2.40pm on Sunday. The child was treated at the scene before being flown to hospital by the air ambulance. Visitors were prevented from entering or leaving the gallery while emergency services dealt with the incident. A Tate Modern spokeswoman said the gallery would open on Monday as usual but the viewing platform would be closed. A photocall for a new exhibition, scheduled for Monday morning, had been postponed, she said. The Met said members of the public were providing witness statements. A journalist, Olga Malchevska, was on the viewing platform when the boy fell and described what happened as “absolutely terrifying”. She told BBC Breakfast: “I saw that woman who was running and shouting ‘My son, oh my son’ and she was crying desperately.” Speaking later, she said she was on the platform with her four-year-old son when the incident took place. “I just felt like something is going on, I should take my child out of there immediately and we tried to go towards the exit,” she said. She could hear people say “Oh my God, the boy dropped.” #Tatemodern Security says the child was taken to the hospital by this helicopter-after falling down from height.I saw a woman running to the balcony on 10floor&crying around 2:45pm,then all visitors got locked in the building till around 4:08pm. Hope the child will get well! pic.twitter.com/WQlPQjCp67 Nancy Barnfield, an administration worker from Rochdale, was on the viewing gallery with a friend and their children when her friend heard a “loud bang”. Barnfield said she turned around and saw a woman screaming, “Where’s my son, where’s my son?” Members of the public quickly gathered around a man who was nearby, she said. “We did not notice the mum before, we noticed her after because she was hysterical by then.” The Labour MP Neil Coyle, whose Bermondsey and Old Southwark constituency covers Tate Modern, said the thoughts and prayers of the community were with the boy and his family. Thoughts and prayers from the local community are with the 6 year old and his family. Nearly 6 million visitors last year to Tate Modern and nothing like this has happened before. https://t.co/mXysZmmd2Q The Tate spokeswoman said: “Tate is working closely with the police to help with their investigations.”