While it looks on the surface like Trump is just drawing attention away from the rest of his ridiculous presidency with his comments about purchasing Greenland, I think that the US government does sincerely want access to our resources. The former is just asinine, but the latter is quite scary, neither of them are appreciated or welcome. If in my lifetime I see a Trump Tower in Nuuk, I should hope that global warming causes the ice underneath it to melt and send it to Atlantis, where it belongs along with the rest of Trump’s fantastical delusions. J, Nuuk Ever since Trump said he liked to buy Greenland, the local social media has been flourishing with funny memes among Inuit. A local cartoonist, Roberth Holmene, made a comment with Inuits building an igloo saying: You go tell Mr Trump that I’m building the only god damn white house we want in Greenland. I believe many find the real estate thought for buying a whole country absurd. The native world view is in many ways diametrically opposite that of the capitalists. As a hunter gather society there are traditions and culture for sharing the whale among all the others in the tribe. You wouldn’t be able to neither hunt, nor eat a whale alone, while capitalism allows few people to take and own much more than all the others. We already have the Thule Air Base and the Russians are building bases just across the North Pole. I personally don’t like the situation and that there is a president with a loose finger on the red button. Qivioq Kreutzmann, 30s, Nuuk Greenland is not for sale from our heart, soul and sense. As Inuit we are an animistic society. We never say we own the land. We only live in the land. Trump is a big climate crisis denier. As an Inuit from the Arctic we already feel the climate crises in our eyes and lives. He doesn’t care about the nature and the environment. He’s thinking business is business as usual. Lana Hansen, 49, writer from Greenland now living in Berlin Our ancestors came from Alaska, our language is Inuit and our culture is simple. The fishing industry is the biggest industry, even some Greenlanders are billionaires. I think the motivation behind Trump’s comments is military strategy – it is in a good place due to Russia and the Arctic Sea. In the US I don’t think they treat Native Americans well. We Greenlanders are the majority in our land and speak Greenlandic. So Trump and his advisers need to respect our Inuit knowledge. We are proud people. Inga Hansen, 55, from Greenland but living in Norway The US has a sad history of appropriation, assimilation and land-use rights. In Greenland we can still see and feel the after effects of colonisation by Denmark. I can imagine that history would repeat itself, if Greenland becomes a state under US. Look at what happened at Standing Rock. The mistreatment of native and non-natives during peaceful demonstrations, at Standing Rock shows President Donald Trump is blinded by a capitalistic worldview. Greenland is an equal part of the Kingdom of Denmark. Which means that we are neither for sale nor can be bought. N.M Hansen, 26, from Greenland now studying Greenland and Arctic studies at Copenhagen University Trump’s statement is an insult to both the Greenlandic and Danish people. He forgets that Greenland is self-governing with strong ties to Denmark. Much can be said about Trump, but total idiot is he not. He knows what values are in the subsoil of Greenland both at sea and on land. From oil to gold, diamonds, uranium, etc. Also, the United States still has one base left in Greenland, Thule Airbase. Angel Evers, 53, from Greenland but living in Denmark I don’t mind Greenland getting a bit of attention but we’re not for sale. We love our beautiful country and it’s not a “product”. Greenlandic people, our land and lifestyle is not for sale. You can buy a ticket and enjoy everything this wonderful country has to offer. We don’t mind visitors. We’ll love to share our culture and nature with you. If you’re lucky you might even be able to try some greenlandic food. But only as long as we both agree, that Greenland is not for sale. Stine Buur Hvistendahl, 27, Nuuk It’s funny. I have the greatest respect for the people of the US, but our wonderful country is not and has never been for sale. Unfortunately it only shows that President Trump is ignorant or doesn’t care for others. Or are his advisors very uneducated? He needs to learn some manners and start showing respect to other countries. Not all is about USA. The world is connected though trading and mutual respect for each other. Lars, 36, Nuuk