Many children of the 70s and 80s witnessed Dungeons & Dragons for the first time not by rifling through Rockholme with curmudgeonly dwarves, or venturing into Old Castle Greyhawk to fend off orcs and hobgoblins with the use of polyhedral dice, but watching the 1982 Steven Spielberg film ET, in which our hero, Elliot, desperately vies to be involved in a game that his older brother Michael is playing with his snarky teenage pals in their front room. Something about the role-playing game seemed impossibly cool back then, even if the reality of playing the damned thing was always a little different. Faced with indecipherable rules, charts, paperwork and (get back, thee devil!) the horror of basic maths, many of us graduated pretty quickly to reading Fighting Fantasy books instead, where all one had to do was turn the page to continue the adventure and find out if Dibby the elf had managed to defeat the Manticore with a carefully prepared giant fireball spell. Still, D&D’s connection to the film world was established, and in many ways has never been broken. When the TV series Stranger Things wanted to riff on old Stephen King movies, it naturally sent its crew of perky pre-teens to sojourn through role-playing game scenarios. There is now even a Stranger Things crossover edition of the hallowed RPG, in which one can battle Demogorgans as a fantasy character of one’s own invention (though Stranger Things’ monsters are mainly named after various original D&D beasties in any case). Why then, with all this cinematic heritage, has there never been a decent Dungeons & Dragons movie? The 2000 film by Courtney Solomon is perhaps the nadir of the Hollywood fantasy genre. Released just before Peter Jackson’s Lord of the Rings films seemed to usher in a new dawn for fans of selfless Dunedain and wizards of the Istari order, it is best remembered for Jeremy Irons’ dreadful scenery chewing as the evil mage Profion, as well as Thora Birch’s turn as dragon-whispering Empress Savina. It was even less likely to enthuse long-term fans of D&D than Duncan Jones’s bland and miserable 2016 effort Warcraft was to put fire in the bellies of MMORPG (massively multiplayer online role-playing game) fans. Perhaps, however, there is light at the end of the tunnel, a way out of Gollum’s lair and into the bright sunlight on the other side of the Misty Mountains. For Variety reports that Game Night’s Jonathan Goldstein and John Francis Daley have been hired to oversee a new adaptation of the famous RPG. Their previous film was a smart black comedy, with switched on performances from Jason Bateman, Rachel McAdams and a superbly creepy Jesse Plemons. Though quite what the film-makers will make of the metallic dragons of Krynn, or the wizard-princes of Glantri, is anyone’s guess. We can surmise that this is likely to be a pop-culture-literate take on Dungeons & Dragons, that feeds into the game’s retro roots and perhaps even features players among its character set. For one thing, films such as the 2000 edition and Warcraft have established that (with the possible exception of Tolkien’s Middle Earth) the mythos that powers the swords and sorcery genre is often so generic that the films need human colouring to truly flourish. This new D&D movie should be looking to pay homage to the game’s 80s routes, and its cinematic heritage, as well as sending up its innate silliness (with a whole lot of love). In the latest series of Stranger Things there is a scene in which Will Byers, having finally got himself out of the Upside Down and the ravages of various demonic monstrosities, discovers that he has lost his D&D-playing mates to girls and other middle-teen obsessions. The look of horror on his face, as he realises there will be no 10-hour campaign through the wilds of the Khurish Massif, battling witches and necromancers along the way, is a perfect symbol of geeky lost youth. One imagines there will be a similar expression on the faces of long-term swords and sorcery fans if studio Paramount doesn’t finally get Dungeons & Dragons right on the big screen.