The glowing white helmet on top of his head gave Owen Wright the confidence to overcome his demons and win a maiden Tahiti Pro surfing title. The 29-year-old Australian dominated the solid swell at Teahupo’o to score 9.17 and 7.90 rides in Wednesday’s final with his combined score of 17.07 too much for defending world champion Gabriel Medina (14.93). Earlier in the day Wright scored a perfect 10-point ride in his quarter-final, dropping late into a beast of a wave to find himself deep behind the curtain as he charged to his third final at the famous left-hand reef break. Unsurprisingly Wright competed throughout the event with a helmet on, having suffered a serious head injury in 2015 at Pipeline. That wipeout and the near-fatal brain injury he suffered is something Wright admits is always on his mind when surfing a treacherous wave such as Teahupo’o. “Four years ago since that accident I definitely am a more tame human,” Wright told AAP. “Definitely when the waves get this size I take all the precautionary measures. Having that helmet option, it just really quietened it down enough for me to just go and see these huge waves coming through and going ‘I’m going, I’ve got a helmet on, I can do it’. It just allowed me to go harder. For me it was a real blessing.” Wright wasn’t the only surfer to take on Teahupo’o’s monster waves with added protection. American Sebastien Zietz donned the headgear during his heat against Michel Bourez while wildcard and trials winner Kauli Vaast wore a helmet in his upset of then-world No 1 Kolohe Andino. Wright said injuries, such as those he suffered four years ago, are making surfers more conscious of choosing safety over style at dangerous waves. “This is one of the gnarliest waves there is and it just takes a split moment for it to go wrong, and you really don’t have any control when you’re in those wipeouts; you can’t cover up or anything like that,” he said. “It’s an easy thing to put on. It might not look the coolest but it’s definitely for sure a life saver.” After missing the entire 2016 campaign as he recovered from his injury, Wright famously returned to the tour with victory in his first event back at Snapper Rocks in 2017. Wednesday’s win was Wright’s first since then and he feels his health is better than it has been at any point before the 2015 accident. Victory lifts Wright to eighth on the world tour rankings and, as the leading Australian male on tour, in the box seat for one of the two men’s spots for his country at next year’s inaugural Olympic surfing competition. “The Olympics is a huge motivator and, for me, just like my general health is a huge motivator,” Wright said. “I’ve been just trying to regain that and regain a good performance in the WSL Tour. That’s how we get to the Olympics, just the performances, so that’s what I’ve been focusing on.”