Ataer Holding, which is on course to buy British Steel, is a subsidiary of Oyak, a Turkish military pension fund set up shortly after the country’s 1960 military coup. With £15bn in assets, Oyak is the largest pension fund in Turkey, presiding over a sprawling empire of investments in everything from car manufacturing to energy and finance. It is also the largest shareholder in the Turkish steelmaker Erdemir. The fund is chaired by a former general in Turkey’s armed forces, the second largest in Nato, while the country’s defence minister attended its latest annual meeting, indicating ties to the country’s autocratic regime. Trade unions are also understood to have made contact with sister organisations in Turkey amid concern about the company’s attitude towards labour rights. Oyak has been at pains to demonstrate the seriousness of its intentions to the UK government, sending representatives to Scunthorpe to see British Steel’s blast furnaces. The former business minister Greg Clark said on Friday that Oyak had also welcomed him at its operations in Turkey. Oyak is understood to have impressed the new government, including the pro-Brexit business secretary, Andrea Leadsom, by talking up the idea that the UK’s exit from the European Union is an opportunity to revive British Steel’s fortunes and double capacity within five years. Its representatives have been less keen to discuss some aspects of Oyak’s past in its native Turkey. The Guardian asked Oyak about its involvement in a corruption scandal in 2012, when a Turkish parliamentary commission accused it of orchestrating land deals that cost the exchequer tens of millions of lire. In a 130-page report, the commission cited several deals, including one in which Oyak allegedly obtained construction permits to build a military barracks on government-owned land but instead built much more lucrative private residential apartments. The commission said deals such as these had helped to swell Oyak’s coffers during the late 1990s at the expense of the Turkish treasury. Oyak, which bid for British Steel via its Ataer Holdin subsidiary, declined to comment. But sources close to the company said it had installed a new management team in 2016, was subject to annual independent audits and exhibited the highest standards of transparency. A Turkish car plant jointly owned by Oyak and the French carmaker Renault has also been the subject of frequent labour disputes, one of which resulted in Britain’s largest trade union, Unite, condemning the “criminalisation” of workers. Despite being a joint owner, Oyak is understood to have no involvement in labour relations at the plant.