Gareth Southgate has called up the defenders Aaron Wan-Bissaka of Manchester United and Aston Villa’s Tyrone Mings for the Euro 2020 qualifiers against Bulgaria and Kosovo, with Liverpool’s Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain also included after injury. With Kieran Trippier back in the fold having moved to Atlético Madrid, there is no place in the squad for Manchester City’s Kyle Walker but Leicester’s James Maddison and Chelsea’s Mason Mount have been selected. Southgate said Walker had not been dropped and that he was looking at younger right-backs. He described Wan-Bissaka’s inclusion as reward for the 21-year-old’s form since moving to United from Crystal Palace in the summer. “He has adapted very quickly to a high-profile move, so we’re really looking at him and Trent [Alexander-Arnold] – that is the reason Kyle Walker is not involved,” the England manager said. Of Mings, who has never represented England at any level but moved to Villa in the summer on a permanent deal from Bournemouth, Southgate said: “I really like his leadership qualities – he is an outstanding athlete and I see a lot of room for improvement.” Tom Heaton (Aston Villa), Jordan Pickford (Everton), Nick Pope (Burnley); Trent Alexander-Arnold (Liverpool), Ben Chilwell (Leicester), Joe Gomez (Liverpool), Michael Keane (Everton), Harry Maguire (Manchester United), Tyrone Mings (Aston Villa), Danny Rose (Tottenham), Kieran Trippier (Atletico Madrid), Aaron Wan-Bissaka (Manchester United); Ross Barkley (Chelsea), Jordan Henderson (Liverpool), James Maddison (Leicester), Mason Mount (Chelsea), Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain (Liverpool), Declan Rice (West Ham), Harry Winks (Tottenham); Harry Kane (Tottenham), Jesse Lingard (Manchester United), Marcus Rashford (Manchester United), Jadon Sancho (Borussia Dortmund), Raheem Sterling (Manchester City), Callum Wilson (Bournemouth) Oxlade-Chamberlain has not played for England since March 2018, having suffered a serious knee injury a month later. He has made four appearances for Liverpool this season, including in the Community Shield. Southgate was full of praise for Mount, another midfielder. “Mason Mount has been one of the outstanding players in the league this season,” said Southgate, who has not called up John Stones. “He is in on merit, as simple as that. He looks like threatening the goal every time he plays.” England play Bulgaria at Wembley on Saturday 7 September and against Kosovo in Southampton three days later.