Coach Ross Lyon and chief executive Steve Rosich have been sacked by Fremantle in a significant shake-up at the struggling AFL club. The decision to show Lyon the door comes at the end of another disappointing season for the Dockers, who failed to reach the finals for a fourth consecutive season. Lyon, who had a year to go on his current contract, had been with the club for eight seasons and took charge of 171 games. He led the Dockers to the grand final in 2013 and won the minor premiership two years later. Assistant David Hale will take over in a caretaker-coach role for Fremantle’s final game of the season – Sunday’s clash with the Power at Adelaide Oval. “Leadership change is necessary to begin the process of renewal and to set our course for the next 10 years,” Dockers president Dale Alcock said. “Fremantle had not made the finals for the past four years. This isn’t acceptable to the board, the players, and most importantly to our supporters. “We need high performance and consistency at all levels of the club, so we need to change and evolve. This leadership change is about transforming our whole club. We need to act now to ensure we are reinvigorated and re-energised for success.” Chief operating officer Graeme Parker will act as interim chief executive until a permanent replacement is identified. Fremantle are currently 13th on the ladder, having fallen to defeat to Essendon at the weekend. That result came on the back of a three-point loss to St Kilda, after which criticism of Lyon increased, but he said he was confident in his job. “I’m really excited about pre-season and what we can do to improve. Personally, I feel like I’ve never coached better,” he said on SEN. “Delegating, calmness … personally I never think I’ve been a better package. Both parties, particularly on the surface, are fully committed to turning it around.” Lyon was under huge pressure earlier this season after a run that saw his team lose five of their six games between rounds 14-19. But his job seemed to be secure after guiding Fremantle to a famous 34-point win over Geelong in round 20. However, it seems Fremantle will officially drop their sacking bombshell at a press conference on Tuesday at 1500 AEST. The news is set to be a shock to Lyon himself, who earlier this season labelled himself as unsackable. “I can guarantee you I’ll be around,” Lyon replied earlier this year when asked if he thought he would be Fremantle’s coach next year. My performance dictates we’ll be around. We’re a rebuilding team. We’re 7-8.” Lyon guided Fremantle to finals action in his first four years at the club, including the 2013 grand final loss to Hawthorn. But the Dockers fell off a cliff at the end of 2015 and haven’t made the finals since. Rumours are rife that players including brothers Brad and Stephen Hill, Ed Langdon and Luke Ryan could leave the club. Fremantle had made major improvements this season but it wasn’t enough to save Lyon’s job. The Dockers lost nine games by 50 or more points last season. This year, Fremantle have suffered just two big losses – a 91-point loss to West Coast in round 16 and a 47-point loss to the Bulldogs three weeks later. Injuries to key players Jesse Hogan, Alex Pearce, Matt Taberner and Stephen Hill hurt Fremantle’s cause, but it was the team’s continued poor skill errors that frustrated fans the most.