British travellers heading to Hong Kong have been told their electronic devices could be checked at the border with mainland China. The Foreign Office, which has updated its travel advice due to continuing protests, said: “In light of ongoing protests and demonstrations in Hong Kong, there are reports of greater scrutiny from mainland authorities at border crossings between the mainland and Hong Kong. “This includes reports that travellers’ electronic devices have been checked at border crossings. You should be aware that the thresholds for detention and prosecution in China differ from those in Hong Kong.” The protests were triggered by a controversial bill that would have allowed extraditions to mainland China, where the Communist party controls the courts, but have since evolved into a broader pro-democracy movement. Public anger – fuelled by the aggressive tactics used by the police against demonstrators – has collided with years of frustration over worsening inequality and the cost of living in one of the world's most expensive, densely populated cities. The protest movement was given fresh impetus on 21 July when gangs of men attacked protesters and commuters at a mass transit station – while authorities seemingly did little to intervene. Underlying the movement is a push for full democracy in the city, whose leader is chosen by a committee dominated by a pro-Beijing establishment rather than by direct elections. Protesters have vowed to keep their movement going until their core demands are met, such as the resignation of the city’s leader, Carrie Lam, an independent inquiry into police tactics, an amnesty for those arrested and a permanent withdrawal of the bill. Beijing’s influence over Hong Kong has grown in recent years, as activists have been jailed and pro-democracy lawmakers disqualified from running or holding office. Independent booksellers have disappeared from the city, before reappearing in mainland China facing charges. Under the terms of the agreement by which the former British colony was returned to Chinese control in 1997, the semi-autonomous region was meant to maintain a “high degree of autonomy” through an independent judiciary, a free press and an open market economy, a framework known as “one country, two systems”. The extradition bill was seen as an attempt to undermine this and to give Beijing the ability to try pro-democracy activists under the judicial system of the mainland. Lam has shown no sign of backing down beyond agreeing to suspend the extradition bill, while Beijing has issued increasingly shrill condemnations but has left it to the city's semi-autonomous government to deal with the situation. Meanwhile police have violently clashed directly with protesters, repeatedly firing teargas and rubber bullets. Beijing has ramped up its accusations that foreign countries are “fanning the fire” of unrest in the city. China’s top diplomat Yang Jiechi has ordered the US to “immediately stop interfering in Hong Kong affairs in any form”. Lily Kuo and Verna Yu in Hong Kong It comes after the British consulate worker Simon Cheng went missing two weeks ago during a business trip to the mainland city of Shenzhen. China said this week Cheng had been placed in administrative detention for 15 days for violating public order regulations. State media claimed he was visiting prostitutes – an accusation often used by the authorities to smear the reputation of government critics. Protests in Hong Kong began 11 weeks ago with calls to scrap a now-suspended extradition bill. They have widened to include demands for full democracy and an independent inquiry into alleged police brutality at demonstrations. Travellers flying to Hong Kong have also been told to expect disruption and allow extra time for travel over the weekend. A statement on the Foreign Office website said: “A large protest action is also planned for 24 August (Saturday) targeting the transportation system to and from Hong Kong international airport, and in the Kowloon East Kwun Tong area. Passengers are advised to allow extra time to travel to the airport.” Previously travellers were warned that the situation around protests and public gatherings could change quickly, with the potential for significant violence, especially during unauthorised protests. Cheng has been working for the UK’s consulate since December 2017 as an international trade and investment officer for the Scottish government. He and other local staff at consulates and embassies support diplomats but do not have diplomatic passports.