Aidan O’Brien has been unable to discover an explanation for Hermosa’s dismal display at Glorious Goodwood last week, when the winner of the 1,000 Guineas in both England and Ireland failed to show anything like her best and trailed home last in the Nassau. The filly had been sent off the 13-8 favourite for a race O’Brien had won twice in the previous four years with other Guineas winners, Minding and Winter, but was eased down in the final furlong and finished 49 lengths behind the surprise winner, Deirdre. “Nothing has come to light with Hermosa,” O’Brien has told the Racing Post. “She just seems to have had an off day at Goodwood. She seems fine since.” The trainer said he would give Hermosa 10 days to recover before deciding what to do next. That makes it seem highly unlikely that she will be taking up either of her entries at York’s Ebor meeting, against the colts in the Juddmonte International or against Enable in the Yorkshire Oaks. Next month’s Matron Stakes at Leopardstown seems a probable next outing. O’Brien made no comment on the general form of his string but cannot be happy about ending Goodwood’s five days without a winner, having dispatched 18 runners to the Sussex track. King Of Athens was another unplaced favourite from Ballydoyle, but Constantinople came within a neck of victory in the Gordon Stakes, for which he was also favourite. Of course, O’Brien has had recent winners, including at Galway last week. But when the Phoenix Stakes rolls around on Friday evening, it will be almost four weeks since the trainer’s most recent Group One success, with Japan in the Grand Prix de Paris, and he will surely be keen to get another such prize in the bag. This quiet spell for him is the more surprising in view of how he dominated the early part of the season, winning three of the first four Classics in Britain. Carlisle’s largest crowd of the year is always drawn to this fixture, with all seven races exclusively for female jockeys. This highly competitive card makes it seem odd that more tracks do not plan similar versions. For punters it is extremely tricky with numerous runners appearing to have been plotted-up. Favourites did show up well on good to firm going last year, but in 2017 outsiders held sway in good to soft conditions and the ground is currently described as mostly good to soft, with good places. Nigel Tinkler, a trainer with an impressive strike-rate at all Carlisle meetings (nine wins from 33 runners in the past five years), relies on Tenax in the third race. Tinkler is confident of a good run from his horse, a Haydock winner on good to firm in July, but said on Sunday he would not welcome further rain. Faye McManoman, who rides Tenax, has an even higher Carlisle five-year strike ratio (five wins from 16 rides) so this jockey-trainer partnership appears to have a solid chance. However, an outsider could be worth checking in the market – the Sophie Ralston-ridden Raha (6.45), available at 14-1 on Monday morning. This filly stepped up considerably on her previous form when third at Yarmouth in mid-July. She may have got into this race on a lenient weight. McManoman has three other booked rides at Carlisle, including Gorgeous General in the opener. Lawrence Mullaney, whose stable struck at this meeting a year ago, trains Gorgeous General and said on Sunday evening his charge would be suited by rain. One of several dangers is Suitcase ‘N’ Taxi (5.45). Tim Easterby’s dual course winner could bounce back to form at around 7-1 after dropping down the weights. Redarna (7.45) from Dianne Sayer’s “all-girl” yard near Penrith, would be a popular winner at odds of 7-2 or so. Rivals include soft-ground performer Beverley Bullet (McManoman again). In the closing contest, the 7-1 shot Majeste (8.45) looks to be Serena Brotherston’s best chance of a winner from her three booked rides. The five-year-old has proven form at this course and looks worth siding with each-way. Kempton 1.45 Streamline 2.15 Mutasaamy 2.45 Glory 3.15 South Coast 3.45 Run Wild 4.15 Ironclad 4.45 Hameem 5.15 Lorna Cole Ripon 2.00 Led Astray 2.30 Four Wheel Drive 3.00 War Brigade 3.30 Muscika 4.00 Delph Crescent 4.30 Two Bids 5.00 Matewan Windsor 5.30 Cogital 6.00 Mild Illusion 6.30 Vibrant Chords 7.00 Perfect Refuge 7.30 Strelka 8.00 Madame Tantzy 8.30 Fly The Nest Carlisle 5.45 Suitcase ‘N’ Taxi (nb) 6.15 Madrinho 6.45 Raha 7.15 The Navigator 7.45 Redarna 8.15 Calliope 8.45 Majeste (nap)