It was hot in the sunshine at Headingley and by two o’clock a lot of the spectators were sheltering in the shadows under the Western Terrace. There was not a scrap of cover out in the middle then, where Joe Root, horribly exposed, was just starting out on one of the most important innings of his career. Root was playing to prove he is still one of the world’s best batsman, that he can be that even while he is leading the team and, more important still, for a shot at what could be his last, distant chance at winning an Ashes series as captain. He knew it, too, and would have had all that and plenty else running around his head all morning. This is the eighth Test England have played against Australia under Root; they have lost five and drawn two of the other seven. With a record like that, Root knows there is no guarantee he will still be England captain by the time the team go back to Australia in 2021. Losing an Ashes series over there is one thing, being beaten back in England another. Right now there is no certainty he will still be in the job this winter, when England will have a new head coach with his own ideas about what has gone wrong with the team in the last few years and whether Root is the right captain to fix it. So one way or another, this was going to be a career-defining innings. It is not the first he has played at Headingley. Back in the spring of 2013 Root made his very first Test century here, 104 against New Zealand. He was 22 then, but so baby-faced that he was asked for ID every time he tried to buy a pint. If he looked young for 22 then, he looks old for 28 now. The England captaincy will do that. Back at the start of the Test summer Root said he would be lying if he denied he was feeling tired, and there was no point trying to kid the press anyway, since the black bags and crows feet gave him away. Root has played a lot of international cricket in the last six years: 320 innings altogether – more than any other player – and he has faced almost 20,000 balls, nearly a quarter as many again as two of the four other great batsmen of this generation, Kane Williamson and Steve Smith. Virat Kohli is the only one who gets close. Right now, Root is the only one of the four whose Test average has fallen below the fifty watershed. It falls all the way from 53 to 42 when he has been captain. Root’s game has frayed and worn, Watching his strange field placings in this series, it was beginning to feel as if his leadership was not worth what it costs in runs lost. Right now Root looks as if he needs rest almost as much as he does runs. He surely did not get much sleep on Friday night. He has spoken before about how he often finds himself lying awake at night during games, and what happened on Friday left him plenty to stew on. He has looked as if he has been running on empty since Edgbaston, when he gave all of himself in that first innings of the series, batting three hours for 57 runs. But since then he has made 28, 14, 0 and 0, the first time in his life he has made ducks in back-to-back matches. He is in the thick of the worst year of his career. He was averaging 27 from 13 innings when he came in here. England were reeling at the time, too, at 15 for two. He was on a pair and Josh Hazlewood thought he had him with his second ball, which landed, of course, on a length outside off-stump. Root leaned into it and it whizzed just by the edge of his bat, which had clipped his pad. Hazlewood mistook the one noise for the other, and launched into a long, loud appeal, which umpire Gaffaney refused. Two balls later Root played a jittery little squirt through the slips that skittered away to third man for three runs. He bounded gleefully down the pitch for those first runs. Root set himself, then, for the grim and serious business of batting through the afternoon. He scored two fours in the next 23 overs, both of them off the outside edge, one wide through gully off Hazlewood, the other past slip off James Pattinson, who mistakenly thought he had him lbw later in the innings, too. Otherwise, he blocked a lot, left plenty and picked up singles where he could. There was one loose drive but otherwise it was brilliantly bloody-minded stuff, an innings of Boycottian obstinacy. Finally Root unfurled a fine cover drive off Nathan Lyon to bring up his fifty, next ball, he flicked four more fine behind to leg. After those back-to-back boundaries, he settled again, until, on 64 he played a reverse sweep for four off Lyon, finely calculated to take best advantage of the width the bowler had offered him. He walked off at the end, unbeaten on 75 from 189 balls. Exhausted as he must have been, it is a fair guess he will not have slept much on Saturday night either. There was too much left to do.