George Warleggan appears, pistol in each hand, before taking out a French general and wounding the man who is about to kill Ross, and it may go down as the moment the show really lost it. I laughed out loud – for all Poldark’s intentional light relief, it is the earnest parts that make me want to giggle, although until now it has somehow managed to stay on the right side of ridiculous. It was the last ever episode – supposedly – of the gloriously entertaining show that has run on BBC One for five series. It has pushed me to my limits with its jumpy approach to time and ludicrous storylines, and the finale nearly sent me over the edge. And yet, like that moment when Dwight Enys grabbed George as he was about to go over the Cornish clifftop in episode three, they pulled it back. Just. Five months have passed since the penultimate episode. Morwenna is heavily pregnant, Caroline is still – implausibly – on at Dwight about being in love with Kitty Despard and Ross is acting strangely (as he warned Dwight he would). Demelza knows he is up to something, but suspects that something is troublemaker Tess Tregidden – devastatingly confirmed to her when she follows him. Heartbroken, she packs for Killewarren, Caroline’s house. “When did I lose you, Ross? I look in your face and see a stranger.” He can’t tell her the truth, which is that he has infiltrated a French gang – ahead of a French invasion – and stringing Tess along is supposedly all part of it. But the invasion is on – and before the peace agreement is to be signed! French general Jules Toussaint turns up at Nampara, news of which finds its way back to George and the slave traders at Trenwith. They are delighted that Ross appears to be betraying his country. But Ross – of course – has a plan. Dwight has to hide under a floorboard, and Zacky and the Carne boys have to do something with gunpowder. With Poldarkian speed, it all gets going – Ross and the general discuss plans, while Dwight, hidden under the floor, takes notes. But the document – bound for Wickham in London – is intercepted. Huzzah! Proof that Ross is a traitor. But what’s this? He is actually acting as an undercover agent? “Damn him. So he’ll be crowned as a hero,” sulks George. Unless they inform the general that he’s been had, they decide, treacherously. There follows a sequence as hammy and cheesy as a croque monsieur. “Forgive me if your carpet is stained, madam,” says Toussaint to Demelza, now he knows of Ross’s double-crossing, “but I must perform a small execution before we resume our conversation.” Demelza, always the quickest-witted Poldark, pretends to side with the Frenchman. “Can you truly think to rid me of this fiend?” she says, standing between her husband and Toussaint, stalling for time. For some reason – something to do with artistry – Toussaint decides not to shoot Ross and have a duel instead. Their moonlit swordfight seems to go on for so long that by the time Hanson decides to take matters into his own hands and shoot Ross himself, you’re almost cheering him on. And then George appears in his Tarantino moment, guns blazing. “I’d rather you kill the other one but we mustn’t be greedy,” says Ross, before they discuss whether to finish Hanson off and dispose of the bodies. If you have stuck with Poldark this far, you have a fairly high tolerance for such nonsense. There is a kind of rapprochement between George and Ross, arch-enemies all this time. “I’m indebted to you, nonetheless,” says Ross, “which is not a position I relish.” George smirks: “Whereas I revel in it.” There is just time to wrap it all up, and fairly satisfying it is too. Morwenna and Drake have a baby girl. Dwight and Caroline have a most touching scene, confronting the grief of losing their daughter but with hope for their future. Sam and the sweet-faced Rosina get married. Geoffrey Charles has his place back at military school. Even Valentine (Ross’s secret son) gets his own mine – but not the knowledge of his true father. George, his supposed dad, asks the Poldarks not to see him any more. “He is, after all, no relation,” he says, all pride and gritted teeth. Most importantly, Horace, Caroline’s pug, seems to have recovered from the poisoning incident. Which just leaves Ross and Demelza. With everything they’ve been through – and put the other through – they end the show as equals. Ross says she saved his life. “As you saved mine, long ago. When you took me from a dog fight, made me your scullery maid, and then your wife,” she replies. Quite why, even now, she puts up with him – he’s going off to be a spy in France while she’s pregnant – is one of the enduring mysteries of her character. Still, it allows the tantalising prospect that this isn’t the end, not really. She expects him back for the harvest (a chance for him to get that scythe out again). One last bit of Poldark smouldering: “I swear to you, my love, I will return.” It’s silly, eye-roll-inducing and the perfect farewell.