Dozens of Heathrow flights have been cancelled despite the suspension of a planned strike by airport workers. Thousands of passengers’ plans were disrupted as 37 departures and arrivals were cancelled, representing about 3% of flights. Monday’s strike was suspended on Sunday night to allow further talks on resolving a pay dispute at the UK’s busiest airport. A 24-hour walkout is still scheduled to take place on Tuesday. Airlines affected included Virgin Atlantic, American Airlines, Air France and Qatar Airways. Approximately 177 flights across all airlines were initially cancelled on Monday and Tuesday. British Airways reinstated its Monday flights, but some passengers reported being warned there would be a “significantly reduced catering offering” due to the “late postponement” of the strike. Virgin Atlantic said it would continue with its plan to switch a small number of flights to Gatwick. Passengers were being told to check with their airline for updates. Members of the Unite union were due to walk out from one minute past midnight on Monday for 48 hours. The two sides met throughout the weekend under the guidance of the conciliation service Acas, and further talks were to take place on Monday. Unite said on Sunday talks would involve senior directors from Heathrow and senior officials from the union “with the aim of averting a second day of planned strike action”. Union members, including security staff, firefighters and engineers, have voted against a pay offer that Heathrow said was worth 7.3% over two and a half years. Heathrow said: “We remain hopeful that we can find a resolution and stop this disruptive and unnecessary threat of strike action. “Airlines may choose to reinstate impacted flights. We regret that passengers have been inconvenienced by this and urge them to contact their airline for up-to-date information on the status of their service.” The airport said it has been working with airlines to identify departures that would need to be cancelled if Tuesday’s strike went ahead. It said some airlines were arranging to operate flights from other airports, others would be delaying flights and a number would be cancelled. “Airlines have now started to contact passengers on affected flights and passengers should contact their airline for more information.”