What an incredible force for goodness and light. Books that resonate and change us are important and rare. I was changed every time I read one of Toni Morrison’s. Masterful control of both form and storytelling. Always bold. Thank you. PsueDenim I absolutely loved Toni Morrison’s book, but more than that I loved what she represented. A true giant bestriding the realms of freedom and imagination. It’s so sad that she should leave us now when her words of wisdom are needed most. She has done a great deal to beautify millions of lives and I hope she knew before she passed away. She was loved for her books, the hope she represented, the strength she embodied. May all she embodied ever march on in majesty with future generations. gavernism Toni Morrison was majestic. She wrote and lived in a way that set people free. I can think of no greater calling, no greater achievement. Some of her words that have shaped my working life: “I tell my students, ‘When you get these jobs that you have been so brilliantly trained for, just remember that your real job is that if you are free, you need to free somebody else ... This is not just a grab-bag candy game.’” So much of her 1975 lecture and Q&A, A Humanist View, has shaped my understanding of what it means to be an artist, and to be a person. Thank you, Toni Morrison, and Rest In Power. MalaclypseTheYounger Her works were as complex as life itself. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination, her post-Nobel collection of essays, for me, was her most powerful statement on southern racism and the deliberate invisibility in the portrayal of African-American existence in white-authored southern literature. Toni Morrison was the most powerful answer to black artistry in a white-dominated world that envisaged the African-American writer, at best, with wistful tolerance at its most polite and amused contempt, at its most extremely conservative. A life fully and satisfactorily lived. Godspeed, Auntie Toni! Africa4 Sad loss. A towering figure in world literature, and an important contributor to the enduring discussion of the African-American experience. Beloved takes a long hard look through that history, and burns powerfully in any reader’s imagination. Rest in peace, Toni, a peace so richly deserved. dylan37 Gutted. Toni Morrison used words for the purposes of freedom and emotional truth. She so fully comprehended how words can be used as violence; that language is communal, even though her storytelling began as such a private thing. A great loss, but your stories and beautiful insight will live forever. Robin_Bland In Toni Morrison, the world has lost a great writer, a novelist of the unconscious, a chronicler of the African-American experience, a bearer of witness to the pains and stains of American history. Idowu Omoyele Toni Morrison was not only a brilliant novelist. She was also a first-class intellectual and thinker. Among her other roles was that of professor at Princeton University. One of her books, Playing in the Dark, looks at the way non-Black Americans carry within themselves an ever-present Black other, a shadow which cannot be dismissed. I’m deeply saddened to know she has died and I’m very grateful for what she taught me. roslev Ms Morrison is one of the greatest icons of world literature to whom we can refer for wisdom about the human condition. It’s a great pain to know such an enlightened writer is no longer with us at a time when we need as many people like her: compassionate, insightful, courageous. Many thanks for her books, they are truly cherished. Tzctguar Beloved is a masterpiece, a work of genius. I remember diving into that book and finding the language overwhelming; I kept having to come up for air. Morrison will live on like all great artists, in her work. A very sad day and loss to literature. ID9735781 I have read and reread her novels, each time marvelling in the sheer poetry of her words. From Beloved: “... a latch latched and lichen attached its apple-green bloom to the metal,” is my favourite example of this. Her power to illustrate the lives of black Americans with such honesty and lucidity, linked with this poetic skill, made her an inspirational writer beyond compare. Onedaylikethis I read The Bluest Eye almost 30 years ago and can remember how powerful it was. After I returned it to the library I bought my own copy because I couldn’t bear to be without it. Then I read Beloved and, my God, I was utterly transfixed by that book. The tension and the drama I have never forgotten. Rest In Peace Ms Morrison and know your legacy for great fiction will live on forever. yogabunny Graceful and incisive and charming and bold. Thank you for being brave enough to keep looking, and keep seeing and keep saying. We will miss you. Elville Some time in the early 1990s, I was sitting outside a cafe in Leiden, waiting for my hotel room to become available, and reading Beloved. I read the first couple of sentences: “124 was spiteful. Full of a baby’s venom ...” If 124, where was 3? How did the words baby and venom get into the same sentence? That beginning was enough to persuade me to put the novel on an undergraduate course I was teaching, and when I came back to the UK I started buying and reading Morrison’s earlier work. A great writer. phillipmallett As a white person, her books gave me the black perspective that in my arrogance and ignorance I thought I already had. RIP. Thank you for adding to my learning. ehdunno Additional reporting Serena Bhandari