The outcome may have been a familiar one for St Helens as they continue to set an unstoppable pace in the Super League but, with this a dress rehearsal for the Challenge Cup final against Warrington in a fortnight, it was a night where both sides can feel encouraged before their reunion. Warrington’s underwhelming league form continued here but without almost a dozen front-line players their young side performed well against the competition’s best team, with the game not settled until the final 15 minutes – by which time Warrington had just one fit interchange. “I was very proud of them,” their coach, Steve Price, said. With one win from their past eight league games Warrington are being dragged into a battle to hang on to second with Hull, Wigan and Catalans all chasing. Price seemed unconcerned, and his side’s display here perhaps reinforces that optimism. But there is no doubting where their Wembley opponents will finish heading into the play-offs. Already confirmed as league leaders, St Helens were without several key men themselves, and like Warrington their youngsters performed commendably. Two of them linked up midway through the second half to score the game-winning try, when Jack Welsby and Matty Costello combined to send the latter over to make it 24-12. “It was an awkward game tonight with Wembley coming, but we’re glad to win it,” Justin Holbrook, the Saints coach, said. Danny Richardson’s goal-kicking split the sides at half-time, after two tries apiece resulted in a 12-10 lead for the Saints. Kyle Amor’s exceptional break for Joseph Paulo’s try put them further ahead and, though a Stefan Ratchford penalty reduced the deficit, injuries were starting to hamper the hosts. Ben Currie, Danny Walker and Luis Johnson all withdrew before the hour, and it was perhaps inevitable when Costello’s try put the game beyond Warrington’s reach. Tommy Makinson then secured another Saints victory with a one-handed finish. Warrington Ratchford; Thewlis, Goodwin, Burrell, Mamo; Dean, Smith; Hill, Walker, Akauola, Currie, Livett, Westwood. Interchange Murdoch-Masila, Tasi, Johnson, Davis. Tries Mamo, Thewlis. Goals Ratchford 2. St Helens Welsby; Makinson, Naiqama, Costello, Percival; Lomax, Richardson; Lees, Smith, Thompson, Taia, Peyroux, McCarthy-Scarsbrook. Interchange Paulo, Ashworth, Amor, Bentley. Tries Naiqama, Lomax, Amor, Costello, Makinson. Goals Richardson 5. Referee B Thaler.