Tottenham are in the dark over Christian Eriksen’s intentions regarding the next move of his career because of a breakdown in the relationship between Daniel Levy and the midfielder’s agent. There have been no talks for some time between Levy, Tottenham’s chairman, and Martin Schoots, who represents Eriksen, and it has served to heighten the uncertainty and vulnerability that the club feel over one of their star players – and that Mauricio Pochettino has referenced on more than one occasion. Eriksen has entered the final year on his contract, he has shown no inclination to sign a new one and Spurs believe he has his heart set on a move to Real Madrid or Barcelona. Whether either club bids for him before next Monday’s transfer deadline in Spain remains to be seen. It is more likely that they would prefer to wait until next summer when Eriksen would be available for nothing but, given that Spurs do not have a clear handle on what is in the works for Eriksen, it promises to be an anxious week or so for them. Pochettino, who has started Eriksen in only one of Spurs’ three games this season, said after Sunday’s home defeat against Newcastle that he had not known a more unsettling start to a campaign at the club – and Eriksen’s situation has been a major contributing factor. Spurs have spent £59.9m on players this summer but they hope to recoup around £10m with the sale of the midfielder Victor Wanyama to Club Brugge. They are also open to offers for the right-back Serge Aurier, who is in danger of becoming the club’s forgotten man. Aurier, signed from Paris Saint-Germain for £23m in 2017, has played only one game since February and he is unlikely to be considered for Sunday’s derby at Arsenal, despite Pochettino’s options at right-back being limited. Kyle Walker-Peters is set to miss out with the hamstring injury that forced him off against Newcastle and Juan Foyth is unavailable with an ankle problem. Pochettino is expected to turn to a makeshift right-back – either Moussa Sissoko, who filled the position during the latter stages of the Newcastle game, or Eric Dier.