Thousands of demonstrators have defied a police ban, taking to the streets of Hong Kong to mark the anniversary of a decision by Beijing to limit democratic reforms in the semi-autonomous Chinese territory. Hong Kong was bracing for another weekend of mass demonstrations as activists protested across the city, after a wave of arrests of prominent pro-democracy activists and politicians on Friday. After the arrests, organisers of a major march planned for Saturday afternoon cancelled the event. Yet, thousands of demonstrators marched anyway, under heavy rain, following parts of the original route, and bringing traffic to a standstill. Many were clad head to toe in black, the unofficial uniform of the protesters, but others appeared to be in normal clothes. Elderly and middle-aged residents and children were among the crowd chanting: “Fight for Hong Kong, stand with Hong Kong!” By Saturday afternoon, groups of protesters had fanned out across Hong Kong island, occupying main roads, prompting the police to warn demonstrators to “stop their illegal acts immediately”. Riot police with shields were stationed along the road watching protesters. It is Hong Kong’s 13th straight weekend of protests, originally triggered by a bill that would allow extradition to China. Local authorities, backed by Beijing appear to be taking a new tack, moving from mass arrests to also detaining high-profile pro-democracy figures such as the former student leader Joshua Wong. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has also hinted that a draconian emergency law could be enacted, giving the government sweeping powers to crack down on demonstrators. Confrontations with police have also grown more violent. Earlier in the week, the convener of the protest group the Civil Human Rights Front (CHRF), and another protester who helped organise a major march last month, were attacked by men wielding rods, baseball bats and knives. Last weekend, the police deployed water cannons for the first time and a group of police officers, while being hit by protesters with sticks, drew their guns on demonstrators. “They are trying to crack down on the movement as soon as possible, and they just don’t want to give any concessions to Hong Kong people,” said Lo Kin-hei, the vice-chair of the Democratic party. “Of course, people will be afraid, but I think people will still go on to the streets to speak out.” Observers see this weekend as a potential watershed for the movement as tensions escalate and confrontations grow more violent. Observers believe Beijing is anxious to stop the protests before 1 October, which marks 70 years since the founding of the People’s Republic, a politically important anniversary. Protesters said they were worried but not intimidated. “If we don’t stand up now, it’s going to be too late,” said Simon Chang, a protester in Wan Chai, where earlier in the day hundreds had filled a sports stadium, singing “Sing hallelujah to the Lord” and holding posters featuring Lam with a bloodied eye – a reference to a protester who was blinded in one eye. “I’m absolutely worried, but … it is necessary for us to stand up and speak out against the government despite the chance that we are going to get arrested,” Chan said. Another protester, who asked not to give her name, said: “Even if they arrest more people, that wont stop us. They keep arresting people, making us more angry. We will keep coming out.” Demonstrators have also called for a “shopping day” in the commercial district of Causeway Bay, to get around the police ban on demonstrations. CHRF, the organiser of the now cancelled march, called on residents to turn on their mobile phone torches and yell slogans of the protest movement at 8.31pm local time. Dozens of police vans were deployed around China’s representative office where the planned march was set to end. A wall of water barricades has been erected around the perimeter of the building. A metro station near the Chinese liaison office was shut and several public facilities closed early. Earlier in the day, an online forum called LIHKG, which protesters use to organise, said it had suffered a series of denial-of-service attacks. Police said that an off-duty male officer was attacked by three men with a knife on Friday evening. According to recent reports, Beijing has ordered Lam not to concede to any of the protesters’ demands, including more politically feasible ones such as the permanent withdrawal of the extradition bill, which officials have already announced dead, or an independent inquiry into police behaviour toward protesters. Chan said he believed Beijing was holding Lam back because meeting any demands would “create a feeling that we are able to do something against the government”. He added: “And they don’t want this sentiment to spread.” Saturday marks five years since China handed down a proposal to introduce democratic elections in Hong Kong, as laid out in the basic law, the territory’s mini constitution, and promised by previous leaders. China’s proposal allowed for popular election of Hong Kong’s leader, the chief executive, but only among candidates chosen by an election committee dominated by pro-Beijing members. The proposal kicked off two months of pro-democracy protests that paralysed parts of the city in the autumn of 2014, known as the umbrella movement. The demonstrations this summer have now lasted longer than the umbrella movement, surprising both protesters and residents with its momentum. Few are confident that the situation will end peacefully.Another protester in Wan Chai, who asked only to give her English name, Joanna, said: “We just try our best to stand up, and see what happens. We can’t predict anything because the government is unpredictable. It makes no sense.”