Thousands of holidaymakers face disruption after British Airways pilots confirmed they will strike across three days in September. Travellers received emails overnight saying flights on 9, 10 and 27 September would be hit by a “large number of delays and cancellations”. The British Airways customer service lines were jammed on Saturday morning with travellers looking to find alternative arrangements. Others messaged the company on Twitter with their frustrations, some complaining they would miss weddings and honeymoons. The British Airline Pilots’ Association (Balpa) said the airline had rejected its proposals to settle a long-running pay dispute and that it had “no choice but to call this action”. The union said 93% of members voted in favour of the action after rejecting a pay rise package of 11.5% over three years. The strikes are likely to cost the airline about £40m a day and take place in what is British Airways’ centenary year. British Airways described the action as “completely unacceptable” and said the union was “destroying the plans of tens of thousands of our customers”. Peter Dempsey said his family would have to pay for alternative flights to attend a family wedding in Spain as they were unable to change the date of their return trip. He said: “We have no option but to completely cancel both legs and rebook or they won’t give a refund.” He said he and three others were booked on the return journey, on 9 Septembe, adding: “I’d estimate we will be about £200 out of pocket.” He said they had spent £550 on their flights but to return on easyJet would cost £330, or to rebook with Ryanair roughly £200. Dempsey described the service since the announcement as shocking, adding that the airline “clearly don’t have enough people to handle such a crisis”. Other flyers complained about a four-week wait for refunds and said bookings on their flights were still listed for sale online. British Airways said: “We will do everything we can to get as many people away on their journeys as possible. However, it is likely that many of our customers will not be able to travel and we will be offering refunds and rebookings for passengers book on cancelled flights.” It said flights with BA CityFlyer, Sun-Air and Comair were not affected and it was “exploring options to supplement our fleet by using aircraft and crew from other airlines”. Alex Cruz, BA’s chief executive, said the pilots had been offered what he described as an “incredible, inflation-busting deal”, which would take a captain’s pay to more than £200,000 a year. He saidthey had been “very badly served” by their union. Balpa said: “Over recent years BA pilots have made sacrifice after sacrifice to assist the company such as taking a pay cut, productivity increases, closing the final salary pension scheme, giving up annual leave days, a new rostering system, and reducing flying pay. “In what is British Airways’ centenary year, this will be the very first time its pilots will go on strike. They do so as a last resort and with enormous frustration at the way the business is now being run. “Our ballot is valid until January, and more dates may be announced until such time as this matter is resolved.”