‘We saw your boobs! We saw your boobs!” The words from Seth MacFarlane’s opening number at the 2013 Oscars – in which the host name-checked the nude scenes of female actors in the audience – are heard at the start of Katie Arnstein’s smart solo show about acting, sexism and the #MeToo movement. We don’t see MacFarlane’s grin or his marching dancers, the words just hang in the air, and the effect is eerie. That sort of routine wouldn’t happen now, we might think, and this piece of recent history feels weirdly archaic. But by the end of Arnstein’s show it’s uncomfortably clear how much the #MeToo momentum must be maintained. The show’s title comes from Kelly Sue DeConnick’s test to asses the value of female characters in a story: if you can replace them with a lamp and the plot still functions, the drama fails the test. On the face of it, Sexy Lamp is an archetypal fringe show: it has an autobiographical journey, with an overarching theme, and is told with pop-culture references (principally The Wizard of Oz), effervescent gags and plucky ukulele songs from a cheery host who we cheer on. We’re even handed rhubarb-and-custard sweets as we enter (perhaps lemon drops were unavailable). But if the format is familiar, the telling is supremely assured. Sexy Lamp, crisply directed by Ellen Havard, is full of sharp insights into the ways actors are exploited – groomed, even – by the machinations of an entire industry. Arnstein’s childhood wish to become an actor was inspired by Judy Garland and she follows the yellow-brick road to London to chase her dream. It’s 2012, there’s “a twinkle in the London Eye” and the city is alive with the celebratory and inclusive spirit of the Olympics. (Eerie, too, how this recent history feels like a bygone age.) Arnstein’s difficulties in cracking the industry are summed up by the three comments she still gets about being an actor: that it’s one step away from prostitution, that surely she means “actress”, and what famous shows has she been in? She learns how selling fragrances can be one step away from escorting, that character descriptions tersely consider a 29-year-old woman “past her prime” and, to her grandad’s chagrin, that she can’t just enlist for EastEnders the way he did for the navy. But the strongest sections consider the way novice actors “learn and yearn to say yes” because the competition is cut-throat and job insecurity makes it hard to say no. Arnstein reads out the sort of sexist casting call notes famously railed against by Rose McGowan (who is at Edinburgh this year with her own one-woman show) and in the most excruciating episode recreates an audition where she is asked to redo a scene in increasing levels of undress. Arnstein moves on to the next chapter of her story, regaining her composure, but her face is still flushed, the trauma clearly still raw. Sexy Lamp is at the Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 26 August. Then at Upstairs at the Western, Leicester, 12-13 September. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.