Cuvée des Vignerons Beaujolais, France NV (£6.19 until 14 August, Waitrose) Like many people in this summer’s crazy heat, I’ve been reaching for spice to cool down. Chilli in particular seems to have the same counter-intuitive effect as a cup of tea, working on the principle that you have to heat yourself up to bring that core temperature down. Beer and cider may be the traditional British partners for spicy food, but wine can be just as effective. Even red wines can do the trick, provided there’s plenty of fruit and the tannin’s been dialled down. In summer, I prefer not to go too heavy with my reds anyway, which means a bottle of the light, juicy red Beaujolais, is often to hand – and Waitrose’s frisky own-label, chilled down, worked very nicely with a Vietnamese-style beef salad with basil, coriander, mint, lime and a good dose of fresh red chilli. Chaffey Bros Düfte Punke Riesling Gewurtztraminer Kerner, Australia, 2017 (from £15.95, Noel Young Wines) If I’d switched the beef in that salad for white fish or prawns, but retained the rest of the ingredients (including a healthy splash of fish sauce), then an aromatic white would have been a better bet. With its succulent lime and unrestrained floral exuberance, the Düfte Punke Alsace-style blend is a taste of the summer, while Tesco Finest CSG Aromatico 2018 (£9) from Chile does a similar job with more tropical fruit. For the combination of smoky flavour and spice heat you’d find in a bowl of chilli con carne or a dish using a piquant chorizo or a good sprinkling of smoked paprika, however, I’d go back to red. Something a little plusher than beaujolais, but still easy on the tannin: a youthful grenache, say, such as the vividly brambly fruity Co-op Old Vine Garnacha 2018 (£5.35). Bortolin Angelo Extra Dry Prosecco di Valdobbiadene, Italy 2018 (£39.95, Jeroboams) Sugar is another useful ingredient in wine if you’re looking to match heat-busting hot food, provided there’s decent acidity, too. That sweet-acid-heat mix is, after all, the key to many a spicy classic dish, from the korma to a basic Thai curry paste. The gentle sweetness and redcurranty acidity of Plessis-Duval Rosé d’Anjou 2018 (£8, Marks & Spencer) – as well as its rather lovely strawberry fruit, creamy texture and relative lightness (10.5% abv) of alcohol – works very well with both those dishes. Equally effective is the sweeter end of Prosecco, the sort that is labelled, confusingly, Dry or Extra Dry (Brut in fact being drier than either). One of the best I’ve tried recently is Bortolin Angelo’s very smart Extra Dry, its sweetness immaculately presented with a gorgeous ping of fresh citrus. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.