Remember that weight-loss product ad splashed all over the tube a few years ago? It shouted a question at commuters, in black capital letters: “ARE YOU BEACH BODY READY?” The guilt-inducing answer, implicitly, was no. In their first Edinburgh fringe show, The Roaring Girls pose that same question and reply to it with a big fat yes. This won’t all be cheesy inspirational mottos and #bodypositivity, warn performers Rachael Abbey, Jess Morley and Sarah Penney. Beach Body Ready is a show about finding joy in your body, but it’s also honest about all the forces eroding that joy, from women’s magazines to Instagram filters. Rachael, Jess and Sarah candidly share their own struggles to accept their bodies, joining the dots between personal experience and a patriarchal system. Crucially, The Roaring Girls make it clear that this is a feminist issue. It’s less about labels like “fat” or “skinny” and more about the myriad ways in which society polices women’s bodies and saps their energy. More than once, performers talk about taking up space. That’s how these women resist: by unapologetically taking up space with their bodies and their experiences, refusing to be shamed into silence. The Roaring Girls’ observations and frustrations are nothing new, but that in itself is damning. We’ve been fighting this fight for a long time and not much has changed. Sure, there’s the body positivity movement, but more often than not – as The Roaring Girls wryly observe – that’s just another way of selling stuff to women. We’ve heard this all before, but it still needs saying. What Beach Body Ready lacks in originality, it makes up for in charm. the women are immensely likable performers, with the kind of emotional frankness and comic timing more often found in confessional standup. Directly addressing the audience throughout, they’re engaging, funny and inclusive, injecting their stories with warmth and wit. As The Roaring Girls admit, they are unlikely to single-handedly smash the patriarchy with this show. But they can stick up two fingers to misogyny and body-shaming while dancing to some banging tunes. It’s a start. • At Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 26 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews 