Rarely can a room have felt so alive. With her Mercury-nominated mix of spoken word, rap and poetry, Kate Tempest absorbs the agonies of the modern world and pours them into music that both wounds and heals. The south Londoner kicks off her debut at the Edinburgh international festival with a selection of her best and most commanding work. Framed by a red moon, she starts with the catastrophic Europe Is Lost, from her 2016 apocalyptic, electronic story cycle, Let Them Eat Chaos. “Kill what you find if it threatens you / No trace of love in the hunt for the bigger buck / Here in the land where nobody gives a fuck.” From then on, the ferocity is relentless. When Tempest glides within the same note from speech to song, it is like plummeting down a rollercoaster, your stomach left mid-air. The cavernous Leith theatre suddenly seems minuscule as she makes the global intimate with her latest vertigo-shot of an album. Produced by Rick Rubin, The Book of Traps and Lessons has a starker score; Where Let Them Eat Chaos had a full band, this sees Tempest joined only by Clare Uchima, live mixing and on keys. Inhaling the hatred, lies and hypocrisy circling politics today, Tempest fumes in Three Sided Coin: “Our leaders aren’t even pretending not to be demons.” Arms wipe eyes dry as she mourns the futility of protest in Holy Elixir and, for the first time of the night, words take a backseat as the bass rouses and the synths rage, with a red wash descending on the stage, intense and blinding. She hunches and the room shakes; this is a reckoning. Having been failed by politics and structures we should have been able to trust, Tempest searches for truth in love and music instead. Loathing, optimistic, lustful: this gig is all the more painful for the intersection of fury with joy. Her eyes are closed as she balances desire and self-preservation in I Trap You, her cynical, hesitant counter to Firesmoke, an impossibly tender love letter performed over a stripped-back beat. “Gentle, ferocious, we are open,” she intones to the woman she wants to untangle, whose body is a map she wants to explore. In that line, she sums up the tone of her set. The lights are Tempest’s backing dancers. Choreographed to the beat then lashing out on its own, Eliza Moore’s lighting design spits, spins and blinds. Only occasionally does it stay with Tempest, as for Hold Your Own, which she performs under a single golden beam. Weaving together her own story with myth and politics, the song – which also gives it name to her first poetry collection – is tenderness scrubbed raw. Too soon, it’s the finale. “I don’t know the answers,” she says, at once optimistic and despairing in People’s Faces, the soft song fuller with an almost symphonic underscore. “But I still have things to say.” Having detailed the uncertainty and anger of our times, she now digs until she finds hope. Throughout her albums, she has always found solace in individuals. By a bus stop. At a party. In a crowd. “So much peace to be found in people’s faces.” The lights dim on stage and rise on the audience. She takes in the applause – seemingly endless – and puts a hand on her heart. Tempest is an excruciatingly beautiful performer. As she continues to grapple with the universal and the personal, we are lucky to be able to listen. I want to hear it all. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.