After graduating three years ago I moved back in with my parents – it was the most logical thing to do at the time as I was only in my first job, so not having to pay rent in London was a no-brainer. Unsurprisingly, I’m not the only to return to the family home. As it turns out there is a whole community of us still living under our parents’ roofs – a community most commonly referred to as the Boomerang Generation. According to the Office of National Statistics, one in four young adults aged 20-34 were living with their parents in 2018 – a significant increase on previous years. With the rent for a home in big cities rising disproportionately to our salaries, topped with zero certainty in jobs and the political climate, the results are hardly surprising. Due to astronomical house prices, if you are lucky enough to get on the property ladder in your twenties, it will most likely be with money loaned or given to you by your family. Other generations – particularly those baby-boomers who were lucky enough to have reaped the rewards of a successful economy, rising property prices and generous welfare state – might label being forced to live in the cushy comforts of your own family home as a first-world problem, and in some ways they aren’t wrong. The fridge is always full; your clothes seem to appear magically clean and ironed just a couple days after you’ve worn them. Your relationship with your parents has probably improved as you’ve left your ungrateful teenage attitude behind you and you might even enjoy each other’s company. And, most importantly, your financial contributions to all of this are next to zero. So what’s the catch? Well, personally, this wasn’t how I imagined I would be spending my mid-twenties. Living under your parents’ roof after existing independently for a few years at university inevitably changes the family dynamic. On the one hand there are certain expectations that crop up once you move back in – I now need to pull my own weight with household chores, for example, cook dinner twice a week and contribute towards the weekly food shop. Then there are aspects which are exactly the same as they ever were: the fixed dinner times, the reluctance to watch my “rubbish” TV programmes in the evening (RIP Love Island) and having to update my parents on whether I’ll be at home for dinner months in advance. What comes from these requests is the pressure to not only comply, but also to be grateful. Whether it’s not thanking my mum for all the ironing she does for me, or forgetting to feed the cat, it is very easy to seem ungrateful. Living under your parents’ roof in your mid-twenties is a constant reminder that you are not living your own life yet, a psychological obstacle to your own identity and freedom. My parents are fully within their right to expect all of this of me: after all, it is their house and their rules. For fear of sounding ungrateful, I just wish it was my own house, with my own rules. However, I know that in order to have me at home my parents are sacrificing freedoms of their own. For starters, I’m sure they don’t actually want me to join in every time they have a dinner date, but nevertheless I will always be invited along. You hear about “empty nest syndrome” among parents who can’t cope once their children leave for good. But I know that my parents, like many others, very much intend on us eventually leaving the nest. Whether it be golfing, travelling or simply engaging in a bit of “repowering”, as the TV presenter Fern Britton put it last week, surely all parents have a plan for when their offspring finally move out. Unfortunately, the current climate is keeping us at home much longer than expected and, instead of seeing the world, they’re building an extension on to their homes because the children are back and they’ve brought their girlfriends with them. (And maybe a pet or two, too.) It’s hard for us millennials, but spare a thought for our parents, too.