The moment we speak about history, we encounter the problem of where to locate it. History, we tend to think, is behind and around us, a structure we inhabit and by which we are shaped. This partial truth, though, obscures a more intimate reality. History resides within us; it arises directly from our actions and choices. Unless we remain conscious of this, the “study” of history, too often predicated on an illusion of remove, becomes an act not of interrogation, but of evasion. Deborah Levy’s exquisite new novel The Man Who Saw Everything – her seventh, and her third in a row to be nominated for the Booker prize – both unmasks and confronts this convenient denial of individual culpability. The “Man” of the title is Saul Adler, a historian. The “Everything” is both his life and ours: his loves and disappointments, a history of 20th-century Europe viewed through, and embodied by, the fragmented memories of a single wounded mind. When we first meet Saul, it is 1988. He is 23 and researching the history of cultural opposition to fascism. On his way to meet his lover, Jennifer Moreau, he is knocked down by a car on Abbey Road in north-west London. Superficially injured, he keeps his appointment with Jennifer, a photographer who has made Saul her subject. After they sleep together, Jennifer breaks up with him, and Saul travels to East Berlin to continue his research. There, he falls in love with his translator, Walter Müller, and also sleeps with Walter’s sister, Luna, at which point the narrative breaks. When we next see Saul it is 2016 and, again, he is run over on Abbey Road. This time, though, the accident is more serious. He is hospitalised, and drifts in and out of consciousness. As he tries to recover his memories, the events of the intervening years swim slowly into focus. Saul’s life, we come to understand, functions as a kind of psychoanalytic mirror of Europe, with events in the material world finding their emotional counterparts in his disordered memories. Early on, Saul and Jennifer reflect on Marx and Engels’s observation that “a spectre is haunting Europe”. That word “spectre” will come to haunt the novel, assuming a variety of forms and functions. It is used to describe a toy wooden train in Walter’s possession – a clue to his secret heterosexual family life that shadows his brief relationship with Saul. Next, the spectre is Walter’s unexpectedly “authoritarian voice”, which conjures two distinct modes of oppression. “He was ventriloquising the voice of the state,” Saul says, “and he sounded like my father.” Towards the end of the book, when Saul attends an exhibition of Jennifer’s photographic work, he thinks: “There is a spectre inside every photograph.” The spectre, of course, is the subject: Saul himself. Levy’s singular achievement in this novel is that it is not simply these spectres that shapeshift. Saul’s entire emotional and psychological topography is unstable, questionable, and within that fluid context, everything has the power to haunt. As he struggles to bring order to his own narrative, even the smallest details recur, reform, assume new significance and meaning. When he tries to buy sunflowers for Jennifer, he is unable to find a florist that stocks anything but roses. Later, Walter’s mother smells of roses, and later still someone brings Saul roses during his convalescence in hospital. Luna, meanwhile, is convinced she is being stalked by a jaguar. When she helps Saul bury a small quantity of his father’s ashes, the emotional impact leaves him feeling “as if I had just been disembowelled by a jaguar”. When he is knocked down for the second time, the car is a Jaguar, and fragments of its shattered wing mirror become lodged in his head. Levy is deeply attuned to human anguish. She also reminds us of fiction’s other great function: the loosening of boundaries This intricate patterning of objects and symbols, which becomes for the reader a kind of psychoanalytic code or interpretive mystery, allows for a complementary layering of phenomena and ideas. Ultimately, Levy is concerned with power – the forms it takes in our lives, the extent to which it is something we both possess and are subjected to. Like the haunting spectres and codified, repeating images and ideas, power keeps reappearing, and each time it does so, it takes a slightly different shape. The “authoritarian regime” of East Germany finds its mirror in the “regime” of Saul’s overbearing father. Censorship is enacted not only through the state’s control of art and writing, but through Walter’s “censorship” of his homosexual desire. Saul’s constant feeling of being surveilled while in Germany is reflected both in his role as Jennifer’s photographic subject and in the way, when Saul and Jennifer argue, he feels punished for an “unconscious crime”. Indeed, their entire relationship is an exercise in the rebalancing of patriarchal power. Not only does Jennifer make Saul her muse, thereby inverting the traditional misogynist binary of male artist and female subject, she forbids him from ever describing her beauty, even as she devotes so much of her time to documenting his. With sexual, familial and political power, of course, comes cruelty, which like everything else in this book functions at both a state-wide and interpersonal level. Saul has a “PhD on the psychology of male tyrants”, and is wounded by his own father’s tyranny, but his studies and recriminations look only outwards, affording him the luxury of displaced responsibility and pain. As Saul’s disordered memories cohere, the life that emerges is not exactly blameless. In the failed intimacy of his relationships, his role is not solely that of victim; in the landscape of political oppression that he makes his subject, his responsibility extends somewhat further than that of the detached, clean-handed observer. “He doesn’t care about his own life,” Walter bluntly observes, “so he doesn’t care about the lives of others.” It has become fashionable, as interest in literary fiction is perceived to have waned, to make a case for what it is that the novel can “do” for us. Often, this is framed around the idea of empathy. Levy’s writing is, no doubt, deeply attuned to human anguish and loss, but her real talent is to remind us of fiction’s other great function: the loosening of boundaries. As Saul picks his way, tantalisingly, through the symbols and signs of his own obscured history, we find that the borders between his emotional landscape and the material conditions he inhabits, between what he feels and what he sees, between self and other, even between the individual and collective, become eerily porous. In softening and blurring these distinctions, Levy’s implied question feels painful and apposite: how can we have any hope of resisting political tyranny when we are so tragically unable to expunge it from our personal lives? It is at this level, the level of cruelty and complicity, the level at which regimes both large and small cohere, that the bold design behind Levy’s intricate motifs and symbols becomes clear. She is asking us to consider a spectrum of harm, and where along that spectrum different incidences of cruelty might fall. Just as it is easier to study “history” as an entity distinct from our own emotional reality, so too it is far simpler and more comfortable to condemn brutality on a mass scale than it is to accept, and atone for, our own smaller acts of devastation. Perhaps, Levy seems to be saying, we have gone about things in the wrong way. Instead of resisting cruelty and injustice at a national or global level, it’s possible that each of us might need to endure the same process of disassembling as Saul, so that we can see, as in the clear light cast by this novel, the awful power we have over others, the unthinking emotional destruction we are capable of wreaking, the regimes we not only suffer under, but enforce. • Sam Byers’s Perfidious Albion is published by Faber. The Man Who Saw Everything by Deborah Levy is published by Hamish Hamilton (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.