I was in Chicago and a DJ friend told me about Kevin Saunderson, who needed a singer. Back then there was no internet or email, so Kevin sent me a tape in the post. I put it on my little cassette recorder and out came Big Fun. The version was very basic, just a keyboard line I think, but I listened to the melody and sang whatever came into my head. I flew over to Kevin’s apartment in Detroit and met his friends. It was only later that I realised they were Juan Atkins and Derrick May, AKA the “godfathers of Detroit techno” who were tearing up the dancefloors. Kevin had a mic set up in his living room and I remember him saying: “Everybody be quiet, she’s gonna sing.” And I did Big Fun just like that. It became our first hit. Good Life was the same – a cassette, then me singing – but this time we used a studio in Chicago. I’d grown up singing in church and had been a girl scout and a cheerleader, so lyrics about positive thinking and good vibes came naturally. The 80s had been very hard for people: Good Life and Big Fun tapped into a feeling that things were getting better. When both songs were global hits, I was flying to the record company in London every week, while working at a department store in Chicago. My bosses were brilliant: “Take another day off! This is great!” I didn’t give up the day job until some time after the hits started. We made the Good Life video in London and had a ball. You can see the famous landmarks – Trafalgar Square, St Paul’s Cathedral, Piccadilly Circus. We’d grab bystanders on the street and ask to film them. At one point we saw a Rolls-Royce parked on the kerb with a uniformed chauffeur standing by it. The director asked the driver: “Could we use your car for a minute?” The idea was that I’d jump into the Rolls-Royce and head for the Good Life. The chauffeur drove me down the street and then parked it back exactly where it had been, all before the owner returned. I often wonder who that car belonged to. Maybe they saw the video and thought: “Hey, that vehicle looks familiar !” Juan Atkins, Derrick May and myself met in school in Belleville, Michigan. I had bet Derrick $5 that my football team would beat his, but when they did, he wouldn’t pay up, so I punched him in the face. He respected that and it was the start of a long friendship. We bonded because there weren’t many other black people in our school. I became interested in what they were doing with drum machines and synthesisers. Juan had visions of futuristic, funky synthesiser music, a cross between Kraftwerk and George Clinton, and was the first to make what became known as techno under the names Cybotron and then Model 500. That inspired Derrick, but I’d been to the Paradise Garage in New York and wanted to use Inner City to create Detroit techno, but with a disco feel. Everything started happening for us after Neil Rushton, a British DJ, came to Detroit and featured our music on a compilation album, Techno! The New Dance Sound of Detroit. When techno hit the UK, I was suddenly playing in clubs like Spectrum or the Hacienda, warehouses or fields at these enormous raves. It was an amazing time: it felt like the world was changing. Thirty years later, Good Life still instantly gets people dancing and feeling good. It’s funny, because there’s not much to it: a TR-909 drum machine for the beat and a TR-707 for percussion, Casio and Korg keyboards and a sampler. I started with the main riff, imitated it with the bassline, put some strings on it and sent it to Paris. After she added her lyrics, I did a mix and a friend of mine played more keyboards. I wasn’t a trained musician, but I heard notes in my head and found a way of getting them out. I may have been a “godfather of techno”, but I couldn’t read music. • New single Need Your Love is out now. Inner City play at Lost Village festival, Lincoln, 23 August. Then One Day at the Disco, London, and Moovin festival, Compstall, on 24 August.