I feel a real affinity with tahini that goes beyond my love of Middle-Eastern food. For centuries, Mexicans have cooked sauces enriched with ground nuts (and other ingredients) to add flavour and protein to simple combinations of vegetables, tortillas, beans and chillies. At Wahaca, we often have a cashew-nut mole on the menu, and it is not unlike this green tahini dressing, enlivening food with its vivid green colour and intriguing taste. For me, seeing parallels in recipes from across the world is endlessly fascinating. Prep 20 minCook 25 minServes 6 2 large aubergines, cut into 2-3cm cubes5 tbsp rapeseed oil2 tbsp pomegranate molassesSalt and black pepper1 large shallot, peeled and finely sliced4 tbsp red-wine vinegar1 tsp sugar2 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained and rinsed (I like Napoli or Brindisa)3 tbsp olive oil2 beefheart tomatoes, cut into 2cm chunks100g watercress, roughly chopped2 handfuls dukkah, to serve For the tahini dressing1 small garlic clove, peeled and roughly chopped1 small handful parsley1 small handful dill90g tahini½ tbsp honey3 tbsp lemon juice100ml olive oil Heat the oven to 240C (220C fan)/465F/gas 9 and line a large baking tray with greaseproof paper. Toss the aubergines with the rapeseed oil and molasses, season well with salt and pepper and spread out in a single layer in the tray (use two trays if they are crowded). Roast for 20-25 minutes, turning the aubergines halfway through cooking, until golden and caramelised. Remove from the oven and leave to cool. Meanwhile, toss the shallot with half the vinegar and the sugar, then set aside. Dress the chickpeas with the remaining vinegar and the oil, and season to taste. Put to one side to absorb the dressing. To make the tahini dressing, put the garlic and herbs in a food processor and blitz for 30-40 seconds (you can also do this with a hand blender). Add the tahini, honey and lemon juice, and blitz again. Combine the oil and 90ml water, then, with the motor running, add to the dressing in a slow, steady stream, until you have a bright-green sauce. Season with salt and pepper and transfer to a bowl. Drain the shallot, then add to the chickpeas along with the tomatoes and chopped watercress, and toss gently. Transfer to a large platter, spoon over the aubergine, drizzle with green tahini and scatter with the dukkah, to serve. Experiment with different herbs in the dressing: tarragon and parsley are delicious, as is mint. Use it for a beautiful potato salad or try with a roast chicken. Whizz any leftover watercress into a chilled vichyssoise.