Jamie Demetriou has never worked in a lettings agency, he doesn’t know anyone who has worked in a lettings agency, and he hasn’t dealt much with lettings agents. So when the comic got the opportunity to write and star in his own sitcom, it seemed obvious where to set it … “Part of the challenge from the beginning was: how can I make this bad idea good? I don’t like the idea of a sitcom about a lettings agency, I really don’t. But then I once made a short about a guy turning into a car, and I think that’s the worst idea ever. But I also think, what’s more impressive than a really good idea done well? A really bad idea done well.” Demetriou’s logic, if you can call it that, has somehow paid off. The show – which reviewers compared to The Office, although it also has flecks of the surrealist comradery of ensemble shows such as It’s Always Sunny In Philadelphia – was nominated for two Baftas and recommissioned for a second season, which airs this week. He is right that it really shouldn’t work. The titular Stath is the kind of character who is normally the bit-part villain in someone else’s TV show: he’s a benefactor of nepotism with a massively inflated sense of his own abilities, doing one of the most loathed jobs there is. Yet Demetriou has crafted a hilarious and empathetic lead who speaks in almost his own language, a creole of north London slang, Greek idioms and the patois of ineptitude. Stath is joined at Michael & Eagle Lettings by a boiler room of flawed colleagues and his sister Sophie (played by Jamie’s real-life sister, comedian Natasia Demetriou). “The world of lettings just lends itself to character comedy,” says Katy Wix, who plays Carole, the office swot who struts around like an Apprentice contestant. “Lettings agents are just really on, they have this fake chumminess with the clients, the whole set-up of viewing lends itself to these characters revealing what idiots they are.” I meet the cast a few days after they have wrapped filming. Jamie is in a button-down shirt and trendy baseball cap. After the first series aired, I’d read interviews in which he says he’s nothing like Stath. But on first impressions, I’m not so sure. “How’s it going … was my hand wet from the toilet?” he says absent-mindedly, before answering his own question without pausing, “Mmm, enough that I should have warned you beforehand.” Not to worry, I say. How are you? “I’m quite nice. Yeah. I pulled a muscle in my neck so I can’t turn my neck one way. Imagine now if I did the interview and I was just moving my neck around – you’d be like: that’s a very specific lie.” It’s the kind of stream of consciousness that you could easily imagine Stath spouting as he shows a couple around a two-bed in Enfield. Stath Lets Flats series 2 is out on Monday the 19th of August at 10pm on @Channel4. pic.twitter.com/LRw1td7tG2 Season two is focused on gentrification, and Stath being lost in a world of millennials and hipsters. Julian, played by Dustin Demri-Burns, who ran the Foxtons-like posho estate agents next door, has become Stath’s boss. “He’s made the office look ridiculous,” says Wix. “He wants it to look like an Apple store, and the contrast of that and the inadequacy of the people who work there is perfect.” In this world of idiots and phonies, the relationship between Sophie and Al (played by Al Roberts), the bashful agent who commutes via coach from Birmingham each morning because he can’t get a flat in London, gives the show its heart. They have a kind of remedial will-they-won’t-they flirting via lobbing bits of rubble around. Natasia explains that it’s not an entirely invented dalliance. “[In real life], Al goes out with [standup comic] Emma Sidi,” says Natasia. “I truly worship their relationship. But when I was first up in Edinburgh … I was single at the time and Jamie kept saying: ‘I want you to go out with Al,’ sending me photos of him from Facebook. So it’s not hard to act like I’m in love with him cos I actually am in love with him a bit in real life – purely platonic.” It is unusual to see a female lead in a TV comedy who isn’t a kind of “feisty” character, teasing the boys and disapproving of any kind of fun. “Oh, I know,” says Natasia animatedly. “[Writers think] ‘Ooh, she’s really sassy, she calls the guys on all their bullshit’ – by which they mean she’s a fucking bore and ruins the fun. I know why it happens, these writers want to write a strong woman, but THAT ISN’T FUNNY. Let women be thick!” We also see more of Katia, Sophie’s equally talentless buddy from dance college, who’s played by Natasia’s comedy partner Ellie White. “We’re all really obsessed with the fail auditions on early series of Popstars and Pop Idol – people talking back to the judges when they get rejected, like: ‘Actually, you’re in the wrong,’” says White. “I think Katia and Sophie have the same sense of delusion as they try to become dancers.” Natasia says the characters are partly based on the way she acts slightly braindead when she’s visiting her parents. I wonder if playing the character makes that worse – do they ever find themselves slipping into Stath and Sophie at the family dinner table? “It happened when we went on holiday to Greece together, a really romantic holiday, just the two of us,” she explains. “Jamie swam out to a little island quite far away and I went over and said: ‘I’ve come to rescue you Stathy,’ pretending to be a pirate. I think that’s what Sophie would do.” Fans of realism could easily be put off Stath by its pilot episode: there’s a lot of physical comedy and not many obvious gags. But as the first series develops, it becomes quite wonderfully surreal, a world that is both mundane and too stupid to exist. At a time when television is fixated on memoirish sadcoms about loss and betrayal, Stath harks back to the golden era of 90s surrealist comedies such as The Fast Show and I’m Alan Partridge, where society was satirised through exaggeration. You can imagine if Partridge had got into lettings rather than local radio, he may well have ended up working at Michael & Eagle. Jamie wrote some of the first series with Robert Popper, who created Friday Night Dinner. But whereas that show always hinted at rather than explored its Jewish setting, Jamie really leans into the character’s Greek and Cypriot heritage. “That’s a voice that’s specific to me and Tash,” says Jamie. “I don’t know about lettings agencies, but I do know about this culture – its thought processes and warmth. I know about the goodness and funniness. Growing up in England I’ve leant more on my English side, but Stath is what would have happened if I leant more on my Greek side.” “In this series, you see that very Greek thing where people will just rock up at anyone’s house and they’ll let you in,” says Natasia. “That is what our dad does and there’s something so funny about when you do that in England because here there’s a culture when it’s very polite, you book in advance, you pencil in a date. But when we were younger we’d be watching TV on the weekend and then all of a sudden three Greek men show up and just sit in our front room.” Is there ever concern from the Greek community about Stath, one of the few out-and-proud Greeks in British scripted television, being such a moron? “You hear an occasional thing about the older generation thinking the show is too mocking. But what would they rather? If My Big Fat Greek Wedding was all about a family of the most respectable members of the Greek community, talking normally to each other, it would be the most boring thing in the world. It’s a comedy. I think it’s a celebration of Greekness.” In the first season, the lettings agency was a family concern and Stath was given a free ride by his dad. Season two brings jeopardy with Julian now threatening to kick Stath out the business. “He just wants to slick the place up. I used to work on Homes Under the Hammer, and the estate agents on that would always have the same walk, with the clipboard and suit,” says Burns. “This skinny-suit-wearing, no socks-in-the-summer, wheeler-dealery tribe. It’s a very funny target.” Julian has also latched on to Dean, played by Kiell Smith-Bynoe, to try to be his No 2, forcing him to appear in a bizarre promotional video-turned-erotic fiction. “I’ve had more to do and there’s just non-stop gags on set,” says Smith-Bynoe. “I want to be around even for the scenes I’m not in because there’s a real-life Office vibe: someone will put a stapler on their head and we’ll all fall about laughing.” Interviewing Jamie and Natasia, the rhythm of their conversation and the way they make each other laugh is infectious. At one point they go on a lengthy riff about “how they met”, networking on the landing and showing each other their poos. Really, though, I beg during the patter, why do they think they’ve followed the same dream? “Do you mean why are me and Jamie both mad, narcissistic comedians?” jokes Natasia. “We had such a strange upbringing with such eccentric parents and so we were often put in situations where finding what was funny was a survival thing. Also, we had this ritual with our mum which was jacket potatoes and TV on a Saturday night – that was The New Adventures of Superman, Blind Date and then whatever the show was [on next]. Big Brother was a religion for Jamie. To a certain extent we just wanted to make people laugh like Darius [Danesh] made us laugh.” Perhaps the sweetest part of Stath Lets Flats is the relationships behind it. Most of these actors have been friends for years, and all of them speak about how grateful they feel for this opportunity. When I leave they stay at the bar, catching up like it’s been years since they last hung out, even though it’s only been a few weeks. “Touch all the wood, long may we be able to work on projects like this,” says Natasia. “I grew up watching Big Train, these collectives of comedians who knew each other, and as a comedy fan you knew who was going out, who were best friends. It’s so rare now to do something like that. I had tears in my eyes every day on set.” For the first time in our conversation she’s not really joking. “This is was what I dreamed of doing.” Stath Lets Flats is on Monday 19 August at 10pm on Channel 4