Bolton have postponed Tuesday’s home game with Doncaster owing to concern over the “welfare” of their young players. The League One club have been in administration since May and Phil Parkinson has been forced to play teenagers in their opening games, including Saturday’s 5-0 defeat at Tranmere for which the manager had only three fit senior players. Parkinson said Bolton had emailed the Football League before the match against Tranmere to express concern that their younger players were being asked to play continually because the club are not allowed to sign players. He claimed he was told they “had to play the game”. A statement on behalf of Paul Appleton, the joint-administrator, said: “It is with real regret and a deepening sense of frustration that we have been forced to postpone the fixture against Doncaster Rovers. “Whilst the threat of further EFL sanctions is obvious, nothing can be allowed to impact on the welfare of such a young group of players. With so many senior players injured or unavailable, the squad has performed heroically and deserves so much credit. “But after consultation with the club’s medical staff, it is obvious that to call on them for another match without an adequate break would be detrimental to both their welfare and development, which cannot be allowed. “We were able to bring in reinforcements before the match against Coventry because the deal was so close to completion. Now, following recent events, the legal position of various parties has altered which means a delay in completion. In this situation, it is very difficult to attract players to the club. “I will be discussing the implications with the EFL but in the meantime I would call on all parties involved with the acquisition of the club and hotel to end this intolerable delay and secure once and for all the future of Bolton Wanderers.” Bolton were close to being taken over by Football Ventures but Laurence Bassini, whose bid to buy the club before they entered administration broke down, was awarded a court order blocking the sale. This has been amended and adjourned, allowing Football Ventures to complete the deal.