The future of the United Kingdom might hang on the application of 13 fateful words in a statute that passed into law with little controversy less than a decade ago. According to section 2(7) of the 2011 Fixed-term Parliaments Act, the date of an early general election can, in particular circumstances, be “appointed by Her Majesty by proclamation on the recommendation of the Prime Minister”. That clause raises the prospect of a perverse Brexit scenario: Boris Johnson loses a confidence vote in the Commons because a majority of MPs do not want Britain to leave the EU without a deal, but he advises the Queen to set an election date after 31 October – so polling day falls once a no-deal Brexit is a legal fait accompli. It would occur while parliament was dissolved. Such an affront to parliamentary democracy would be unthinkable if Boris Johnson were not encouraging the thought. Downing Street this week refused to rule it out, although it is worth bearing in mind that bluff and bluster are the prime minister’s stock in trade. Besides, the sparsely worded law contains gaps for exploitation by MPs determined to obstruct him. The Commons could mobilise in creative ways during the 14-day window that the fixed-term act provides between a confidence vote and dissolution. But the prime minister is not bothered by technical debate over the feasibility of Brexit scenarios. Downing Street is using the idea of crossing the no-deal rubicon in the middle of an election campaign to signal determination to meet the “do or die” pledge that Mr Johnson made during the Tory leadership race. It is a performance of total commitment to the cause with the intent of intimidating opponents – the constitutional equivalent of refusing to rule out deployment of nuclear weapons in a military confrontation. Pro-European MPs are in danger of falling into a trap, with the prime minister’s apparent readiness to do outrageous things as the bait. His ideal sequence of events would be a general election after an orderly Brexit is completed. But if that cannot be arranged – and the odds are against it – the second-best model is an election framed as a contest between a brave Tory leader, determined to fulfil the will of the people, and a cowardly, unpatriotic, arrogant Europhile establishment, holed up in the Palace of Westminster. Arcane rows about precedent and protocol set that contest up nicely. Most voters are unfamiliar with the procedural letter of Erskine May and unbothered if its spirit is flouted. Some might despise Mr Johnson for treating parliament with contempt, but many others think that is exactly what the House deserves. Meanwhile, 31 October gets embedded ever deeper in the minds of Eurosceptics as a sacred appointment with Brexit rapture. In such a climate British politics is collectively losing sight of the fundamental questions: what sort of relationship the country needs to have with the EU and how that might be achieved. It is easy to see why Mr Johnson prefers not to frame the matter in those terms. His rock-hard Brexit model and the confrontational strategy for getting there point the country in the opposite direction to the one that calm, rational judgment would counsel. Downing Street’s position makes more sense as part of a bare-knuckle fight for control of the domestic political narrative. The aim is to cast parliament as the disposable husk of an obsolete, old order, then ask the electorate to replace it with a new cohort, more obedient to the prime minister, styled in presidential terms as tribune of the people. It is a sinister fantasy, made all the more dangerous by signs of economic downturn. Official data on Friday showed growth turning negative in the spring – a development that might once have given government reason to reconsider lining up a gratuitous shock for the autumn. But Mr Johnson is no more interested in sober economic analysis than he is in constitutional propriety. He is not running an administration so much as a rolling campaign. His critics in parliament must understand that they are already the target, regardless of when or how an election date is set.