The singer and impressionist Joe Longthorne, who has died aged 64 of cancer, may have been categorised as a middle-of the-road cabaret entertainer, but nobody would deny his talent. In his hugely popular live shows and on television, he would brilliantly mimic idiosyncratic crooners such as Frank Sinatra, Tom Jones and Shirley Bassey, and be funny at the same time. The impressionist Rory Bremner once said: “I wish I could sing like Joe Longthorne as I’d love to do Sinatra.” Although he had been a performer since childhood, Longthorne got his big break with an appearance on the LWT series Search for a Star in 1981. It led to his own variety specials and, getting away from the working men’s clubs, a month-long engagement at the London night spot The Talk of the Town. This won him a Club Mirror award as specialist act of the year in 1983, and the Variety Club’s most promising artist award the following year. After a regular guest spot on The Les Dennis Laughter Show (BBC), in 1988 Longthorne was given his own eponymous ITV show, co-starring the magician Wayne Dobson and produced by Nigel Lythgoe, which ran for three years and drew audiences of up to 10 million. In 1989, following a US tour culminating in Las Vegas, he starred in his first Royal Variety Performance. At the peak of his fame in the early 1990s, Longthorne filled the Royal Albert Hall and completed a record-breaking 19-week season at the Blackpool Opera House. Longthorne never took his audiences for granted. “I’ve had a few unfortunate nights where things have gone wrong,” he told me, “but it is always down to me as a performer. I would never blame the audience.” Born in Hull to Fred Longthorne, a scrap metal dealer, and Teresa (nee Sheridan), Joe was proud of his Gypsy heritage, and at home in the tough Hessle Road community where they lived. He attended several different schools, but none of his teachers recognised that he was dyslexic. I learnt that the props got in the way of the impersonation. Now I would rather imagine myself as Judy Garland for two minutes instead of hiding in a frock Encouraged by his parents, who both sang, Longthorne was winning talent contests from the age of six. In 1968 he was featured on Yorkshire Television’s Junior Showtime, presented by Jess Yates, who said he could be a professional. From the age of 16 Longthorne began to play the working men’s club circuit. “I played in a lot of social clubs,” he said, “and sometimes I was on with a comedian and a stripper. The PA systems were not that good and it was hard to get across, particularly if they were waiting for the stripper. It enabled me to work out what an audience is going to be like as soon as I get on stage.” During that time Longthorne met the impresario Tony Cartwright, who advised him that impersonating Steptoe and Son and Alf Garnett was passé, and that he should concentrate on the likes of Bassey and Jones. Longthorne developed an uncanny ability for vocal impersonations, both male and female. He later said: “I would take a tea chest on stage and I would dive into it and get things out, but then I learnt that the props got in the way of the impersonation. Now I would rather imagine myself as Judy Garland for two minutes instead of hiding in a frock.” The Joe Longthorne Songbook was released in 1988: full of sentimental songs and overblown endings, it stayed in the album charts for three months, and its follow-up, Especially for You (1989), was another big seller. Longthorne was drawn to songs that were universal in their meaning, rather than purely romantic. “I love the lyrics of Wind Beneath My Wings,” he said. “A blind lady told me that she had lost her guide dog and when I sang, ‘You’re my hero,’ she thought about him. That was wonderful.” However the big hit single eluded him and he had only minor hits with Young Girl and Passing Strangers, with Liz Dawn (both 1994). Longthorne had been diagnosed with lymphoma in 1989, but continued to tour nonstop. Some theatres were reluctant to accept engagements, for fear they would be cancelled. Of his Blackpool stint, he said: “I did need £3m insurance for a summer season … but I did 19 weeks without a night off, so that was very good.” His extravagant lifestyle and large entourage, or, in his words, “hangers on”, meant that, while earning millions, he was losing more. In 1996 he was declared bankrupt. The following year he met James Moran, who became his manager as well as his partner. They married in 2014. In 2005 Longthorne was diagnosed with leukaemia and received a bone marrow transplant. He was back on stage five months later. In 2011 he broke his nose and some ribs in a car crash. A diagnosis of throat cancer, then surgery, followed, after which he once again returned to performing. He was open about his illnesses, raising funds for various cancer charities as well as other causes. Longthorne received a lifetime achievement award from the Variety Club in 2007, and in 2012 was made MBE. He published an autobiography, Sugar in the Morning, co-written with Chris Berry, in 2015. James survives him, as do his son, Ricky, from a previous relationship, his sister Ann and his brother John. • Joseph Patrick Daniel Longthorne, entertainer, born 31 May 1955; died 3 August 2019