We may expect a topical theme from Knut, but his recent puzzle doesn’t seem to have one. Unless, that is, there is something connecting these apparently disparate clues … 3d Matthau dropping line in lake (5)[wordplay: first name of Matthau, without (‘dropping’) abbrev. for ‘line’][WALTER – L][definition: lake] 23ac Chaps downing limoncello on vacation – it’s quite sweet (5)[wordplay: synonym for ‘chaps’ containing (‘downing’) first & last letters of (‘on vacation’) LIMONCELLO][MEN containing LO][definition: it’s quite sweet] 21d Girlie regularly featured in text looks happy (6)[wordplay: every other letter of (‘regularly’) GIRLIE, contained in abbrev. for ‘text’][ILE in SMS][definition: looks happy] … for WATER, MELON and SMILES? With LETTERBOX, PICK and NINNIES elsewhere in the grid, the theme emerges. Meanwhile, the tremendous second Independent puzzle from Whynot (known in these pages as Tony Collman) … 19d Monday disastrous for electricity supplier (6)[wordplay: anagram (‘disastrous’) of MONDAY [definition: electricity supplier] … appears as the country wonders when the lights are next going to go out. (The answer’s DYNAMO.) And if you missed Arachne’s anniversary puzzle: no spoilers, and it’s waiting for you. The annotated solution is available for Paul’s prize puzzle, which included this affectionate clue … 2/7d Our love bites sweet, initially – disagree? (5,6)[wordplay: what setter and solver enjoy (‘our love’), containing (‘bites’) first letter of (‘initially’) SWEETS][CROSSWORDS containing S][definition: disagree] … for CROSS SWORDS, the same weekend that Raich’s Independent puzzle had this clue … 1d Argue puzzles must include smut (just a bit)? (5,6)[wordplay: example of puzzles, containing (‘must include’) first letter of (‘initially’) SMUT][CROSSWORDS containing S][definition: argue] … for the same answer, with a clue which, if you have read our Q&A with Paul, makes the coincidence all the spookier. Tees is topical in a different way with a puzzle featuring both leads in Killing Eve, enough to make me suspect for a while that this clue … 17ac Shabby theatre bound to appear in correspondence (7)[wordplay: synonym for ‘bound’ (as a verb) inside (‘to appear in’) synonym for ‘correspondence’][LEAP inside FIT] [definition: shabby theatre] … may lead to something other than FLEAPIT; namely, the show which has shared a writer in Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Fleabag. Waller-Bridge was born, we’re told, in 1985. The name Phoebe (meaning “light”, with nods to Artemis and Apollo) was hot stuff in the late 17th century, but later … not so much. In the 1990s, though, it absolutely soared up the charts. There was a temptation at the time to attribute this to Friends’ Phoebe Buffay, but Guinness Book of Names author Leslie Dunkling thought otherwise … Parents often give a name which they see as coming from a class above their own … I think Phoebe has existed in Sloaney circles for some time. … which would mean that Waller-Bridge is part of the upper-crust resurgence which made Phoebe mainstream again. Our next challenge concerns an incredibly popular name which wasn’t really a thing before Shakespeare and which, as far as I can see, entered the top tens before one of its owners was granted national-treasure status. Reader, how would you clue OLIVIA? And what do you think of first names as answers in cryptic crosswords? Many thanks for your clues for BASTILLE. What a versatile word it is, especially regarding anagrams! So we had a charming mix of surface readings explicitly mentioning incarceration, such as Smylers’ “Bishop quietly leaves sweet old prison”, which feels like the opening shot of a film. No audacity award, though I did enjoy the consciously conversational tone of Shenguin’s “Place that, well, it’s a bit, a bit, revolutionary?” and JollySwagman’s “The French can possibly stall Brexit, oddly enough” and the frankly Francophone nature of TonyCollman’s “Bâtiment originalement là, il est détruit”. The runners-up are Lizard’s all-in-one “Bestir all suffering here – revolution’s starting off!” and GappyTooth’s relatable “A jail cell it’s a bore being back inside”; the winner is Dunnart’s multiply sly “What had Marquis de Sade penned? Depraved, entertaining work”. Kludos to Dunnart; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. It’s always obliging if a device we’ve discussed here appears in a puzzle. So it was with the cluedoku and a recent clue by Eccles … 7d Argument of rowing crew leader is baseless (5)[wordplay: synonym for ‘rowing crew’, with base removed from its first letter (‘leader’)][EIGHT with the E becoming ‘baseless’][definition: argument] … for FIGHT. Now we just need to see a “hobophone” clue in the wild. Crossword blog will return on 9 September.