Casey Affleck has talked about “a ton of partying” on the set of his 2010 mockumentary I’m Still Here where sexual harassment and verbal abuse allegations were made against him by two female members of the crew. Affleck was speaking on the Armchair Expert podcast, and claimed that the methods he had used to direct I’m Still Here, which featured Joaquin Phoenix as he apparently attempted to embark on a career as a rapper, were “confusing” and “a big mess”. “There was a ton of partying, because that was the content of this documentary, at times mockumentary,” said Affleck. “We’re recording everything. It was confusing for everybody and it was deliberately so. And that’s my responsibility. The intention was to have the crew as a part of the movie. I don’t know how much they knew they were a part of the movie … It was a big mess and it’s not something I would do again. I would be way smarter, more sensible, more sensitive to it being a workplace if I were to try to do this again.” In 2010, Affleck was sued by two female colleagues, cinematographer Magdalena Gorka and producer Amanda White, after they had worked on I’m Still Here. Their complaints included claims that he propositioned and grabbed White, slid into Gorka’s bed uninvited and created a hostile climate by, among other things, instructing a crew member to display his penis. Affleck denied wrongdoing and later settled with the claimants out of court. After winning a best actor Oscar in 2017 for Manchester-by-the-Sea, he subsequently admitted he had been “unprofessional”. Affleck’s new film, Light of My Life, is a drama in which he plays a father struggling to protect his daughter after a plague kills the rest of the world’s female population. It was greeted with some hostility, with Daily Beast writer Amy Zimmerman describing it as “a total fuck you to anyone who’s familiar with the allegations against him”. In his Armchair Expert interview, Affleck said that his long silence over the accusations was due to his support of the #MeToo campaign against harassment. “Not being able to talk about it has been hard because I really wanted to support [#MeToo], but I felt like the best thing to do was to just be quiet so I didn’t seem to be in opposition to something that I really wanted to champion.” He added: “Who would not be supportive of the #MeToo movement? That’s an idea that’s even out there? That there are some people saying we do not believe in equality and we think the workplace should be a dangerous place for certain people and not for others. That’s preposterous.” “It is very, very hard to talk about … because the values of the #MeToo movement are values that are at the heart of my being. Just the way I was raised, they are baked into my own value system having been raised by a mother who didn’t let us watch Dukes of Hazzard when we were like eight years old because it was sexist.”