England have named an unchanged squad for the third Ashes Test against Australia, which starts at Headingley on Thursday. The brevity of a four-day turnaround between matches meant changes to the struggling top order were always unlikely at this stage, while Jimmy Anderson is not yet considered fit after a calf injury. That means the XI that drew a compelling, rain-affected draw at Lord’s on Sunday will remain in place, joined by the all-rounder Sam Curran. Australia will wait on Steve Smith’s availability after their talismanic batsman was felled by a Jofra Archer bouncer on Saturday and diagnosed with concussion on Sunday. Smith was subsequently replaced by Marnus Labuschagne – the first player substituted in a Test match under the International Cricket Council’s new concussion protocol. The ICC’s regulations on such injuries state a player must have medical clearance before returning to cricket. But while it lists the typical recovery time as seven days, they add: “This can vary from individual to individual.” Anderson, who pulled up after bowling just four overs in the first Test defeat at Edgbaston, is said to be “making progress”. He will play for Lancashire’s second XI in a three-day match against Leicestershire on Tuesday in Liverpool and will be assessed continually leading up to his home Test at Old Trafford on 4 September. While the selectors were always likely to keep faith with their batting personnel for at least one more match, their decision was made a little easier by low scores on Sunday from Dom Sibley and Zak Crawley. The pair are considered the best young openers in the country and could be promoted should Jason Roy’s lean run continue, but Sibley got a duck for Warwickshire against Somerset while Crawley was dismissed for just five in Kent’s match with Essex. England trail 1-0 in the series, having lost the opening match at Edgbaston, and must win two of the remaining three Tests to regain the Ashes. Jofra Archer, Jonny Bairstow, Stuart Broad, Rory Burns, Jos Buttler, Sam Curran, Joe Denly, Jack Leach, Joe Root (capt), Jason Roy, Ben Stokes, Chris Woakes