Gaby Hinsliff (Journal, 3 August) is right to insist that the ultimate decision on numbers of children is in the hands of women and their partners but ignores the many ways that any modern state already makes so many of the rules regarding sex and reproduction. Just think of all the rights and allowances that determine the length of maternity leave, resuming work, flexible working, equal pay and the like. Then, there are decisions by states to subsidise or not the costs of childcare, including all the costs of education from pre-school to university and college. Throughout, there are rules and regulations about which maternity and childcare services are state- or authority-provided. Couples reproduce in such economic and regulatory environments and it would be naive to think that such powerful social and economic decisions do not bear on the timing and numbers of births they choose. A declining population is not in anyone’s interest, reducing the pool of new talent in the next generation and encouraging an imbalance between those concerned with the cost of TV licences and others eager to see young innovators moving through our age cohorts. Sure, there are major populations in sub-Saharan Africa with total fertility rates too high for their current economic growth, but changing their fiscal and social environments in favour of a life less constrained by childbearing for such women is not beyond our capacity to imagine without the fear of being charged with “population control”.Allan G HillProfessor of population and international health, University of Southampton • Simon Cooke of Marie Stopes International is right to draw attention to the link between the climate crisis and population growth (Letters, 7 August). The Guardian has reported (Best solution to climate change? Fewer children, 12 July 2017) that having one fewer child saves 58.6 of CO2-equivalent per year. This is by far the biggest saving that can be achieved by an individual in altering their own lifestyle.Roger PlentyStroud, Gloucestershire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition