That Rangers scored four goals after Hibernian were reduced to 10 men in this fixture may lead to false perceptions. In truth, Steven Gerrard’s team were utterly dominant even before Sean Mackie was sent off for a second bookable offence. There is already an air of familiarity about the Scottish Premiership table; only the Old Firm have won both their opening matches. Celtic visit Ibrox after the next round of league games, meaning this mutually positive start has wider meaning. Rangers scraped past Kilmarnock last weekend but there was no such anxiety for Gerrard here; his players were utterly rampant. Even so early in the campaign, there is a rising sense Celtic and Rangers could detach themselves from the remainder of the league. Regression elsewhere might be as influential in that as improvement in Glasgow but, on this evidence and that from a Europa League tie in Denmark on Thursday evening, Gerrard has boosted Rangers’ potency over the close season. “I’m quite disappointed that we didn’t score more really,” said Gerrard, only partly in jest. “I am really pleased. That’s how I want us to look, like a threat all the time. Their defence had a really, really tough 90 minutes.” This was an early candidate for understatement of the season; the hosts had 34 attempts at goal. In recent seasons, Hibs have shown themselves capable of giving Rangers serious problems. The trouble in analysing a game such as this is in whether to attach more significance to the positive elements of Rangers’ play or how woeful their opponents were. Paul Heckingbottom’s summer recruitment at Hibs is worthy of more scepticism than has generally been the case. From kick-off, the visitors were timid in attack and disorganised when defending. Only a piece of magic from Scott Allan, who fed Daryl Horgan with a wonderful pass to reduce Rangers’ lead to 2-1, triggered thoughts of a Hibs recovery; and even they were lacking in foundation. In that opening half, Rangers had only poor finishing to blame for not being on easy street as their intensity overawed the visitors. Jermain Defoe notched the first goal of a hat-trick inside 10 minutes after reacting quickest to a Sheyi Ojo long-range shot which Ofir Marciano could only parry. The former England striker’s second arrived after the excellent Jordan Jones fed Ojo, who supplied the perfect cut-back. Horgan stunned Ibrox five minutes before the interval, following Allan’s creative touch. “It was a magnificent pass, I would have been proud of that myself,” said Gerrard. Mackie protested against his second yellow – for handball – when he would have been better served ruing his own stupidity. Rangers were of a mind to rub salt into Hibs wounds; Steven Davis tossed up a terrific cross for Defoe to head home at the back post. This marked his first treble for three and a half years. “There have been a few braces in that time,” Defoe said afterwards. Alfredo Morelos, who started the game among Gerrard’s substitutes, scored two almost identical goals from an angle, just inside the penalty area, in what afforded a fair complexion to the scoreline. Worse was to follow for Heckingbottom as Ojo’s stoppage-time shot bounded past Marciano via a deflection from David Gray. “It got tougher as the minutes went on,” the Hibs manager said. “We made bad decisions with 10 men but we were second best for long spells at 11 v 11 as well. I could sit here and give Rangers all the credit in the world but I’m more concerned with our performance.” Gerrard hinted he might be of a mind to add a third striker to supplement Defoe and Morelos. If this result suggested such a signing is barely needed, perhaps this was an indicator of the manager’s aspirations. It won’t always be as blissfully straightforward as this; one assumes, at least.