The Lake District is impossibly beautiful, as well as delicious. I spend half my life there, but at times it’s woefully inaccessible. Not “Kirkstone Pass in a Vauxhall Rascal with worn-out brakes” inaccessible. No, I mean much of the notable dining and friendly service in the Lakes takes place in ultra-spendy luxury resorts, with a minimum two-night stay, at approximately £300 per room. “Yes, I’ll bring my 83-year-old mother and tween niece for a three-hour, 10-plate chef’s journey of citrus bisque and kohlrabi,” I groan mournfully as weekly news arrives of yet another billion-pound stately home renovation aimed at stressy Zurich hedge-fund managers who want to spend 48 hours blasting haplessly at grouse and having £200 hot-stone massages. Which is all lovely, but every week I’m in search of a big, reasonably priced and, above all, welcoming place to take normal folk; one in fact like The Yan at Broadrayne. Somewhere that serves rustic stuff with finesse, but not too much finesse: Cumberland sausage, bowls of buttery mash, sticky toffee pudding or even just a rack of toast with local jams. Somewhere like The Yan that’s open more than 20 hours per week and serves sweet things that appear to be made from scratch, not bought at the local Pioneer food store and thawed out. Somewhere the staff are jolly and not broken by 20 coaches of Beatrix Potter fans every day. “Are you going to ruin this place for us by talking about it?” my brother sighs midway through demolishing one of The Yan’s sharing boards of home-smoked thyme and garlic beef brisket. We’re sitting in a large, carefully restored outbuilding, near the open kitchen, watching chef Will Manley as he dishes up piles of fresh golden onion rings, mini baked potatoes stuffed with garlic butter, grilled corn on the cob, homemade coleslaw. “I’m going to have to tell readers,” I say. “It’s my duty,’ I add, as if I work for MI5, rather than write about tarte tatin with cinnamon whipped cream – available here – for a living. But it does hurt my heart to reveal these things; like whenever I speak of places such as Syke Farm Tea Room at Buttermere, The Drunken Duck at Barngates or Baba Ganoush in Kendal. These places are tiny and special, and all of the world wants to visit the Lakes. There’s a reason Rome has finally cracked and begun asking tourists to curb their enthusiasm. The Yan sits near Grasmere, where millions stop each year to buy gingerbread. It’s close to Helm Crag, which boasts a formation of rocks at the top that resembles (if you squint) a lion nurturing a lamb, or a woman playing a grand piano. This is very exciting the first time you see it as a Cumbrian child, and, although it perhaps fades with the 789th viewing, you never quite numb to the hulking majesty of this landscape. Broadrayne Farm sits above what would have been the flood plain of the valley. The name can be traced back to Norse language and translates as broad “rein” (long strip). The farm has bred some of the best Lakeland Herdwick sheep for miles, and these grey-faced beauties watch impassively as you park your car. The Yan is truly a family affair, with chef Will’s gloriously chipper wife, Jess, and her parents, Dave and Sally, all pitching in. I took my family for early dinner; that kind of 5pm meal you need when you are a mixed bag of diners. We ordered “hummus of the day” (yes, it is ever-changing), which was a well seasoned pea-and-mint affair that came with warm flatbreads. A very good black-pudding scotch egg with a runny yolk appeared on a pickled carrot salad. The Cumberland sausage sharing platter came with excellent creamy mash, braised cabbage and green beans. There was an excellent veggie option of sweet potato with goat’s cheese and pearl barley wrapped in shortcrust, served on garlic green beans. This is thoughtful veggie cooking despite being centre stage on a living farm. We ordered a cookie stack for pudding, which came with a little jug of fresh chocolate milkshake. My mother was delighted to find an old-school summer pudding on the menu, a crimson riot of berries and soaked bread. After many misses and few hits, the thing I love most about taking my family out is the moment when everyone is eating heartily and shuts up. Dinner at Broadrayne was like that. They’re The Yan for me. Food 8/10Atmosphere 8/10Service 8/10 Broadrayne Farm, Grasmere, Cumbria, LA22 9RU, 015394 35055. Open seven days a week, breakfast 8.30am–10.30am, dinner 3pm–8.30pm. About £25 a head plus drinks and service. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.