Virgin Australia has announced it is cutting 750 corporate and head office jobs as part of a restructuring plan forced on the struggling airline that will also include the axing of uneconomic routes. After posting a “disappointing” full-year loss of $349.1m on Wednesday, Virgin said the “challenging trading environment” had been compounded by headwinds such as increased fuel prices and the weak Australian dollar. “There is no doubt that we are operating in a tough economic climate with high fuel, a low Australian dollar and subdued trading conditions,” Virgin Australia chief executive Paul Scurrah said. The group, which includes the budget carrier Tigerair, will undergo what Scurrah called a “rightsizing” program which would see 750 jobs cut from the total of around 10,000 employees. The majority of job losses look set to be borne by staff at the airline’s headquarters in Brisbane. Although revenue for the 12 months to 30 June rose 7.5% to $5.83bn as it added passengers, it was not enough to prevent the group recording its seventh consecutive year of losses. Movements in the fuel price and the Australian dollar cost the company $158.8m. Its international business went into the red by $58.3m after heavy investment in new routes to New Zealand and Hong Kong. It has not declared a final dividend. Shares in Virgin fell 3% on Wednesday to 16c, their lowest for 10 years. Biggest downer in a decade: Virgin Australia stocks hit their lowest levels in 10 years https://t.co/pu6wuBX4ai pic.twitter.com/KGKVi8U1Wd Scurrah said that demand had been “soft” in the second half of the financial year, a problem also noted by Qantas boss Alan Joyce when he posted weaker results last week in the face of a broad slowdown in consumer spending across Australia. “Market demand moderated in the second half of the financial year [to June],” Scurrah said on Wednesday, “impacted by the timing of the Easter holiday period and the federal election, which saw both the corporate and leisure travel sections soften.” Demand had continued to be weak in July, he said. “Decisions which have a direct impact on people’s livelihoods are never made lightly, and I regret the need to reduce the size of our workforce so quickly,” Scurrah said. “However, today’s financial results tell us loud and clear that we need to reduce costs.” The airline’s restucturing, which aims to save $75m a year, includes a shakeup of the top executive team involving the departure of the chief financial officer, chief operations officer and chief commercial officer. The boss of Tigerair, Merren McArthur, will also leave the company as her role will disappear under the changes. The airline’s three distinct parts – Virgin Australia, Virgin Australia Regional Airlines and Tigerair – will have their operations merged under the restructure, although the brands will survive. Scurrah said he had been reviewing the group’s “overly complex” structure since taking over as chief executive in March and hoped that the streamlined management team would deliver “better financial outcomes for the group”. The airline was still “in the process of a detailed review” of its fleet and network and it was likely that underperforming routes would be axed. “The group intends to further reduce flying across elements of its short-haul international and domestic network to meet demand and maximise route profitability,” the airline said. Adrian Schofield, an editor at Aviation Week, said Virgin was experiencing the negative effects of a downturn in passenger demand that had also caused problems for Qantas and Air New Zealand. “There are indications that the industry is seeing a downturn and Virgin has run into that,” he said. “Aviation is really cyclical so it’s important to look at the industry as a whole and we’re definitely seeing signs of weakness.”