You won’t find anything contemporary in Juan de Mayoralgo’s Porto home-turned-guesthouse. The pieces in his handsome townhouse are full of memories, including family hand-me-downs such as a bedroom cupboard once used to store potatoes, and a faded floral two-seater sofa, both of which belonged to his grandparents. “I can remember playing on the floor beside the sofa as a boy, eye-level with its fringed trim,” he says. The townhouse is narrow and deep – as wide as a single room and a corridor, and extending back the depth of four rooms. Steps from the front door and a huge, almost double-height entrance lead to a raised ground floor, with a bedroom, a reception room that has been turned into a bathroom, a dining room and kitchen. A wooden staircase winds up the house. Just to the left of the front door are a library-cum-sitting room, small bedroom and bathroom – De Mayoralgo’s private quarters, to which he retreats when guests are staying. On the first floor and second floors are more bedrooms and bathrooms. Ten years ago, De Mayoralgo moved to Portugal with his then partner. He worked in interior design in Lisbon for seven years before deciding to do something completely different. “There is a Spanish phrase, liarse la manta a la cabeza – wrap a blanket around your head – which means cover your eyes and just go for it. That’s what I did,” he says. He moved to Porto and rented a larger house than he needed, in an area of the city called Bonfim, which translates as “the good end”. “It’s calmer than the touristy streets downtown and there are still traditional cafes where you can get simple but very good food,” he says. He now makes a living by renting three bedrooms to paying guests for parts of the year. His home may be filled with heirlooms, but his local finds – from shapely mid-century chairs to side tables – come with their own stories, too. For example, the rosewood dining chairs are prototypes from the same Portuguese maker, each back carved slightly differently. Buying vintage pieces is so much more rewarding than buying new, he says: “You get a sense of the person who made them.” The house is filled with artworks and pots of oversized plants – single stems of sculptural tree philodendron and Monstera deliciosa are on display in science lab flasks. “Those, too, are the legacy of my mother and my grandmother,” he says. “Growing up in Spain, we’d get fresh flowers from the market every Friday.” De Mayoralgo rents his home long-term from the grandson of the master builder who originally constructed a row of six townhouses in this street in the 1930s. He sold off the others to members of Porto’s growing bourgeoisie, but kept this one. “It has beautiful green tiles on the facade, marble lining the hallway, cast iron radiators and plasterwork that is just slightly more ornate than usual,” De Mayoralgo says. “He definitely kept the best for himself.” The plumbing and wiring needed an overhaul, but the basic structure of the house was sound. De Mayoralgo decided to install two new bathrooms; he came up with the idea of setting them inside plasterboard cubes, so they function as a room within a room. “I didn’t want to change the architecture – this way, all the fixtures, lighting and tiling are self-contained. They don’t impinge on the original features.” The kitchen, however, remains untouched in all its 1920s glory. It features prettily domestic tiling and a large marble sink set slightly low down for modern, taller occupants: “I have to stoop a little to wash up,” he says. He often recommends the city’s markets, museums and vintage shops to guests who are interested. But one suspects that it’s the sense of family history in the house that keeps them coming. A collection of handprinted menus hangs in the hall, dating from the 1940s. “They were all collected by my grandparents, starting with their wedding dinner and progressing to my mother’s first communion,” he says. “The food and the wines conjure up the era.” In a similar way, that is what De Mayoralgo’s house does, too. “I’m not casual about what I buy. I take time to think about my compositions in all the rooms, but I am very sentimental.” • myhomeinporto.com