After the men’s World Cup a couple of weeks ago, Liam Plunkett talked about the emotional comedown he felt after such a high. I totally get where he is coming from, writing this after our massive Women’s Ashes win. We have invested so much energy into coming here to England and performing at our best and we really have. I’ve found myself pondering “now what?”. While there is a bit of a risk associated with this period, we are lucky to have such a hyper-competitive group under our coach Motty, who is more competitive again if that is possible. Our next assignment is in the West Indies, which won’t have anywhere near the attention this series has had, but that’s the test of a true professional, so we are totally up for that. Of course, then comes the T20 World Cup on home soil. To defend our title would be significant no matter where the tournament was being held, but to try and do so at the MCG – where there a goal has been set to sell out all 100,000 tickets for the final on International Women’s Day – really is next level. Who knows, that may not happen. But even if we ‘fail’ and 70,000 come along, that’s 70,000 more people than five years ago. It’s humbling to be part of such an exciting era when thinking of it in those terms. Seeing the shots back home of landmarks lit up in green and gold when we won the Women’s Ashes was such a thrill as well. We know times are changing with almost every passing week. To be able to deliver on that promise and dominate against our biggest rival is a brilliant feeling. In saying that, I am surprised with the final scoreline of 12-4 on points. In the end, we were disappointed not to go undefeated by winning our final T20, but overall, we did not expect the gap between the sides to be as pronounced as it was in some of those games. We have gone on this journey as professionals in the national team alongside England over the last five years and it has been a constant push and pull between the sides since, until this series. Tammy Beaumont, England’s opening bat and a teammate of mine from the Adelaide Strikers, said that we seem to have a production-line of 20-year-olds ready to dominate. She’s right, we do. And I get her frustration – it’s how we saw New South Wales in state cricket. But in recent seasons, our professional system at state level has given us such a deep talent pool to nurture in a way that England haven’t as yet. We have probably done them a favour in a way because the ECB are now going to do the same for their domestic game. With the trip coming to an end, I’ve been thinking back to what I will remember from the last seven weeks. Certainly, on the field, those early wins to set up the series win, which let us get in the huddle to sing the song in Essex, are memories that won’t fade. Cricket won’t be here forever and I know to treasure every one of those celebrations we have in our uniforms. Off the field, our party was relatively tame back at the hotel bar – even though we did kick on pretty late there. We stayed together with our family and partners, who were able to be with us in the second half of the trip per the agreement with the Australian Cricketers Association and Cricket Australia. That has made a big difference, also bringing us into line with the men. But best of all, as always, was the sanctuary of the team bus. Our tour song last year when we won the World T20 in the Caribbean was sung but Cher and this time around the anthem we came back to over and again was Anastacia’s Left Outside Alone. We loved belting that out. The back seat, where I always sit, is meant to hold six people. When we had finished the job in the park, we squeezed every player in there for a rendition of You’re the Voice by John Farnham. It doesn’t come much more Australian than that! We leave here a very happy team.