This is a long shot, but did you by any chance rent Titanic on VHS around September 1998? Yes? Was it from a branch of Blockbuster somewhere in suburban north Kent? Yes? Amazing! We have so much in common. Because I spent several weeks of that summer folding and packing the display cases for those videotapes, and shoving them in the back of a lorry. Just to walk you through the process, I would start with the flattened display case (Kate and Leo facing upwards), pop it on the cardboard housing, fold-fold, big Sellotape, flip, big Sellotape, shove it in the lorry. It actually wasn’t unlike burying someone at sea. In exchange for this task I was paid more than £4 an hour – a princely sum in pre-minimum wage Britain, especially for a teenager with a chronic CD habit. There were however two major drawbacks. First, the paper cuts. Or should I say, cardboard cuts – the cousin of paper cuts that burned like a bee sting. To this day I can’t look at Kate or Leo’s face without experiencing the dull smart of an old wound. The second, and main, drawback was the boredom. And not just the boredom, but how to deal with it in a way that didn’t land you in trouble. There we were, a bunch of schoolmates earning a bit of summer cash, but just over there were the full-timers, the warehouse alphas who would still be there when we disappeared in September. We couldn’t exactly muck about or moan. It was a matter of respect. Plus, we played football against them at lunchtimes, so it was a matter of fear, too. Still, the tedium was real. While the warehouse alphas yanked levers on heavy machinery and bezzed about on forklifts, all we could do was fold. In hindsight, it was a lesson not just in patience, but resourcefulness. We would find ways to get up to teenage japes, often involving those industrial glue-guns where the glue is near boiling point. We’d invent games on the sly. We had conversations – I know, young men actually talking – for hours on end. Half of it was on the level of “How much to lick a can of Coke off the floor?”, but at least we were talking. I remember having one conversation about how much we would pay to get someone killed, when an ex-convict who had joined us for the week came down the line and gave us an actual quote. So as you can see, we made the best of the situation, which is a serious life skill if ever there was one. But all of the above relied on being paired with, or near, your schoolmates on the production line. If you were shunted down the other end for the week, and you and your fellow folder did not click, then it was just you and the cardboard. This is another level of boredom entirely. We’re talking the existential stuff here. But even then – unexpected benefits. You could do a lot of mental filing on those more isolated shifts. I had quite a lot to get through, too. In the months running up to that summer I’d done my A-levels, passed my driving test, got my first girlfriend and lost a parent. My world was both opening up and shutting down. Having seemingly endless time to process what the hell was happening wasn’t all bad. On some occasions I remember slipping into a kind of zen state. Not so much mindfulness as gormlessness. Whatever you call it, I’d come out of those shifts more calm than when I went in. To this day I put a great value on finding time to do absolutely nothing. I didn’t know it at the time, but I think we can call my first paid role a job that left its mark in more ways than one. • Paul Fleckney is a Guardian subeditor and writer