Free-agent quarterback Colin Kaepernick should be employed by an NFL team, US president Donald Trump told reporters outside of the White House on Friday. “Only if he’s good enough,” Trump said. “If he’s good enough. ... And I think if he was good enough, I know the owners, I know (New England Patriots owner) Bob Kraft, I know so many of the owners. If he’s good enough, they’d sign him. So if he’s good enough – I know these people – they would sign him in a heartbeat. They will do anything they can to win games. “So I’d like to see it. Frankly, I’d love to see Kaepernick come in, if he’s good enough. But I don’t want to see him come in because somebody thinks it’s a good PR move. If he’s good enough, he will be in.” Kaepernick, who hasn’t played in the NFL since Week 17 of the 2016 season, posted a video to his social media accounts on Wednesday saying that he’s “still ready” to compete. The 31-year-old Kaepernick shared a corresponding video in which he says he’s been “denied” work for 889 days. He shows off a football-ready physique and appears to be closer to his playing weight – listed by his former team, the San Francisco 49ers, at 230lbs – than he was in the middle of last season. Kaepernick opted out of his contract following the 2016 season in a bid for a better deal, however he remains a free agent. In February, he settled a collusion grievance with the NFL. Kaepernick filed his grievance in October 2017, alleging collusion by NFL owners to keep him out of the league. Kaepernick’s decision to kneel during the national anthem in protest of police brutality and racial injustice created controversy throughout the country in 2016. While compiling a 28-30 record as the 49ers starting quarterback from 2012-16, Kaepernick led them to a Super Bowl XLVII appearance after the 2012 season. A person close to Kaepernick told the Associated Press on Friday: “Colin has always been prepared to compete at the highest level and is in the best shape of his life.” The person spoke anonymously because of the confidential nature of discussions with teams. The Philadelphia Eagles lost backup Nate Sudfeld to a broken left wrist suffered Thursday night, raising speculation the team would be in the market for an experienced quarterback. Sudfeld was scheduled for surgery, but coach Doug Pederson said it’s not a season-ending injury and the team was content with No 3 quarterback Cody Kessler and rookie Clayton Thorson. However, Eagles starting quarterback Carson Wentz has sustained season-ending injuries each of the past two seasons. Nick Foles led Philadelphia to four playoff wins in two years and was 2018 Super Bowl MVP, but signed an $88 million, four-year deal with Jacksonville in free agency. Sudfeld has thrown 25 passes in the NFL. Kessler is 2-10 as a starter in three seasons with Cleveland and Jacksonville. The Ravens considered signing Kaepernick in the summer of 2017 when starting quarterback Joe Flacco was dealing with a back injury that would keep him out for the entire preseason. Owner Steve Bisciotti said he consulted with fans and the team ultimately passed. Kaepernick met with Seattle a couple of years ago, but Seahawks coach Pete Carroll said he should be a starter in the league and the team only wanted a backup for Russell Wilson. Former 49ers coach Jim Harbaugh said he has told teams who’ve asked him about Kaepernick that he’s a “great competitor” and he’ll “have a great career and be a great quarterback, win championships”.