‘They called my girlfriend a white supremacist,” says Skin indignantly, over the noisy chatter of a pub in east London, leaning towards me on a creaky old leather sofa and recalling a recent incident where her partner was called out online. “I think the woke kids go too far. They call my girlfriend a white supremacist? I mean what is that? I mean, how dare you? Do you know what a white supremacist is? Do you know what those people do? And you’re aligning my girlfriend and me with these people?” Right from the start, our interview, which is taking place on a muggy summer evening, has been touched by Skin’s mantra: “Everything is political.” As the frontwoman of rock band Skunk Anansie, the 52-year-old is a queer black icon, known for such consciously emotive anthems as Weak and Hedonism, not to mention her fashion sense. She has been called radical, but these days seems to be treading slightly new terrain in the era of “wokeness”. Her band, currently on a European tour, formed in 1994, sandwiched by the politics of John Major and the relative banality of Britpop – worlds away from the discourse happening today. “There was a conversation about multiculturalism,” she says. “That was what we called diversity, back in the day. I like to say that a lot of the discussions now are standing on our shoulders. Because we started that shit.” Today you’ll see Skunk Anansie on throwback playlists with Blur, Sleeper and the Verve, but in the 1990s they blazed a distinct trail. Their name spoke to their different races, skunks being black and white. Their first single, Little Baby Swastikkka, was a throbbing, piercing rumination on the corrupting influence of fascist, racist ideologies. But although she still feels a deep responsibility to get off the fence and fight against fascism, homophobia and sexism (“The more artists that do that, the better”), our interview keeps returning to the topic of political division. “We’re making it too black and white,” she says. “Because the world is not black and white. I have some views that I think are quite conservative. But I would say mainly my views are leftwing.” What would be an example? “Oh, I don’t know. Umm. You know, I’m not into smoking weed, for instance. Because of my family’s experience.” The gist is that Skin – like others I have met of her generation – is frustrated by what she sees as intellectualised leftwing distractions getting in the way of the serious business of fighting the extreme right. “Trump has told four black women to go back to their countries,” she says, firmly. (Actually, the women are all ethnic minorities, not all black, but you get her point.) “That to me is one of the original racist sins. When you tell someone to go back to where they came from. The fact that that is being said by an American president? It normalises it.” Of Boris Johnson she says: “We didn’t vote for him. We should be having a general election.” The band’s anniversary LP – 25LIVE@25 – came out earlier this year, marking their quarter of a century in the music industry, but Skin says everything is still fresh. “It feels like an original rock band. There’s a chemistry about bands that means you can stay childlike and stupid for ever.” Consisting of Martin “Ace” Kent on guitar, Richard “Cass” Lewis on bass and Mark Richardson on drums, the quartet keep each other on their toes – and take the piss out of each other in a “very English” way. Though they did separate for eight years in the 00s, partially due to alcohol and drug problems, friendship drew them back. If I'm really honest, I was way more irritated when Beyoncé said she was the first black woman [to headline Glastonbury] Even if it did end in a break-up, Skin’s memories from that first blast of fame are scintillating. She duetted with Pavarotti in front of the Dalai Lama, sang happy birthday to Nelson Mandela, and became the first black Brit to headline Glastonbury in 1999, something she had to remind the world about after Stormzy’s vaunted performance this year. “If I’m really honest,” she says, “I was way more irritated when Beyoncé said she was the first black woman. I really like Stormzy and I think he does a lot of good. I would never tear that guy down and I would never start a beef and take that moment away from him. But I had to stick up for myself.” That meant sending a tweet to the grime artist, correcting the mistake. “The guy has so much class. He DM’d me personally and it was a lovely message. We had a little conversation. We’re all proud of the fact he’s a black man, doing the black man things.” In terms of Skin’s own voyage with Skunk Anansie, it was their maiden tour of the US that contained some of the oddest occurrences. They sound a bit like episodes of Louis Theroux’s Weird Weekends. Skin, in her blunt, affecting way calls it “lunacy”. One time, they showed up to perform only to find that their set had been cancelled due to an anti-fascist demonstration. “They said, ‘Well, you have a song called Little Baby Swastikkka right?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ He goes, ‘And you’re a skinhead right?’ It’s like, ‘Yeah.’ ‘And the name of the band is Skunk Anazi?’ I was like ‘NOOOO, it’s Skunk Anansie!’” At one US diner, people 'were praying for us: "Please God, look after the heathens on the other table" Another time, at a US diner, they noticed the people at the table next to them had started praying. “We suddenly realised that they were praying for us. They were like, ‘Please God, look after the heathens on the other table. May they find God and may they find the word. So, of course, we acted up.” Towards the end of the tour, having been caught with weed at the US border after a stopover in Canada, Skunk’s whole crew got sent back to the UK. “We had to get a new crew in America. They were the proper typical kind of American crew: horrible and greasy and slimy.” The singer, born Deborah Anne Dyer, lived on military bases – her dad worked in the Royal Air Force – before moving to Brixton as a young girl, just around the corner from her grandad. “In those days, Brixton was a black place,” she says with a hint of nostalgia. “It was one of the places that white people wouldn’t go to. There was always a transient level of people. But Brixton is, underneath it all, a black community. And that’s what I grew up in really.” Her family moved from Jamaica to the UK as part of the Windrush generation, and Skin feels their connection to music is innate. “Everyone in my family can sing. They can all sing. They just didn’t work on it, so they ain’t got great voices. But if they’d worked on it, like I did, they would have been good. I was the one who had the drive and ambition to do music and to be successful.” Her voice is often singled out as one of the best in rock. She sings, and articulates in general, from a pure-sounding place. Husky would never be the right word. It’s high and precise with plenty of vibrato. Skin’s first real exposure to music was through the shebeens her grandad would throw – however, the last time she labelled his parties as such in an interview, she got in trouble with her mum. “It was a shebeen. But for the purposes of this conversation, let’s pretend it wasn’t and it was a residential club.” She pauses. “I don’t care what they say, it was a shebeen.” Bob Marley was one of the most lauded visitors, and the events set her down the path she is on now. The punters would listen to ska and Prince Buster, dancing and drinking the night away. “My earliest memories were sitting at the top of the steps and watching everybody, watching all those people dance and hang out. And then at a certain point, we had to go to bed.” Leaving the party was always a wrench so, later in life, she figured out a way to stay, at least symbolically. Although she studied interior design and computing at university, she quickly came to know the parameters of what would constitute personal success. “Now, I think fame is a big part of people wanting to be successful. And it’s a barometer. But for me, being successful was just, ‘I wanna do that and I want to do that all day until I die, and not have to do anything else.’” For her mum, meanwhile, Skin wasn’t successful until she appeared, lithe and glistening, on Top of the Pops in 1996. “That’s when my mum stopped moaning at me and said, ‘Oh, you’re doing all right! You’re on television.’” Skunk Anansie’s latest track, What You Do for Love, is their first original outing since 2016, and brings us back around to politics. Top of the Pops no longer exists, but Skin believes rock is having a renaissance thanks to social media and that, especially in London, there is a bubbling lesbian, feminist scene. The track again speaks to the contradictions and divides we’re witnessing in society. “The fascists will say they love God,” she explains. “You use the word love but you’re doing really heinous things to a lot of people. And so that’s just where the idea for that song came from.” Despite her strong moral views, I wonder how it feels to no longer be at the radical forefront when it comes to perceptions of marginalised identities. “We write songs about all different kinds of things,” she says, rewrapping the pink patchwork jacket she’s wearing. “It’s just you have a black shaven-headed woman fronting and there are all the preconceived notions about that. In actual fact, I never really thought anything I did was radical at all.” • Skunk Anansie tour until 7 September.