4-3-3 Alisson Could have done better with goal but made amends with a strong save from Sterling. 6 Trent Alex-Arnold Caught out a couple of times in the first half and struggled to cope with threat of Sterling. 5 Virgil van Dijk Not quite at his dominant best yet still a formidable barrier. Unlucky not to score and great assist. 8 Joe Gomez Lost ball to Sterling early on and was slow to react to City’s quick free-kick for the opening goal. 4 Andrew Robertson Guilty of ball-watching for goal. Found it hard to get forward with his customary freedom. 6 Jordan Henderson A typically committed display but spent most of the match trying to chase down City’s midfield. 6 Georginio Wijnaldum Ran himself into the ground, although too often came off second best. Had the vital miss in shootout. 6 Fabinho Brazilian was another who found it hard to have his usual effect on proceedings. Replaced by Keïta. 6 Divock Origi Largely anonymous in the first half, he improved slightly but never looked like scoring. 5 Roberto Firmino Superb control and early shot. He was Liverpool’s most threatening attacker until brought off. 7 Mohamed Salah Missed golden early chance and hit a post after brilliant skill. Slightly subdued until late chances. 7 Subs Matip for Alexander-Arnold, 67; Keïta for Fabinho 67; Shaqiri for Firmino 80; Lallana for Henderson 80; Oxlade-Chamberlain for Origi 80 4-3-3 Claudio Bravo Made some good saves to deny Liverpool victory late on and ended as the shootout hero. 7 Kyle Walker Pushed back after the break after dominant first half. Amazing goalline clearance at the death. 7 John Stones A couple of nervy moments in defence but the England man generally looked assured on the ball. 6 Nicolás Otamendi Always looks ready to make a mistake yet was not really troubled by Liverpool’s attack until their goal. 6 Oleksandr Zinchenko Stood up well to attacking threat of Salah and deadly accurate with his passing. 7 Rodri A solid presence. The Spaniard never looked flustered until his late error almost let in Salah. 8 Kevin De Bruyne Full of energy from the start but grew frustrated as Liverpool came back into the game.7 David Silva Delightful flick to set up Sterling’s goal and still oozes class. Ran out of steam slightly. 7 Bernardo Silva A constant menace all over the pitch, didn’t stop running in a brilliant performance. 9 Raheem Sterling Relieved to see shot trickle in for goal. A thorn in Liverpool’s side throughout but fluffed a one on one. 7 Leroy Sané Bright start but went off after 10 minutes with ankle injury following a clash with Alexander-Arnold. 6 Subs Jesus for Sané 10 – Brazilian’s pace caused trouble for Liverpool’s defenders when he came on. 7; Gündogan for D Silva, 60; Foden for De Bruyne 89