Paris Saint-Germain suffered an early first defeat of the new Ligue 1 campaign after Rennes came from behind to win 2-1 at Roazhon Park. Edinson Cavani had given the visitors the lead in the 36th minute when he capitalised on a stray pass in the penalty area from Rennes captain Damien Da Silva. However, the hosts were level just before half-time through a fine shot on the turn by M’Baye Niang. Romain Del Castillo headed the home side in front soon after the restart and they could have added another when Jeremy Morel’s volley came back off the post. Denis Bouanga struck late to salvage a point for St Étienne at home to newly-promoted Brest. The visitors, who made a good start with a draw at home to Toulouse last week, went ahead through defender Julien Faussurier in first-half injury-time. Atlético Madrid striker Álvaro Morata scored a goal and then missed a penalty as his side began their La Liga campaign with an eventful 1-0 win at home to Getafe on Sunday which saw both teams reduced to 10 men. Morata nodded home a cross from England defender Kieran Trippier in the 23rd minute and things got even better for Atlético when Getafe’s Jorge Molina was shown a straight red card for a studs-up challenge in the 38th. The home side’s numerical advantage only lasted four minutes though, as debutant left back Renan Lodi earned two yellow cards in the space of 60 seconds and followed Molina down the tunnel. Atlético’s João Félix thrilled the crowd with a superb run in the second half which led to him winning a penalty but Morata’s spot-kick was saved by David Soria. Elsewhere in Spain, Alavés edged to a 1-0 victory over Levante thanks to a Joselu strike. Sevilla beat Espanyol 2-0, while Real Betis were surprising beaten at home by Real Valladolid 2-1. In Germany, Julian Nagelsmann got his RB Leipzig managerial career off to a flying start as his side swept to a 4-0 win at Bundesliga new boys Union Berlin. Leipzig grabbed the opener on 18 minutes when Marcel Halstenberg curled home from the edge of the box. Marcel Sabitzer added Leipzig’s second in the 31st minute following a defensive blunder, and Timo Werner drove home a third two minutes before the interval. Christopher Nkunku scored Leipzig’s fourth and final goal in the 69th minute. Nagelsmann’s former side Hoffenheim were sunk by Martin Hinteregger’s early strike as Eintracht Frankfurt claimed a hard-fought 1-0 win. Hinteregger grabbed the only goal of the game after just 36 seconds when he volleyed home from a Filip Kostic cross.