Roy Hodgson is planning to utilise Wilfried Zaha against Everton in some capacity on Saturday despite admitting the Ivory Coast forward “is not jubilant” at the prospect of facing the club who tried to sign him. Repeated attempts to force his departure this summer eventually came to nothing on Thursday, with Marco Silva’s side failing to match Palace’s valuation of the 26-year-old. Having been sent home early on transfer deadline day after Hodgson admitted he had “beef” with the owners, Zaha trained with the rest of the Palace squad on Friday and the former England manager said he was expected to be available for selection. “I can’t say to you that he is delighted with the situation because it’s not the outcome he wanted. The outcome he wanted was to be sold and leave the club,” he said. “We did not want that. When I say we, I mean the coaching staff and the players. That was the last thing we wanted. We wanted him here with us. For me as a coach and the playing staff, we wanted the player rather than the money.” Hodgson celebrated his 72nd birthday on Friday and was handed another boost when Palace announced Luka Milivojevic has agreed a four-year contract extension. The Serbia midfielder has been a key performer since joining from Olympiakos in 2017 but had entered the last year of his deal. Palace won only five times at home last season and could hand Gary Cahill his debut in the absence of James Tomkins and Mamadou Sakho. Even so, their manager insisted he was happy with his squad despite spending just £6m on permanent arrivals Jordan Ayew and James McCarthy, with Victor Camarasa also joining on loan from Real Betis. “It is dangerous at the start of the season when everybody is excited to talk about targets because so much depends on injuries,” he said. “The most important thing for us to do in this transfer window was to try and bat off interest from other clubs in Wilf Zaha because there is no doubt that with him, with Tomkins and Sakho returning and with the additions, we should theoretically be stronger than we were last year. If we can be stronger there is no reason for us to have a lower total as our goal.”