Josh McGuire is not everyone’s cup of tea. He comes with spikes, like the grinning hound Muttley from Wacky Races. He’s chunky, ornery, a throwback to the olden days of the hard man when a “facial massage” was just a normal part of playing footy. Today, though, McGuire is sidelined, suspended for three weeks after his third facial massage (or eye gouge, depending on your sensibilities) was picked up by cameras and forced the NRL’s match review panel to dish out more than a fine. McGuire has since known the modern, electronic equivalent of a village mob; the online pile on by legions of “supporters”, united in vociferous condemnation. Today, a high-profile sports person’s deeds are broadcast on mainstream media, their characters assassinated on the internet. Everyone has an opinion, everyone has a phone, and everyone can use the phone to wield their opinions at the player, unadorned, unfiltered and, often, rank. And for young rugby league players in their 20s whose brains aren’t yet wired to put such venom into context, to compartmentalise this stuff into a mental box – or who simply haven’t yet decided to turn off their phone – it can be a highly anxious, angst-filled experience. Yet rugby league, like most things, has progressed. And while it appears that McGuire hasn’t completely evolved along with it, at least on the field, off it he’s seeing a counsellor to help cope with the noise. Where once a man’s peers, supporters, media and club may have seen it as a “cry for help”, and thus something weak to be distrusted and feared, today there has been barely a ripple. A flow-on effect for McGuire is that estimations of him have gone up. According to one NRL club official, many players are seeing mental health counsellors as they would physiotherapists. They’re using experts to rehab or just to “get ahead of stuff”. The NRL offers every player six free confidential sessions. Today the average young professional footballer is well-equipped to deal with abuse that comes with the territory. They’d want to be. According to his wife, Tanyssa, McGuire has received “death threat upon death threat, countless threats of the most unthinkable things”. She wrote on her Instagram page: “Mental health is constantly being spoken about within the NRL and yet what I am witnessing is the absolute bashing of a man who can only take so much before that thick skin starts to soften.” Turn off the phone? Or is it better to call it out? Roosters’ centre Latrell Mitchell was racially abused on his Instagram page by a person who said they hoped Mitchell broke his neck. Mitchell’s father Matthew – who came to Sydney as a young man to play rugby league and enjoyed effectively zero per cent of the support his son can access today – was in tears. Latrell Mitchell, though, in highlighting the racism and abuse has emerged stronger for it. He has called it out and risen above it. The vast majority of sports fans – like the vast majority of human beings – despise racism, bullying and vilification. Not everyone calls it out. While the NRL’s “Summer from Hell” so damaged the code that clubs which didn’t even have poorly-behaved players struggled to retain sponsors because their brands were tarnished by association, the players themselves – with Manly’s one-time bad-boy Joel Thompson, 30, at the vanguard – have reached, dare we say it, a level of enlightenment. The 20-something men who play rugby league seem to have reached the point where they’re comfortable talking with peers and professionals about their mental health. Like tattoos and tight pants, the new normal is that it’s cool to get help. As Thompson once wrote: “It’s just like any physical injury. You have to go treat it. Your mental health is just as important as your physical health and it’s important to get out there and take care of it and do the right things.” Being constantly pushed by punters online has forged solidarity among the playing group. Post-match handshakes are meetings of old mates. There are large groups who hold post-match prayers. Sam Thaiday’s tattoo reads: “One brother bleeds, all brothers bleed.” All players have copped degrees of abuse, be it online or over the parapets. The NRL and the Rugby League Players Association have great swathes of accessible information to help players be better people. And if McGuire, perhaps the most old school member of the fraternity, can seek help from a professional, not only can young players use him as a role model, but all young men. It’s well-documented that suicide is the leading killer of men aged between 15 and 44. Stories such as this always feature contacts for organisations if people are struggling. And if the NRL can hang a hat on one thing, it’s that McGuire may have encouraged one young man to think, if that tough mad bastard does it, why not me too? Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14;Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800;MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.orgorjo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international suicide helplines can be found atbefrienders.org