Brendan Rodgers believes James Maddison has all the attributes to fit seamlessly into Gareth Southgate’s England setup. Maddison is expected to be called up to the England squad for the Euro 2020 qualifiers against Bulgaria and Kosovo after making an impressive start to the season with Leicester, and Rodgers has no doubt the 22-year-old has the attitude as well as the ability to thrive. Rodgers highlighted how much extra work Maddison puts in on the training ground and also praised the midfielder, who was named in the England squad for the first time last October, for having the intelligence to play in a number of positions. The Leicester manager referred to Raheem Sterling, who he deployed in a variety of attacking roles during their time together at Liverpool, and said that although the two are totally different players Maddison is of a “similar ilk in terms of his view of the game”. On the subject of England and whether Maddison’s profile aligns with Southgate’s thinking, Rodgers said: “If you’re looking at talent, players who are hungry and coachable, he fits into that mould. England have a lot of very talented players. However, he is one that certainly Gareth will see that [work ethic and ability] in his game and how he has a real talent to succeed. “Many players say they want to be the best they can be but they are last into training and first away. So what they want to be isn’t matched by putting the effort in. He’s a guy that puts the effort in. Everyone talks about his set pieces but it does not come by accident. Every day he will spend extra time on them, the quality he has on his delivery is sensational. He has confidence as he puts the work in.” Rodgers explained how he has tried to take Maddison “out of the floaty position he has been labelled as – the No 10” and instead use him where he believes he can be more effective. “I think he’s flexible, that’s the beauty of him,” the manager said. “There are players who are multi-talented. I look at Raheem when I had him at Liverpool, we played him wide, in behind as a 10, both flanks. Pep Guardiola uses him in a number of positions: as a striker, wide either side, flexible. “James is a different type of player but is a similar ilk in terms of his view of the game. You put him in the team and then, depending on the structure of the team, you find the best position for him. Some guys can play only one role but he has the quality and the brain to play really well in a couple of positions.”