Well, t’is only right and proper that at this stage of proceedings we be left hanging. This was very much a holding episode, designed to let us draw breath after the shenanigans of last week. There’s a lot brewing, but not quite coming to the boil … The prospect of a newly sane Sir Evil George bent on revenge against Ross. (You didn’t really think he was going to give that up, did you?) The spectre of a wronged Tess who will do anything to get her own back on Demelza. The unresolved question of Valentine and who exactly is responsible for him. The unrequited love between Geoffrey Charles and Cecily. Plus Sam’s romance with the cute, flaxen-haired one who once had a gammy leg. (Or was it scurvy?) But no one apart from Demelza really cares about that. The only moments of light relief were provided, as ever, by Horace the pug, who has started to purr like a cat for some unknown reason. If I were Horace the pug, I, too, would purr in Caroline’s welcoming embrace. I enjoyed the glimpses of Sindy Doll’s house which is, like Sindy Doll herself, impossibly beautiful and deserves its own Instagram account. It’s worth giving a quick hat tip to Gabriella Wilde (as Caroline Enys, née Penvenen) who hasn’t had as much to do in this series, and yet manages to convey so much in her facial expressions. Naturally, Dr Enys and his bride are still very much in love, as evidenced by them addressing each other in the third person. But things are becoming strained as she grows tired of his devotion to his work. I thought from the start of this series that Ned was going to be a massive pain in the arse. And so it has come to pass. The business about the crown requiring Ross to make amends and become the James Bond of Nampara is finally rearing its head. And now there’s a storyline about Kitty and a concealed pregnancy. (Would they have used the word “miscarriage” in this era? Was it used in the original books? Never mind. Poldark is hardly the place to become exercised about historical inaccuracies.) In all the “Ned” scenes, I find myself wishing they would just go back to France and do some more prison-breaking – or go on location to Honduras for an episode. Tensions rose between Ross and Demelza as she struggled to look upon the face of Valentine, a constant reminder – for Sir Evil George and Demelza – that Elizabeth and Ross loved each other probably more than anyone has ever loved anyone in the history of the world. (Discuss.) There was a reminder here that Ross indirectly caused Elizabeth’s death by suggesting she had another child. Keen viewers will recall that there was a necessary confusion of dates with Valentine’s birth, designed to reassure Sir Evil George that he was the child’s father. Then, with the second pregnancy (which was definitely Sir Evil George’s child), Elizabeth had to pretend she was prone to going into premature labour. This was how the evil tincture came into play. I’m predicting that, at some point, it is going to come out that Dr Enys knew all about this (without sanctioning it). Let us not forget that Dr Enys is the man who knows too much. And he knows so much that he is able to treat mental health conditions using techniques that will not be invented for many decades to come. Off he went to the graveyard with Sir Evil George for some immersion therapy. Which appeared to work. “There is no fault in any of this. Loss. Yes. But no blame.” Oh, Dr Enys, you are the well of compassion! “Are you quite certain she died?” The later scene where Dr Enys reminded Sir Evil George that not all parents are blessed with living children was heartbreaking. Meanwhile, Morwenna caught up with her child born of violation. It didn’t seem like the best idea to be skulking in the bushes spying on him, but desperate times call for desperate measures. And here was Drake also spying on her. No good can come of that. And even less good can come of the Wheal Plenty rejects marching on Trenwith. I had a horrible sense of deja vu in these scenes. “There ’e is, the spineless worm. Let ’im come out and answer to us, if ’e dare.” Heaven forbid anyone might think Poldark deserves to draw to a close as it’s just repeating itself … I say that with tongue firmly in cheek as, of course, one of the great strengths of Poldark is its obsession with hubris: how blind we are to our own faults, how many times we repeat mistakes and how we foolishly repeat the same actions over and over while expecting different results. Which is, as Sir Evil George will tell you, the very definition of madness. Hardly a supporting actor (although everyone must be considered a supporting actor to Ross Poldark in this business), but let us raise a sterilised bowl of leeches to the majestic Jack Farthing as Sir Evil George. He has repeatedly shown his comedy chops over the last few series, bringing the wonderful tinge of villainy required to sustain the animosity between George and Ross. This animosity fuels the entire narrative, so his performance is essential to the success of Poldark. However, this series he has had to take on a difficult task: depicting mental illness in a situation where his portrayal could come across as hammy and ridiculous. But he has pulled it off, pulling our sympathies towards a character we detested. Although now it seems that he is cured and the real Sir Evil George is back with a vengeance. Bravo. • “Have you been in London?” “No. An odious place: Bristol.” Bad times for Bristolian viewers. • “Don’t ’e be givin’ me the squinny eye.” Tess gets into bed with the slave-owner for a glass of port and a purse of silver. Hopefully only metaphorically. • “But what of your complainants? What do they seek?” “Work. Means. Justice. Hope.” Ah, Ross, just like the rest of us. • “When I dragged you from that dog fight, could I have known that you’d be the saving grace of my life?” Never was a more romantic word spoken. A smile and a kiss over an apple pie is the most we can hope for. Truly the scything days of yore are gone and forgotten. Sir Evil George seeks revenge against Ross. Again. Ned gets even more heavily involved in revolution. And Drake takes a huge risk on Morwenna’s behalf. Only four episodes to go until it is no more, ’Darkers. Savour ye every moment!