New Zealand authorities are asking drivers to check their dashcam for footage of any hitchhikers near where the Australian surfer Sean McKinnon was killed in the middle of the night while his Canadian fiancee ran for her life. A man has faced court charged over the 33-year-old’s shooting murder at Raglan – a popular North Island surf spot – on Friday. McKinnon’s shattered family say they “don’t know how to begin to put life together without him”. He and his fiancee, Bianca Buckley, had been sleeping in their campervan about 2am on Friday when the accused gunman allegedly demanded the keys and shot McKinnon before driving off with his body inside. Buckley managed to run to a nearby farm for help before McKinnon’s body was discovered in the abandoned van about 80km away on Gordonton Road, near Hamilton. Police said on Sunday they were looking to speak to anyone who had seen hitchhikers near where the campervan was found on Friday. “As part of our ongoing inquiries, police are looking for anyone who may have seen any hitchhikers in the Gordonton-Whitikahu area during daylight hours on Friday,” Det Insp Graham Pitkethley said in a statement. “Particularly, if any motorists that travelled this route on Friday have dashcam footage, police would like to hear from you.” Police are also still looking for the gun used in the attack and are working to return McKinnon’s body to his family in accordance with their wishes. McKinnon’s 23-year-old alleged killer appeared in the Hamilton district court on Saturday charged with offences including murder, aggravated robbery and making threats to kill. The man, whose identity has been suppressed from publication, was remanded in custody after a public tip-off led to his arrest in the Waikato area on Friday night. Outside court, McKinnon’s sister, Emmeline, told reporters “we just don’t know even how to begin to put life together without him”. “The worst thing was telling my mother,” she added. She said her brother’s fiancee had been “amazingly resilient and strong”. “I cannot even begin to understand what she’s gone through. She’s a really strong young woman. We’re just really glad she’s alive.” Pitkethley said Buckley remained shocked and traumatised from her ordeal. “She is thankful that an arrest within a 24-hour period has occurred and we’re working with her and her family, and we’ll continue to be in touch with her around her welfare,” he said. Police are not looking for anyone else in relation to the attack. McKinnon grew up around Warrnambool in south-west Victoria. A friend, Julian Smith, said his mate loved to surf big waves along the Victorian coastline. “He was a lovable, knockabout Aussie guy, loved his surfing,” Smith told AAP. McKinnon’s alleged killer is expected back in court on 27 August.