Australian travellers are facing major delays after thousands of pro-democracy protesters descended on Hong Kong’s international airport, forcing authorities to shut it down on Monday. Operations resumed on Tuesday but further delays were expected. Qantas cancelled three flights to Australia on Monday night. Eleven outbound services due to leave on Tuesday were also cancelled: one out of Brisbane, seven out of Melbourne and three out of Sydney. Scott Morrison said Australians contemplating travel to Hong Kong should monitor the travel advice. He called for a peaceful resolution to the standoff. “My view is, one, to seek to de-escalate things – to encourage the chief executive of Hong Kong to be listening carefully to what people are saying in Hong Kong and work towards a peaceful and calm resolution of what is a very, very serious issue,” the prime minister told reporters on Tuesday. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said consular officials from the consulate general in Hong Kong and Macau were at the airport on Monday to help Australian tourists leave it safely. A video circulating online shows an Australian man stranded at the airport complaining about protesters. “You are angry because your flight is cancelled.” One stranded Australian tourist got into an argument with protesters at Hong Kong airport, saying they supported independence and that police should crack down harder. It didn’t go well for him. https://t.co/7TryMbHrEW pic.twitter.com/x7dIuNQ5ot Two Virgin Australia flights due to leave Australia on Monday night were also cancelled. Other Australian travellers stuck in Hong Kong described chaotic scenes. @cathaypacific Hi, I’m supposed to be flying on the 14th from London Gatwick to Sydney via Hong Kong (CX354/139) is this expected to be going as normal? I’m very concerned about getting home “Quite eye-opening to arrive from Paris into a sea of protests and find my onward flight to Sydney no longer existed,” one, Paul Dennett, tweeted on Monday. I’m all about Hong Kong locals fighting for democratic rights but I need to get home to Sydney mannnnnn Anyone planning to travel between Australia and Hong Kong has been urged to check with their airline. The Australian government’s Smartraveller website continued to warn people to exercise a high degree of caution while in Hong Kong. “Flash mob protests and random attacks on protesters have become less predictable and are expected to continue,” it warned. “Tourist and residential areas have been affected. There is a high risk of violent confrontation between protesters and police, or criminally linked individuals.”