Poor Frank Lampard. There he was on his flight to Istanbul, ready to settle down and plan his tactics for the Super Pot clash with Liverpool, when he heard tutting from the person behind him. It sounded like familiar tutting and he could feel his stomach tightening. He turned around and, sure enough, the seat was occupied by former football manager José Mourinho, who has made it his business to follow Lampard around in the style of the Harry Enfield character Mr You Don’t Wanna Do It Like That, there to question and correct every decision by Chelsea’s rookie coach, who could only sigh as his old boss leaned over and grabbed his tactical notes. “Oh no, you don’t wanna do it like that,” Mourinho said, crossing out the names of Kurt Zouma, Mason Mount and Tammy Abraham and replacing them with Ricardo Carvalho, Michael Essien and Didier Drogba. “You’ll want much more experience against the European champions.” Lampard looked at him quizzically. He reached for the paper, put Fikayo Tomori at centre-back and handed it back to his Portuguese chum. But Mourinho still wasn’t satisfied. “No, no, no!” he yelped. “I do not think you want to play a raw young defender against Mr Roberto Firmino, do you? What you want is Branislav Ivanovic.” Poor Lampard. On and on it went. By the time the flight was over Mourinho was asking whether it might be a good idea for him to take the team against Liverpool. After all he had been far from impressed with Chelsea’s naivety against Manchester United on Sunday and Liverpool showed what they can do to teams who give them space when they beat Norwich City 4-1 at Anfield last Friday. And he’s only trying to help. If only Lampard would listen. If only he’d step aside. If only he’d let José be manager again. Sigh. Ultimately there’s only one path Lampard can take to put a stop to all this: he’s going to have to send every youngster on loan, put 10 manly men behind the ball, refuse to let his full-backs cross the halfway line, turn the game into a sh1t on a stick and try to beat Jürgen Klopp’s side 1-0 on penalties. Because that’s how adults do football. “There is not one single part of me that wakes up and thinks ‘I want to be on the training field’” – Gary Neville on how his disastrous stint at Valencia was enough to turn him off management for ever. Join Jacob Steinberg at 8pm BST for red-hot minute-by-minute updates of Liverpool 3-0 Chelsea in the Super Pot final. “Whilst I didn’t worry for a second about Ivan Perisic’s ‘rippling abs’ or his advanced age, (Tuesday’s Fiver) I was rather concerned by the image from his medical that was still visible on the monitor. Hopefully the good doctors at FC Bayern can find him some cream for that” – Tony Crawford. “‘Football’s philosopher managers are here to stay’, argued Jacob Steinberg (Tuesday’s Still Want Mores). Do you mean the likes of the Frankfurt School’s own Frankie Lampard, who drops such existential pearls of wisdom as ‘You can lose finals; they’re very tough’? Ommm” – Mattias Lundberg. “It was very sad to see the Queen’s Celtic of Neil Lennon humiliatingly lose over two legs to a poor team in a qualifier to go out of Big Cup before it really starts for the second consecutive year … back in 2010. Plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose and all that” – Noble Francis. “Given all the recent chat about Golas and The Beautiful South, I’m assuming next week’s letter of the day prize will be a Smorgasbord of trainers and CDs? If not, can I suggest both the brand and the band need new PR representation?” – Daniel Kennedy. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day prize is … Tony Crawford of 50 Years of Shoot! We have more to give away, so get scribbling. Emiliano Sala and pilot David Ibbotson were probably poisoned by carbon monoxide fumes in their small plane that crashed in the Channel in January, investigators have found. 32 Bet’s Wayne Rooney’s Derby County have drawn the ire of the sports minister, Nigel Adams, who harrumphed that their granting of the No 32 shirt to the former England captain was “very crafty”. Mario Balotelli is set to return to Serie-Ah with Brescia, spurning the amorous advances of Flamengo in Brazil. Brescia are owned by Massimo Cellino. What could possibly go wrong? Sunderland have paid out more than £335,000 to Vélez Sarsfield to settle their claim over club legend Ricky Álvarez. Manchester City have been fined a whopping two pints of lager and a packet of crisps (£314,000) by Fifa suits for breaching regulations on the recruitment of youngsters, but, unlike Chelsea, have escaped transfer-knack. That £314,000 might come in handy at Bury, who have had another fixture suspended, against Gillingham on Saturday, due to the ongoing absolute state of their ownership and finances. Neil Lennon is not happy, fuming in fact, about the not entirely unpredictable manner of the Queen’s Celtic’s not entirely unpredictable Big Cup qualifying exit against European heavyweights FC Cluj. Elsewhere in Big Cup, Porto were also humbled and Ajax almost were, but squeaked through. And in the Rumbelows Cup, Nasty Leeds dashed The Class of 92’s Salford City’s oh-so-romantic hopes of an upset by scoring three goals, and AFC Wimbledon did a cheeky number on the EFL’s regulations about printing opponents’ names on programmes, by not printing a programme for their defeat by MK Dons on penalties. Elsewhere, Middlesbrough lost to Crewe on penalties, among other lukewarm shocks. The Joy of Six is back with a bang, or rather a deliciously curled free-kick, as Rob Smyth picks out half a dozen slices of outside-of-the-boot brilliance. Andy Brassell on the rebuilding job ahead of Bayern Munich after Uli Hoeness and Karl-Heinz Rummenigge go. Paul Wilson on Tottenham’s Christian Eriksen dilemma. This week’s Knowledge explains how an English team could play 94 teams in a season. It would involve, say, Manchester City getting relegated twice and winning Big Cup in successive seasons. A price worth paying? Lee Bullen is fast becoming Mr Sheffield Wednesday by doing a bang-up job as caretaker every time a manager is bundled (or legs it) through the door marked Do One. He gets his chat on with Ben Fisher here. Suzanne Wrack on the referee Stéphanie Rappart’s big moment as she prepares for tonight’s Super Pot final. And on that subject, here’s Andy Hunter on the challenge facing Frank Lampard’s Chelsea manager Frank Lampard against Liverpool in Istanbul. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!