The British car market declined for a fifth consecutive month to deliver the weakest July sales in seven years, as the industry struggles with Brexit uncertainty and the backlash against diesel. New car registrations fell by 4.1% to 157,198, the weakest sales in July since 2012, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said. The UK sector has been battered in the past year, with Brexit uncertainty putting off buyers and forcing carmakers to put in place contingency plans for repeated no-deal Brexit deadlines. The global industry has been hit by the slump in demand for diesel vehicles after emissions cheating scandals prompted bans of the fuel in some cities. Diesel sales slumped by 22% year-on-year, while petrol sales edged up. Demand for new cars fell among business and private buyers. Sales of cars to smaller firms, with fewer than 20 vehicles, slumped by more than a fifth year-on-year, continuing a precipitous 37.9% decline this year. The one bright spot was the continued acceleration in sales of battery electric vehicles, which do not emit carbon dioxide. In July, 2,271 electric cars were sold, compared with 880 sold in the same month last year. Despite the government’s claim that electric vehicles are the future of the industry, they represent only 1% of total car sales. The dominance of internal combustion engines is subsidised by about £9bn per year thanks to the government’s freeze on fuel duty, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Mike Hawes, the SMMT chief executive, said it was encouraging to see a strong increase in electric car sales amid a struggling broader market, but added that the government needed to spend on longer-term incentives and infrastructure to bolster sales. The industry has previously been heavily critical of the government’s inconsistent policy towards plug-in hybrid cars that combine an internal combustion engine with a battery that can be charged separately. In October it removed a £2,500 subsidy for the vehicles: sales of plug-in hybrids duly halved year-on-year in July.