If you can’t be optimistic in pre-season it’s time to hang up your hundred quid replica kit. That said, while recent spending has lifted the mood, there’s been scant evidence of any fix to our defensive inadequacies. In the absence of Unai imposing a definitive brand of football, I’m still fearful that the upshot will be the same as it ever was. Key men/weak links Despite the Kroenkes relaxing their grip on the purse strings to sign Pépé, we’re still lacking proven talent elsewhere, leaving us praying that the bevy of talented youngsters – Willock, Nelson, Smith Rowe, Medley, Nketiah, Saka, John-Jules, Burton – will fulfil their promise. We need to sign Kieran Tierney would be a result, but it’s the heart of our defence which requires most urgent attention. Mustafi getting the bird from our home crowd before this campaign has even started says it all. Headline maker Sadly it looks like the Mesut Özil saga is set to run and run. VAR: good or bad? To stop it becoming a constant distraction its use has to be strictly limited to resolving just “clear and obvious” errors. Nothing more. Predictions… We will finish: Third. Top four: 1. Liverpool; 2. Man City; 3. Arsenal; 4. Chelsea. Bottom three: 18. Brighton; 19. Aston Villa; 20. Sheffield United. First manager sacked: Ole Gunnar Solskjær. • Bernard Azulay GoonersDiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 We chose “Love don’t live here anymore” as the song to accompany Villa’s demise three years ago. Suddenly “Love is all around”. Season ticket sales are through the roof, the homegrown manager and captain have been deified and we’ve splashed the cash. It’s impossible not to be excited. Grealish is a top-six player, nobody will outrun McGinn and Mings is ballast. That said, the Spurs game will be a Premier League bow for eight of our likely XI, so talk of the top 10 is surely too bullish. 14th will do – safe by Easter. We certainly won’t “do a Fulham” – but even if we do, the Championship is bloody marvellous anyway. Key men/weak links Grealish won’t get kicked so much in the Premier League. Every Villa fan would love Jota to star given where he came from, but McGinn has hints of Souness (nails), Dalglish (vision, big arse) and Macari (good terrace song) and may really impress. We need to sign Wesley could go either way, so probably some striking cover. Headline maker The tabloids would love it if Terry slipped up but he’s been nothing but a positive since he joined. Wesley is a bit of a non-conformist apparently so that might be fun, and Jack will always be one who enjoys his and our success … and why not? Footballers are too boring these days. VAR: good or bad? It’s a joke. Human error is a (sometimes delicious) part of the game. I also like to get back to the pub within three hours of the kick-off. The pluses of “more right decisions” are far outweighed by the downsides of breaks in play and general “what’s going on?” periods. And how can you go nuts with the spectre of VAR looming over every goal? Predictions… We will finish: 14th. Top four: 1. Man City; 2. Liverpool; 3. Tottenham; 4. Chelsea. Bottom three: 18. Brighton; 19. Newcastle; 20. Norwich. First manager sacked: Ole Gunnar Solskjær. • Jonathan Pritchard Observer reader There’s more apprehension than usual. With the club funding a new training complex, the money for players has been a bit more restricted this summer. Mid-table would be a good season. Key men/weak links Wilson, Fraser and Brooks will be the players most talked about – the latter when he’s back from injury. It’ll be Fraser’s last season due to his contract running down. A few youngsters to watch: Lloyd Kelly at left-back and Sam Surridge up front, plus keepers Mark Travers and Aaron Ramsdale, if they aren’t loaned out. As for weaknesses: I’m still not convinced about Solanke, Begovic or Ibe. We need to sign A top keeper, perhaps Jack Butland, and another midfield option – Liverpool’s Harry Wilson would be ideal. But I’m pleased to have signed Philip Billing from Huddersfield – we’ve always lacked height. Headline maker You can pick any of our current back four, or keeper, to make a few talked-about blunders. VAR: good or bad? Bad. Who wants every goal double and triple checked before it’s given? Fans want to celebrate, not wait and hope. Predictions… We will finish: 12th. Top four: 1. Liverpool; 2. Man City; 3. Tottenham; 4. Arsenal. Bottom three: 18. Sheffield United; 19. Aston Villa; 20. Brighton. First manager sacked: Steve Bruce. • Peter Bell afcbchimes.blogspot.co.uk @cherrychimes It’s a case of fingers crossed. Much lies on the shoulders of Graham Potter after the heart-wrenchingly sad sacking of Chris Hughton. Potter will have to work his magic on what he inherited – who knows if he can do that? A lot of players need to step up (yes, you, Locadia, Jahanbakhsh, Andone) but maybe Potter is the man to lift them. Tony Bloom obviously thinks so, and that’s good enough for me. Key men/weak links A lot will be expected of our new £15m winger Leandro Trossard, especially after the (welcome) exit of hotheaded Anthony Knockaert. Elsewhere, young Aaron Connolly could break through, and if Dunk goes, new signing Adam Webster will need to settle in fast. No weak links – although… We need to sign A striker. Or are we going to be relying on Glenn Murray again? He’s 36 in September. Headline maker Hopefully Potter as the division’s most inspired managerial appointment. Our exciting, attacking play will be a joy to watch and give even Pep Guardiola food for thought, right? VAR: good or bad? It made Manchester City’s Champions League defeat by Spurs enormously entertaining for neutrals. But as the system is still based on an opinion, I don’t think it’s conclusive enough for all the fuss it causes. Predictions… We will finish: 10th. Top four: 1. Liverpool; 2. Man City; 3. Arsenal; 4. Tottenham. Bottom three: 18. Crystal Palace; 19. Norwich; 20. Aston Villa. First manager sacked: Ole Gunnar Solskjær. • Steph Fincham Observer reader I don’t think we’re going to trouble the top six but there are any number of reasons to be optimistic – more so given the second half of last season when not many teams bettered our points return. Key men/weak links Hopefully we’ll be defensively organised and so, as always, the attention turns towards the front. We will be needing Barnes, Wood, Rodriguez and Vydra to get those goals. Also watch out for Dwight McNeil, who broke through last season. Central midfielder Josh Benson has looked good in pre-season, too – there are high hopes for him. We’ve got cover for most positions now, and we’ve reached the point where we can just about put out two different teams. As always, it’s the unit that’s the strength at Burnley and I don’t see that changing. We need to sign The centre of midfield could do with strengthening, particularly given Steven Defour’s continuing injury problems. When he’s available he makes so much difference, but we can’t rely on his fitness. We need to add a quality, mobile operator to the squad. Headline maker Barnes is supposed to be the dressing room clown, but, as always, Sean Dyche will dominate our news. VAR: good or bad? Ask me in a year. I have real concerns: I’m not convinced it’ll be beneficial. It’s hard to see how it won’t generate its own controversy. Predictions… We will finish: 12th. Top four: 1. Man City; 2. Liverpool; 3. Tottenham; 4. Arsenal. Bottom three: 18. Brighton; 19. Norwich; 20. Sheffield United. First manager sacked: Daniel Farke. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com @UTCdotcom I’m pretty optimistic – probably more so than I should be given the transfer ban. We have an inexperienced manager – but that manager is Frank Lampard, and that’s what makes me optimistic. A man who understands today’s players, understands the club’s hierarchy and who played under some of the best managers in the world. Key men/weak links All eyes on Pulisic, given that he’s meant to be Hazard’s replacement. No pressure then … Players often need at least a season to get used to the speed and physicality of the Premier League, so I’m not going to expect too much this season. We need to sign The damn ban means we’re stuck with the issues we’ve had for a few years: up front, at left- and right-back, and at centre-back, too. Headline maker I can see Jody Morris being to Lampard what Rui Faria was to Mourinho – not that Mourinho couldn’t get into trouble on his own. I think Jody may initiate a Chelsea Fight Club. But, of course, I can’t say anymore, because the first rule of Fight Club is… VAR: good or bad? I can just about put up with technology to confirm whether the ball has crossed the line. Everything else – no – just no. I want to howl at a referee error, scream at the injustice of it all, become apoplectic with rage at a missed red card tackle; I want to laugh my ass off when we score an offside goal against Spurs, grin like a lunatic when the wrong Manchester United player gets sent off, and guffaw when the ref overlooks a Liverpool stonewall penalty (as if…). The point is our game is passionate not despite the flaws but because of the flaws. VAR is nonsense. Predictions… We will finish: 3rd. Top four: 1. Man City; 2. Tottenham; 3. Chelsea; 4. Liverpool. Bottom three: 18. Newcastle; 19. Brighton; 20. Aston Villa. First manager sacked: Steve Bruce. • Trizia Fiorellino ChelseaSupportersGroup.net We’ve sold our second-best player, and have, so far, only signed a third-choice keeper. Oh, and made Jordan Ayew’s move from Swansea permanent. Add to that the pressure on wages, the noise surrounding the American part-owners looking to sell their stake, and daily speculation on Zaha, and Palace fans are a little nervous right now. Key men/weak links We simply must keep Zaha. The return of Sakho and Tomkins to fitness will be welcome, and Max Meyer has had a strong pre-season. Lack of numbers mean we may have to use youngsters such as Sam Woods and Luke Dreher on the bench. We need to sign Our striking options – yet again – look weak. We still need a quality forward but I doubt we have the funds. And the lack of right- and left-backs is a real concern. Headline maker The ownership of the club will take up some column inches. VAR: good or bad? Palace will undoubtedly win a lot more penalties this season – Luka Milivojevic will surely be top scorer. But the fear is the potential lack of joy after scoring, with the threat of a VAR appeal lurking in the background ready to cancel it out. Predictions… We will finish: 14th. Top four: 1. Man City; 2. Liverpool; 3. Tottenham; 4. Chelsea. Bottom three: 18. Brighton; 19. Newcastle; 20. Norwich. First manager sacked: Steve Bruce. • Chris Waters PalaceTrust.org.uk @Clapham_Grand Realistically, the fight is to break into a regular European spot – but above all else, Evertonians want silverware: 24 years without it is far too long, so the cups have to be a priority for Marco Silva. Recovering from the disastrous Koeman/Allardyce eras, Brands and Silva have their work cut out to reduce the squad while improving quality – but signing Digne, Gomes, Gbamin, Bernard and Delph suggests they are achieving that. Key men/weak links Besides those new arrivals, Richarlison is key. Without a proven scorer – the mythical Everton No 9 – he’ll be under great pressure to improve on his 13 goals last year. Also keep an eye on Lewis Gibson, the central defender signed from Newcastle three years ago for £6m. He’s had injuries but has just had a very good pre-season. We need to sign In order: a forward – Moise Kean sounds close; right-back cover for Coleman and central defence cover, given Zouma appears to be staying at Chelsea. Headline maker Farhad Moshiri’s impromptu appearances with his friend Jim White are good ground for unscripted comments. Jordan Pickford can have his moments, too. VAR: good or bad? Totally against it. There are already too many long stoppages disrupting the flow of the game. Besides which, to err is to be human. Predictions… We will finish: 4th – if we sign a proven scorer. If not, 6th to 8th. Top four: 1. Man City; 2. Spurs; 3. Arsenal; 4. Everton. Bottom three: 18. Liverpool; 19. Sheffield United; 20. Brighton. First manager sacked: Roy Hodgson. • The esk theesk.org @theesk Given the level of ambition we’ve shown in the window, it’s hard to feel anything but optimism right now. Lots of pundits are tipping us as outsiders for the top six – it’s a big ask but it’s definitely not impossible. In truth though, I’d rather see us lift the FA Cup. Key men/weak links A lot was made of the Harry Maguire transfer saga, but him leaving for United hasn’t made my heart sink like the fleeting rumours of Juventus eyeing up Ricardo Pereira. Pereira was without doubt our best player last season – a stalwart in defence and attack. As for weaknesses: we’re still light up front. Vardy has been carrying the burden alone. We need to sign A winger. Albrighton’s unrelenting effort levels can produce only so much, and the likes of Gray and Ghezzal have routinely failed to deliver. Wilfried Zaha would be a major boost – but I won’t hold my breath. Headline maker It’s Jamie Vardy’s world, and we’re all just living in it VAR: good or bad? On paper it’s a good concept, but it hasn’t had a positive impact in other tournaments. I’m feeling quite pessimistic about it, frankly. Predictions… We will finish: 7th. Top four: 1. Man City; 2. Liverpool; 3. Tottenham; 4. Arsenal. Bottom three: 18. Burnley; 19. Brighton; 20. Sheffield United. First manager sacked: Manuel Pellegrini. • Chris Whiting clippings.me/chriswhiting @ChrisRWhiting We’ll do well. Hopefully one place higher than last time. The fans are still basking in the glory of Madrid, and rightly so: we have to be optimistic, don’t we? We haven’t had the best pre-season but that counts for nothing when the real games kick in. And quite a few of our players only returned to training a week or so ago. Key men/weak links The main men last season will be the main men again. It helps to have the best keeper, central defender, left-back and strike force in Europe. And Rhian Brewster is the obvious contender to break through after a year out injured. It’ll be interesting to see how he’s managed. We need to sign Some back-up, particularly if players such as Mignolet and Lovren go. We’d also benefit from a creative midfielder. Keïta showed in glimpses what he can do but injury stumped his progress. Eriksen would lift the pressure. And another striker could help. Origi is a deity but reinforcement from the bench is never a bad thing. Headline maker The boss, though maybe not so much for profanities this time around. Until we win the league, that is. VAR: good or bad? Hate it. It’s bad for obvious reasons: killing spontaneity, halting play, making the game about business full stop. Yes, the right decision prevails, but it does mostly anyway. Predictions…We will finish: 1st. Top four: 1. Liverpool; 2. Man City; 3. Tottenham; 4. Arsenal. Bottom three: 18. Brighton; 19. Sheffield United; 20. Norwich. First manager sacked: Dean Smith. • Steph Jones Observer reader • Part 2: Manchester City to Wolves