To see Prince William last week, traipsing across the tarmac to catch a budget flight to Aberdeen, was to watch what some said was an excellent PR move. The papers say William is feuding with his brother, and his brother just got pilloried for taking four private jets in 11 days, and then William and the kids head to Balmoral on Flybe. Genius. Are the royal siblings really going full Game of Thrones, or is this just a tabloid fantasy? Who can say? But still, I can relate, because if things aren’t going well, a sibling relationship can be just about the worst thing going. Because siblings are dicks, and you are tied to those dicks for your entire life. If you don’t like your spouse, you can get divorced. If you don’t like your parents, at least they will eventually age out and die. But your sibling was born within a few years of you. They are probably not going anywhere. My brother is three years younger than me. If I live to 80, I will have known him for 77 years. When things are going well, that’s a comfort. But when things aren’t – and they quite often aren’t – then it’s rough. This might explain the public fighting between Julia Sawalha (aka Saffy in Absolutely Fabulous) and her sister, EastEnders actor Nadia Sawalha. During an episode of ITV’s Loose Women last week, Nadia said: “My younger sister and I have always had a really stormy relationship. She’s totally amazing [but we] have always had periods of time in our lives where we don’t speak”, causing Julia to tweet: “So tired of #nadiasawalha talking about our ‘stormy’ relationship which she created … You have destroyed our family so don’t sit on TV with your fake tears to gain sympathy & attention.” Take it from an expert, this isn’t how to go about confronting a sibling. By dragging their issues out into public, the Sawalha sisters have ensured that this is all they will be asked about for decades. Just like that, their relationship has become their one defining feature. It’s the worst possible outcome for everyone. I’m not one to talk – I literally wrote a book about my brother – but I think I’ve finally cracked the right way to deal with a sibling dip. You just have to wait it out. When we hit a rocky patch, it’s always for the exact same reason: I get grumpy and he gets belligerent. It reaches a head, we swing apart for a while and then we eventually reunite. It happens every couple of years, like clockwork. But we have come to understand that this is just how it works, so now we let it happen. I love my brother and we are in this for the long haul. Sometimes the healthiest thing to do with this sort of relationship is to learn to weather the bad bits with grace. But William and Harry? If we take the tabloids’ word for it, the budget flight last week was a manoeuvre that plays right to their deepest desires. Harry wants to look like a celebrity, William wants to look like a man of the people. This is the dance they are destined to perform forever.Next, Harry will be spotted accepting a Fortnum & Mason delivery, so William will subsequently be papped in a Tesco Express. Then Harry will retaliate by shopping at Waitrose, forcing William to be photographed staggering out of an Aldi with a discount power tool under his arm or struggling to unlock a trolley with a pound coin. It’s petty, but they are brothers and this is how it works.