Steve Bruce has pledged to do everything possible to lead Newcastle to domestic cup glory but his plans are being tested early by injuries and the need to protect players before hosting Watford in the Premier League on Saturday. Newcastle entertain Leicester City in the Carabao Cup on Wednesday night not having won a major trophy since the European Fairs Cup in 1969. Moreover they are without a domestic prize since 1955 but, under Mike Ashley’s ownership, cups have been low priority with a series of managers apparently happy to accept early exits. Shortly after succeeding Rafael Benítez, who was not prepared to risk Premier League survival in exchange for cup runs, Bruce vowed to change this mindset but he seems certain to make wholesale changes against Brendan Rodgers’ side. Six players – Allan Saint-Maximin, Christian Atsu, Miguel Almirón, Joelinton, Jamaal Lascelles and Fabian Schär – returned from the restorative 1-0 win at Tottenham Hotspur on Sunday nursing injuries and appear unlikely to be risked. With a hamstring injury likely to force Saint-Maximin out for a minimum of three weeks and Andy Carroll and Dwight Gayle sidelined, Bruce’s attacking options have contracted and he is expected to start Yoshinori Muto as Newcastle’s lone forward. Sean Longstaff, who is regaining full fitness following a serious knee injury, is likely to be rested, leaving room for his younger brother Matty in midfield. “It’s a squad game now,” Bruce said. “We have 25 players and I still expect to pick a team which is hopefully going to take us through.” Even so, Bruce will be making more changes than he would have liked in the wake of a win which defused the considerable criticism – and mounting pressure – surrounding his opening two Premier League defeats against Arsenal and Norwich. “The criticism is something we’ll always have to live with here but the players knew they didn’t play well enough against Norwich. But on any given day that can happen to you,” Bruce said. “The response was the most important thing and it was terrific. By beating Tottenham away they’ve set the standard we now need to maintain.” Joelinton, scorer of the winning goal at Spurs, has a groin injury and is among those ranked extremely doubtful for Leicester’s visit, as is Almirón. “It’s different with a muscle injury,” Bruce said. “If you’re carrying a knock or bruise, then of course you might be able to be patched up . But if you have a soft tissue injury like big Joe or Almirón, with his ankle, then it’s always a problem. Those are the ones you worry about.” The manager was particularly disappointed by the recurrence of hamstring trouble sustained by the former Nice winger Saint-Maximin. “We’ll let the bleed settle on his hamstring and scan it again,” Bruce said. “It’s been a frustrating start for him but, if it’s not too serious, we’d be looking at three weeks out.”