School officials in southern California are reportedly reopening an investigation into a group of high school students seen giving Nazi salutes on video, after more racist video and images surfaced on Wednesday. The initial video obtained by the Daily Beast shows members of the boys’ water polo team at Pacifica high school in Orange County in an empty room that administrative officials say was later used for an athletic banquet. The video, which according to the Daily Beast was taken before an awards ceremony late last year, showed about 10 boys in a stiff-arm salute while singing a Nazi marching song. The Garden Grove Unified school district said in a statement that the footage had been recorded last November but that administrators hadn’t become aware of the video until March. It said the students had been unsupervised at the time. The district said on Monday that administrators had “addressed the situation with all students and families involved”, but it failed to specify what disciplinary actions it took. The Los Angeles Times reported that since Monday, officials said, several other videos showing students engaged in hate speech have surfaced. Those videos will be examined as part of the district’s reopened investigation. The new videos appear to show students giving Nazi salutes, marching with a German flag and wrapping themselves in a Confederate flag, according to a reports from ABC News and the Daily Beast. It was not immediately clear whether they included the same students shown in the previous video. “This new information, which continues to unfold minute by minute, demands a school-wide call to action to address the severity of these claims to ensure hate speech never happens again,” said Steve Osborne, the Pacifica high school principal. “Hate speech will not be tolerated. This is not who we are.” Osborne apologized during a school board meeting on Tuesday for failing to address the original video with the entire school immediately after it was brought to administrators’ attention. He added that the school had been in communication with the Anti-Defamation League and the Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles in an effort to expand anti-bias education for students. It’s not the first time a high school in Orange County has dealt with its students engaged in Nazi portrayals. Students from schools in the Newport-Mesa Unified school district faced suspension in an unrelated incident in March after photos emerged of them playing beer pong with cups set up in swastika formation.