Over the course of the weekend I can only tell if either of my younger two sons is home by counting the shoes in the hall - if they are not out, they are in their rooms, staring at screens. On Sunday evening, however, they are suspiciously present, hovering between the kitchen and the sitting room, aware that any minute my wife is likely to come downstairs, look into the fridge and order a takeaway. They want to be ready. My wife is woken from a nap by a text from the oldest one, sitting in his flat. It says, “What time are you eating?” By the time she comes downstairs he has already arrived, and is sitting with the other two watching television, and waiting. “Look at them,” my wife says. “Lined up like gannets.” “When are we ordering?” the youngest says. “What time is it?” my wife says. “I’m so hungry,” the oldest says. “I haven’t eaten today.” “Let’s do this,” the middle one says. Though never planned in advance, the Sunday night takeaway is enough of a fixture that our previous order never needs adjusting – someone just has to click on it. Forty minutes later, the food arrives. My wife’s rules about the Sunday night takeaway allow it to be eaten in front of the television, provided that everybody agrees to watch Antiques Roadshow and no one speaks. The first part of the rule is usually grudgingly obeyed; the second part never is. We talk all the way through it. “That’s hideous,” says my wife of an art deco vase. “It’ll be worth a fortune.” “Five to eight hundred pounds,” the middle one says. He is correct. “Oh, thank you,” says the man whose vase it is. “He says thank you,” I say. “What he means is: it’s not enough.” “Quiet,” my wife says. “Their expressions always give it away,” I say. “They needed it to be more.” A set of antique glasses is spread across a table. The appointed expert says that one of them is worthless. “It’s the one nearest his hand,” the middle one says. He is correct. “Maybe you should become an antiques dealer,” my wife says. “What, despite knowing absolutely nothing about antiques?” he says. The expert says that the rest of the glasses are together worth £3,000. “Oh my goodness,” says the woman who owns the glasses. “Look at her face,” I say. “It’s not enough.” “Are you going to do this all the way through?” my wife says. “He always does,” the oldest one says. “Fast-forward through the medals,” my wife says. “I don’t care about medals.” During the fast-forwarding the conversation turns to items around the room. “Are those worth anything?” the middle one says, pointing to two small figures on the mantelpiece. “I’m not telling you,” my wife says. “When you die I want the picture of the horse by the stairs,” the oldest one says. “You’ll have to go round putting stickers on everything,” my wife says. “Like my sister and I were made to do by my mother.” “I’ll have that,” the middle one says, pointing to a small painting above the sofa. “Good eye,” my wife says. “I’m not playing this game,” the youngest one says. “Aww, he loves his mummy,” my wife says. “I want the rabbit in the kitchen,” I say. My wife looks over at me. “I’m afraid you’re going to die before me, sweetie,” she says. I nod sadly. “We’ll see,” I say. “Do we have any stickers?” the oldest one says. “I really do not want to play this game,” the youngest one says. On the telly a woman is standing to one side of a painting she owns, a view of Venice. “Six to eight hundred,” I say. “Six to eight thousand, more like,” the middle one says. He is correct. “Whoa,” I say. “Oh, lovely!” says the woman with the painting. “In other words: it’s not enough,” I say. “Is there more food?” the oldest one says. “It’s never enough,” I say.