Sol Campbell had waited a long time for a chance in management but his debut job in charge of Macclesfield Town has ended after only eight months. The former England, Tottenham and Arsenal defender’s departure was “by mutual consent” and comes with the League Two club facing a winding-up order after embroilment in a financial crisis which has sometimes seen payment of Campbell’s salary delayed. Although there were reportedly tensions between the manager and Macclesfield’s owners, Amar and Bashar Alkadhi, the 44-year-old performed a minor miracle to keep the team in the Football League last season and, outwardly at least, the split was cordial. “This has been conducted in the most amicable of ways and there has been total transparency between the club and Sol,” said Macclesfield in a statement on Thursday. “Sol’s passion, drive and football knowledge will always be remembered at the Moss Rose with fondness. “We would like to thank Sol for his time at the club – not only in helping us retain our League Two status but also for installing a winning mentality.” In turn, Campbell, the holder of 73 England caps, said: “Macclesfield Town provided me with a fantastic learning curve which I am truly grateful for.” That term seems somewhat euphemistic when viewed in the context of the financial problems which resulted in not only the manager but his assistant, Hermann Hreidarsson, and their players repeatedly being kept waiting for their wages. Such delays recently prompted six former Macclesfield players to initiate a winding-up order against the club with HM Revenue and Customs having now taken over that petition before a High Court hearing on September 11. Campbell, this season’s first managerial casualty, assumed control last November, kicking off with a narrow Checkatrade Trophy defeat at Newcastle United at a time when his new team were seven points adrift at the foot of League Two. Under his management the club collected 31 points from 25 League games, securing survival with a 1-1 draw at home to Cambridge United on last season’s final day. Before signing up for the challenge in Cheshire, Campbell – whose now former side have made a strong start to the new season – described the lack of BAME managers in English football as a “sad indictment” of the game, explaining he had made numerous unsuccessful job applications before eventually joining Macclesfield. His departure leaves five BAME managers in England’s top four divisions: Nuno Espírito Santo (Wolves), Sabri Lamouchi (Nottingham Forest), Darren Moore (Doncaster), Keith Curle (Northampton) and Dino Maamria (Stevenage). “I’m slightly shocked about Sol going,” said Curle. “I thought he did a fantastic job. Considering the obstacles facing him, to keep Macclesfield up was remarkable.”