The European Tour is to step up efforts to eradicate slow play by increasing penalties from the start of next season. With the pace of play in the spotlight following the antics of Bryson DeChambeau, the move means attention will also fall on what steps the PGA Tour in the US will take. Starting from late November, a player on the European Tour will incur a one-shot penalty for two bad times in a single round. Fines for those who are consistently needing to be timed – known as being “on the clock” – will be increased significantly. A player who is timed 15 times next season will be fined £26,000 compared with £9,000 now. The tour will also reduce field sizes where possible, a factor considered integral to the pace of play. Its members will be offered educational sessions as part of the detailed, four-point action plan. The tour insists this is not a reaction to DeChambeau’s slow play during the Northern Trust event in New Jersey. The world No 9’s glacial approach led to him being criticised by fellow players, including Brooks Koepka and Justin Thomas, while the PGA Tour promised to review pace-of-play guidelines. In Europe, the tour was approached by players on its tournament committee in May with a view to putting a plan in place for next season. Rory McIlroy, a European Tour member who spends the majority of his time on the PGA Tour, supports stroke penalties as the best way to counter slow play. A European Tour statement said: “When players are out of position and either being monitored or timed, a one-shot penalty will be incurred after two bad times – currently a player would be ‘monitored’ and if he breaches the time allowance (50 seconds for first to play, 40 seconds for second or third to play) he will then be ‘officially timed’ and would then have to breach twice more before being given a one-shot penalty. Players will, however, have the option to request one time extension per round, giving an additional 40 seconds to hit a shot on this request.” Referees will be told to be proactive in targeting known slow players with regards being in position to play. Keith Pelley, the chief executive of the European Tour, said: “We are already at the forefront of pace of play management in the professional game, but after being mandated by our tournament committee to be even firmer in dealing with this issue, the time was right to take these additional steps. “I believe the plan we are implementing for the 2020 season will bring about meaningful change that will make golf even more enjoyable for the players and our fans, whether they are at the course in person or watching on television.” A statement from the tour added: “All players will now be required to pass an interactive rules test as part of their conditions of membership, while new members will be allocated a dedicated referee to educate them on pace of play policies at the start of their European Tour career.” A trial of technology dedicated to pace of play will be undertaken at the BMW PGA Championship at Wentworth on 18-22 September. Larger gaps between start times in the third and fourth rounds of tournaments will be implemented.