It would be quicker, probably, to come up with a list of male artists who did not depend on a woman to facilitate their genius, than a list of those who did. Think of Tolstoy wife’s copying out War and Peace eight times and raising their 13 children while Leo failed to lift a finger. Or Milton demanding everything of his three daughters, to compensate for his blindness. Or Brecht, calling in literary and domestic favours from a rolling cast of female devotees. Now there is another pairing to add to the list. The new BBC/FX series Fosse/Verdon dramatises the toxic marriage and thrilling creative partnership that spanned five decades between the still famous choreographer and film-maker Bob Fosse (Sam Rockwell) and Broadway star and fellow choreographer Gwen Verdon (Michelle Williams), whose contribution to their groundbreaking work was not fully recognised in her lifetime, and whose reputation outside the world of musical theatre has since faded. She was an extraordinary dancer whose star was in the ascendant when she met and married Fosse. Together they worked on such influential masterpieces as Cabaret and Chicago, but Verdon’s dancing career faltered after she had their daughter, and she shored up her serially unfaithful husband as he became increasingly unstable and addicted to pills. Their story plays out over eight very oddly structured hours. Overall, it’s a countdown to Fosse’s death: the opening episode begins with a title card that reads “Hollywood – 19 years left”, as Fosse faces his failure to translate his mammoth Broadway hit Sweet Charity to the screen. But we move back and forth so quickly, in and out of real and imagined scenes and across so many timelines and locations that any sense of that narrative arc, or concomitant dread, sorrow or suspense, is dissipated. The same is true in microcosm, as we repeatedly cut away from events before they resolve. An early scene emblematic of Fosse’s endless adultery, which begins with Verdon knocking on his door after he has failed to get rid of his latest mistress as promised, is split and referenced so many times that it becomes redundant. It makes the story impressionistic at best, hopelessly muddled at worst. Because we don’t see the evolution of their relationship, but only fragments of different stages of it, it is hard to see what kept drawing Verdon back to Fosse, or how much better their work was together than separately. Perhaps this is the result of a deliberate attempt to mirror the unknowability of creative chemistry – but surely the goal should be to demonstrate its existence, even if you can’t anatomise it. The few glimpses we do get of why the couple worked so well together, however, are worth the price of admission alone. Rockwell and Williams’ chemistry is undeniable, and every ounce of work they’ve put into the dance sequences (especially in Williams’ case) is up there on screen. They move and banter deliciously, while even in the earliest stages letting you see how the seeds of bitterness will be sown. Within a few scenes they will remind you of Kenneth Tynan’s description of his marriage to Elaine Dundy – “each with its teeth sunk deep in the other’s neck and reluctant to break the clinch for fear of bleeding to death” – though in Fosse/Verdon’s case it would have been both a romantic and creative exsanguination. On top of the structural confusion, the series seems undecided about its point of view. In its dutiful recording of Fosse’s many flaws, it clearly knows it is a product of the #MeToo era, but it stops short of truly fleshing out Verdon as a character, or fully celebrating her talent and contribution to Fosse’s enduring status. The brief flashbacks to her first, forcible marriage to an abusive man, and her decision to leave the resulting baby with her parents to pursue her career in New York, do not do justice even to this one aspect of her life. If it weren’t for Williams’ astonishing, virtuoso performance – humane, fragile, funny, she sweeps all mesmerisingly before her – it would be perilously close to the kind of exculpatory “price of genius” story we have all seen about famous men a million times before.