Whisper it but Arsenal have completed a transfer window more or less to their satisfaction. Nicolas Pépé and Kieran Tierney are signings of the right age and profile who should provide incision from the flanks while David Luiz’s arrival is a curveball but, after Laurent Koscielny’s unsavoury departure, makes sense from a leadership perspective. If Dani Ceballos settles they have a potential star on their hands and Alex Iwobi’s departure means the books have been balanced. Nick Ames Major ins: Nicolas Pépé Lille £72m; William Saliba St‑Étienne £27m; Kieran Tierney Celtic £25m David Luiz Chelsea £8m; Gabriel Martinelli Ituano £6m; Dani Ceballos Real Madrid loan. Major outs: Krystian Bielik Derby £7.5m; Laurent Koscielny Bordeaux £4.6m; David Ospina Napoli £3.5m; William Saliba St-Étienne loan; Carl Jenkinson Nottm Forest undiscl; Danny Welbeck Watford, free; Alex Iwobi Everton £35m. For the pessimist, Villa’s £146m spend on 13 new signings might summon memories of the trolley dash Fulham embarked upon last year. But Dean Smith has done enough to earn some trust and a more positive slant is that Villa have set themselves up for a return to where they believe they belong, among the division’s established teams. Wesley Moraes, Trezeguet and Jota should enliven their attack while Douglas Luiz looks a very smart addition. NA Major ins: Tyrone Mings Bournemouth, £26.5m; Wesley Moraes Club Brugge, £22m; Douglas Luiz Manchester City, £15m; Matt Targett Southampton, £14m; Ezri Konsa Brentford, £12m; Marvelous Nakamba Club Brugge, £11m; Björn Engels Reims, £9m; Trezeguet Kasimpasa, £8.8m; Tom Heaton Burnley, £8m; Anwar El Ghazi Lille, £8m; Frédéric Guilbert Caen, £5m; Jota Birmingham, £4m; Kortney Hause Wolves, £3m. Major outs: Glenn Whelan released; Ritchie De Laet released; Alan Hutton released; Mile Jedinak released; Micah Richards released. It has been a satisfying summer for Bournemouth, with Eddie Howe improving his squad with the arrivals of Philip Billing and Harry Wilson, on a season’s loan, the most eye-catching. But tying down Callum Wilson to a four-year contract was arguably Bournemouth’s best piece of business, with Nathan Ake and Ryan Fraser also sticking around. Injuries to David Brooks, Lloyd Kelly and Dan Gosling have dampened enthusiasm but they look ready to build on last season’s 14th place. Ben Fisher Major ins: Philip Billing Huddersfield, £15m; Lloyd Kelly Bristol City, £13m; Arnaut Danjuma Club Brugge, £13m; Jack Stacey Luton, £4m; Harry Wilson Liverpool, loan. Major outs: Tyrone Mings Aston Villa, £26.5m; Lys Mousset Sheffield United, £10m; Harry Arter Fulham, loan. Graham Potter’s task at Brighton has been considerably eased by a flurry of signings across the past week. The arrival of Neal Maupay, Aaron Mooy and Adam Webster from Brentford, Huddersfield and Bristol City respectively, strengthens the spine of a team who had gone stale under Chris Hughton. Coupled with Leandro Trossard, who has shown glimpses of class in pre-season, Potter has plenty of ammunition, including Alireza Jahanbakhsh and Jürgen Locadia, who have so far underwhelmed on the south coast. BF Major ins: Neal Maupay Brentford, £20m; Adam Webster Bristol City, £20m; Leandro Trossard Genk, £15m; Matt Clarke Portsmouth, £5m; Taylor Richards Manchester City, £2.5m; Romaric Yapi Paris St-Germain, undisclosed; Aaron Mooy Huddersfield, loan. Major outs: Markus Suttner Fortuna Düsseldorf, £2m; Matt Clarke Derby, loan; Anthony Knockaert Fulham, loan; Ben White Leeds, loan; Alexis MacAllister Boca Juniors, loan. Losing Tom Heaton for £8m to Aston Villa was a blow for Sean Dyche, even with the England goalkeeper in the final year of his contract at Turf Moor, but if the aim of any transfer window is to finish with a stronger squad then Burnley can be satisfied. The deadline day arrival of Danny Drinkwater from Chelsea brought yet more Premier League experience following Jay Rodriguez’s return to his boyhood club and the signing of Erik Pieters from Stoke. A solid summer. Andy Hunter Major ins: Jay Rodriguez West Brom, £10m; Bailey Peacock-Farrell Leeds, £3m; Erik Pieters Stoke, £1.5m; Joel Senior Curzon Ashton, undiscl.;Ryan Cooney Bury, loan; Danny Drinkwater Chelsea, loan; Adam Phillips free. Major outs: Tom Heaton Aston Villa, £8m; Peter Crouch released; Stephen Ward released; Anders Lindegaard released. While Mateo Kovacic and Christian Pulisic arrived early, Chelsea had flown under the radar until the late drama of David Luiz’s £8m move to Arsenal. The club’s transfer embargo has forced Frank Lampard to turn to the academy to refresh his squad – he has not been able to spend the funds generated by Eden Hazard’s move to Real Madrid – and the focus has been on outgoings, with Danny Drinkwater loaned to Burnley on deadline day. Davide Zappacosta and Tiémoué Bakayoko could also depart before the European transfer windows shut later this month. Jacob Steinberg Major ins: Mateo Kovacic Real Madrid, £40.2m; Christian Pulisic Borussia Dortmund, £58m. Major outs: Eden Hazard Real Madrid, £88.5m; Ola Aina Torino, £8.8m; David Luiz Arsenal, £8m;Tomas Kalas Bristol City, £8m; Kasey Palmer Bristol City, £3.5m; Ethan Ampadu RB Leipzig, loan; Lewis Baker Fortuna Düsseldorf, loan Jake Clarke-Salter Birmingham, loan; Danny Drinkwater Burnley, loan; Gary Cahill released. With only £6m spent on players after the £45m sale of Aaron Wan-Bissaka, the news that Wilfried Zaha is staying at Selhurst Park was crucial for Palace’s chances this season. But with Zaha having made no secret of his desire to move on, reintegrating the forward back into the squad could be tricky for Roy Hodgson but Palace will hope Zaha can return to the form that helped them survive relegation with ease last season. The pressure is on Christian Benteke to deliver goals in the last year of his contract. Ed Aarons Ins: Jordan Ayew Swansea, £3m; James McCarthy Everton, £3m; Gary Cahill Chelsea, free; Victor Camarasa Real Betis, loan;Stephen Henderson free. Outs: Aaron Wan-Bissaka Manchester United, £45m; Julian Speroni released; Bakary Sako released; Jason Puncheon released; Alexander Sørloth Trabzonspor, loan; Pape Souaré released. A productive, well-planned window came to something of a haphazard end with attention switched late to Alex Iwobi after the thwarted pursuit of Wilfried Zaha and the priority of a new central defender going unresolved. Other key areas were addressed by signing players with title-winning experience in Spain, Italy and England. The damaging departure of Idrissa Gueye was covered swiftly and over 20 players were removed off a previously soaring wage bill. AH Major ins: Moise Kean Juventus, £29m; Jean-Philippe Gbamin Mainz, £22.5m; André Gomes Barcelona, £22m; Fabian Delph Man City, £8.5m; Djibril Sidibé Monaco, loan; Alex Iwobi Arsenal, £35m. Major outs: Idrissa Gueye PSG, £29m; Ademola Lookman RB Leipzig, £22.5m; Nikola Vlasic CSKA Moscow, £12m; James McCarthy Crystal Palace, £3m; Ashley Williams released; Jonjoe Kenny Schalke, loan; Sandro Ramírez Real Valladolid, loan. Mo Besic Sheffield Utd, loan. Leicester got a good fee for Harry Maguire but the deal did not leave them enough time to buy a replacement so there are question marks in central defence, where Jonny Evans will need to stay fit and either Caglar Soyuncu or Filip Benkovic will have to step up. Elsewhere, they have recruited well. Securing Youri Tielemans on a permanent transfer was a coup, his compatriot Dennis Praet could contribute more goals from midfield and Ayoze Pérez is a shrewd addition to the attack. Paul Doyle Major ins: Youri Tielemans Monaco, £40m; Ayoze Pérez Newcastle, £30m; Dennis Praet Sampdoria, £18m; James Justin Luton, £8m; Mitchell Clark Aston Villa, free; Vontae Daley-Campbell Arsenal, undiscl; George Hirst Leuven, undiscl; Ali Reghba Bohemians, undiscl. Major outs: Harry Maguire Man Utd, £80m; Shinji Okazaki Málaga, free; Danny Simpson released. Jürgen Klopp always said this window would be quiet for Liverpool, with the club having invested heavily in signings last year and lucrative contract extensions subsequently, but just how quiet was a surprise given their position of strength as European champions. The only senior addition was the goalkeeper Adrián on a free transfer as a replacement for Simon Mignolet, while Sepp van den Berg, 17 and Harvey Elliott, 16, were acquired for the future. AH Major ins: Sepp van den Berg Zwolle, £1.3m; Harvey Elliott Fulham, undisclosed; Adrián free Major outs: Danny Ings Southampton, £18m; Simon Mignolet Club Brugge, £6.4m; Rafael Camacho Sporting, £5m; Daniel Sturridge free; Alberto Moreno Villarreal, free; Sheyi Ojo Rangers, loan; Marko Grujic Hertha Berlin, loan; Harry Wilson Bournemouth, loan. Pep Guardiola lamented that he “could not afford” Harry Maguire after the Leicester centre-back joined city rivals United but the Manchester City manager has reasons to be pleased with this summer window. Rodri looks like an excellent signing and will allow Fernandinho to have a breather (or play in defence) every now and then, while City look to have had the better out of the João Cancelo-Danilo swap deal despite paying Juve £30m as part of the arrangement. Marcus Christenson Major ins: Rodri Atlético Madrid, £62.6m; João Cancelo Juventus, £60m; Angeliño PSV, £5.3m, Pedro Porro Girona, undiscl. Major outs: Danilo Juventus, £32.3m; Douglas Luiz Aston Villa, £15m; Fabian Delph Everton, £8.5m; Manu García Sporting Gijón, £3.6m; Taylor Richards Brighton, £2.5m; Thierry Ambrose Metz, £2.3m; Pablo Marí Flamengo, £1.5m; Patrick Roberts Norwich, loan. At some points during the summer it threatened to turn into quite a positive window for United and Ole Gunnar Solskjær but in the end there was a sense of deflation. True, Harry Maguire has joined for £80m and Aaron Wan-Bissaka for £45m but the midfield needed more than Daniel James and the squad is now light up front with Romelu Lukaku leaving. United were interested in signing Paulo Dybala but that proved too expensive – but the main question is: why leave it so late? It’s another window Ed Woodward has not come out of well. MC Major ins: Harry Maguire Leicester, £80m; Aaron Wan‑Bissaka Crystal Palace, £45m; Daniel James Swansea, £15m. Major outs: Romelu Lukaku Inter, £70m; Ander Herrera PSG, free; Antonio Valencia LDU Quito, free. Newcastle’s refusal to sell Sean Longstaff – one of England’s finest young midfielders – to Manchester United arguably represents their best business decision this window. If investing around £60m on Joelinton and Allan Saint-Maximin seems a gamble from the new manager Steve Bruce at least they bring much needed pace. Meanwhile Andy Carroll – when fit – will add a new atttacking dimension to a squad who have been well reinforced in both full-back positions. Louise Taylor Major ins: Joelinton Hoffenheim £40m; Allan Saint‑Maximin Nice £16.5m; Emil Krafth Amiens £5m; Kyle Scott Chelsea free; Jake Turner Bolton free; Jetro Willems Eintracht Frankfurt loan; Andy Carroll free. Major outs: Ayoze Pérez Leicester £30m; Joselu Alavés £2.5m; Dan Barlaser Rotherham loan; Mohamed Diamé released; Liam Gibson Grimsby loan; Freddie Woodman Swansea loan. Norwich’s best business was securing a series of young (and not so young) talents to new contracts. Second best was probably the signing of the defensive midfielder Ibrahim Amadou on loan from Sevilla, the one position where a starting XI option was desperately needed. Cover at goalkeeper, right-back and centre-forward has also come in, with the winger Patrick Roberts a wild-card loan deal from Manchester City. Paul MacInnes Major ins Sam Byram West Ham, £750k; Aidan Fitzpatrick Patrick Thistle, £350k; Patrick Roberts Manchester City, loan; Daniel Adshead Rochdale, undiscl;Josip Drmic Borussia Mönchengladbach, free; Archie Mair Abderden, undiscl; Rob Nizet Anderlecht, undiscl; Rocky Bushiri Oostende, undiscl; Ralf Fährmann Schalke, loan; Charlie Gilmour Arsenal, free; Ibrahim Amadou Sevilla, loan. Major outs Matt Jarvis released; Ivo Pinto Dinamo Zagreb, free; Steven Naismith released; Adam Phillips Burnley, free. The Blades will be delighted with their work over a summer in which they broke their transfer record four times in as many weeks. Luke Freeman was the first, swiftly followed by Callum Robinson, Lys Mousset and finally £18m Oli McBurnie. That means they have strengthened exactly where the side needed it – in attacking areas. A deadline day move for Everton’s Mo Besic adds a bit of snarl in midfield when required. John Ashdown Major ins: Oli McBurnie Swansea, £18m; Lys Mousset Bournemouth, £10m; Callum Robinson Preston, £8m; Luke Freeman QPR, 5m; Ben Osborn Nottm Forest £3.5m; Phil Jagielka Everton, free; Ravel Morrison free; Michael Verrips Mechelen, free; Dean Henderson Manchester United, loan; Mo Besic Everton, loan. Major outs: Conor Washington Hearts, free; Martin Cranie Luton, free; Ched Evans Fleetwood, undiscl; Rhys Norrington-Davies Rochdale, free; Mark Duffy Stoke loan. Southampton needed to clear the dead wood this summer but doing so has proved easier said than done. Charlie Austin has departed but high-earners have reduced Ralph Hasenhüttl’s capacity to upgrade his squad sufficiently, with Fraser Forster and Guido Carrillo among those dispensable players eating up the wage bill. Che Adams looks a steal at £15m and Moussa Djenepo, a raw winger, should stimulate supporters but as one deadline closes all eyes are on the European deadline on 2 September by which point Saints hope to have offloaded Mario Lemina. BF Major ins: Moussa Djenepo Standard Liège, £14m;Che Adams Birmingham, £15m; Danny Ings Liverpool, £18m. Major outs: Matt Targett Aston Villa, £13m; Sam Gallagher Blackburn, £5m; Charlie Austin West Brom, £4m. After two windows of inactivity, Spurs made up for lost time with the late arrivals of Ryan Sessegnon and Giovani Lo Celso on deadline day but failed to secure an audacious move for Paulo Dybala and find a buyer for Danny Rose. There are still concerns over a lack of cover at right-back following the sale of Kieran Trippier to Atlético Madrid but Mauricio Pochettino will still feel he has improved the squad who reached the Champions League final last season. Now to win a trophy perhaps? EA Major ins: Tanguy Ndombele Lyon, £55.5m; Jack Clarke Leeds, £10m; Giovani Lo Celso Real Betis, loan; Ryan Sessegnon Fulham, £25m. Major outs: Kieran Trippier Atlético Madrid, £20m; Vincent Janssen Monterrey, £6.3m; Michel Vorm released; Fernando Llorente released; Tobi Oluwayemi Celtic, undiscl. A flurry of late activity during which Watford completed deals for Danny Welbeck and the Senegal forward Ismaïla Sarr has given supporters hope of at least emulating the team’s exploits under Javi Gracia last season, although the failure to sign Danny Rose from Tottenham at the last minute was a slight setback. Nonetheless the potential of Sarr and the Nigerian teenager Tom Dele-Bashiru should give cause for optimism for the future, as should keeping hold of their most crucial performers. EA Major ins: Ismaïla Sarr Rennes, £30m; Danny Welbeck Arsenal, free; Bayli Spencer-Adams Arsenal, free; Joseph Hungbo Crystal Palace, free; Sam Dalby Leeds, undiscl; Tom Dele‑Bashiru Manchester City, free. Major outs: Dodi Lukebakio Hertha Berlin, £18m; Miguel Britos released; Obbi Oularé Standard Liège, undiscl.; Jerome Sinclair VVV-Venlo, loan. It has been a decent summer for Manuel Pellegrini’s side. Unwanted players have departed, Pablo Fornals looks an exciting addition in midfield and West Ham have reacted well to losing Marko Arnautovic, replacing the disruptive Austrian forward with Sébastien Haller and Albian Ajeti. They broke their transfer record to sign Haller from Eintracht Frankfurt and Ajeti, a 22-year-old Swiss international, scored 15 goals for FC Basel last season. The concern, however, is that Pellegrini has not focused on strengthening a suspect defence, either by recruiting better full-backs or signing cover in defensive midfield. JS Major ins: Sébastien Haller Eintracht Frankfurt £40.7m; Pablo Fornals Villarreal, £24m; Albian Ajeti Basel, £8m; Gonçalo Cardoso Boavista, undiscl Major outs: Marko Arnautovic Shanghai SIPG, £22.4m; Edimilson Fernandes Mainz, £8m; Pedro Obiang Sassuolo, £7.2m; Reece Oxford Augsburg, £3.6m; Lucas Pérez Alavés, £2m; Sam Byram Norwich, £750k; Andy Carroll Newcastle, free. Nuno Espírito Santo likes to keep his squad tight so did not demand massive reinforcements despite Wolves’ European commitments. That risks leaving them vulnerable to a spate of injuries. On the plus side, they have retained the players who excelled last term, turning loans for Raúl Jiménez and Leander Dendonker into permanent deals. The few newcomers offer promise, especially the powerful striker Patrick Cutrone and the centre-back Jesús Vallejo, who joined after leading Spain to victory at the U-21 European Championship. PD Major ins: Raúl Jiménez Benfica, £30m; Patrick Cutrone Milan, £16.2m; Leander Dendoncker Anderlecht, £12m; Pedro Neto Lazio, £10.8m; Bruno Jordão Lazio, £7.2m; Jesús Vallejo Real Madrid, loan; Renat Dadashov Estoril, undiscl Major outs: Kortney Hause Aston Villa, £3m; Renat Dadashov Paços Ferreira, loan; Hélder Costa Leeds, loan; Ivan Cavaleiro Fulham, loan.