Urbanisation and globalisation have swept sleepy Pune off its feet. This city in Maharashtra, western India, is growing by the day – and much has changed for this small, old, town of pensioners. While skyscrapers go up in the city, there’ still a slice of the past that remains rooted in the old town’s by-lanes, although there are few traces of the old times. There’s change happening everywhere, yet there are some proud owners of century-old (or even older) properties who are striving to preserve the traditional buildings. Walk down the lanes of the old city and you’ll find these structures – and the people who have held them dear for years. The cell-like formation of caste groups continues, though it is giving way to modern heterogeneity. As you drift into the lanes at the risk of getting lost in nostalgia, you find more interesting buildings that clearly shout out “heritage”. Not only are there wadas (traditional mansions), but also multi-storied buildings from the colonial era that adorn the narrow streets on both sides. Previously lavish residences for British officials, these buildings now are often devoted to commercial enterprises, but even so remain architectural marvels; some crumbling, some still standing tall. The balconies proudly display intricate woodwork on their railings, while tinted glass windows reflect rainbow colours when sunlight falls on them. In these rapidly changing times, the labyrinthine by-lanes of Pune’s Peth area continue to retain their old city charm. The life-style of the upper class was spartan and austere. This was reflected in the townscape too. There were no grand avenues, monumental buildings or ornate palaces. But the development of the wada as a house form reached its climax in Peshwai Pune and gave the cityscape a distinctive architectural character. Though it might seem chaotic, these narrow lanes and clustered complexes are actually more organised than the planned settlements we have today. With all the right and bright colours, they radiate a unique texture or earthy tones characteristic of old Pune city. The past also confronts us in the city’s many temples. They comprised an important and crucial part of the city’s public places. These temples structured the community and formed a physical and social bond. A paar is a platform built around a venerable tree with a small shrine under it. Even the most congested of cities people have always found a way to ferret out small open spaces for social interactions. It may be a little cul-de-sac at the end of the lane, a little bulge to a winding street space between houses or culverts and other nooks. The paars have stood the test of time and new ones keep cropping up in the newer parts of the city. There are also a number of trees in the Peth areas as old or even older then some of the wadas. Of great antiquity, these acquire a special place in the old city along with a lot of fables attached to them. Today enveloped within the bustling city, they represent continuity amidst change. Glimpses of the old medieval town can be caught, and history relived, as we walk through these chaotic lanes, cool even under the midday sun. Though most people no longer follow the caste professions, there are still some craftsmen who reside in the interior core of the city. Pune had a distinct social pattern of “Alis”. An Ali is a street, or group of streets, inhibited by people of one community pursuing one trade. They have been named on the basis of the trade that they carried out: Burud Ali (cane), Kumbhar Ali (potters), Tambat Ali (coppersmiths), etc. During the Peshwa period the rulers invited people from various areas who had specialised skills to come and settle in Pune. As a result of this many professionals who were not Maharashtrian came and settled in the city. Alis formed the places where these groups stayed together and carried out their trade and commerce. These micro units over a period of time have now merged with the whole city’s development leaving a distant memory. Built during the zenith of Peshwa rule in Pune, the Ram Mandir (temple) at Tulsibaug is one of the few places which has survived in an almost intact form even after years. Located in the heart of the city, its main features are a historic temple precinct and a large market. At that time when it was named, the place used to be a flourishing garden filled with the fragrance of basil. Hence, Tulshi (Basil) Baug (Garden). Though the neighbourhood has changed dramatically, Tulsibaug Wada, where the temple is located, has remained like a cherished treasure and a visit to this temple literally takes you back in time. Tulsibaug, with its array of shops splattered all around and a few heritage temples, is both a commercial hub as well a cultural hub with a vintage feel. The British era also brought development to the western bank of the Mutha River, in the vicinity of the village of Bhamburde (now Shivajinagar). The Deccan Gymkhana Post Office, established in 1923, saw the communication links with the rest of the towns under British Raj completed. With the area offering a post office, a sports club, a tennis court, a vegetable market and other civic amenities, it became a much sought after residential locality. It was now that Pune acquired an image which firmly linked it to the typical image of the British Raj. The town acquiring a duality: a traditional Indian city with its jostling crowds and narrow lanes and vibrant “disorderliness”, contrasted with a British colonial settlement, a suburb for the elite. Although the city has slowly transformed, the Deccan Gymkhana Post Office still functions just as it did in the colonial era. Holding history and utility in both hands is Mahatma Phule Mandai (a mandai is a market), or simply Mandai, as Punekars lovingly call it. Mahatma Phule Mandai (formerly Reay Market) is the biggest vegetable market in Pune City. Located in Shukrawar Peth, it is a major landmark. With eight entrances and a prominent octagonal tower, the construction of the gothic-style building began in 1882 and was completed in 1886. Originally named after the then governor of Bombay, Lord Reay, Mandai served as a retail and wholesale market. Post-independence it was renamed Mahatma Phule Market, after Pune’s social reformer Mahatma Phule. Today, there are more than 520 stalls of fruits and vegetables. Although an old part of the city’s heritage, the importance of Mandai will always be a British era relic for the Punekars. Today with the spread of the suburbs, the inner city has been neglected. The old residential cores have a distinct look of typical urban blight. The opportunity to create a coherent urban form linking the everyday the life of Puneites and their traditions seems to be slipping by. All is not lost, however. Some of these buildings and areas still lie safely protected – and also sometimes hidden – in their cocoons of heritage. Fortunately for us, there is tribe of architects who are not completely caught up in the consumerist mode who have shown that it is possible to build modern structures within the context of their surroundings, without denying the history or tradition of this city. Hopefully they will help to ensure we retain a balance. Saurabh Agashe is an artist and urban planner from Pune City, Maharashtra State, western India. He works extensively with local government and its agencies, which affords him a good glimpse of the changing face of India’s urban landscape. More of his work can be found on Instagram If you’re an illustrator or graphic artist with an idea for The Illustrated City series, email us at Cities@theguardian.com Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter