I was 14 years old and had just received a long letter from my mother 3,000 miles away, saying that our authoritarian president back in Guyana had introduced stricter currency controls. This meant the family would not be able to get any money out to my elder brother and I for a while. I knew my parents had sacrificed and saved so much to give us the opportunity of safety and a good education in Britain, so I had to help. Along the seafront in Eastbourne, East Sussex, stood hotel after hotel. I was determined to get whatever job I could, but being only 14 I had to make myself look at least 16. I planned the job mission with precision. First, I went to a second-hand shop to buy more adult, smart-looking clothes – the choice was a white, lacy blouse and a black and white skirt. Shoes – smart black courts with a heel to make me look taller. I found a suitable pair but struggled to walk in them at all, so over the next few days I practised walking around the flat and down the road outside to get used to them. The result is that today I can practically run in high heels. Books on bedside tables made me smile. I would jot down the titles and take them out of the local library I was unaware of the need for a CV and just planned to walk up to hotel desks and ask if they had any summer jobs going. The idea made me panic inside but outwardly I had to be the swan my mother had told me to be – paddling like fury under the surface but cool, calm and graceful on the surface. I would start at one end of the seafront – the Beachy Head end – and work my way down towards the pier. To my utter amazement and surprise the first hotel I walked into said, “Yes, you can speak to housekeeping”, and sent me to the appropriate entrance. Before long I was given a locker key, and told to come back the next morning at 6am to start as a chambermaid. I was so excited I rushed back to the flat where I lived with my brother and sat down to write my mother a letter with the good news. I seem to remember I would work 6-12 four days a week for £10 a day, and get to keep any tips. I couldn’t believe my luck. That summer I learned a lot about housekeeping: how to battle a double duvet and a cover that was bigger than me – “Match up the ears then give it a good shake,” my boss instructed. Beds had “hospital corners”; we used different cleaning products for different services; learned how to set out the tea and coffee tray, and I did a crash course in the many kinds of British biscuits I had never heard of. In my break I was allowed to help myself, so I tried them all: shortbread (too sweet), gingernuts (reminded me of the cakes and biscuits my mother baked) and my favourites, chocolate bourbons. I learned the different towel sizes, the importance of bathmats so the elderly guests didn’t slip over – who knew? It was exhausting and, sometimes, dirty work. People could afford to spend their holidays in a good hotel but it didn’t necessarily mean they had any manners or standards. Some rooms were left in a simply disgusting state, but it was my job to make them look perfect for the new guests, sometimes in a matter of 20 minutes. I cleaned toilets, lugged about a vacuum cleaner so heavy my arm ached at the end of the week, and emptied dustbins full of goodness knows what. But there was the odd moment of joy: walking into a room where they had left a tip of 20p or even 50p; seeing a beautiful bottle of L’Air du Temps perfume by Nina Ricci on a dressing table, which reminded me of my mother. A designer dress on a hanger from the night before and the books on bedside tables made me smile. I thought I could learn about the best books to read, so I would jot down the titles and take them out of the local library – 39 Steps, The Hound of the Baskervilles – yes; anything by Barbara Cartland and the book about John Profumo – no. That was the summer I learned the pain of having to grow up quickly. Back home, the currency restrictions, part of a tough policy that tried to ensure people did not take their money out of the country as the economic decline continued, were in place for years. And so, for me, it was the last summer of being a carefree child. At 14 I had no choice but to live with my brother, on our own, without adults, with all the responsibilities, decisions and day-to-day practicalities of living independently. I had, though, the joy of earning my own money. • Gina Miller is a businesswoman and remain activist