Tom Blomfield doesn’t come across like the CEO of a bank. Bank CEOs aren’t usually 33. They don’t turn up for interviews in a stripy T-shirt, munching on a banana. They certainly don’t lean over to show you their current balance, mid-conversation. Blomfield actually wants to show me a feature on the Monzo app, a piece of software that has become bank manager, financial advisor and, in some cases, personal counsellor, to its 2.5m customers. If that means revealing all in the process, he’s fine with it. What is the account balance of the founder and CEO of the fastest growing bank in the country? Less than you might imagine. “Five days until payday!” Blomfield says. Presumably he can bring his own payday forward. “My own payday?” He is aghast. “No! We have a very strict finance department. Auditors get very nervous when bank CEOs start moving money into their own accounts.” Blomfield doesn’t like to distinguish himself from Monzo’s core customers – he’s a millennial with budgeting issues. But he’s also a stickler for rules, and avowedly risk-averse. Monzo currently looks after about £1.1bn, and, though other banks lend most of the millions they have sitting in deposits, none of Monzo’s cash is being flash-traded or gambled or divvied up into baroque financial instruments. Almost all of it sits in the Bank of England, which, for a bank, is about as dull as it gets. “On a spectrum of risk,” he says, “we’re literally the safest bank you could possibly imagine, because the money just sits in the central bank.” He is reassuring me. “It seems bizarre. Anyone from another bank who looks at our balance sheet just scratches their head. They can’t understand it. Unless the UK fails as a country, that money is safe.” I first met Blomfield a couple of years ago, when Monzo’s distinctive fluoro charge cards were just becoming a must-flash accessory for tech-savvy millennials. (“Hot coral” is the card colour’s official name.) I was profiling him for a fashion publication, and I was curious to hear how an Oxford law graduate, with stints at GoCardless and Starling behind him, had encouraged fashion publications to write about personal finance. Lily Allen had just tweeted about how much she loved her card. When was the last time a pop-star tweeted about their bank card? But it was the app that really won over its early customers. Monzo was a bank that lived on your phone. It wasn’t the only challenger bank to emerge in the wake of post-financial crisis reforms – Revolut, Tandem and Starling are among its rivals – but it was the most fun to use, with a satisfying “ker-ching” when you topped up your card, and emoji-rich updates when you spent your money. The app’s interface, which was attractive and easy-to-read, promised, gratifyingly, a kind of control. At the time, Monzo’s numbers were impressive. In two days in March 2017 it raised £22m, breaking crowdfunding records on Crowdcube. But it faced challenges. It had to change its name from Mondo following a copyright boo-boo, and it was losing money. Monzo customers were offered free cash withdrawals abroad, but that doesn’t come cheap. One typical headline of the time read: “Digital bank Monzo’s losses more than quadruple.” But that was then. The bank still loses money – it has 1,000 staff, and counting – but Blomfield insists profitability is on the horizon. It is officially a “fintech unicorn”, one of the rare British startups to be valued at over £1bn. Earlier this year it raised £113m from a Californian investment group, which doubled its value to £2bn. And a new strategy has emerged. When Monzo launched, in 2015, its customer base was 95% male, 100% iPhone-owning, and highly concentrated in London. But a recent TV ad campaign targeted older customers, prompting 260,000 account openings in June alone. Blomfield hopes to reach 3m customers by the end of the year. He’s betting on reaching not just more millennials, but their parents, too. It’s not only 20-somethings who have money issues after all. Consider it Monzo 2.0. If Monzo really is transitioning from startup to bank, there are bank-sized questions to ask. If it becomes the size of Lloyds, or Deutsche Bank, what is to stop it behaving like other banks that size? How safe is our money? And our data? And, as it promises, can Monzo really “make money work for everyone” as it moves into overdrafts, loans and mortgages, too? Google famously vowed not to be evil – until it worked out how to convert its data into cash. Blomfield is more ambitious than that. “Let’s just talk about ‘Don’t be evil’ for a second,” he says. “Such a limited statement. How about you try to leave the world a little better than you found it?” It recently raised £113m from a Californian investment group, doubling its value to £2bn Blomfield is talking at Monzo’s office, on Finsbury Square, east London, where the vibe is more “tech” than “fin”. There are meeting rooms with names like “Batcave”; fridges stocked with directional sodas; a ping-pong table; an office cockapoo. But leaning into tech clichés isn’t without risks; if anything, brands like Amazon and Facebook are currently more toxic-seeming than NatWest or Barclays. Blomfield appears all too aware. He’s just back from his latest trip to Silicon Valley, and he wasn’t impressed. “It’s lost its magic,” he says. “One problem is this myopic bubble culture. You go to a party in San Francisco, and everyone’s pitching VCs [venture capitals] or talking about their crypto-currencies. It’s problematic if you’re trying to build a product that works for everyone. And the amount of money that you need to survive in San Francisco is insanity! People are paying $3-4,000 a month for a single-bedroom apartment now. I was staying at a friend’s place and there were homeless people in deep, deep poverty camped outside the apartment. It feels like dystopia.” The City of London is hardly an egalitarian paradise, but there is at least some “diversity of thought”, Blomfield thinks. His girlfriend, Hannah-Polly Williams, works for the refugee charity International Rescue Committee. His friends are doctors, teachers, builders, lawyers, musicians. And he is keen to distance himself from the hustle culture – he doesn’t get up at 4am or take blood transfusions from teenage interns. “I probably work 40 hours a week. Maybe 45. I worked in consulting before and we worked 70 hours a week as standard. The pressure comes from not being able to turn my brain off. If I could go home and flick a switch and not think about Monzo, it would be great.” Blomfield seems unusually keen to get ahead of any potential criticism, which can make him sound a little embattled. He is keen to tell me that 26% of Monzo’s staff identify as non-straight, but laments that gender diversity “still isn’t very good”. (The staff is around 65% men.) “We’re also not great at age diversity. Most of our staff are in their 20s and 30s, and people in their 40s and 50s find it much harder to integrate.” He is about to hire a diversity inclusion leader. “I’m very, very excited about that. For the sake of transparency, anyone can read the minutes from Monzo board meetings; that transparency doesn’t extend to revealing who gets paid what. “It’s continuously a question that nags us,” he says. “Why should anyone not know what anyone else is paid? It makes lots of people nervous, but if you don’t know, how can you be sure that you’re not systematically underpaying one set of people – writers or designers or women or people from certain ethnic backgrounds?” The fact that all of this is on Blomfield’s agenda speaks to a new financial culture that has emerged in the post-crash era. Increasingly, campaigners for fair pay encourage us to challenge taboos around salaries and, hopefully, reveal structural inequalities in the process. Meanwhile, we seem to be endlessly obsessed with the minutiae of other people’s finances: witness the popularity of Refinery 29’s money diaries, or the constant babyboomer complaints about millennial avocado habits. Given the precarity of modern employment, it is no wonder more of us are being mindful about our money. For all its high-tech innovations, Monzo’s success mostly comes from treating customers as people as opposed to econs – the supposedly rational, profit-maximising consumers that economists have traditionally assumed us to be. One of Monzo’s most popular features is the “pot”. If you want to save for a holiday, for example, you can channel a certain amount of your money into a “pot”. A more recent iteration is the “locked pot”, which prevents users from accessing those savings for a year, if they choose. “To an economist, that is totally illogical,” Blomfield says. “You’re actually reducing someone’s optionality there. But to a behavioural psychologist it’s perfectly obvious.” A similar philosophy lies behind the gambling block pioneered by Monzo’s vulnerable customers team – since copied by other banks. Customers can opt to block all gambling transactions from their cards, with a 48-hour cooling-off period, “giving people that little bit of extra friction to control their behaviour in ways they want is incredibly powerful.” It’s not hard to see how such features might be extended – and abused. Why not introduce, say, a McDonald’s block? “McDonald’s, yeah, you could do a McDonald’s block quite easily,” says Blomfield. “But alcohol and cigarettes are the two I would really love to put a block on.” Monzo doesn’t have the data to do this by itself, he explains. “But what Tesco could do is send entire receipt data through the Mastercard and Visa networks, which would then enable us to say: ‘Aha! There’s alcohol on that!’ Then we could decline the transaction until you take the alcohol out of your cart and re-swipe your card. It’s entirely possible, it just needs all the shops to adopt it.” You can see why civil liberties campaigners might be concerned: imagine if Universal Credit were contingent on cigarette consumption. Companies that rely on exploiting our passing weaknesses won’t like it either. But for the individual who struggles with impulse control in the face of societal pressure to spend, it’s quite appealing. The economy has functioned on cheap credit for more than a generation now – banks lending you money they don’t really have so you can buy stuff you don’t really need. Blomfield seems to be saying: maybe we wouldn’t need to borrow so much money if we didn’t buy so much stuff. Maybe control is more important to us than choice. That would appear to give lots of power to Monzo, but Blomfield stresses that power really lies in the “community”. There are more than 40,000 members of the bank’s community forum (5.62% of the company is owned by microfunders) and they seem happy to defend the company on social media and pitch in with ideas, too. It’s hard to think of a financial brand that commands that sort of loyalty besides MoneySavingExpert.com (MSE), the personal finance community founded by Martin Lewis, aka “the most trusted man in Britain”. Blomfield accepts the comparison, “But their problem is 70% of their costs go on marketing as they need to keep persuading people to come back to the site each year,” he says. “The average Monzo customer checks their app 15 times a week.” The dream, as yet unrealised, is to build MSE-style price comparison features into the app, so it would be the single place you control all of your finances: student loan, mortgage, savings, pension, credit cards. “The idea is that we become the kind of storefront for everything. For example, when it’s time to renew your mortgage, we come to you proactively and say, hey, we’ve gone out and we’ve found these three or four providers, which one would you like? Here’s the best rate, here’s the best customer service, you choose but we proactively find the best deals for you. I think that’s a fundamental challenge to the big banks’ business models because they rely on cross-sale of their own products.” Another unrealised dream is to turn Monzo into a social enterprise. As a law student, Blomfield spent a lot of time thinking about jurisprudence: “Can you ever make a rule today that you can’t undo in the future? Can we as a company put a set of rules in place that mean in the future we can’t break those rules? There are certain corporate structures which require you to place social and environmental impact alongside profitability. I’m surprised more companies don’t do that, to be honest.” We’ll find the best deals. The big banks can only sell their own products But Monzo has more workaday challenges to meet first, not least persuading its customers to deposit more of their actual salaries in their accounts. There are regulations to comply with, staff to hire, and the small matter of disrupting the banking sector in the US. Monzo has teamed up with a partner bank in Ohio and is planning a “grassroots” launch. That is the “shiny new toy”, but Blomfield is trying not to be too distracted by it for the moment. He says he tries to leave his laptop at home when he’s on holiday, bakes his own sourdough, and makes his own pottery (“I know, I know, the tech cliché…”). But clearly switching off is hard. So what is on his mind at 3am? “Honestly? I’m worried about some catastrophic event, whether it’s a data breach, a cybersecurity incident, an infrastructure outage, which means our systems go down and we lose people’s money and Monzo is over. That is terrifying.” It’s also not improbable. Last week (after this interview had taken place), Monzo urged 480,000 customers to change their pin numbers, after it emerged that the data had not been stored in the most secure part of the bank’s internal databases, leaving it exposed to 110 “unauthorised” engineers, who could have accessed the pin numbers over a six-month period. Monzo stressed that no fraud had taken place, but clearly, it might have. The last financial crisis was all about credit risk and liquidity, he warns – essential banking problems. “The next problem with banks is going to be technology. So I spend a lot of time thinking about systems resilience.” Monzo is regulated just like any other bank – its customers are protected up to the standard £85,000 under the government’s Financial Services Compensation scheme. And while it’s hardly reassuring to imagine a cyber- financial crisis might look like, it would be more worrying if he weren’t worried about one. He is no longer too concerned about the bigger banks launching their own Monzo-esque features. Most have them now. “I worry that we’ve not got the winning model yet,” he says. “And someone new will come along with some way of managing your money that everyone then flocks to.”