The first trailer for The L Word sequel, Generation Q, was released last week, teasing its return to TV screens in December. Ten years after The L Word’s run ended, I expected to be cynical about its 2019 incarnation. Right now, in the world of entertainment, there are more planned comebacks than Fleetwood Mac have managed in their entire career. With mooted revivals of everything from The Matrix to Home Alone to Beverly Hills, 90210, you could read an issue of Empire magazine from the 1990s and assume it had come out last week. Generation Q (I’m trying to get on board, but it still sounds breathlessly perky, like a kids’ cartoon or a supermarket clothing line) is all about the young people, as the title suggests, and appears to be far less glossy and polished than its elite older sibling. Of the three original characters returning to LA’s lesbian scene, every fan will have their favourite. Shane is back, as is her haircut, and Alice, too, but Jennifer Beals’s Bette promises to make the biggest splash. Beals is an executive producer, but vitally will also reprise her role as alpha female Bette Porter, California’s answer to Swiss art curator and critic Hans Ulrich Obrist, who couldn’t resist booting the impressionists out of her gallery in favour of something modern, shocking and blasphemous, particularly if that enabled a flashback to a sexy, art-based hook-up from the past. In the new world, Bette is going straight to the top and is running to be mayor of Los Angeles. The original L Word was campy and crass, as over the top as it was revolutionary. But I loved it for everything it was. It gave viewers six seasons that put mostly queer women front and centre. For the first time, those characters were not the subplot, but the main event. Even so, at first I wondered if Generation Q was necessary. Times have changed beyond comprehension in a decade; some of the storylines that seemed less worthy of remark then, such as Alice’s out-of-character transphobia, or Lisa the Lesbian Man, would incite an opinion mob in an instant. The growth of streaming television has opened up a world of queer storylines on all sorts of shows. If there isn’t a same-sex kiss on a Netflix series you start to wonder if you’ve accidentally skipped an episode. And then the Generation Q trailer brought it all back, gave me butterflies and of course, as if it was ever in doubt, I will be glued to the whole thing. In his new book Perfect Sound Whatever, comedian James Acaster makes a claim that may horrify the paternal gatekeepers of music history as much as it will delight dissenters: he argues that 2016 was the greatest ever year for music. Take that, dad rock. One-nil, 1970s. Following a breakdown, he set himself the task of listening only to music from 2016 (“the year before everything went wrong”) and bought more than 500 albums, including Beyoncé’s Lemonade and David Bowie’s Blackstar. (For younger readers, buying music is a bit like cassettes, which were a bit like smartphones, which were a bit like the chips soon to be implanted in our eyeballs.) The 2016 argument, which is about far more than just Acaster’s record collection, is deliberately provocative. “I’m trying to convince people to find their own greatest year for music,” he told the BBC. In a flash poll of my own opinions, I suspect I land somewhere between 1993 and 1994, because of Debut, Live Through This, Rid of Me and In Utero damaging my hearing at a critical point during my adolescence. Really, though, my choice can only ever be vaguely nostalgic nonsense. It’s fixed there because it’s easiest to pin down; you’d be a fool to argue that music peaked in the early 1990s. In choosing 2016, Acaster makes a crucial point: that innovation still happens and at a pace. Already, 2019 has been a fantastic year. Every week, there’s a new album to get excited about, something odd and explosive and different and new. To recognise that is a welcome relief from the endless chokehold of prizing the past, the idea that older is always better, that something recorded in a shed on a guitar that Jimi Hendrix once looked at will have instant superiority to, say, Ariana Grande’s Into You. I have listened to that roughly several hundred times and never tired of it, and it came out in 2016, thus proving Acaster entirely right. Billie Eilish, whose minimal goth-pop is surely the oddest sound to break big in quite some time, has become the first artist born this millennium to have a US Billboard Top 100 number one. The brilliant creeping loop of Bad Guy has knocked Lil Nas X’s Old Town Road off the top spot, where it had been sitting for an astonishing 19 weeks. Finally, that horse can have a well-earned rest. It’s been quite the week for Eilish, who, at 17, seems to be made up entirely of long shorts, neon and world-weary wisdom. In a conversation with Pharrell Williams, for V magazine, Williams asked Eilish if there were any big misconceptions about her. She talked about being praised for her baggy clothes, for her “not necessarily feminine, or girly” style and how that comes with an element of shaming other young women who choose not to dress as she does. “I have always supported and fucked with and just loved when a woman or a man or anyone in the world feels comfortable in their skin, their body, to show just whatever they want,” she said. To quote the inimitable Bad Guy: “Duh.” • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist