I love bread pudding, and not only for its taste. I buy relatively expensive bread, usually sourdough, figuring that it is more nutritious, with its slow rise and good ingredients, and that it makes a more filling, satisfying meal. When it starts to harden, and even a splash of water cannot revive it, I love to find other ways to use it up – I hate the thought of binning it. Whether sweet or savoury, there are endless ways to use a slightly stale loaf with excellent results, but this is a good one. The crisp top, fluffy interior and contrast of acidic raspberries, chewy, savoury sourdough and sweet custard makes this pudding a real winner. Prep 20 minRest 2 hr+Cook 45 minServes 6 40g butter, plus extra for greasing4 slices sourdough (about 250g), ripped into large chunks3 nectarines, stoned and cut into eighths150g raspberries150g golden caster sugar, plus 1 tbsp for sprinkling3 eggs½ tsp vanilla extract200ml whole milk200ml double creamZest of 1 lemon40g flaked almonds35g coconut flakesDouble cream or creme fraiche, to serve Grease a medium-sized baking dish with butter. Spread the chunks of bread evenly around the dish, then scatter over the nectarine pieces and raspberries. In a large mixing bowl, whisk the sugar, eggs and vanilla until slightly thickened. Pour the milk and double cream into a small saucepan and put over a gentle heat. Once hot, but not yet boiling, whisk this into the egg mix. Grate in the lemon zest, stir, then pour the mixture over the bread and fruit, pushing the bread down so it’s submerged. Cover and leave to sit for two to three hours, to allow the bread to absorb the custard. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Sprinkle over a tablespoon of sugar, dot the butter over the top and bake for 35-40 minutes, scattering with the almonds and coconut flakes halfway through cooking. It is ready when just set in the middle and the coconut is golden. Leave to cool slightly, and serve with double cream or creme fraiche. Whizz old bread into crumbs and fry in garlic butter or anchovy butter, or toast with dehydrated black olives to make a delicious piquant topping for pasta dishes and salads. You could also fry the crumbs in salted butter and demerara sugar, then layer with custard and fruit puree for a quick and delicious pudding. Old slices of bread are also wonderful for soaking up sopa de ajo (garlic soup), a Spanish classic, using the still-young summer garlic.