So here was a denouement we had been expecting for a long time. It was wrapped up in an episode that managed to have a few interesting twists and turns but was, in some ways, a teeny bit muddled. In the most predictable plot development since Sir Evil George turning out to still be extremely evil, Ned found himself in prison and on trial for treason. This was always going to happen and it has been, in many ways, a very long and painful time coming. Now there are two questions to take us up to the end of this series. One, if Ned goes down, then how can Ross not go down with him? And, two, if Ned doesn’t go down, then can Sir Evil George still triumph in some way against Ross? This episode still had plenty of old-school Poldark joy to offer (Christmas scenes, the children heading into Mrs Carne’s school, John Conan’s grandmother being a grumpy old battleaxe). But it also had a few missteps. Is my timing off or are we supposed to have completely forgotten that Kitty was pregnant and might have had a miscarriage? Or could she still be pregnant? Meanwhile, the slavery debate became complicated with the transformation of Sir Evil George into some kind of pro-slavery campaigner. (Good luck with that, George!) At the same time we seemed to veer very quickly away from Honduras and slavery into proclamations that “the King is mad”. Plus, the Irish question was also randomly thrown in for good measure. Some sleight of hand and a little simplicity might have rendered this all a bit easier to swallow. But never mind. ’T’is still Poldark. The subplot about the forging of the magic money paper was entertaining and a good way for Demelza to reassert her authority over Tess without risking too much. “Why would a body do such a thing?” Well, if a body was sacked by Demelza, a body might be very angry and vengeful. That t’is why. (“I’ve saved you a hanging, missy,” was the basic conclusion; I paraphrase.) The scenes bridging the gap between “the action in London” and “the action in Cornwall” were very nicely balanced here. Including the heart-wrenching will-they-won’t-they business over the potential kidnapping of four-year-old velvet-clad fencing enthusiast John Conan, which was handled brilliantly. (More effusive praise and the awarding of the pewter tankard below.) Back in London, though, and true to form, Ned was turning out to be a most annoyingly ineffectual and indiscreet revolutionary, resplendent in full Bob Geldof Live Aid mode. Obviously I agree with Ned’s anti-slavery views as t’is only right and proper. But I would seriously not like to get stuck next to him at a dinner party. To be fair on Ned, #TeamSlavery are a miserable bunch with very poor taste in house pets. The falcon (is it a falcon?) is gaining an ever-more prominent role and has started squawking menacingly. If Horace the Pug finds out about this usurper, he’s going to be livid. In the next drawing room along, Geoffrey Charles made his eventual ill-fated proposal. Sir Evil George added insult to injury by wilfully throwing Elizabeth’s child under the bus and agreeing to marriage with Cecily just to spite Geoffrey Charles. I decided to withdraw my previously sympathetic comments about Sir Evil George long before his speech entitled: “Let Me Commend To You the Mahogany Trade.” Although it was completely hilarious that he thought he could give the most racist speech in the history of racist speeches and still ask afterwards: “But why is everyone saying that I am a racist?” (I make no comment about echoes with the present day.) Well, I suppose there was no better character to espouse the bonkers “logic” of racism. “I am viewed as a friend of heartless slave-owners.” Could that possibly be because you are the friend of heartless slave-owners, Sir Evil George? Put him back in the water-boarding bath with the leeches. Luckily, Cecily had some morals and was able to leak the letter telling the truth about the wildly uncommendable nature of the mahogany trade. And she knows that the only way to fix any of this is to “drive a wedge between my father and Sir (Evil) George. With a little more charm, she is a Sindy Doll in the making. Meanwhile, Sindy Doll herself reminded us of how brilliant she is at diplomacy. Thank heavens for real friends who know where they need to be at the right time. During the search of Ross’s house, Sindy Doll was truly using her poshness to the best effect. “You were magnificent!” “Yes, I was.” But you always are, Sindy Doll, you always are! The relationship between Drake (Harry Richardson) and Morwenna (Ellise Chappell) has very occasionally been trying, as long-term viewers will recall. (I think the word “simpering” may have been used in the below-the-line comments.) However, I think over time these two have truly earned our respect and the scenes in this episode were beautifully done, from Drake’s desperation to do the right thing and his anguish that this always seems beyond him, to Morwenna’s sadness at leaving her child and her eventual stoic acceptance of reality. As I’ve mentioned in regard to other pairings in this series, the chemistry between these two actors is perfect. They’ve managed to turn something that could be cloying and irritating into a poignant and believable relationship. I, for one, am ready to donate the contents of my purse to Mrs Carne’s School for Learnin’. Coins only, obviously. (Side note: was it my imagination or did they keep changing the child actor for John Conan? What happened there and why did they think we wouldn’t notice?) “Why do you not go to London, mama?” “Because if I did, who would see to Cornwall?” Rightly said, Demelza. “Do we not know a man with the needful skillage?” An expression which surely deserves more frequent outings. “You shouldn’t have done that, Ladyship.” Drake rediscovers the inner strength he had during the toad-finding days. (Remember ‘e they?) “What possible use could you be in a carriage with your wife and a pug?” Best line of the entire series? Or best line in any TV drama ever? I’m torn. My eyesight has been so irreparably damaged by the mind-scrambling chest sightings witnessed in series one that it appears I failed to spot a pectoral glimpse faithfully reported by eagle-eyed ’Darkers on last week’s episode. Many noted this below the line and a reader wrote to me from the Netherlands to berate me about this failure (I am not joking). I can only apologise. This week, though, it was back to business as usual. Which is to say no business at all. Someone is stealing from the mine. Ned is in severe trouble. And Sir Evil George is back doing what he does best: marrying a woman who doesn’t want to get married to him.