Bryan Washington focuses on his native Houston for his first book, Lot. Houston is prosperous yet, like many cities in the US, thousands of its inhabitants are only one missed paycheck away from ruin. In this enthralling collection of interconnected short stories, Washington vividly portrays the interior lives of his marginalised fellow citizens, often overlooked in literature save as characters sketched to elicit pity and despair. These are tough yet tender tales of uncertain existences, stalked by the certainty of future violence and the shadow of homelessness. The jeopardy the characters face is magnified both by the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey, which blew through the city in 2017, killing more than 100 people, and by the encroaching gentrification that will further displace them. Each story is located in a different district – some are set in salubrious gated communities, but most are grounded in rough and forbidding neighbourhoods. The sense grows of the characters’ inability to escape the closed circuits of their desperate lives In subtle but bruising prose, Washington deftly conjures an idiosyncratic world in which people live cheek by jowl. A father drowns a dog because none of the children will walk it; a nervous mother packs her daughter off to college with a knife slipped into a pillowcase; a pair of drug dealers style themselves as non-discriminating “equal opportunity pharmacists”. Washington has said he wanted “every narrative in Lot to have a queer character or queer component”, and a recurring teenage narrator, wrestling with his homosexuality and the repressive environment in which he lives, serves as the book’s emotional centre. Nicolás, his siblings and parents (a black mother and feckless Latino father) live above their restaurant in relative comfort, surrounded by basic “shotgun” dwellings with busted TVs and perennially blocked pipes, the kind of houses “you shook your head at when you drove up the road”. While waiting tables, his mother negotiates the necessary but unwelcome attention of potentially generous-tipping customers: she “shot all of the [suitors] down … just enough to have them thinking they were always in striking distance”. Her allure, though, is lost on her unfaithful husband, whose lover, the brothers speculate, is probably white, because “Why the fuck would he leave home to go back home?” Nicolás’s father unashamedly brings him along on a visit to her: this is a world where everything is hidden in plain view. Nicolás’s father may escape society’s censure, but the infidelity of a female Jamaican immigrant has dire consequences for her illicit lover, a nerdy “whiteboy” interloper whose every move is monitored by neighbours. They become a Greek chorus of whispering critics who inflame her cuckolded partner’s brutal revenge. A critique of the way a group mentality can limit individuality and thwart nonconformity courses through the book. At the funeral of a murdered local youth, Nicolás recounts his brother’s warning that “this was what happened to fags”. “Waugh”, a tale of male sex workers who share a house, explores the near impossibility of a relationship with a “john” developing from transactional to tender. Its theme is echoed in “Shepherd”, when a classical music-loving Jamaican sex worker who is grieving over the death of her baby visits aspirational relatives in Houston. Her glamour stuns her confused adolescent cousin – “her dress glowed a shade of margarita”, “she smiled like mandolins ringing” – and she offers herself to him as a shortcut to his sexual awakening. As the stories follow and contextualise each other, the sense grows of the characters’ inability to escape the closed circuits of their desperate lives. Avery, a conflicted drug dealer, is crestfallen when he discovers his son – whose attendance at university ought to have provided a passport out of the ghetto – homeless, trying to score drugs on the streets. In “Navigation”, Nicolás, now an adult, is tasked with menial chores, sweeping up and gutting pigs in a restaurant. He stumbles into an affair with a customer and struggles, as do other characters, to navigate that liminal state between temporariness and permanence, between physical sex and platonic love. A number of these stories stop abruptly in the midst of a profound realisation; far from being irritating, Washington’s technique here mirrors the fleeting lucidity of his characters, who are usually in a fug of alcohol, and their casual acceptance of disastrous events. This is most tellingly illustrated in a digression in “Waugh”, by a chilling account of an encounter at a military checkpoint in an unnamed Central American country. The driver realises that when the sentry says the car is too full, it’s code for the fact that he will be executed. Only in the elegiac final story, a lament for the loss of youth and family ties as well as the end of the neighbourhood, does Nicolás break free from the stultifying crucible of Houston’s ’hoods. He heads for the coast and, in a kind of self-actualising baptism into a new life, wades into the water. Nicolás is yet to find a language to express the powerful feelings that have left him broken. Washington, however, already possesses a compelling and seasoned writer’s voice. • Lot by Bryan Washington is published by Atlantic (RRP £12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.