We read about the Lib Dems being under pressure to back Jeremy Corbyn’s effort to stop a no-deal Brexit (Report, 16 August). Since the May local elections, progressives of all political complexions in our borough of Waverley, Surrey, have worked together. Liberal Democrats work alongside Green and Labour councillors on the council executive and, while we agree on a number of issues, we disagree on others and resolve those disagreements in a tolerant and respectful way. We urge our Westminster colleagues to do likewise, and to engage seriously with Jeremy Corbyn’s offer to lead a caretaker government limited to the specific tasks of stopping no deal and calling an election, with a commitment to a referendum with a remain option at the earliest opportunity. This may well be the only way to avert no deal, and we urge our parties to give that absolute priority at this critical time for our country. We also hope that our parties will all campaign energetically for remain in the subsequent referendum.Paul Follows, Nick Palmer and Steve Williams Leaders of the Lib Dem, Labour and Green groups on Waverley borough council, Susan Ryland Chair, South West Surrey Compass • The truth is that whatever Labour’s leadership team comes up with, Jeremy Corbyn can’t win. When he finally announces a no-confidence vote and a “temporary administration” led by him “on a strictly time-limited basis”, he puts the success of the vote in jeopardy because many would vote against rather than see him as prime minister. Labour’s frontbench apparently think Corbyn is the “only politician who could lead a caretaker government”, but they should know by now that he is not going to lead them to an election victory weeks later. His domestic and foreign policies are fair and popular, but his leadership has seen too much obfuscation and confusion, and lacked any positive electioneering. Making this announcement via a letter rather than at least a press conference highlights the need for stronger and more determined leadership. This is not to say the party needs another attempt to oust Corbyn with another rightwing candidate, but it does mean Corbyn should hand over the reins to someone on the frontbench with the nous to win an election. That has to be the be-all and end-all of Labour policy at this time; if Johnson is not defeated the party will never be forgiven.Bernie EvansLiverpool • Jeremy Corbyn’s plan to avoid a no-deal Brexit has just one crucial flaw: Jeremy Corbyn. It is already clear that too many members of other parties consider the prospect of his being PM, even for a time-limited period, unpalatable. Yet it would be tragic if a seemingly effective approach floundered for such a relatively trivial reason. A few weeks ago there was support from many across the political spectrum for Rory Stewart’s bid to lead the Tories and hence become PM. Might it now be the time to reboot Rory?Philip DaviesLondon • Divisions between the anti-no-deal forces in parliament now seem to centre on the question of whether or not a referendum should follow new elections (Where groups of MPs stand on the Corbyn option, 16 August). Those who argue for a referendum first have yet to explain how the result of this would be honoured, should it endorse whichever version of Brexit was offered on the ballot. A national unity government could hardly be expected to do so: the country would immediately be thrown back into political chaos, with no party or coalition willing to own the result. Labour’s preference – an election followed by a referendum in which the sitting government was committed to honour the outcome – is the only one that provides a viable conclusion to this impasse other than a no-deal exit. It follows from this that Labour should have the opportunity to negotiate its own deal to exit the EU on the best terms possible.Tom LengSheffield • Dominic Cummings will be sleeping easily tonight. Jeremy Corbyn and others have very publicly put forward their solutions to stymie a no-deal Brexit and it completely coincides with what Cummings wants – namely, divide and rule. So as the majority of us all argue among ourselves and find no way to compromise, the end result is a no-deal Brexit much more likely to be safely delivered.Gary BennettExeter • Malcolm Pittock claims that the referendum “was not advisory” (Letter, 16 August). But that’s precisely what it was, as House of Commons Briefing Paper 07212 set out: the referendum bill “does not contain any requirement for the UK government to implement the results of the referendum … [it is] consultative, which enables the electorate to voice an opinion ... The UK government does not have constitutional provisions which would require the results of a referendum to be implemented.” Clear enough, I think, regardless of what the government promised it would do with the result.Dr Richard CarterPutney, London • In discussing his reasons for voting leave, Malcolm Pittock states that this country needs to renounce nuclear weapons, refuse to participate in foreign wars of choice and break the special relationship with the US, but can do none of these while a member of the EU and Nato. But consider these facts: Austria, Finland, Ireland, Malta and Sweden are EU members but are not members of Nato. Only two EU countries have nuclear weapons (the UK and France), and only the UK claims to have a special relationship with the US. If we leave the EU we will still be in Nato, still have nuclear weapons and still claim a special relationship with the US.Paul TattamChinley, Derbyshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition