Arise, Lord Tim of Wetherspoon’s. Try on this ermine for size, any economist prepared to go against almost the entirety of your profession in arguing that a no-deal Brexit would be just terrific for Britain. The prime minister is reportedly drawing up a list of so-called “Brexit heroes” to be rewarded with peerages, although the word “hero” here is arguably being stretched to breaking point: the plan is apparently to ennoble a bunch of leading leavers after 31 October, in a clear rebuke to a House of Lords that has so far proved decidedly sceptical about the idea of leaving the EU at any price. Well done, everyone involved in dragging Britain into this godawful mess! Now here’s your reward: the chance to get a whole new set of life-changing political judgments wrong, for generations to come. Prime ministers packing the House of Lords with their own supporters is not exactly new, obviously – and if you don’t complain when your own side does it, then it’s hypocritical to complain when the other side does. After all, Theresa May’s own resignation honours list is expected to include the likes of her former chief of staff Gavin Barwell, who fought tirelessly behind the scenes for a more moderate Brexit and would be free to continue in the Lords with the gloves off. It’s only natural that Boris Johnson would retaliate in kind, stuffing a few no-deal enthusiasts on to those increasingly crowded red leather benches ahead of the battles to come (for even if we do leave the EU as promised on 31 October, that will only be only the start of years of haggling over the future relationship). If the names now doing the rounds seem hopelessly underqualified to make law, then the same is true of countless honours lists past padded out with party donors or nondescript MPs being bumped up to the Lords so some favoured political protege could have their Commons seats. But step back, and the overall picture emerging across public life is alarming. Johnson is rapidly correcting what many leavers see as the great strategic error of the last three years, which was to win the referendum battle but not the ensuing war. They got their popular mandate to leave, but never secured control of the political establishment charged with carrying it out. Parliament may be cowed and confused, afraid of confronting the 52%, but deep down it’s never been convinced by hard Brexiters’ arguments (and Tory peers, who unlike Tory MPs, have nothing to fear from an increasingly radicalised grass roots membership, have proved particularly hard to keep in line). Downing Street under May was full of former remainers, and while civil servants have done their level best to serve their masters with the requisite political neutrality, it’s not really neutrality the Johnson administration seeks now but the kind of gung-ho evangelical belief that finds a way through, regardless of the practical obstacles. Ordinarily, the fact that a no-deal Brexit unites this many smart and politically experienced Westminster people in a horror that transcends party lines would be seen as a giant, flashing red light. If the consensus is that an idea is barking mad, then the chances are it is. But the twisted logic of populism turns all that upside down, arguing that if “the establishment” is against something then it must be the establishment that needs changing, not the strategy. Hence the virtual takeover of No 10 by former Vote Leave staffers, led by Dominic Cummings, and emerging concerns within Whitehall that a more widespread politicisation of the civil service may now be on the cards. Some senior Tories have been arguing for years for a more activist, ideologically minded Whitehall machine that could help ministers drive through ideas that have popular support. Well, they’ll never have a better chance to secure it. What makes all this so ominous is that these would be permanent changes. Regimes in Downing Street come and go, but peers are peers for life, retaining the ability to shape the country’s future long after Brexit is either done and dusted (or, less likely, shelved for good). Civil service impartiality is rather like virginity in that once it’s gone, it’s gone for good. And the way Conservative membership associations handle deselection threats against rebellious remainer MPs will reverberate through parliament for years to come; it’s not just about who survives the cull, but about who would choose to try to become an MP in the current climate and who would walk away. Whatever the outcome of the daily fight over Brexit, it may have permanently changed the conditions under which future battles will be fought – and not for the better. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist