Joe Root said Jofra Archer has changed the dynamic of England’s attack and given Australia something to think about after the tourists clung on for a tense draw. Australia will take their 1-0 lead to Headingley for Thursday’s third Ashes Test but may be without Steve Smith after their talismanic batsman was ruled out before the final day here with delayed concussion symptoms. While Marnus Labuschagne, Test cricket’s first concussion substitute, helped close out the match – his 100-ball 59 a key hand in reaching 154 for six when set 267 to win in 48 overs – the man who struck Smith was on everyone’s lips. Asked about Archer, who claimed match figures of five for 91 from 44 overs, Root said: “He’s come in and made a massive impact. He’s added a different dynamic to our bowling group and given Australia something different to think about. “It’s pleasing to see someone come in on Test debut, shake up things and live up to the hype – even some of the hype he put on himself. It makes for a very interesting last three games. “He makes things happen with such a unique action and natural pace, which is always in the game on any surface. That with the skill of the others, makes for a tasty combo.” If the scoreline remains the same after England’s opening defeat at Edgbaston then the mood of the series certainly feels different. Root said: “Things can change very quickly in sport. At the start of the week we wanted a big response and we have definitely done that. It felt like we put them under huge pressure. It shows how much we’re in this series.” While Archer shone and Jack Leach claimed three wickets to put the squeeze on Australia, it was Ben Stokes who was named player of the match. The all-rounder’s seventh Test century, an unbeaten 115 from 165 balls, helped England to declare on 258 for five and take full control. Stokes was keen to talk up Archer too, describing his teammate’s ability as frightening before adding: “I am not sure there will be a better debut in terms of announcing yourself. “The spell [to Smith on Saturday] was incredible to watch. We were laughing he was going to be top of the rankings after one Test. We are very lucky he is in our team. He gives you an extra dimension.” Tim Paine, the Australia captain, said his side were not at their best in this Test and admitted Smith’s chances of returning to the fold this week remain subject to medical clearance in the coming days. He said: “It was a really nasty knock. He felt OK then the concussion was delayed – he woke up not feeling well. I’m not doctor but we have professionals who makes those decisions. Steve passed the tests [on the day] but deteriorated overnight. I’m not sure about Headingley. He’ll need to improve, there’s no doubt about that. Hopefully for our sake he does.” On Archer, Paine added: “We’ve seen him for a few years now [in Twenty20 cricket] and we know the package he brings with his pace. That’s something every team wants to have. It’s up to us to make some plans and get better [against him]. It’s not all doom and gloom.”