The US said on Tuesday it will delay tariffs on Chinese-made cellphones, laptops and other items and remove other Chinese imports from its target list altogether, in a move that triggered a rally on Wall Street. The Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR) said it was still planning 10% tariffs on about $300bn in Chinese imports, extending the import taxes on just about everything China ships to the US in a dispute over Beijing’s aggressive trade policies. Most of the levies are scheduled to kick in on 1 September. But the agency said it would delay tariffs to 15 December on some goods, including cellphones, laptops, video game consoles, some toys, computer monitors, shoes and clothing. It will remove other items from the list based “on health, safety, national security and other factors”. The USTR action was published minutes after China’s ministry of commerce said vice-premier Liu He conducted a call with US officials. It said talks with trade representative Robert Lighthizer and treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin would occur again in two weeks’ time. The news sent the Dow Jones up more than 460 points in mid-morning trading. Shares of Apple, Mattel and shoe brand Steve Madden shot up. A 4.8% jump in Apple shares and a rise in chip stocks pushed the technology sector, traditionally among the most sensitive to trade issues, 2.33% higher. The Philadelphia chip index rose 3.16%. However, some consumer electronics items spared from previous US tariffs on Chinese goods, including smart watches, fitness trackers, smart speakers and Bluetooth headphones, were not given a reprieve. According to lists published by the USTR, a broad category of items taken off a $200bn tariff list last year will be subject to the 10% tariff as of 1 September. Popular products on the list include smart watches made by Apple and Fitbit, smart speakers from Amazon and Apple and Alphabet’s Google and Bluetooth connected devices. The dispute between the world’s two biggest economies has rattled financial markets for more than a year and clouded the global economy. The US and China are fighting over US allegations that Beijing steals trade secrets and forces foreign companies to hand over technology, as part of a drive to become a world leader in advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence and electric cars. “Its unlikely that there’s going to be major deal but we might start to see some small concessions on both sides,” Tom Plumb, chief investment officer of Plumb Funds, told Reuters. “It’ll be good maybe for this week as we kind of get out of an oversold situation but the market is going to bounce around for the rest of the year.” As news of the tariff delay broke, Donald Trump used Twitter to complain that China had not followed through with expected large purchases of US agricultural products. “As usual, China said they were going to be buying ‘big’ from our great American Farmers. So far they have not done what they said. Maybe this will be different!” the president wrote. By mid-morning US eastern time, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 429.49 points, or 1.66%, at 26,327.20, the S&P 500 was up 46.24 points, or 1.60%, at 2,929.33. The Nasdaq was up 165.16 points, or 2.10%, at 8,028.57.