Hundreds of people have rallied in Sydney in support of Hong Kong pro-democracy protesters, despite warnings from Beijing for foreign governments and protesters to stay clear of the issue. Around 500 to 600 people gathered at Sydney’s Belmore Park on Sunday afternoon, while Hong Kong braced for hundreds of thousands to rally in the central business district. More than two months of protests have seen violent escalations including brutal crackdowns by police who are now frequently deploying teargas and using batons against protesters. Placards in Sydney leaned heavily on concerns over police brutality, with many referencing the first-aid volunteer who was hit in the eye with a rubber bullet fired by Hong Kong police. One speaker who had recently returned from the Hong Kong protests said they were fighting for their “future, for democracy, and for the things we used to have” before the 1997 handback of Hong Kong to China. “Many Hong Kongers have bled for such values as we have here in Australia today,” he said. Another speaker outlined the demands now held by the evolving movement: Total withdrawal of the controversial extradition bill, which sparked the protests 11 weeks ago Withdrawal of all accusations against protesters that they engaged in “riots” The unconditional release of more than 700 arrested protesters, and all charges dropped The launch of an independent inquiry into police brutality Implementation of universal suffrage for Hong Kong “Hong Kong protesters have to face brutality, they have to face jail, they have to face persecution,” which they don’t deserve,” said one woman. Many in the crowd wore face masks, wary of alleged Chinese state surveillance of citizens who publicly supported Hong Kong. One 45-year-old man, who declined to give his name, said he came to the rally out of “support and solidarity”. “We are far away from Hong Kong. This is the least I can do. It’s something I need to do for myself as well.” The man said he came to Australia from Hong Kong with his parents in 1986. “It’s the value. The injustice that Hong Kong teenagers are facing at the moment. They’re treated as outcasts and have no stake in society.” The protest came just a day after China sent a warning to protesters and foreign governments about getting involved in the Hong Kong situation, saying “any attempt to mess up Hong Kong is doomed to fail”. The Chinese ambassador to Australia, Cheng Jingye, said protesters in Hong Kong had exhibited “radical, violent and illegal behaviours” which had “grossly trampled on the rule of law” and threatened lives and Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability. “No responsible government would sit idly by,” he said. “Hong Kong affairs are solely the internal affairs of China.” The Labor party has asked the government to allow all federal parliamentarians to access briefings on China, given the high focus on relations at the moment. Wong said the fact that government backbenchers had been the most vocal with their concerns about the Chinese government and Australia’s relationship with it, was a demonstration that the government had failed to lead the conversation. “We are at a point where the relationship is more complex and also more consequential,” shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong, told Insiders on Sunday morning. “We should have a more informed debate.” On Friday the Australian prime minister said it was a “concerning situation”. “Anything I would say would be only to encourage a de-escalation of the situation in Hong Kong, and for those that are protesting to do so peacefully, and for that to be respected,” he said. Thousands have rallied in Australian cities in recent days, on both sides of the divide. Scuffles and some violence was reported, including an attack on an ABC crew in Melbourne and threats against pro-Hong Kong protesters by Beijin loyalists. As Sunday’s speeches continued, a small crowd was drawn to a boisterous debate behind them. A couple of pro-Beijing men argued the five points with a protester. An elderly man carrying a Chinese flag said he was born in Malaysia but supported China. Police quickly moved to clear the crowd, urging the protesters to ignore them. “Don’t let it ruin your day,” said one. “This is why people live here, we can have a say.”