It’s August, which means it’s my birthday month, and I’ll be celebrating with this super-simple sundae. There was a point in my life when I ate dried apricots all the time. When I finally tasted a fresh one, it blew my mind. It was so summery and fresh, which is why apricots are taking centre stage here (cooked with spices and balsamic vinegar). Pick up some of your favourite vanilla ice-cream, top it off with the best pistachio cookie crumble and some dark chocolate sauce, and you’ve got yourself a happy sundae. Prep 30 minChill 20 minCook 30 minServes 4 500g vanilla ice-cream 100g dark chocolate (I use 70% cocoa solids), melted For the crumble90g unsalted butter, softened 45g golden caster sugar½ tsp vanilla extract115g plain flour50g raisins 50g pistachios, roughly chopped For the apricots50g unsalted butter10 apricots, stoned and quartered100g light brown sugar2 tsp balsamic vinegar1 tsp vanilla extract½ tsp ground nutmeg½ tsp ground cardamom For the rose whip300ml double cream½ vanilla extract¼ tsp rose extract First, make the crumble. Cream the butter, sugar and vanilla in a large bowl, add the flour, raisins and pistachios, and mix until a dough forms. Shape into a log measuring about 5cm widthways, wrap in clingfilm and chill in the fridge for 20 minutes. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Slice the log into 1cm-thick discs and put on a baking tray lined with baking paper. Bake for 15 minutes, leave to cool a little on the tray to firm up, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. Once cool, crush half the biscuits and leave the rest whole. Heat a frying pan or skillet over a medium-high heat, and melt the butter. In a large bowl, combine the apricots, sugar, vinegar, vanilla and spices, then gently toss. Put the apricot mix in the pan, and cook for 10 minutes, until the fruit starts to fall apart. Leave to one side to cool. In another bowl, whip the cream, vanilla and rose extract using a whisk or electric mixer, until just whipped. To assemble, put two generous scoops of ice-cream in four sundae glasses or small bowls. Sprinkle with the crushed cookies, then add the cooked apricots. Top each one with a dollop of rose cream, wedge in a cookie and drizzle with the melted chocolate.