Despite his admirable letter (17 August), the sentiments of which I wholeheartedly concur with, David Hinchliffe has omitted the name of the late and great Clive Sullivan, who skippered the 1972 Great Britain team to its last World Cup success. Indeed, I understand that Sullivan was the first black captain of any British sporting side. Supporters and fellow players of what we northerners refer to as “the greatest game” feel immensely proud of this fact and of his memory, which is cherished to this day. Unfortunately, despite his outstanding qualities on the wing for Halifax, Johnny Freeman was never selected for Great Britain – his career coincided with the primacy of Billy Boston, Mick Sullivan, John Stopford and Ike Southward. Like his compatriots Boston, Clive Sullivan and Colin Dixon, he hailed from the famous Tiger Bay district of Cardiff. As such the prospects of these players in Welsh rugby union would have been strictly limited.Les SheardChulmleigh, Devon • Congratulations on printing two letters extolling the forward “social” thinking of rugby league. Your reader, Bill Tordoff, reminds us not to forget the word “union” when talking about the white middle-class sport. However, we should not forget the word “football” either. Hull Football Club play Rugby League football and are called “FC” because there was little or no soccer (association football) when, according to the Hull FC website, “Led by a certain Anthony Bradley, a group of ex-public school pupils, mainly from Rugby School but also from St Peter’s, York, Marlborough and Cheltenham, the Hull Football Club was formed late in 1865.”Sue AllotIlkley, West Yorkshire • I am writing to express my sincere respect for Nicky Bandini and to acknowledge the importance of her recent article coming out as trans (I’m Nicky Bandini – and I’m still a sports writer, 17 August). I am an LGBTQ football fan and have followed the Guardian’s football journalism since I was a teenager in South Africa. It is striking just how behind the football world is with respect to minority rights, not least of all those of the queer community. The fact that there are very few or no openly queer players – and, to my knowledge, no prominent writers until now – is quite a remarkable feat in this day and age. In this context, Nicky’s decision to come out so publicly and eloquently is brave and remarkable. Although I am not trans, this is inspiring to me and other LGBTQ fans. I hope that the football world is moving towards a situation where prominent figures like Nicky are not viewed as exceptional, and where they do not make the general footballing public fearful or uncomfortable. I wish her all the best for her future writing. Love, strength and empathy.Raphael Chaskalson London • I am a little surprised that Nicky Bandini is unaware of the work of Philippa York in cycling journalism. Perhaps as followers of sport we are all guilty of only looking for people like us in our own niche.Simon FieldingWolverhampton • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition