After the endless hype and anticipation of Serena Williams’ all-superstar first-round grudge match with Maria Sharapova, in the end it was a mere rookie who had the audacity to step up to the all-time great and fearlessly push her to the edge of despair. But despite difficulties, Williams defeated 17-year-old grand slam rookie Caty McNally, 5-7, 6-3, 6-1, to move into the third round of the US Open in an electric night on Arthur Ashe Stadium. Against one of the all-time greats, all McNally had was a blank slate. This was Williams’ 949th career tour-level match compared to McNally’s 10th. This year marks Williams’ 20th US Open, while it was McNally’s first. In total, the youngster had previously only competed in the main draw of five top-level events. No matter. McNally was ready and she arrived with a game that seemed forged by the memory of some of the players Williams used to face 20 years ago. She disrupted Williams’ game with her backhand slice that skidded low into the cement, her heavy topspin forehand and her insatiable desire to constantly move forward to the net. Most importantly, the young American, who would watch Williams play as a youngster at her home tournament in Cincinnati, matched Williams’ serving throughout. “When I went out there, I just worried about myself,” McNally said. “I didn’t think who was on the other side of the net as much. But obviously I knew I was playing against the greatest of all time. I knew that I had to bring a certain level.” At 5-all, Williams’s groundstrokes began to splutter, and it was all the encouragement McNally needed as she broke serve with a searing forehand return. When the 23-time major champion raced to triple break point in the following game, McNally methodically saved all three with a lethal mixture of potent serving and deft touch, confidently capturing the set. It has been a difficult year for Williams with countless injuries and setbacks. She did not return to the scene of most of her greatest on-court traumas to lose in the second round. Williams despaired for a while, but then she fought and roared into action, elevating her game as she so often does. ‘ “I had to stop making errors,” Williams said. “I made so many errors in the first two sets. It was just too many. You can’t win tournaments making that many errors. I knew I had to play better, and I knew I could.” By the final set, the 37-year-old was in full flow. Williams broke serve immediately with a piercing return, then the youngster gave up the second break with a double fault, the pressure of Williams’ return suffocating her. Finally, the six-time US Open champion sealed the match with a forehand return winner to march on. McNally was not born when Williams captured her first grand slam title 20 years ago at Flushing Meadows, but after watching Williams for her entire life, she was unsurprised by the authority with which she slammed the door shut. “I’ve watched her so many times,” McNally saud. “I know how well she can play. I was just really impressed with the way she was serving towards the end of the match, how well she was returning. Hats off to her, she just played really well.” McNally will experience the biggest stages many more times as her career progresses, but she will always remember the experience of staring down Serena Williams as a 17-year-old ingenue and leaving with a set and her respect. Unsurprisingly, it has provided ample motivation. “For me, I think it just shows that I’m capable of playing with the best,” she said. “I got a set off Serena Williams. Had her close in the second set, too. Had some chances. For me, it just gives me a lot of confidence, shows me that I can compete out on the biggest stages. Just keep my head down, I’m ready to go back to work. “ For Williams, though the battle brought frustration and despair in the moment, she appreciated the long road that lay ahead to a possible record-tying 24th slam. Any match that hardens her battle instincts and prepares her for the challenges ahead is an asset. Any moment that reminds her just how desperately she wants to win this title is to be cherished. “I think it’s great because I want to be able to win matches where I’m not playing my best, play players who are playing great, be able to come through. I need to be tested, I guess,” she said. Then Williams rolled her eyes. “Sounds scripted. Actually, I’d rather not be tested in every match. But that doesn’t happen, so it’s important for me to have those, like, really rough, rowdy matches. That helps a lot.”