Tim Bell was famously Margaret Thatcher’s favourite PR guru. It’s not hard to see why. He mixed a ridiculously easy and seductive charm with wit and free-market views. He operated at the height of the then critical nexus between global CEOs, top politicians and journalists. His death marks the end of a “golden” public relations era that spanned almost half a century, and Bell was one of its leading lights – and his particular star always shone brightly – for good and bad. I know something about Bell because I worked for him for three years in the mid-1990s. It was an odd thing to do for someone who had worked in Gordon Brown’s office. I was in my late 20s, had a young family and little money, and I was intrigued to learn about my supposed enemy. Bell of course knew New Labour was coming. He hated having to prepare for it, but took me under his wing with genuine warmth nevertheless. The man, like most of us, was shot through with contradictions. On the surface it was all free-market, small-state nostrums, but the daily practice of running his company was a million miles from that. He treated everyone with care and compassion, to the ridiculous level of never sacking anyone, no matter how idle or useless they were. I refused the offer of private health insurance, only to be told by him that he’d just pay if me or my family were ever ill. He went to everyone’s leaving event and his door really was always open. I worked directly above his office and could never get past it without being called in to discuss the political events of the day, interspersed with endless cigarettes (his not mine) and calls from cabinet members and Fleet Street editors. His free-market morals found expression in his client base. He’d work for almost any dodgy dictator (though I wouldn’t). But he’d also take on clients who had views alien to his own. Through Bell I worked to help get Sweden into the EU – an institution he despised – and I cut my political teeth working with Alan Johnson, then head of the postal workers’ union, to stop Michael Heseltine privatising the Post Office. We won. Bell believed everyone had the right to representation – if, of course, you could afford his fees. To him, it was just business. He couldn’t believe I wouldn’t work for the fox-hunting lobby – didn’t they deserve representation too? This was, to say the least, a grey period in my life. It was the moment when New Labour became ascendant and, it seemed, the contradictions between labour and capital could be ignored – “the end of history”, the political economist Francis Fukuyama called the time, and so it felt. According to New Labour’s answer to Bell, Peter Mandelson (who learned much from Bell’s mastery of the media), there was nothing wrong with being “filthy rich”. Through Bell I learned how to make things happen. In the future I made sure I reserved these skills for things I really believed in. There is a bigger arc here, though, than just Bell’s life, as big as that was. He always argued that PR was “simply a truth well told”. But whose “truth”, and what happens when “well told” just becomes spin? I don’t think Bell cared – what mattered was influence and financial success. The practice of PR for him was to talk “your” side up and “their” side down. A zero-sum game. But as the pager gave way to the mobile and the fax to social media, truth stopped being what rich and powerful people said it was – not least through their well-paid advisers. That old world of command and control PR was being consigned to the same dustbin of history as command and control communism. In an increasingly networked society, truth is something we should be able to construct together transparently. New battle lines are now drawn: between those who would use nefarious means to manipulate and distort our information world and those with the democratic desire to exploit technical possibilities for the common good. A future that isn’t imposed on us but is negotiated by all of us. Bell was certain the free market and not the state was the answer to everything. And yet his empire was run like the nanny state, coddling everyone within it. He would quote Thatcher, in turn quoting John Wesley: “earn all you can, give all you can, save all you can”. Such entrepreneurialism mixed with altruism is not my guiding philosophy – but can we easily condemn those who espouse it? The world is complex. Tim Bell was a complex man. And today there are no simple truths to be told – just complex relationships and interests to be managed and negotiated. • Neal Lawson is chair of the centre-left pressure group Compass