The yellow postal bus lurches up the narrow, dead-end road that winds through Valle Onsernone, blasting its horn in warning as it rounds one cliff-hugging hairpin turn after another. Just a flimsy-looking guardrail separates us from the yawning ravine below. Heart somewhere in my throat, I wonder how many previous buses have tumbled over it into the churning Isorno River. For the record, the answer is none – this is Switzerland, after all. Just 25 minutes ago I was in the manicured lakeside resort of Locarno, watching wealthy holidaymakers clink Aperol spritzes. Now, as I shakily disembark in front of the Villa Edera hostel, I’m surrounded by birdsong, the hum of insects and towering peaks in innumerable shades of green. On the sunny northern side of the river, a chain of tiny hamlets stretch to the Italian border, their architecture a mix of traditional slate-roofed houses and ornate villas built by boastful émigrés. To the south stand a handful of solitary stone huts, accessible only on foot. This rugged stillness brought artists and writers such as Max Ernst and Kurt Tucholksy to this corner of Ticino, in southern Switzerland, in the 1930s. It later drew a wave of Swiss-German Aussteiger – nature-loving hippy “dropouts”, who risked the antagonism of Italian-speaking locals for a chance to live truly off the grid. And it’s what Villa Edera manager Mike Keller, the 37-year-old son of two such escapees, hopes will bring a new generation to Switzerland’s wildest valley. “I never used to tell my American friends where I came from – I wanted to keep it for myself,” Mike says. Born in Onsernone but brought up mostly in his mother’s native US, he returned on holiday in 2016 after becoming disillusioned by a career in foreign aid. Mike was dismayed to find half-empty villages, closed schoolhouses and an ageing population that had dwindled to 700 from a 19th-century high of 4,000. So he decided to apply the experience he’d acquired in Chad, the Middle East and Afghanistan to his hometown. Starting, but definitely not ending, with a hostel. Under his direction, Villa Edera transformed from prison-like municipal student accommodation to a cheery backpacker hub, with a fridge full of local craft beer and a bright-yellow common area lined with upcycled antiques. Flyers in the hall direct guests to the valley’s most popular hiking trails (on which you’re still likely to be alone, even at the height of summer) and the museum in nearby Loco, where Italian and German speakers can load up on Onsernone history. In addition to running this and two group hostels – in Loco and Vergeletto, further up a side valley – Mike mans the information point next door, where he tells newcomers all about the delights of his birthplace with the persuasive zeal of a tech chief executive who’s discovered microdosing. On his lead, I end up in a genteel hamlet a few miles to the west called Berzona, famous as the final residence of Swiss playwright Max Frisch. Here, at Pagliarte, Spanish-German transplant Lara Blumer heads a collective of women reviving the valley’s flagship trade: straw hats. Before the industrial revolution, nearly every man, woman and child in Onsernone was involved in the business, whether harvesting rye from terraces carved into the steep mountainsides, softening and braiding the straw, or carrying the products on muleback to the market town of Intragna. Today, the old mule path is a gentle hiking trail, and Blumer and her colleagues make their hats, bags and keychains out of pre-plaited rice straw bought from a Florence wholesaler. “I want a product locals can afford, and that wouldn’t be the case if we were braiding it ourselves. We tried: it takes forever!” But she has begun growing rye for another Pagliarte product: an all-natural alternative to plastic drinking straws. In Vergeletto, I meet Pagliarte’s founder, Ilario Garbani. Since 2009, the retired teacher and avid local historian has been preoccupied with Onsernone’s other signature product: farina bòna, or roasted cornflour. In his village’s former school gym, he heats the kernels until they’re “one-third popcorn”; next, he hauls them to the restored watermill above, where they’re stone-ground into a fine powder. The subtly sweet result is a hit with Swiss foodies – Garbani estimates he ships 10 tonnes a year to restaurants and supermarkets. Until recently, the mill and Pagliarte received state support as part of a decade-in-the-making plan to turn Valle Onsernone and its environs into a national park – which would have been only the second in Switzerland. The project would have injected millions into the local economy and infrastructure, but many here saw it as an unnecessary imposition – among them the dropouts who moved here precisely to escape such authority, and old-timers afraid of losing the freedom to hunt and protect their livestock from wolves. (Park plans didn’t restrict that freedom, but a virulent internet campaign suggested otherwise.) In June 2018, residents voted down the park by a slim margin, leaving Blumer and Garbani on their own and the valley bitterly divided. “It’s a wound that still hasn’t healed,” says Markus Weibel, an anaesthetist from Bern who runs a hilltop B&B called Palazzo Barione. He recalls the plebiscite as a “dark day”. His neighbours, who own a flock of free-grazing sheep, celebrated with fireworks. Most of the people I meet in Valle Onsernone are in favour of a national park – though on a trip to Spruga, the hippy stronghold at the valley’s endpoint, I come across an ear-ringed beekeeper named Basil who is against the project. Chiefly, he doesn’t want more visitors tramping past his home on the way to Bagni di Craveggia, an abandoned thermal spa just over the Italian border that is the closest thing Onsernone has to a proper tourist attraction. And there, he’s got a point. In 2009, a 300-strong “rainbow gathering” at Craveggia proved a bit much for the valley to handle. A tourist influx of the sort that plagues Valle Verzasc, north-east of Locarno – whose arched Roman bridge is a fast-rising Instagram fixture – could destroy the blissful isolation that makes Onsernone special, and upset its patchwork community’s delicate balance. Which is why, though disheartened by the park vote, Mike at the hostel sees a silver lining. “With the park, we wouldn’t have been able to control what kind of people come here,” he says. “This way, we’ve got a chance to choose for ourselves.” Which people would those be? Villa Edera has already brought a jolt of young, international energy to Onsernone’s usual summer crowd of in-the-know Swiss Germans. Modern-day “wellness” types are a logical target demographic and Keller caters for them with Saturday yoga sessions and the occasional stone mandala workshop. More hardcore self-searchers flock to the hut atop Alpe Salei, a 1,783-metre peak reachable by cable car from Vergeletto. In 2015, it was taken over by a thirtysomething Italian couple who met at a Zen monastery and now host yoga and tai chi retreats there. But Keller’s vision for Onsernone goes beyond yoga, or Blumer and Garbani’s folk traditions: “Protecting what we have here is a noble idea ... but what about something else?” Every week or so, he rings the mayor to present his latest scheme for rejuvenating the valley, and is usually summarily dismissed. I hear about a stargazing preserve, a residency programme for artists and writers, and a “digital detox” hostel where guests hand their phones in at the door. “My most radical idea was to tear down one of our microwave towers, to create a reception-free zone for 5G opponents.” One plan that did come to fruition was a co-working space on the ground floor of Casa Schira, his hostel in Loco, to be opened next year. “Let’s face it, people aren’t going to move here and start making cheese any more,” Keller says. “Our best hope is digital nomads – people like web designers and programmers who can come here to get work done but also go hiking and experience the valley, even if it’s just in the summer.” Instagrammers, on the other hand, aren’t welcome – for everyone’s sake. Onsernone’s overgrown, oft-slippery hiking trails require concentration and sensible clothing. (Food porn, too, is scarce: local specialties polenta and risotto hardly look appetising on a mobile screen.) Visitors to Valle Onsernone don’t have to be particularly intrepid, but they should be willing to do their homework, talk to residents and take time to adapt to a place a little out of step with the rest of the world. At one point Keller turns on his laptop. “My friend shot this with a drone last year, but I still haven’t posted it on social media,” he says, opening a video file. It’s him, swimming alone in the deep, crystal-clear river at the bottom of the gorge. The drone zooms out to reveal dramatic granite cliffs above; the path he took down from his home village of Crana isn’t visible. Onsernone evangelist that he is, Keller would still prefer some things about his valley stay secret. For now. Getting thereFrom Zürich, take the train to Locarno (from £48 one-way) then take the FART bus (giggling out of the way now) towards Spruga. Buses run every 2-3 hours, so plan your departure with Swiss precision or consider renting a car. A communal taxi, free for hostel and restaurant patrons, runs on weekend evenings when the buses don’t. Where to stayVilla Edera hostel (dorm beds £24, doubles £68) provides basic accommodation and a discount at the next-door restaurant. Valle Onsernone’s only hotel is Palazzo Gamboni (doubles from £138), a historic villa with sauna, original antiques and the current owner’s hand-woven textiles. Markus Weibel’s B&B, Palazzo Barione (doubles from £94) is a 10-minute uphill walk from the village of Mosogno. Up the valley in Russo, Da Toldo (doubles from £102 B&B) is a lovely hippy-ish refuge owned by one of the original Aussteiger (dropouts). Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips 