After Nell Zink’s mother died a few years ago, she asked her friend Tom to treat her for post-traumatic stress. Zink was having trouble sleeping, and her friend, a semi-famous German singer-songwriter, had retrained as a shaman. “I laid down and closed my eyes, Tom did this shamanistic ritual, and when I came out of this trance an hour later, he looked at me and said: ‘I am afraid I have to tell you, Nell, you have no subconscious mind.’” Zink laughs hysterically while telling this very Zink-esque story. “He’d gone into my mind, and there is usually an empty room with doors. But in my case that room was completely full with an over-the-top, psychedelic party that was really loud and populated by these nightmarish creatures. It was complete overload and there was no escape.” A wild party in your mind, crammed with colourful characters and no taboos: as an introduction, that’s also a good description of Nell Zink’s fiction. Her debut novel, The Wallcreeper, moved from birdwatching to anal sex within the opening seven pages. Her follow-ups, Mislaid, Nicotine and Private Novelist, filled the room with all varieties of modern misfits: feminist squatters, smokers’ rights activists, white lesbian mothers who self-identify as black, Israeli spies, mythical seal-women. In her latest, Doxology, the party gets even louder: the novel’s main protagonists are a post-punk three-piece propelled by an unlikely Top 10 hit into a world of music videos, free drugs and signature dance moves. If Tom the shaman is right and all these people were merely hanging around on the surface of her waking mind, waiting to be harvested into short sharp novels, it would explain the speed of Zink’s rise to fame: Doxology is the fifth book in five years from the 55-year-old writer who until 2014 was living in complete obscurity in a small town outside Berlin. When US magazines first took notice of her blackly comic prose, the rumour in the German capital’s literary circles was that “Nell Zink” had to be a JT Leroy-style hoax, or a pseudonym for an already established author such as Jonathan Franzen, the US novelist who championed her. Her writing was too stylistically assured for someone with no track record of plugging away on the fringes of the publishing industry, her name too neatly memorable. And who on earth would choose to live in Bad Belzig, a medieval spa town in Brandenburg, preened into pensioner-friendly blandness with post-Wall subsidies? Her novels are usually set among exclusive social scenes with their own codes – birdwatchers, hippy communes, New York’s indie rock scene In fact, Zink lives in the middle of Bad Belzig’s high street, in a top-floor flat that looks as if it is being let for the short term even though she has occupied it for six years, with mismatched pieces of furniture and a mattress in every corner of the room. Having completed a PhD in Tübingen, in Germany’s south, she was looking for a place halfway between Dessau, where she has friends, and Berlin, which has airports, and her index finger landed here. “It’s the spaceship principle”, she says, pulling a wicker chair up to a marble table in her living room. “I like having the infrastructure. I really like that when I want to go to the post office I have to walk 75 yards. There’s a stationery shop, a drugstore, supermarkets, everything is really close.” She’s aware of the rumours about her fictional identity but unfazed by them: “People who claim to live in Berlin but don’t spend any time there, they are the real hoax”. The other reason people assume Zink might not be real has to do with her prose style. Her novels are usually set among exclusive social scenes with their own codes and rituals – birdwatchers, hippy communes, New York’s 90s indie rock scene – but they are always written from the inside. There are no rock cliches, no “stabbing angular guitars” in Doxology, but instead “high fretting”, “Phil Lesh meets the Congos bass”. Who has the kind of life experience that makes them familiar with so many different walks of life and their mannerisms? “I try to work with allusions and a sort of knowingness”, says Zink, who was a masonry repairer, a secretary, a cocktail waitress, a translator and life model before starting to make a living from fiction. She says she trusts her readers to pick up the clues in her writing because she read a lot of science fiction as a child. “In science fiction it is often the case that you read for about an hour without knowing what is going on. What are these flowers supposed to be? Are they alive, are they carnivorous? The world-building is all by implication … It seems to me if people can get into science fiction, then they don’t need fiction that is written the way [Jeffrey] Eugenides or Franzen do it, where you get all the background information about every single character all the time.” In Doxology, the knowingness is both a pose appropriate to its setting, and a sign of lived experience. In the mid-90s, Zink played the guitar in F.E.R.R.E.T., a New York noisecore band she describes as “terrible but glorious”, and that doesn’t sound too dissimilar to Marmalade Sky, the band at the heart of her new novel. “It has come to my attention that the times and places of my fiction and my biography can overlap. I lived in Virginia until about 89, and that’s when Mislaid ends. This novel picks up in 89 in DC and New York, which is where I went after that. And yet there is nothing autobiographical about it, I swear. I use material because I think it makes for good fiction when you know what you are doing.” In a novel in which characters often talk “pitched low and on the inside, knowing and hopeless, every clause meaning and mourning its opposite”, one of the most memorable and quotable passages mounts an earnest defence of what Zink calls the “80s hipster”: “The eighties hipster bore no resemblance to the bearded and effeminate cottage industrialist who came to prominence as the ‘hipster’ in the new century,” it says. “The eighties hipster was the short-lived cap of spume on the dirty wave of working-class higher education.” Born in Corona, California, in 1964, Zink studied and worked in Virginia and Washington DC before immersing herself in New York’s music scene. As well as living in Germany, she also spent several years living in Israel. Is Zink still an 80s hipster at heart? She emphatically rejects this, only to slowly backtrack by narrowing down her definition even further: hipsterdom in the 80s was not just about intellectual one-upmanship, but an idealistic search for a kind of purity. “When I was way younger and more sensitive, before I watched Tarantino and still had a soul, I listened to bands like Swans, Foetus or Nurse With Wound. Someone hitting a garbage can lid over and over, amplified beyond belief with a lot of chorus on it. That’s what hipsters listened to back in the 90s. Watching horror movies like From Beyond, or documentary footage of the Katyn forest massacre.” While she played in F.E.R.R.E.T, Zink also published a fanzine called Animal Review, in which indie musicians wrote about their favourite animals (Steve Albini of the band Shellac wrote about lemurs). The tagline was “hard music and soft animals”: jaded on the outside, sweet on the inside, that was the mode of her social circle. Zink wrote each of her first two novels each in the space of only three weeks. Doxology took much longer Zink wrote each of her first two novels in the space of only three weeks. By her own admission, Doxology took much longer, undergoing several revisions, and it is more than just a period piece about 90s New York. “I wanted to put together a mosaic that cast a unified shadow,” she says. A “doxology” is a short hymn of praise to God in Christian worship, but there are also instances of doxing (publicising others’ private data online) and women referred to as doxies (sex workers). In ancient Greek, doxa can mean “glory” but also its apparent opposite, “illusion”, and one of the central paradoxes Zink’s novel wrestles with is whether it is possible to be real by faking it. While the first half of Doxology is essentially a defence of the hipster’s devotion to naivety and purity, exemplified at its most saintly by Marmalade Sky’s singer Joe Harris, the second half investigates the limitations of the same mindset. We follow Flora, the daughter of guitarist Pam and drummer/keyboarder Daniel, a passionate environmental scientist who campaigns for Jill Stein, the Green party candidate who helped to split the left-liberal vote in the 2016 US elections. In the age of Trump, the search for moral purity can become a problem in its own right: good intentions aren’t enough. Or, as Flora’s boyfriend, an elderly Democratic strategist, says: “Positive is how people feel when you unite them in hate.” “Flora would like to change the world, but how do you change the world?” Zink asks. “There are 7 billion people, can anybody change the world? And then sometimes examples come along of horrible people who manage to change the world in distressing ways. Maybe effecting a negative change is possible for one person. To build something requires an entire ecosystem working together in concert. To break something, you just need one bullet.” Doxology is, in the best possible sense, a novel at odds with itself. If it wasn’t for the fact that Zink apparently doesn’t have a subconscious mind, you could say it reads like the sound of an author whose intellect is wrestling with her heart. In her second novel, Mislaid, the protagonist used a stolen birth certificate to create an African American identity for herself and her daughter – a plot line conceived before the world had heard the name Rachel Dolezal, an official for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People who turned out to have no African ancestry whatsoever. Doxology seems to achieve a similar feat of clairvoyance. The novel seems to anticipate Greta Thunberg’s rise to prominence. When I suggest this, Zink’s response is surprisingly cautious. “Her success in getting young people to skip school is certainly … remarkable,” she says with composure, before remarking that even arch-conservative politicians in Bavaria have started to talk about cheaper public transport and banning plastic bags. I am about to express my agreement when she interrupts: “It’s such a crock of bullshit! I don’t know what flaming swords Greta Thunberg needs to have to get reactions that are not just crocks of shit.” But isn’t it a real achievement that politicians can no longer avoid talking about the climate crisis? Zink is having none of it. “Your memory isn’t very long. Merkel used to talk about the environment all the time. And nothing happened. She worked actively against her own promises. It was lies. They lie. They are going to lie to Greta Thunberg.” She gets up to fetch a tissue and dab her eyes, then returns to the table. “The question is: how angry is Greta Thunberg going to get, and will they still take her seriously after she is angry? Right now, she is a child warrior character from an anime film. She’s straight out of Miyazaki. What’s she going to be when she is 20, when we are at 500 parts per million [of carbon dioxide]? It’s so out of style to be pessimistic about climate change, I am afraid to do it.” What does she mean by pessimistic? To say we are all doomed? “Oh, I don’t think we are doomed. The human race is going to be fine. Guess what: we are highly intelligent and adaptable. The human race is not in trouble. But as always poor people will be in trouble and the natural world will be fucked to the wall.” Isn’t that optimistic, too, to say we will survive as a species? “Most people don’t read books because they play video games that require servers. Every game has a server out there that consumes as much electricity as a city of 100,000 people. That’s the reality. No amount of generation of renewable energy is ever going to keep up with our appetite for data processing.” Luckily, the party in Zink’s mind isn’t just made up of cynical doomsters wearing black, but also young idealists full of dreams. And as in her novels, they talk over each other all the time. “My hope for the planet is that we would be invaded by the kindly aliens in Arthur C Clarke’s novel Childhood’s End,” she adds. “They would just put a stop to it all: ‘You can’t run your planet this way. It’s not happening. We are in charge now’.” • Doxology is published by 4th Estate (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.