Fascist leader Oswald Mosley has featured on TV and film before, but the portrayal of the charismatic demagogue of the 1920s and 30s can rarely have been so timely. Mosley, the Labour MP who would go on to found the British Union of Fascists, is the main antagonist in the forthcoming fifth series of the Bafta-award winning Peaky Blinders – and the show’s creator, Steven Knight, says despite the politician’s abhorrent views, the decision to feature him prominently was an easy one. “The show always leapfrogs forward two or three years with each series, and in 1929 the most eye-catching storyline, and the one that felt the most resonant to now, was the rise of fascism and the growth of populism and racism in politics across Europe,” he says. “Given that we ended the last series with [lead character] Tommy Shelby getting elected as a Labour politician, it seemed inevitable that he would come into contact with Mosley – and interesting to consider what both men might have in common as well as what marks them apart.” Mosley wasn’t somebody spouting things that people didn’t want to hear but rather someone who people did listen to. That’s what was so terrifying. The dapper Mosley was celebrated when younger for his sharp style and “personal magnetism”; Knight admits that the show had to walk a fine line when depicting his appeal. “All the stories about Mosley mention his charisma, and in Sam [Claflin] we cast an actor who could portray that, but I also wanted to reflect the fact that for lots of people his policies appeared horribly attractive. I wanted audiences to remember that he wasn’t somebody spouting things that people didn’t want to hear but rather someone who people did listen to. That’s what was so terrifying about him.” With the notorious 1936 Battle of Cable Street, in which Mosley’s fascists were sent packing from London’s East End, some years away, the show’s version of the politician is very much the man described by the Westminster Gazette as “the most polished literary speaker in the Commons”. A young and arrogant politician on the make, whose thuggery is hidden under a polished veneer, he is still convinced that he can bend the Labour party – which he joined after a spell first as a Conservative MP and then as an independent – to his will. Claflin, who made his name on Hollywood blockbusters such as Pirates of the Caribbean and The Hunger Games, describes the role as “the most grown-up thing I’ve ever done”, and prepared for it by watching clips of the fascist leader addressing the faithful. “You can see from watching the footage that’s out there of him that he was both incredibly charismatic and incredibly manipulative,” he says. “What was important was trying to get the essence of him without doing an impersonation, because I want the people who remember him to feel that there is real flavour of him there.” It was important, too, not to underestimate the appeal of Mosley’s populist message. “It’s easy to see how and why people fell for it without agreeing with anything he says,” adds Claflin. “It’s the same as the Trump situation. People wanted change. They felt that what was happening in politics wasn’t working, and they aren’t really listening to what’s being said. They’re just thinking, ‘oh, this all feels refreshing and new.’” Anthony Bryne, the series director, agrees, describing the populist politics of the time as an ideology that’s “spreading like a virus, and it seems as though there’s no cure for it”. The show also has fun drawing parallels with Tommy Shelby’s own attempts to present himself as a man of the people. “To begin with, Mosley and Shelby are very much the same side of the coin,” says Knight. “What I’m interested in exploring is how an amoral person [Shelby], whose ideas of human value have been destroyed by his experiences in the first world war, responds when confronted by this ideology.” While the series will have twists and turns along the way, it seems that its creator may be hoping its ending holds a message for today’s politicians. “My hope would be that [viewers] know that history was the judge of Mosley, as it will be of all those people who offer simplistic solutions to complicated problems.” Peaky Blinders returns on BBC One at 9pm on Sunday 25 August Sir Oswald Mosley of Ancoats, sixth baronet (1896-1980), has been portrayed and pastiched on British television and in film in a string of dramas and satires. In 1998, the actor Jonathan Cake played the fascist leader in Channel 4’s Mosley, a drama based on books by Mosley’s son, Nicholas. One of the first to base a character upon him was the writer Aldous Huxley. Everard Webley in his 1928 novel Point Counter Point was inspired by Mosley’s Labour party days. PG Wodehouse’s unappealing Roderick Spode, a character seen in TV adaptations of the Jeeves books, was also based on him. HG Wells’s The Holy Terror features a leader, Lord Horatio Bohun, who owes much to Mosley, while the BBC revival of Upstairs Downstairs included scenes of Mosley during the Cable Street riots. Sir Geoffrey Wren in Kazuo Ishiguro’s The Remains of the Day is another close copy. But Mosley or Mosley-like figures have appeared most frequently in alternative histories that imagine a Nazi victory in Britain, such as the 1964 film It Happened Here.