Etgar Keret is one of Israel’s leading writers, known best for his short stories, graphic novels and screenplays; in 2016, he also published an acclaimed memoir, The Seven Good Years. His new collection, Fly Already, features a father who turns into a rabbit and an array of other surreal and apocalyptic scenarios. He lives in Tel Aviv with his wife and son. Like your other books, Fly Already is a wild ride. Can you tell me a bit about what you’re trying to do with short fiction?For the past 33 years, I’ve been writing short stories, I would say, almost constantly. It’s really more like an uncontrollable reflex, you know, than a career decision. It’s my way of coping with reality. My stories come from a very unconscious place. I don’t premeditate them, I don’t know what’s going to happen in them. Something about this transformation from writing short stories into a collection is almost like a therapy process in which I understand where I am at that time, what is bothering me, what is my experience. What happened this time?I think it had to do with an accident I had about three years ago. I was in a car service going from Connecticut to Boston on a reading tour in the US, and the driver hit another car going something like 120km/h [75mph]. For the first couple of minutes I thought I was dying, and it was as if I was looking at myself from a distance, being very disappointed that my life was not [flashing] in front of my eyes, like they promised in the brochure. The kind of crap that Johnson and Trump are doing now in the US and UK, Netanyahu’s been doing for the past 20 years It wasn’t Technicolor enough!I always saw it in American movies and it always had greater production value, a nicer musical score… I felt this overwhelming experience, like a candle that we know will go out in a second and everything will go dark; and at the same time this kind of understanding that on a global scale, you know, nothing happened. Those cars will keep driving by and the McDonald’s will switch from breakfast to lunch at 11:30, and this idea of the title that came up to my mind was the Hebrew title of the collection, which is A Glitch at the Edge of the Galaxy. Many of the stories take place in a recognisable present day, but others are highly speculative and create a parallel reality. Why is that?I think the stories that I write about, say, cloning, or about AI, when I read them, I feel for sure that it’s a fable‑like way to talk about racism and about xenophobia, and about the human instinct to try to find entities that have less rights than you and exploit them. You know, maybe in some ways, it’s easier to write a story about a clone than to write a story about a refugee arriving in a European country. Politics run through your work. What do you feel about what’s happening?The kind of crap that Johnson and Trump are doing now in the US and UK, Netanyahu’s been doing for the past 20 years; I think he understood a long time ago that you don’t have to control the country, you have to control the discourse. If in the past the role of the leader was of this kind of selfless person who puts the country in front of him, now it’s the kind of guy that could win a Big Brother reality show. Everybody knows his name, a total asshole, but never boring; this is what you really demand from this guy, to be kind of visible and to be above the noise. Back to the stories, I notice a lot of strange, shape-shifting animals…Well, as I speak to you, my rabbit also listens. You really have a rabbit?Yes, I’ll send you a photo of him! He’s really into storytelling. It’s funny because when I sit next to my computer and I write emails or surf, he never comes, but the moment I start writing a story he comes and sits next to my feet and doesn’t get up until I finish it. What’s the last really great book that you read?I’m usually honest in my writing and less honest in interviews, but I can tell you that for the past year, I didn’t read any book, which is the first time since I went to first grade. Why was that?My wife and I were working on a very demanding TV series, a project that demanded relocation and that we direct in French, when we don’t speak French, so all in all it was a very overwhelming experience. It took a lot of my inner space. This year, I’ve been doing something that – if we talk about changes in humanity – all humanity’s been doing, but I guess I gave myself a very good alibi. Whenever I wanted to delve into a book, I would go and watch a Netflix series instead; I must say for pure laziness, because I think the big difference between a TV or film and reading a book is that reading a book demands creativity from you, because you need to imagine things and you need to create them in your mind. And I felt so drained at the end of the day that I wanted somebody else to think out how the characters look. As a child, were you a keen reader?From the moment I started writing, I read less. I think reading was a way of widening the world in which I lived, and that the moment I started writing I found a different way to widen it. So I would alternate between writing such a reality or reading such a reality. I grew up in a family where this traditional transformation between being a child and being an adult was much more blurred. My parents were both children of war, with my mum being orphaned from both her parents at a young age and growing up in a hostile environment; when she was in the orphanage, grownups were the people who were trying to steal food, not the people who took her aside and protected her. Then the idea was that reality was what you wanted it to be. Was there one specific writer you loved?When I was my son’s age, 13, Douglas Adams’s books revolutionised the way that I thought. Not as an artist, because I was not an artist, but as a human being. When I was young, being exposed to Douglas Adams’s books, or to Monty Python, or Blackadder, it’s not that they affected my taste but they affected my attitude to the interaction of this thing called life. • Fly Already by Etgar Keret is published by Granta (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99