We wanted to make a show, the Tarot trio tell us, in the true spirit of the fringe. If that means a left-field idea pursued in the name of fun and in defiance of good sense … well, they’ve succeeded flamboyantly with this occult-meets-cult hour. The jokes come out of nowhere, are bark-out-loud funny, and the whole hour is startlingly live. That’s partly due to the conceit: members of the audience select tarot cards, for each of which the trio have a sketch prepared. They milk the process for anarchic mirth, as skittish Ed Easton scolds us for imprecise choosing and Adam Drake leads us in a chant of “Brucie, Brucie”, another entertainer who required us to play our cards right. But it’s also because – like the Gein’s Family Giftshop shows in which Easton and Kath Hughes once starred – the backchat and needle are as prominent as the sketch comedy, and played as if wholly in-the-moment and real. One sketch about the phrase “I’ll be mother” used when pouring tea dissolves into a coded (then not so coded) exchange of unpleasantries between Hughes and Drake. (“That’s a shit impression of my mother” / “Sorry, did I not sound dead enough?”) Another number set in a sauna finds Drake and Easton in a standoff, each poised to rip away the tiny towel round the other’s waist. It couldn’t be more childish, but in the playing – which is more about the performers’ rivalry than the characters’ plight – it brings the house down. Here as elsewhere, the sordid delinquency of Gein’s humour persists, but dialled down to just the right level of queasy, as when a terrific sketch about a man who never learns his wife’s name ends in childbirth, and gore. (“She’s got your eyes!”) There’s a sense throughout that the trio really are committed to keeping proceedings as surprising as possible, and, as Satan himself makes an appearance, they’ve got the brass necks to do so. It’s fun for them – I could see director Kiri Pritchard-McLean laughing uproariously in the wings – and a hoot for us, too. At Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.