Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching The Handmaid’s Tale, series three, on Channel 4 in the UK. Please do not add spoilers for later episodes in the series. Last week we speculated that perhaps June was bending herself to prove she couldn’t snap. Well, as it turns out, she did snap, and it very nearly landed her on The Wall. But once more, she proves mysteriously immune to the punishments of Gilead, a thick layer of plot armour protecting her from the horrors the likes of Ofmatthew, Janine and Emily have suffered for similar, or lesser, ‘crimes’ against Gilead. Which isn’t to say June isn’t suffering. We’ve seen her lose the will to live before, but we’ve never seen her lose her sanity. This episode is as tractionless as her mind, scenes slipping around each other, time bleeding all over the place. Ofmatthew’s stark white hospital room offers nothing for June’s mind to cling on to, and the episode is a blank canvas for the splashes of colour that come in and out of June’s orbit in vignettes: clusters of red handmaids and blue wives, parades of soft pink daughters, intrusions of green and black from Aunt Lydia and the doctors. The episode is essentially a series of encounters between June and whoever she can get her hands on, all designed to bring her through her dark months of the soul. She tries to kill Serena, in a scene weirdly lacking in tension considering how long this confrontation has been building up, and it’s over almost before it starts. Serena’s vitriol has again given way to sympathy, and she lets June get away with it. Far more impactful is June’s conversation with Janine. Janine has always been the show’s voice of insanity; as the only person capable of seeing good in Gilead, she must be crazy, right? But here it’s June who’s the mad one, and Janine – normally so easily manipulated in June’s schemes – who stands up to June and refuses to let her kill Ofmatthew. “You’re different,” she tells June, pointing out her increasingly selfish behaviour. “I don’t like it.” It’s only when later speaking to the doctor that June realises the truth in Janine’s words, and recognises her own death wish. Everything she’s done since Frances was executed and Hannah was taken away has indirectly been to bring about her own death. The scene was a little heavy-handed, and June could have reached that realisation herself, rather than being told it by a convenient one-off character. But at this point, with only four episodes of the season left to go, anything that gets June back on track is, frankly, a relief. The Handmaid’s Tale has been treading water for the middle part of this season, and June’s promise to Ofmatthew – or Natalie, as we should really call her – also acts as a promise to us that the show is ready to get back down to business. June is no longer selfishly focused on herself and her own family. Her goal is bigger now: she’s going to get as many kids out as she can, because “Gilead should know how this feels. It’s their turn to hurt.” Praise be. The episode opens with an unlikely blast of Belinda Carlisle’s Heaven is a Place on Earth, which has ear-wormed its way into June’s head and stays there throughout the episode, burrowing deeper and deeper into the cracks in her psyche. June is so convinced the beeps of Ofmatthew’s monitors are playing the tune she even breaks the fourth wall to look us dead in the eye and tell us “you’ll hear it”. (Sorry, June, we didn’t.) The song seems an odd choice until June sings a verse at Ofmatthew’s deathbed, including the lyrics: ‘And the world’s alive with the sound of kids on the street outside.’ Heaven, in her mind, is a place where children are free. Under his eye The pubescent girls undergoing fertility tests are a reminder that the upcoming generation of wives are victims just as much as the handmaids are. Their value will be defined by their fertility, and they will be sold off to husbands at an alarmingly young age. Wealth and power are no protection for women in Gilead – there is no protection. Janine’s new eye patch makes her look like a “space pirate”, as Aunt Lydia once again demonstrates her warped fondness for her ‘girls’. Janine’s compassion is heartbreakingly wide-reaching. Yes, she is capable of seeing that Ofmatthew is “one of us”, and therefore as much a victim as she is, but she also loves Aunt Lydia. She’s a puppy who keeps returning to the boot that kicked her. Madeline Brewer doesn’t get nearly enough praise for her performance. Medicine is a ‘miracle’ only when convenient in Gilead. IVF is out of the question, but when a pregnant handmaid is left brain-damaged, suddenly God ‘allows’ doctors to perform miracles. Ah, the irrational justifications of fanaticism.