Right now, we need all the escapism we can get, and that’s precisely what Control, the latest game from Finnish developer Remedy (of Max Payne, Alan Wake and, most recently, Quantum Break fame) delivers – to a deliciously over-the-top degree. An immaculately conceived paranormal fantasy, it is built on several premises which are so preposterous that the writers of The X-Files would surely have rejected them, it somehow manages to feel simultaneously believable and beyond bizarre. Control’s action opens with the character you control, Jesse Faden, entering the New York headquarters of the Federal Bureau of Control, ending a 17-year quest to find the shadowy agency that kidnapped her brother Dylan when she was a kid. But the FBC appears to be empty, apart from Ahti, the Finnish caretaker who lets her in, apparently under the impression she is there for an interview as his assistant. Proceeding upstairs, she finds the dead body of the FBC’s Director, Zachariah Trench. She picks up the gun next to his body, which turns out to be the shape-shifting Service Weapon, which can only be wielded by the FBC’s Director. Her ability to use it instantly installs her as the new Director – and there’s work to be done, since the FBC’s building, known as The Oldest House, is in chaos, thanks to an invasion by entities from another astral plane known as the Hiss. What subsequently emerges is at heart a third-person tactical shooter, with the odd detour into puzzle-solving, some fine boss-battling, a generous number of side-missions and even a hint of Metroidvania-style backtracking, as Jesse’s ever-escalating security clearance allows her to revisit areas of The Oldest House that she couldn’t previously access. If you had to compare Control’s gameplay experience to an existing game, you’d probably pick Arkane Studios’ Prey, although Control’s scope is much greater. That’s partly because Jesse – who has carried in her head an otherworldly entity called Polaris since the incident in which Dylan was taken away by the FBC – develops superpowers such as a Gravity Gun-style ability to pick up objects and hurl them at enemies, a heavy melee attack, levitation and so on. Also, all of Control’s action takes place within The Oldest House which, as well as being sufficiently vast to accommodate a quarry and a power plant, provides a gateway to other dimensions. It feels a bit like a grounded spaceship, except even more fun to explore. Newly recruited Director Faden sets about finding her surviving staff (luckily, Research Department head Dr Darling manufactured a range of devices that render individuals immune to possession by the Hiss) killing vast amounts of enemies and restoring order to The Oldest House bit by bit. Along the way, allies emerge and, via a nicely written internal monologue, she agonises over whether to grill her staff regarding what happened to Dylan. Faden’s Service Weapon is central to the gunplay: as you collect resources, you can reconfigure it from a pistol into a shotgun, sub-machine gun, sniper rifle and even rocket-launcher; you can only carry two forms of it at any time (presumably in order to simplify the control system), but you can swap them around on the fly. Faden is often beset by enemies, some of whom can fly and/or have shields, while others can heal their Hiss comrades and even resurrect them, so a tactical approach is de rigueur. Dead and even wounded Hiss drop blue shards that restore some of Faden’s health, so you pretty much have to stay on the move constantly, picking up objects to launch at enemies (satisfyingly fast, and with a large amount of snap so pinpoint accuracy isn’t required), ducking behind cover when you’re about to have rockets or furniture fired your way, emerging to replenish health and so on. The weapons and abilities can be upgraded and modded – equipping the right mods for your situation can give you a crucial edge. While all the elements of Control’s combat have been seen in countless past games, the way Control puts them together feels fresh, interesting and compelling. Control, via its cleverly conceived FBC (the game contains some sly digs at the officiousness of US federal agencies), has a vast and bonkers jargon of its own. You’ll find out about Objects of Power (hilariously prosaic items, usually, that give Faden extra powers) and Altered World Events, in which other dimensions encroach on the real world, and which the FBC was set up to deal with. It’s as though Remedy challenged itself to cram every preposterous paranormal concept it could think of into a single game. But remarkably, it all manages to hang together, providing a meaty, exciting and utterly unforgettable video game experience.