The architect of a historic bill to decriminalise abortion in New South Wales has hit out at opponents of the legislation, after a conservative MP wrongly claimed the bill would allow unrestricted abortion “until the moment of birth”. The independent MP for Sydney, Alex Greenwich, tabled the bill on Thursday after it was delayed by a week by resistance within the Coalition government. The bill has the backing of the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, and a number of members of cabinet including the health minister, Brad Hazzard, but has faced pushback from the Liberal party’s conservative wing. MPs including the state’s police minister, David Elliott, have argued they will oppose the bill “because there has not been enough time to consult with my electorate”, and on Thursday the Sydney Morning Herald published an opinion piece by the finance minister, Damien Tudehope, in which he wrongly claimed the laws would allow “unrestricted abortion until the moment of birth”. Describing the proposed bill as “the most extreme abortion laws in the country (perhaps in the world)” Tudehope – who described himself as “fiercely pro-life” in his maiden speech to parliament – wrote that MPs supporting the bill had “tried to ride roughshod over parliamentary procedure and pass abortion laws that barely anyone in the state has even heard of”. The private member’s bill is based on laws in Queensland and Victoria and has the backing of the NSW branch of the Australian Medical Association and the Pro-Choice Alliance. Under the proposed legislation a woman would not commit an offence if she procured a termination within the bill’s framework. It would also repeal provisions of the Crimes Act relating to abortions and common law offences. The bill would allow for terminations up to 22 weeks – and later if two doctors believe they should be performed given the medical, physical, social and psychological circumstances. But Tudehope claimed the bill would allow abortions “all the way up to birth, with no meaningful restrictions whatsoever” because, he wrote, authorising doctors “wouldn’t need to be independent from one another” and “needn’t give reasons” for performing the procedure. He also said there were “no criminal sanctions for a doctor who flouts this requirement and performs an abortion beyond 22 weeks without the consent of an additional doctor”, though supporters of the bill have said the legislation would create a new criminal offence under the Crimes Act for anyone who assisted in terminations without authorisation. On Thursday Greenwich hit back at Tudehope, saying the bill was the “result of decades of advocacy”. “On behalf of our 15 co-sponsors this morning I will introduce our bill to decriminalise abortion,” Greenwich said. “This bill was first publicly announced early March, it is 119 years overdue, and the result of decades of advocacy. “My message to the opponents of reform who are currently playing politics with this reform is clear: don’t hold women’s reproductive rights hostage because you haven’t done your homework.” Coalition and Labor MPs will be given a conscience vote on the bill, but a number of key members of cabinet support the bill including Andrew Constance, Bronwyn Taylor, Gareth Ward, Shelley Hancock and Sarah Mitchell. Another Liberal party MP, Felicity Wilson, is one of the bill’s 15 co-sponsors. NSW is the only state in Australia which has yet to decriminalise abortion, instead relying on common law rulings to define what constitutes a lawful abortion. Introducing the bill into parliament on Thursday, Greenwich used the example of a mother of five who was prosecuted for self-administering a drug to cause a miscarriage as recently as 2017. “The courts have ruled that terminations are lawful if they protect a woman from serious danger to her life or physical or mental health, taking into account economic, social or medical reasons,” he said. “There is no clarity beyond this interpretation in the law itself and determining whether each termination meets the common law criteria for ‘lawful’ remains a grey area in the law. “This has a number of poor consequences for women trying to access reproductive health care. “The threat of conviction can obviously create fear and stigma for women wanting an abortion and reluctance by health practitioners to provide services or even advice to women about their options. In turn this prevents many facilities from providing a full range of reproductive health care services. This has the biggest impact for women in regional areas where there are already limited health care choices.”