A hot pork roll stand in Peterborough isn’t the most obvious place to find out you’re a natural despot, but it’s where my inner dictator first emerged in the working world. I was benevolent yet damning. I ruled with an iron fist (and fork). In essence, I was the Catherine the Great of country shows in the 90s. And I loved it. I didn’t start off that way. The world of work terrified me. I wasn’t remotely practical, I found other humans largely terrifying and an onslaught of hungry strangers pressed a lot of anxiety buttons in my brain. But in front of a spit I discovered the full force of my naturally loud voice, my instinctive girl-boss spirit and the fact I adored being in charge of just about anything. Quantities could be changed to reflect the customer's quality. A lack of manners got less crackling and a gravy overdose When you’re dishing out pork crackling you have power. Real power. People get feudal about crispy animal skin. Standing in front of a twirling dead pig doesn’t sound like a situation from which to dish out summary justice but as summer jobs go it was simple: I was the Pork Tsar. I made my own laws and customs. My task was simple enough – pick up a cob, place stuffing, roast pork and crackling on top and ladle in a bit of gravy. But the quantities of that concoction could be subtly changed to reflect the qualities of the customer. A “please” and a smile earned more crackling. A lack of manners got fatty meat and a gravy overdose that would lead to a soggy bap – and that’s hard to handle in a field with one napkin. It’s a movable punishment of a feast. I may have been just the girl serving in a blue and white apron that made me look like a demented butcher but there should have been a crown on my head: I could make or break lunches. And I did. I was the Porcine Queen. Three days in, I’d gone full Stalin. Stuffing could be reduced to a scant scraping. Crackling quantities became even more arbitrary. Polite women with children and good-looking men got piles of the stuff. Grunting young farmers who I suspected had Tory leanings got none at all. I was out of control. It was fantastic. No one complained. And I discovered a beautiful thing: I could be friendly but intimidating. Sadly the country show gig economy meant that you leapt from one event to another. The fiefdom I had lovingly created stopped as soon as it had started. My next job was looking after the campsite at a three-day event, which meant serving the middle and upper horsey classes. I had a working-class chip on my shoulder the size of the country park the thing was being held in and the thought of being looked down on made me incandescent, especially now I knew I was born to rule. A mound of students were paired up at random. Andy from Oakham (dark hair, Leeds University, funny, liked Suede and Björk, had girlfriend – damn) was a congenial companion. Things could be distasteful but there was satisfaction in tackling the unspeakable on a strictly temporary basis. Once you’ve cleaned the toilets and emptied the bins of people who eat a lot of game, most things in life seem manageable. Assumptions about the appalling snobbery of dressage fans were tossed aside as various old ladies in Barbour jackets and Hunter wellies invited us in for tea and snacks to escape the rain. Sitting on heavily patterned deckchairs in blue overalls being offered a cursory read of Horse and Hound was a surreal experience, especially when you smelt of bleach. The campers were partly being kind but Andy and I knew they were also eyeing our toilet rolls. It worked. The tents that gave us fruitcake got extra stock in their nearest portable toilets. Equestrianism is not a cheap pursuit. You’re always trying to make savings. This was a symbiotic relationship – biscuits for toiletries. We became very adept at getting fed for free. We gorged ourselves on free samples from the Phileas Fogg snack stand and ate endless chutneys on wafer-thin biscuits. Ingenuity, blagging and, at times, total cheek: vital skills for a life in the creative industries were being primed. Once the event finished we were the ones cleaning up, and we got to collect the spoils. Disappointingly, this amounted to a six-foot cardboard cutout of a man in lederhosen advertising Emmental cheese. I took it back to my student house in Hull, where it lived on the stairs to deter burglars. At the time, my summer jobs seemed inconsequential – but this rural work boosted my confidence, blew apart some long-held assumptions and taught me some valuable life lessons. Most notably, that you can’t judge a woman by her chosen sport, that free food is good food, and that power can be created and seized just by dishing up dead pig. I will for ever embrace my inner crackling dictator (despite being a vegetarian). She’s won me some notable professional battles, far away from any field in Cambridgeshire. • Rae Earl is a writer and broadcaster