My daughter, like me, is of mixed heritage. She has wildly curly hair, as have I. When she was born four years ago I was given five copies of the same kids’ picture book by well-meaning friends and relatives. It was called Guess How Much I Love You. This book, whose lead characters are rabbits, was a bestseller in the 1990s. Back then it flew off the shelves. What I did not expect when I was pregnant with my daughter was that it would be far easier to find her a rabbit picture book than one featuring a child like her with brown skin and curls. This week Malorie Blackman, author of Noughts and Crosses, told Channel 4 News that of the many books she read as a child “not one of them featured a black child like me”, adding that “it made me feel invisible in the world of literature”. And when, in her mid-20s, she noticed in a children’s bookshop that little had changed, “that’s when I decided that I wanted to write for children ... for the child in me, really, for all the books I wish I could have read as a child”. Blackman’s books have now sold over a million copies, but sadly, aside from her groundbreaking novels, little has changed. When the Guardian analysed the top 100 bestselling illustrated children’s books published last year, only five were found to have featured a black, Asian or minority ethnic (BAME) character in a central role, with three of those being the same character, the malevolent mixed-race burglar Lanky Len from the What the Ladybird Heard series. Almost 70% of the books with illustrations of minority characters featured them in only non-speaking roles. Not a single author or illustrator on the list was identified as BAME. Last September the Centre for Literacy in Primary Education published the results of a study of all new children’s books published in 2017. Shockingly, only 1% featured a lead minority ethnic character, and only 4% featured any characters of minority ethnic background at all. This on the heels of The Bookseller’s analysis of the general top 500 adult books published in 2016 revealing that only six were written by minority British authors. You were more likely to be called Dave than be black and working class and get your book published. How can it be that close to 99% of the top-selling books for adults and children published in the UK in recent years were either written by or featured only white people? Does the book industry even recognise the enormity of the problem with this lack of representation? This summer a well-known publisher announced her new venture – heralded as an exciting, groundbreaking new take on storytelling with a 20-strong all-female author lineup. Except every single one of those authors was white. I came into publishing 20 years ago as an editorial assistant. I consider myself some sort of unicorn within corporate publishing for not only am I a person of colour, the only child of a single mother, I’m also from a small working-class town in south Wales. I had free meals at school. Statistically a London publishing career was more than unlikely for me. So when another survey was published recently, this time describing the experiences of BAME interns entering the industry, I wasn’t surprised by the comments: an “endless fruitless slog”, “wading through mud” and “every face and every opinion was the same” were thoughts familiar to me. For me, one particular experience sums up the problem. Last year the former pop star turned daytime TV presenter Rochelle Humes approached me with the idea of publishing a book. Like Blackman, she wanted a story her child could identify with, and with a black lead character on the front cover who encouraged children to embrace themselves – and their curly hair. What’s not to like? If we feel disconnected from each other, perhaps it starts in this skewed, unrepresentative vision of the world that begins in our books when we are at knee height Yet what a battle to get the book commissioned (“She’s a pop star, not an author!”) and then adequately supported by retailers (who seem to be locked in an eternal loop of only supporting the books and authors who are already selling – more Mog, more Enid Blyton – and gripped by fear over debut writers from nontraditional backgrounds). It was exhausting. If I hadn’t had a track record of success with previous commissions, which helped reassure the doubters, I might well have given up. What is going so wrong? You might well start in the boardroom, and with the gatekeepers who decide who and what hits our bookshelves. I have sat in more new business acquisition meetings than I dare count, inwardly cringing at times at the blunt, clumsy conversations in and around prospective books by authors of colour: who is the market, they ask, as if not realising that about 20% of Britain’s under-18 population is BAME and it’s growing. One comment left me literally lost for words: “Do they read?” I was once asked. The fear of lack of retail support can strike a new submission dead in a heartbeat. The constant need to compare a prospective book with what has come before exacerbates the fear of making a mistake. Add into the mix the lack of diversity, ethnicity and class in the meeting room and you have a roadblock against change. There have been efforts to redress this imbalance and the rollcall stretches back decades – from the first black female independent publisher, Margaret Busby, in the 1960s, to the pioneering children’s publisher Verna Wilkins in the 1980s, latterly joined by Valerie Brandes, Sharmaine Lovegrove and Crystal Mahey-Morgan, among others. But these are individual efforts, the Davids of the book world, when we need to urgently sort out the Goliaths of corporate publishing: the gatekeepers who can transform a single parent from Edinburgh into a global multimillion-selling author. It is here that the gap is most pressing, the need for a massive and collective sustained effort most vital. What I’m seeing instead are 10-point inclusivity plans but no books on the shelves. Where’s the black Wilbur Smith? The Asian David Walliams? Language matters. Stories matter. If we feel disconnected from each other, perhaps it starts in this skewed, unrepresentative vision of the world that begins in our books when we are at knee height. You can’t be what you can’t see. And by the way, Rochelle Humes’ book sold out on Amazon a day and a half after release, with the entire first print run of 10,000 copies cleared in less than a month. It’s now sold many times more after further print runs. Proof, if it were ever needed, that inclusive publishing works. • Natalie Jerome is a brand publishing specialist