There is plenty of constitutional outcry on the front pages of the British papers today, which all lead with Boris Johnson’s decision to suspend parliament ahead of the looming Brexit deadline. Front pages from abroad show the international press is transfixed too. The Guardian says there is “Outrage as Johnson suspends parliament”. The paper leads with John Bercow’s comments that the decision was a “constitutional outrage” and the paper’s leader says: “Johnson’s move represents a grotesque abuse of the country’s highest office”. Guardian front page, Thursday 29 August 2019: Outrage as Johnson suspends parliament pic.twitter.com/UVVF9RGL5J The i has a similar headline: “MPs outraged as Johnson shuts down parliament” but also teases an opinion piece on its front page that calls Johnson’s decision a “Bold move [that] will divide the Conservative opposition”. Thursday's front page: MPs outraged as Boris Johnson shuts down parliament #tomorrowspaperstoday #skypapers #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/4QvLXg1R8x According to the Mail’s telling, it was not the prime minister but Jeremy Corbyn who sparked “fury” by demanding a meeting with the Queen. The paper is far more positive about Johnson’s decision, calling it a “historic move … to thwart anti-Brexit MPs”. Thursday's @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/8yMyKe9hxN The FT focuses in on the implications for the constitution: “Boris Johnson sparked constitutional uproar yesterday”, says the paper. Bercow’s “constitutional outrage” comments are prominently featured. FT: Uproar as Johnson shuts down parliament to protect Brexit plan #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/URvJ2D2P4J The Times’ front page features a large, flattering black and white photo of the prime minister under the headline “Johnson goes for broke”. While it leads with the fact that the news has “pushed Britain to the brink of a constitutional crisis”, it also features a front page sketch in which it mocks Speaker John Bercow who challenged the constitutionality of Johnson’s decision. “John Bercow, Speaker of the Commons, was on his family holiday yesterday when he heard of Boris Johnson’s prorogation plans,” writes Quentin Letts. “How did it go down? Let’s just say you would not have wanted your new sandcastle anywhere in Mr Bercow’s orbit in those moments after he heard the news. He might have stamped up and down on it in a tantrum.” TIMES: Johnson goes for broke #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/3CYas5QSWH The Telegraph, which employed Boris Johnson as a columnist, is very positive about his decision, leading on Jacob Rees-Mogg’s accusation that it is “MPs trying to thwart Brexit” – and not the proroguing PM –who are risking a “constitutional crisis”. “Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Leader of the Commons, hit back at those who accused Boris Johnson of being undemocratic, reminding them Parliament’s duty was, in the words of the constitutional expert AV Dicey, to ‘give effect to the will … of the nation’ – which had chosen to leave the EU.” The front page of tomorrow's Daily Telegraph: “The Prime Minister must give effect to the will of the nation” #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/ky7SXcu0HL The Sun says “Ballsy Boris” has “come out fighting”: “Battling Boris Johnson took the fight to his Remainer enemies yesterday.” The paper also wins the award for best headline: “Hey big suspender”. Tomorrow's front page: Battling Boris Johnson took the fight to his Remainer enemies by suspending Parliament to force through #Brexit https://t.co/UgKcYCoj9a pic.twitter.com/Xq9GWQhpVx The Express is thrilled with the proroguing, writing: “PM secures approval from Queen to suspend Parliament in bold move to sweep aside MPs hellbent on stopping Britain from leaving the EU”. It attempts a bit of a sleight of hand by suggesting that by granting the suspension, the Queen must be in favour of it, with a picture of Her Majesty captioned: “Boris Johnson has had his move approved by the Queen”. EXPRESS: Brexit: The die is cast #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/Z8b6MZjoZe On the other end of the spectrum, the Mirror is furious, dubbing Johnson a “Prorogue” and saying he has been “branded a tinpot dictator for suspending Parliament” and that a no-deal Brexit could lead the NHS to face “‘ritual suicide’”. The paper also has a very different take on the Queen’s involvement, saying there was “outrage” at her being “dragged into chaos”. Tomorrow's front page: Prorogue#tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/eur1H1iS87 pic.twitter.com/9nydaOe7Ct The papers in Scotland understandably lead on the news that Ruth Davidson, leader of the Scottish Conservative party, is likely to quit over her unhappiness with Johnson. The Daily Record, which calls Wednesday “the day democracy died”, reports comments from Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister: “If Ruth can’t stand him then why should we?” Thursday's Scotsman front page: Dark day for democracy #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/AMowi4vcQ4 The National has a similar headline and teases a comment piece from Sturgeon, in which she writes: “Today is the day that independence became completely inevitable.” The Herald leads with a quote form Sturgeon: “‘Today will go down in history as a dark one indeed for UK democracy” and the Scotsman has a similar lead: “Dark day for democracy”. THE NATIONAL: Davidson to quit #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/TZOwD73bgq European newspapers are mixed, with several in Belgium calling it a “coup”, including De Morgen, which labels the event a “very British coup”. A little look at how Europe's newspapers have reacted to the suspension of parliament. De Morgen in Belgium called it a "very British coup". pic.twitter.com/3UrMUQRWw0 De Standaard reports: “Johnson puts everything at stake for hard Brexit”. Again in Belgium: De Standaard. pic.twitter.com/k7NX0kbXpc ABC in Spain says Johnson has “put the Queen into the Brexit war” and Liberation in France says we are seeing a harder and harder Brexit. A la une de Libé ce jeudi : le Brexit de plus en plus hard avec Boris Johnson https://t.co/7BqpBYknm1 pic.twitter.com/3PkLt6Hos5 ABC in Spain went for a Sex Pistols theme for their front page. pic.twitter.com/nhPlf7ubzc