I flew to Kuala Lumpur and I thought I could just go from there. Anywhere. It didn’t matter. Less a destination than an escape. An escape from alarm clocks, cold nights, high rents. The housing crisis. The consequences of underemployment. My sister. My former therapist who was trying to sue me. From rules. I wanted – really, really wanted – to be free. I wrote an article about the evils of crystal meth, how to get off crystal meth. I was high on crystal meth again not long after it was published. I was in the hospital emergency room complaining that my internet porn history was on the TV news at weekends. Non drug users avoided me and I avoided them. I was living in a boarding house. I was nominated for a Walkley award. I believed I had untapped musical talents and I could quit journalism and become a rapper. I sometimes used meth with a guy who was convinced he was once David Bowie. Really. I flew. I flew to Kuala Lumpur. From there took a bus to Penang, Phuket, Bangkok, Laos. In Laos I smoked opium and dreamed I lived in a nice house with a nice yellow blonde family before I woke choking on chunky, blonde-coloured vomit. Then I ran out of money and stayed in a jungle temple and meditated for days amid lizards, ferns, mist and a cemetery. I saw how life was without drug-induced fantasy. I liked it. I wanted more. Fantasy, I decided, is surely the root of all our insanity. I travelled more. Thousands of years of life had been going on just outside my drug bubble, just north of my nation of birth; billions of lives, so many different cultures, styles, ideas, ways of living. Adventure. Adventure would be anecdote. Because going to a strange new place in a new country is the best trip one can ever get. I hiked abandoned buildings, I watched Muay Thai, I learned Muay Thai, I ate a snake in Vietnam, I saw a tarot reader in Ubud. I saw public cremation in India. I got offered Valium by a psychiatrist in Jakarta who promised it – along with antipsychotics, testosterone, hypnosis and looking at pictures of Lady Gaga – would cure me of being gay. I declined the Valium, only to become addicted to it, buying off street dealers in Bali a few weeks later, only – in turn – to find I had the presence of mind to flush them and never use them again. Progress. Two years into my trip and I had not used crystal meth again. I was “making progress”. Progress has an interesting meaning to me. Most of the people on my father’s side who have a mental illness, my family, have got progressively worse as they got older. My dad got put on a disability pension when he was 53, when his bipolar made him unemployable. My uncle became couch-bound and catatonic aged 36: late-onset “stress-induced” schizophrenia. My grandfather was in and out of psych wards for 20 years after returning from the second world war, before he killed himself aged 42. By the time I arrived in the Philippines I had turned 38. By the time I arrived in the Philippines I got my grandfather’s medical file. Pop had catatonic schizophrenia. The same morning I got his file, I did an interview for my book with a Vietnam veteran. He talked about being in a group of soldiers and shooting a Vietnamese man so many times that the man’s body fell in half. He started to cry, but pretended he was coughing. From there, trying to make a life for myself in the Philippines – among the poor, the sex workers and alcohol-soaked ex-pat ex-soldiers – I started going down, down, down. Right down. I did know this sadness. I did not know the depths of sadness lurking underneath the drug highs. I did not know what to do with such sadness when I did not have drugs. I began to plan my suicide. I cried a lot. I wrote a will. I started acting recklessly and got arrested. I came back to Australia after three and a half years away and spent two weeks in a psych ward. Months later it occurred to me I’d spent almost all my adult life on drugs and was still working out how to live, what I needed, what I am. It seems trite to say you can’t run from your problems. Because when I write about all my adventures I can’t stop smiling. Even the bit about jail. The whole trip warms me from head to toe every time I think back. I’ve grown. I learned. I stopped using drugs. I had some of the most amazing experiences of my entire life. I recovered. I have certainly lived. I’ve returned. I am back in Thailand. I am in Thailand with new medication, with an Australian therapist who I Skype with every week, with an understanding of the warning signs, and with an understanding of the importance of exercise and journaling and talking with friends. With a knowledge that I cannot spend long periods of time on my own. I’m still trying to find my tribe. I’m still working out what makes me happy and what makes me sad. I’m still trying to find my feet on solid ground. I feel lucky. We should all feel lucky. We have so many places to go. So many places to see. Roots to grow. So many countries with their hostels, ashrams, communes and budget hotels, where we can start again. Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636 • Luke Williams’ memoir Down and Out in Paradise is out 1 September through Echo