As I stare at my garden, or, more accurately, the ugly, fly-strewn dustbowl just north of my kitchen, I feel that once again I have failed in being a proper, upstanding adult. I’m not the type, say, that one sees on an ITV1 drama talking to a detective at her suburban kitchen sink, the camera panning to a neat lawn, some roses, possibly a koi carp pond and a Swingball set; all things that signify a household under control. My garden, utterly devoid of grass (the lawn died) or any blooming flora, does not suggest domestic bliss. My garden hints at me having a heroin problem, which is untrue, although I will require some sort of opiate sedative this weekend in order to face my spider-infested shed. Only then will I be able to retrieve my loppers and hack a rudimentary path back through the out-of-control bindweed that is plotting to strangle me in my bed. After this, I shall lie on the sofa, exhausted, mewling, full of self-pity, certain that this is not the kind of August that Jools Oliver is experiencing. I cannot forget the Olivers’ outdoors wood-fired pizza oven from the original Jamie At Home series. Or the surrounding horticultural splendour. The dark irony with Generation X is that although we were the last Britons to get our paws on homes and outdoor plots, millions of us neglect them. If you’re not aware of this, it’s because we stay sheepishly quiet. Meanwhile, the gardenless believe that, should they have the privilege of owning 30 or 40 metres of land, it would look like something Monty Don farts about with on BBC Two every Friday night, featuring patches of fragrant pastel wildflowers, neat ivy trellises, a buoyant compost heap, barrels of delicious new potatoes and those reclaimed church pews that probably give you piles but look gorgeous painted in Farrow & Ball Vardo. Others reading this may also think, “Well, if I had a neglected garden I would jolly well donate the land to a charity bread kitchen supplying ancient grain sourdough to the wider community.” Which is a smashing idea, but these patches of forgotten dirt, all over Britain, will one day have to pay for my generation’s retirement care. We are the proverbial dogs in the manger; fortysomethings not quite sure what “retirement” will look like in the future, but also not grown up enough to deal with our gardens. We have no bandwidth left for the dozens and dozens of days per year of musing, pottering and bloody hard work needed to create livable outdoor space. Even if we did, many of us moved away from home early, fled hundreds of miles away, and missed out on learning the necessary skills. My mother, now in her 80s, can instinctively make things bloom; her home is a tropical wonderland of revived B&Q bargains and spider plants gone haywire. My grandad, her father, spent his life after the war quietly raking, pruning and mulching. But I’d gone by the age of 18, chasing money, chasing status, chasing the kind of property that has a lovely garden – and I never went home again. I did not inherit my family’s gardening talents; nor an iota of their contentment. Soon after buying this house in 2005, as well as some Orla Kiely wellington boots and a set of secateurs from the Victoria and Albert Museum, the gritty truths of horticulture began to reveal themselves; not the clipping back, which I quite enjoy, but the relentless bagging up and disposing. The blisters, the septic wounds, the cat turds, the suicidal snails that crunch under my feet and ruin my morning. The fluttering hope of new sprouting strawberries, then the onslaught of slugs. “Oh yes, you’re supposed to go out at night and pick them all off by hand,” someone told me. Several times in the past decade, I’ve nurtured a begonia, cajoled it upwards, watched it flourish, then moved it very slightly out of the path of the direct sun, for its own good, so I thought, and watched it die. Did I mention that gardening is heartbreaking? How it begins to symbolise all one’s other failures? How one anthropomorphises one’s minor victories: “Look, Rhona Rhododendron is thriving!”, before Rhona mysteriously withers, in a series of events that no amount of Gardeners’ Question Time or YouTube clips can explain. Presently, nothing is growing in my garden, but on the upside nothing can die, which suits my fragile heart much better. I spoke to the actor Danny Dyer many years ago, and he told me that he had artificial grass, which was much easier as “you can Hoover it”. It seemed ludicrously funny at the time, but now I’m not so sure. Perhaps I’ll do fake grass in 2020, or I’ll cement over the entire sorry space and create a middle-aged rollerdisco. I still dream of my perfect garden – one day, when I grow up – but until then, I’m going to rebrand bindweed as a fashionable, sustainable wildflower. I’ll put a rotting deckchair in the middle and open a bottle of crémant. Let your gardens go, and join me.