We said goodbye here to Theresa May, but perhaps she will always remain in crossword setters’ hearts? Eccles has not let go with a dystopian clue … 24d Departing prime minister’s on the phone to procure staple food (5)[ wordplay: soundalike (‘on the phone’) of name of departing PM with an ‘’s’ on the end ][ soundalike of MAY’S ][ definition: staple food ] … for MAIZE. Phi meanwhile looks to the future … 4d Less sensible ditching leader – no feasible PM? (9)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘less sensible’ without first letter (‘ditching leader’) + NO (‘no’) + synonym for ‘feasible’ ][ DAFTER without first letter + NO + ON ][ definition: PM ] … in his clue for AFTERNOON. Here’s a gentle clue from a very pleasant Orlando puzzle: 19d The King and I (without stereo sound) that’s put on in Japan (6)[ wordplay: abbrev. for ‘King’ + I + synonym for ‘without stereo sound’ ][ K + I + MONO ][ definition: something put on in Japan ] Ah, the KIMONO. An item the west seems to find tricky. Recently we’ve had an attempted linguistic landgrab from a Kardashian … Upon hearing this cultural treasure was being used to shill American underwear, Japanese citizens reacted with anger. The mayor of Kyoto weighed in, penning a letter to Kardashian West asking her to reconsider her Kimono trademark. … following which I was disappointed to see that she did not double down and launch an additional range of kimchi. From business, we have an expression sometimes seen in Financial Times headlines: Opening the kimono on ‘dark pools’ Dark pools are easy enough to explain: they’re like stock markets but without such pesky impediments as scrutiny and public access. A phrase which the subeditor didn’t think needed inverted commas: what about “opening the kimono”? The phrase goes back to the 1980s, when certain American businessmen found Japan both intimidating and rousingly exotic. Hence “open-kimono meetings” (in which candour is at least feigned) and institutions being obliged to “open the kimono”, a term denoting transparency which manages to feel simultaneously childish, predatory and not un-racist. “Kimono” itself is splendidly mundane in that it means “thing to wear” (“Her outfit was lovely” / “Oh, what was she wearing?” / “A thing to wear”). Reader, do you have any favourite boring etymologies? Mine is the subject of our next challenge. A genuinely iconic landmark, a site of events which continue to shape our world, its name can be translated as “the building”; reader, how would you clue BASTILLE? Many thanks for your clues for CUPBOARD. Confronted with PeterMooreFuller’s “Backgammon set (missing dice, counters and one of the shakers) languishes here?”, Harlobarlo remarks “I think Alan will have to create a new category for this one”; tempted, but perhaps we should extend the admittedly vague scope of the audacity award to cover this nonsense. And the ingenuity award goes to Porcia for “Press reporter’s dealt with having a blocked nose” “Press” is a legit if recherché synonym of “cupboard”, while the cryptic device reminded me of the advert accompanying this paragraph – how new is it? Over to you. I also enjoyed the directness of Seandmcc’s “Directors go after trophy, and somewhere to put it” and GappyTooth’s “Old D-cup bra thrown in wardrobe”. CUPBOARD seems to bring out the best in everyone; the runners-up are PeterMooreFuller’s sly “China’s security hinges on this” and Porcia’s hopefully untopical “Cabinet scrambled COBRA, involving DUP”; the winner is Phitonelly’s sneaky “Penny stole into cheesemaker’s cabinet”. Kludos to Phitonelly; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. Some silliness from Azed … 7d Number two’s second after word number one brought up (7)[ wordplay: abbrev. for ‘second’, after synonym for ‘word’ + reversed (‘brought up’) abbrev. for ‘no’ & synonym for ‘one’ ][ S, after MOT + reversed NO & I ][ definition: number two ] … in a clue for MOTIONS.