Thomas Cook has confirmed the terms of a £900m rescue deal that will give the Chinese conglomerate Fosun control of its holiday business – but warned its shares may be pulled from the London stock market as a result. The Chinese investor Fosun will inject £450m into the business in exchange for a 75% stake in its 178-year-old package tour division and a 25% holding in its airline business. The rescue package will give the Shanghai-based Fosun another foothold in the European market, where it already owns the holiday resort chain Club Med and the Premier League football club Wolverhampton Wanderers. Fosun holds an 18% stake in Thomas Cook. Thomas Cook owes its name to a humble and deeply religious 32-year-old cabinet-maker who, one June morning in 1841, hiked the 15 miles from his home in Market Harborough to Leicester, to attend a temperance meeting. The former Baptist preacher believed that the ills of Victorian society stemmed largely from alcohol and, presumably fatigued from his walk, realised he could deploy the power of Britain’s flourishing rail network to help spread the word. Addressing the temperance meeting, he suggested that a train be hired to carry the movement’s supporters to the next meeting in Loughborough. Thus, on 5 July 1841, some 500 passengers travelled by a special train for the 24-mile round trip, paying a shilling apiece. Over the next few years, Cook laid on ever more trains, introducing thousands of Britons to train travel for the first time. The first such outing to be run for commercial purposes was a trip to Liverpool in 1845. Over the next decade or so, the business expanded to offer overseas trips, to France, Switzerland, Italy and beyond, to the US, Egypt and India. His more business-minded son John expanded the tour operator and its reach was such that the government enlisted its expertise in an effort, ultimately in vain, to relieve General Gordon at the siege of Khartoum in 1885. John’s three sons inherited the business, which incorporated as Thos Cook & Son Ltd in 1924 and benefited from the increasing ease of international travel. Its first flirtation with collapse came during the second world war, when the government requisitioned some of its assets and it was sold to Britain’s railway companies, effectively a nationalisation. But it boomed in the postwar years as growing prosperity fuelled the appetite for holidays and it returned to private ownership in 1972. Since then, it has changed hands and changed shape via a series of mergers and takeovers. It nearly collapsed in 2011 but averted its demise with a bailout deal funded by banks. Now, after 178 years of operation, it is relying on its largest shareholder – the Chinese conglomerate Fosun – to survive. The travel firm’s banks and bondholders will provide the other £450m, taking the remaining stake in the tour operator and a 75% stake in the airline. The £900m cash injection, which Thomas Cook hopes will be completed in early October, is meant to help the company avoid bankruptcy as it heads into winter, when holiday bookings are at their lowest. However, the firm warned its new owners may cancel its publicly traded shares and take the company private. It said the deal would also significantly reduce the value of shares held by other investors. “The current intention of the board is to maintain the company’s listing,” Thomas Cook said in a stock market announcement. “However, the implementation of the proposed recapitalisation may, in certain circumstances, result in the cancellation of the company’s listing.” Tough competition from online rivals, as well as one-off factors such as Brexit, have weighed on the company’s recovery after its near-collapse in 2011. It has also been hit by the high prices of jet fuel and hotels pushing up costs, while last summer’s heatwave convinced European customers to stay at home, hitting earnings. In May, Thomas Cook reported a £1.5bn loss for the first half of the financial year, mostly because of a £1.1bn cut in the estimated value of its package holiday division. The company’s shares have been languishing at about 7p in recent weeks but fell a further 16% on Wednesday morning to only 6p. Russ Mould, an investment director for AJ Bell, said the rescue package was bad news for regular investors. He said: “Shareholders in the troubled travel company may have to accept that their investment could be worthless. “An update on its refinancing reveals that Chinese group Fosun and Thomas Cook’s lenders are going to get the lion’s share of the equity, meaning very little – if anything – is left on the table for the other shareholders. “That would explain why the shares have fallen another 14% on the latest news. Investors are simply trying to cash out and crystalise any value left in their investment before the refinancing, for fear there could be nothing left if they wait.” Some details still need to agreed between Thomas Cook, its banks, and Fosun, before a final deal can be sent to regulators and investors for approval.