CiCi says it can feel as though she is running two lives: “I’ve got my Wolf Pack life online, and then I’m also a normal mum that does the school run, shops at Asda, typical mum duties.” CiCi is the moniker used by this 30-something mother of three, who lives near Glasgow and is a key member of Wolf Pack Hunters, the most active anti-online grooming group in Scotland. Self-styled “paedophile hunting” groups such as Wolf Pack have occupied an ambivalent territory between law enforcement and vigilantism for nearly a decade across the UK. But in Scotland over the last 18 months, lawyers have described an “explosion” in cases going through the courts, based on evidence gathered by these groups when an adult decoy, pretending to be a child, engages with an alleged abuser online. Wolf Pack alone is conducting an average of four stings a month across the country, as experts point to a rise in activity resulting in hundreds of prosecutions. Simultaneously, questions are again being raised about the methods that online child abuse activist groups (OCAAGs) employ. In June, one Dundee sheriff described the use of such evidence as “an affront to the justice system”. But detail from the groups themselves about their methods and motivations has remained scant. Now, through in-depth interviews, freedom of information requests and data analysis, the Guardian has pieced together a comprehensive portrait of their approach in Scotland and how it sits alongside law enforcement. According to the Guardian’s investigation, these groups are highly organised, making serious attempts to gather the most usable evidence for police and courts, and are often self-taught in legal procedure. They provide more general advice on internet safety and support around sexual abuse to their thousands of online followers. And they claim to have positive individual relationships with local police. The National Police Chiefs Council (NPCC) estimates that police across the UK deal with about 100 incidents every week, related to 190 OCAAGs, but cautions that some groups have only ever been involved in one incident while others are differently named groups started by the same individuals. The nature of their online presence makes it hard to pin down their locations, but the Guardian is aware of at least 10 OCAAGs operating in Scotland, while others work cross-border. Many refuse to speak to the media. According to data shared by Glasgow-based Wolf Pack Hunters, it has conducted more than 80 sting operations from mid-October 2017 to the end of March 2019, all of which resulted in arrest and charge. So far, 25 have been independently verified as resulting in either a guilty plea or a guilty verdict. Another active group, Child Protectors Scotland, has conducted 54 stings since the beginning of November 2017, resulting in seven convictions and many other cases awaiting a court appearance. Keeping Kids Safe, which now operates from England but was originally set up in Scotland in mid-2017, has undertaken 12 stings, 10 of which resulted in convictions, with two still going through the courts. Analysis found sentences ranged from community payback orders to up to three years in prison, with all who were convicted being placed on the sex offenders’ register for varying lengths of time. The activities of these hunters have attracted plenty of criticism since they first came to prominence earlier this decade, with reports of mistaken identity, blackmail, mob violence and suicides linked to online exposure. But this growing army of online activists also attract significant numbers of supporters – footage of the groups’ confrontations with alleged paedophiles, often streamed live on Facebook, are viewed and liked by millions – who believe they are doing a job the authorities are unwilling or insufficiently resourced to do properly. “We embrace the vigilante label,” says Oliver Braid, one of the founders of the Scottish Wolf Pack group. “The response from the public has been overwhelmingly positive, whether that’s at stings or the thousands of messages we get online. People don’t feel the police take this seriously enough. So it’s about keeping children safe but it’s also about building a sense of community.” Stuart Allardyce, the director of the child abuse prevention campaign Stop It Now! Scotland, confirms the increase in hunting activity north of the border, but warns: “While many online activist groups are genuinely trying to help, they often fail to consider the risk of harm to their target, as well as their family and friends. Their work can also be counterproductive – the evidence they supply is often not high enough quality to secure a conviction.” The police take a firm official line on OCAAGs – the NPCC is clear that “we do not endorse these groups and will not work with them”, while Police Scotland says: “It’s understandable that people want to protect children from harm but we would ask them not to take the law into their own hands.” According to the force, nearly 1,600 crimes where an individual communicated with a child for sexual purposes were recorded between April 2018 and February 2019. Police sources also express frustration that these incidents pull resources from high-harm cases to low-grade grooming offences that might not even make it to court. I’ve had police officers shake me by the hand. They know we’re not leaving any time soon. But the hunting groups say individual police officers are more supportive of their activities. Sophie (not her real name) runs the Child Protectors Scotland team, which has about 30 members, ranging in age from early 20s to 60s. “Certain police forces will work with us, but they’d never admit it. For example, we might call and say we’re planning a sting at a certain time, and they’ll ask us to delay it because they’re busy. I’ve had police officers shake me by the hand. They know we’re not leaving any time soon.” Speaking to a number of Scottish OCAAGs, what is immediately striking is the degree of organisation involved. Wolf Pack decoys, for example, are given a lengthy handbook that includes suggested childlike responses and tips on evidence gathering. They are also instructed never to initiate sexual conversation or arrangements to meet in person. Decoys are trained to talk about school, homework and parents, and to explain their inexperience if a person tries to introduce sexual content to the exchange. They are also taught to move the chat to WhatsApp as quickly as possible so the conversation can be easily retrieved and is encrypted, reducing the chances of mistaken identity. As CiCi explains: “Some will say immediately: “Oh, you’re too young,’ and sometimes report you; others continue to talk. I’m always reminding them of my age. When it comes into the sexual chat, I say: ‘I don’t know anything about that,’ and again the ball is in their court. Some will go right into it, by which I mean graphic details, pictures, videos, links to porn sites, things that kids should not be seeing.” At a face-to-face meeting, the alleged offender will be met by members of the OCAAG, who will immediately make a citizen’s arrest and call the police, livestreaming the incident to the Wolf Pack Hunters UK Facebook page while waiting for the police to attend. It is this practice of filmed confrontation, reminiscent of the US TV show To Catch a Predator, which originally ran from 2004 to 2008, that is most controversial. Braid insists the Wolf Pack team “will protect both the hunter and the predator” and that stings are timed to last for no longer than 15 minutes, to ensure a potentially aggressive crowd does not gather. But last summer, on a housing estate in the West Lothian town of Armadale, a man who was already a registered sex offender was taken into protective custody for his own safety after an angry mob gathered around his house and a car was set on fire. Braid says the group visited the man’s house because they were concerned that he was living with children of a similar age to the Wolf Pack decoy he was talking to, and insists the location was not posted online in advance. He adds that “despite the events being portrayed negatively in the media, we have had overwhelming support from the people of Armadale”. The man who was hounded out of his home later pleaded guilty to a grooming charge. Interviews with those involved in OCAAGs reveal a strong belief that sexual abuse of children, particularly online grooming, is not being taken seriously enough by the authorities. But their motivation also stems from a deeper personal motivation. “Almost everybody in the group has direct personal experience of abuse,” one member said. Group members also insist that stings are only the most visible part of their activities, which include internet safety advice to worried parents, support to individuals disclosing historical abuse for the first time, and a gathering place for people who feel their concerns about children’s safety are not being heard elsewhere. CiCi, who has acted as a decoy on about 20 stings, is hopeful that her work is starting to alert those in authority to what she sees as an epidemic of online grooming. “Wolf Pack has opened my eyes to how I can prevent this happening to my kids and help other people. I definitely feel I’m making a difference. Since we’ve started pointing this out to people, the police, the courts, the right people are hearing it. They know there’s an epidemic. Do we want to live in a country that just lets this happen?”