England resemble the 2003 World Cup-winning team in at least one respect: the inestimable value of the player who wears the No 4 jersey. Back then it was in the possession of Martin Johnson, the side’s captain, an indomitable character whose face wore the evidence of a career that started in the amateur days when the sport connived at lawlessness and duelling was a game within a game. The former Wales and Pontypool second-row John Perkins was the master of four‑play. “I would always give my opposite number a whack in the opening minutes,” he once said. “If there was no comeback, I knew I was in for an easy afternoon.” Johnson’s career did not quite overlap with that of the Welshman: he was not known for his habit of turning the other cheek and in the second half of his career, when professionalism took root, he found himself answering charges that not 10 years before would barely have caused a referee’s finger to wag. Perkins would not get away with it now and not just because of multiple camera angles and citing officers. The awareness of the dangers of concussion has led to punching carrying a stigma: it is 50 years ago that another No 4, the Wales captain, Brian Price, felled the Ireland flanker Noel Murphy with a haymaker at Cardiff Arms Park when the Prince of Wales was part of the crowd, executing a plan to get the back-rower off the field, an act that earned no more than an admonishment from the referee. A repeat today would earn an enforced rest of several months. Maro Itoje does not have to be vigilant for a fist that appears from nowhere. It is the body of the current holder of the jersey worn by Johnson, rather than his face, that bears witness to the demands of the professional game. The Saracens lock epitomises the best of the modern-day player, athletic, powerful and composed, driven but in control. His performance against Ireland at Twickenham last Saturday was Johnsonian in its impact if not in its manner. Johnson oozed competitive zeal, the first one out of the trench: when Ian McGeechan chose him as the Lions captain in 1997 for the tour to South Africa, the second-row did not then lead his country. He was tall and imposing in a series McGeechan knew would be swayed by the physical contest. Itoje’s enforcing comes through his reading of the game, his rugby intelligence, and England are stronger for his presence. Manu Tuilagi was named man of the match against Ireland, understandably so for the impact he made with and without the ball, vexing a defence that lacked its customary sharpness off the line, but it was Itoje who lubricated England’s engine, from the opening minute when he forced a turnover. Tuilagi is conspicuous but a lot of Itoje’s work is, if not unseen, barely noticed. He facilitates, winning lineouts and sabotaging the opposition, alert for opportunities after a tackle and on hand to sustain attacks. He is adding ball-carrying to his armoury and at 24 still has to peak. Four years ago, he was in England’s training squad for the World Cup but failed to make the cut. Had Eddie Jones been the head coach then, he would surely have been chosen; not as someone likely to make the 23 for the major group matches, but as a young, hungry forward whose head would not drop if he remained on the sidelines. Jones said before announcing his squad for Japan that the most important positions in the 31 were the first 15 and the last four. He has gone for the largely untried and untested in the latter group, rather than experienced players who have served him well in the past three years, tyros who will not have to mask disappointment and therefore not drain squad morale. England’s previous two World Cup campaigns were blighted by tension within the group that proved undermining. Jones is a coach for whom the World Cup provides a power surge: he has lost two matches in three tournaments, in the 2003 final to Johnson’s England and to Scotland four years ago when he was in charge of Japan. He appreciates the rigours of a tournament that has broken many a good team. The physical demands placed on his players since taking charge at the end of 2015 have been designed not just to make them comfortable with the ever-increasing pace and intensity of the international game, but to harden them mentally so that when they get to the closing moments of a game that is in the balance, they do not lose their heads, as they did against Wales and Australia in their home tournament in 2015. Itoje is central to that, focused and unruffled. He has in the past conceded penalties in testing the tolerance threshold of referees at the breakdown but he did not give away one against Ireland, putting experience to advantage. He is seen as a future England captain, but he would be a Sam Warburton, leading through example and his sheer will to win, rather than a Johnson, whose demeanour camouflaged a great rugby brain that, for the past eight years, has been wastefully lost to the English game. Leadership was a concern for Jones a couple of years ago but now he has it covered in all areas of the pack through Jamie George, Itoje and Billy Vunipola and in Owen Farrell, George Ford and Ben Youngs behind. They are bubbling at the right time and Jones knows Japan, its climate and culture. They will be ready and they have Itoje to the fore. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.