By the end of July 1987, cracks were beginning to show in the premiership of Joh Bjelke-Petersen. For six months he had embarked on the infamous “Joh for PM” campaign, succeeding only in splitting the Liberal–National Party coalition vote at the federal election. The bluster and hubris that had once made him a folk hero of the political right had finally caught up with him, and for the conservative movement he was now a kind of King Midas in reverse: everything he touched turned to shit. As Labor was elected to a third successive term in office, the federal leader of the Liberal Party, John Howard, declared that Bjelke-Petersen “must carry an enormous share of the blame”. Within weeks of the humiliating result, in which Labor actually gained four seats in Queensland, a probe into police misconduct began. Prompted by an investigation by the ABC’s 4 Corners program, as well as months of reporting by the Courier-Mail, the Fitzgerald Inquiry raked through a vast web of official corruption – an open secret known in Queensland as “the Joke”. According to Matthew Condon, author of a true-crime trilogy of books about corruption during the Bjelke-Petersen era, “the Joke” was an “elaborate, multi- million dollar scheme of kickbacks from illegal gambling, SP bookmakers, brothels and escort services”. The 18-month-long inquiry would result in the imprisonment of a police commissioner and three government ministers, and an end to the 19-year reign of Bjelke-Petersen, who was deposed as premier before the year was out. The revelations were terribly ironic for fans of the Brisbane Rugby League, which had been brought to the brink of financial collapse in part due to Bjelke-Petersen’s moral crusade against poker machines. In the end, some wondered, what had it all been for? While clubs in Sydney had built on the profits of their lucrative slot machines, football clubs in Queensland had been forced to search for other ways to raise capital. The Brothers club in Brisbane, for instance, decided to invest in prize homes, also known as art unions, which were raffled off to the public. Instead of creating a lucrative revenue stream, however, the art unions were a disaster. By the winter of 1987 Brothers were reportedly $3m in debt and placed in the hands of a receiver. The cruel irony was that Brothers had historically been a well-run, relatively affluent club, with a network of affiliates throughout the state and one eye on the future. Yet according to ABC commentator David Wright, who played for Brothers during the 1970s, “by the time the Broncos concept came in, in 1987, Brothers were already in trouble. Had they not got into strife, caused by mismanagement in the early 1980s, I’m sure they would have been one of the key players. And actually, there’s many people who would say that they would have been the Brisbane club. They were that strong.” Yet from the outset there was a cold war between Brothers and the Brisbane Broncos, one of three expansion clubs set to enter the Sydney competition in 1988. It stemmed, primarily, from the fact that the Brothers coach, Ross Strudwick, had been overlooked by the Broncos directors for the vacant coaching position. During the 1987 season Strudwick complained that the Broncos’ spending spree was disrupting team harmony in the Brisbane competition, while Broncos director Barry Maranta made a thinly veiled swipe at Brothers’ lack of cooperation with his organisation. And as the season progressed, not a single Brothers player signed for the Broncos. Instead, Strudwick organised contracts for his players with clubs in Sydney. Five first-graders, including the captain Trevor Bailey, ended up signing for St George – Strudwick’s old side. Winter gave way to spring, and with the Broncos set to enter the Sydney competition, there was a sense of finality to the last rounds of the 1987 BRL season. In the lead-up to the grand final between Brothers and Redcliffe, Rugby League Week published a dramatic front page with nine Brothers players decked out in Parramatta, St George, and North Sydney jerseys – the clubs they would join in 1988. It was, as the headline suggested, the “last tango in Brisbane”. On the afternoon of Sunday 20 September 1987, Brothers were led out onto Lang Park by an eight-year-old mascot, Bradley Jacobs, who was dressed in a bright green leprechaun outfit and top hat – a throwback to the club’s Irish Catholic roots. The players bravely absorbed 10 minutes of pressure from a fired-up Redcliffe side before Bailey, in his last-ever game for Brothers, crossed over for the first try of the match. From there, the Brethren ran in five more tries to win by 18 points. As Bailey hoisted the trophy aloft, his teammate Steve Carter lifted the happy young leprechaun mascot onto his shoulders. Despite the off-field drama, Brothers had managed to win both the reserve-grade and first-grade titles. Chairman Frank Dolan promised reporters that the club was “looking to the year 2000” and hoped that there would be a Brothers club in Brisbane for their little mascot to play for in the future. Yet as the Brothers faithful crammed into the clubhouse to celebrate into the early hours of the morning, what should have been the start of a glorious new era instead became a long, painful hangover. Within a few years, Brothers would be forced from its leagues club and home ground – which were eventually demolished to make way for townhouses – and the football side was reduced to a shadow of its former self. The situation facing Brothers was a powerful metaphor for the collapse of the BRL. For Maranta, a Brothers old boy who was now heading up the Broncos, there was never any intention to adversely affect Brothers or any other club. Still, he was aware that big changes were necessary to rejuvenate the game. “We wanted the BRL to be successful,” he remembered, “but none of us went to rugby league. Rugby league was not promoted in any way shape or form ... I mean, it was moribund.” To a remarkable degree, the decline of the old style of Queensland politics coincided with the decline of the traditional world of rugby league. The end of Bjelke-Petersen’s long reign as premier would soon be followed by the BRL’s demise. At the beginning of 1988 the city of Brisbane was caught in rugby league purgatory. Other sports were moving in. The Brisbane Bears, a newly established Australian rules club, had set up shop on the Gold Coast, while in basketball, the Brisbane Bullets were drawing crowds of 10,000 people a game. Yet the Brisbane Broncos had to resolve a far more complex set of circumstances than the Bears or the Bullets. It would need to negotiate the divided loyalties of the existing rugby league supporters, as well as capturing the attention of the latent community of sports fans in southeast Queensland. The Broncos directors studied the success of the National Football League in America and were impressed by a financially viable organisation underpinned by professional marketing and dazzling match-day entertainment. “We never ever wanted to treat the Broncos as anything more than a business,” later recalled Broncos director Porky Morgan. “The intention was to create a really good side under private enterprise lines to make sure that there are sufficient funds there to develop what we thought was the way football should be run.” Over the next decade and a half, all the football codes in Australia would experience profound changes in their relationship to supporters and to the general public. Football would soon become a privatised product, beholden to the family-friendly expectations of the entertainment industry. In many ways, the Broncos began this gentrification of Australian sport. The rough-and-tumble world of Brisbane club football – the brawls at “Bash-up Park”, the crude verbal tirades from the “chook pen” at Kougari Oval, the stinking urinals of Lang Park – were almost prehistoric compared to the Broncos’ vision for rugby league. Adrian McGregor, a journalist and biographer of Wally Lewis, once observed that rugby league clubs were in fact workingmen’s clubs, with their social and cultural values “fixed in an Australia which existed between 1930 and 1960”. “When the Brisbane Broncos run on to Lang Park [...] for their inaugural Sydney premiership match,” predicted McGregor, “their toughest task will not be to defeat Manly-Warringah, but to drag rugby league into the 21st century.” Maranta admitted that none of his fellow directors would take their wives to hyper-masculine rugby league matches. Instead, they decided to civilise rugby league by separating Lang Park into drinking and dry sections, while Maranta told reporters that wives and kids were welcome, as well as dads. At the Broncos’ first trial match at Lang Park in February, an overexcited ground announcer heckled the Canberra Raiders over the PA system, blasted neighing horse noises, and a brass band struck up a tune whenever an opposition player lined up a conversion attempt. This kind of confected atmosphere was, as more than a few people noted, taken straight from the artificial bombast of American sport. But on the first Sunday of May 1988, more than 17,000 people witnessed the Broncos beat the defending premiers, Manly-Warringah, by 34 points. For many Queenslanders, the Broncos were like an extension of the state side. Wayne Bennett was coach of both teams; the Broncos general manager, John Ribot, had only recently been farewelled from the Maroons; and the Emperor of Lang Park, Wally Lewis, carried his genius from State of Origin to club football. And the playmaker in the No 7 jumper was Allan Langer. For a new franchise that hoped to spread rugby league’s appeal, he was a revelation. Anyone who had been put off by the raw brutality of rugby league was now comforted by the fact that Langer, who looked like a small child, could mix it with the best. When “Alfie” received the ball, onlookers could not stop a grin spreading across their face. Children flocked to him at club functions and open days. Mothers and grandmothers simply adored him. According to one reporter, “New York’s Madison Avenue advertising district could not have manufactured a more appealing product than Langer is already.” What the Broncos were attempting to do, in effect, was end the class prejudice that existed towards rugby league and reach out to new audiences. “There was a real bad feeling towards rugby league,” recalled Barry Maranta. “I played golf at Royal Queensland and no-one would talk to me because I was a leaguie! Serious. I didn’t go to a GPS school and I played rugby league, so I was persona non grata!’ Maranta and his fellow directors set about transforming the mud, sweat and beers approach of clubs in the 1970s into a corporate franchise that would be all things to all men – and women. “The first thing we decided, in trying to get bums on seats, was why deny yourself half the marketplace?” explained Maranta. “We went out of our way to get women immersed with us from day one. Our No 1 Bronco supporter, and in fact jersey-holder, was Sallyanne Atkinson, who was the lord mayor of Brisbane at the time. “The first game that we played against Manly, Sallyanne was the one that kicked the ball off, and notoriously her shoe went further than the ball. It became quite a thing, and was publicised in the media, because rugby league was considered not a game for women to go to – they went to the rugby union. We changed that, virtually from game one.” This is an edited extract from Heartland: How Rugby League Explains Queensland by Joe Gorman, University of Queensland Press. Available now.