England is one of the only large countries that does not wait for confirmed results before offering places on higher education courses, and Jo Grady is absolutely right to be calling for a new system (Education, 13 August). The education system is changing, so we need to make sure the higher education applications process is still fit for purpose. Over the last few years we’ve seen a rapid rise in the number of unconditional offers. These cannot be justified and are not in the interests of students. However, they are largely a direct response to an increase in competition between institutions for a smaller group of young people. We need wide-reaching change to build a fair and transparent post-qualifications admissions system, with all parts of the education system working together in the best interests of students. It is too easy to talk up the risks of changing the system without fully recognising the benefits, particularly when the pain of change will be more for institutions and the benefits for students. It is high time we approached this in an open-minded way and use our combined efforts to support a planned approach which utilises new technology to transform the process for the better. England’s colleges are ready to help lead the way.David HughesChief executive at the Association of Colleges • The continuing annual obsession with A-level grades, predicted grades and grade inflation reflects an age when few were deemed both worthy and capable of benefitting from higher education, to an age when it is widely recognised that everyone benefits from continuing education and the highly educated society that this brings. We should be looking to expand higher education to the whole population, not continue to obsess over A-levels, which in themselves are poor predictors of future performance.Roy Boffy(Formerly senior adviser for further education, Dudley LEA), Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands • If (only) three out of 10 students end up paying off their student debts (Report, 13 August), well that leaves 70% in debt for most of their lives … an horrific outcome for little public purse return, but great for the private debt company.Rowan VuglarLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition