The small Leicestershire town of Burbage is certainly not the first place you think of when it comes to rugby league. But on Saturday, a small pocket of an area where fewer than 15,000 people reside will be travelling en masse to Wembley for the sport’s showpiece event to see one of their own realise a childhood dream. Born on the outskirts of Leicestershire and initially a promising rugby union player with Leicester Tigers, Matt Davis’s route to the top of rugby league is certainly unique. However, it is perhaps also ironic that the biggest game of his career will take place a stone’s throw from where his breakthrough as a professional happened just a couple of years ago. “I lived just down the road from Wembley when I played for London Broncos in Ealing,” Davis explains to the Guardian. “I’d drive past it most days and always wonder what it would be like to play there. Hopefully on Saturday, I’ll find out.” It has been a whirlwind few years for the Warrington forward to say the least, culminating in an appearance in the Challenge Cup final on Saturday when the Wolves take on St Helens. As a teenager Davis spent time in the Tigers’ academy before stumbling upon league after being introduced to it by a friend. “Up until 16 I was still at Leicester, before someone recommended the Leicester Storm league side to me,” he recalls. “I played flanker, centre, everywhere in union but instantly fell in love with league. I got into the Midlands Academy side and then somehow ended up at the Broncos at the age of 17. “The first two seasons there were really tough, but last year I really cracked it – and that earned me my move here to Warrington. Growing up was a world away from this; we played in a park with Leicester Storm and used to have to walk up and down before the game collecting syringes. But I just loved league. I’d miss school to play rugby league with my mates because my dream was to be a professional rugby league player. It’s a bit of a weird dream for a kid from just outside Leicester... but here we are.” Davis is part of a strong rugby family – his two younger brothers, Sam and Jonno, are in the academies at London and Hull respectively – and they will all be at Wembley on Saturday: with the forward covering the costs of a trip that has proven to be more expensive than originally anticipated. “We actually only get about three free tickets per player,” Davis laughs. “But I don’t care, I want everyone there so I’ve had to buy another dozen or so tickets, maybe more actually. All the London Broncos boys I played with last year, around 30-odd of them actually, are going to be there with my family too so it’ll be crazy. It’s like going back home in a way, and having my family there too will be very special.” Davis’s move to Warrington at the start of this season, having attracted the interest of several Super League clubs while playing in the Championship for London, has certainly paid off, but the transition was not straightforward. “It’s taken its time to click here,” he admits. “I was actually in the crowd watching Warrington play Catalans in last year’s final and wondered what it would be like to play for them. “But I had to go out and earn my stripes, which I get at a club of this size. I went back to London on loan for a bit and even played for Rochdale at the bottom of the Championship, but I’ve worked hard and I hope everyone can see that. To now be here, on the brink of a Wembley final... it’s the realisation of everything I dreamed of as a child. The cup final at Wembley is the pinnacle.” Despite being second in Super League, Davis and Warrington are 16 points behind Saturday’s opponents, the runaway league leaders, St Helens – with the Wolves going into Wembley on the back of five successive league defeats. Even their own coach, Steve Price, has labelled Warrington the biggest underdogs in the final’s modern-day history. But having witnessed the Wire’s shock defeat to underdogs Catalans first-hand this time last year, Davis is confident of history repeating itself once again. “I was in the stands for that final and Catalans showed how to handle being underdogs,” he insists. “I’m not saying that’s going to be the case this year, but we can thrive on the underdog tag. “We’ve got a great chance, better than what some people think.” With around 50 friends and family there to cheer him on, Saturday has proven to be one of the most expensive days of Davis’s life. If his prediction of the Wolves stunning St Helens comes to fruition, you suspect it will have been worth every penny.