The Rugby Football League and Super League were quick to condemn the events that took place last Saturday after the tensions of Catalans’ fractious affair with Warrington spilled over into the Perpignan stands. But the wider question for the game’s authorities is whether this was an isolated incident or indicative of a growing problem in the sport. Answers vary. “We have a pretty good record on the whole,” the RFL’s chief executive, Ralph Rimmer, says. “Incidents like these aren’t unique to rugby league and generally we are a very good, family sport.” Rimmer is right in the sense that it is a small minority who appear to be tarnishing the sport’s image but the message from the clubs signals just how problematic crowd trouble is becoming. Featherstone have issued banning orders to three individuals this season, after a number of incidents at games and on social media. Their chief executive, Davide Longo, says: “I’ve said for a number of years that this is creeping into our sport. We appear to have a movement of fans not getting into football games because of bans, and because you can still drink on the terraces in rugby league, it’s appealing. We’ve got to stop hiding behind the fact we’re a ‘family sport’ and tackle it.” Longo’s sentiment is echoed by Wakefield’s CEO, Michael Carter. “It’s getting worse. I can’t avoid saying that unfortunately,” he says. “There are a small minority causing issues not only for the club but for everyone else trying to enjoy it.” So what is the answer to tackle what many clubs clearly consider to be a growing problem? The RFL’s investigation into what happened in Perpignan could, Rimmer says, take weeks to conclude. Only three players received suspensions after the game, leading many to question the governing body’s disciplinary procedures. Many believe supporters found to have been involved in crowd trouble should receive far more serious penalties. Carter says: “We are endeavouring to work out who anyone involved with trouble here is and ban them for life. You are not welcome, and it’s the only way to properly tackle it.” Longo agrees. “I really do think that’s the answer. We’ve got to protect the club’s image, the sport’s reputation and those people who want to enjoy the game for the right reasons.” Many clubs have operated without hard segregation in their stadiums for years but are now understood to be reconsidering. Longo even says Featherstone almost played a game behind closed doors early this year, to reinforce how seriously they were taking the problem. Meanwhile there were reports after Warrington’s game with St Helens on Thursday night that coaches carrying away supporters were attacked. St Helens, who won 30-12, have confirmed that images circulated on social media were legitimate and the Super League leaders are investigating. “From Siddal under-16s through to Great Britain we will not let anyone ruin this sport,” Rimmer said when asked how serious the RFL is. “Anyone seen responsible for what happened last week or anywhere will be brought to task.” It is a commendable attitude – but for a sport that prides itself on being family friendly, how the game responds will determine whether that mantra remains credible.