Living in a city flat with a small patio garden, I’m not blessed with the seasonal summer glut that you often associate with a home jam-maker. I do, however, have a tendency to overbuy fruit at the supermarket and then forget about it. To save myself from guiltily having to toss it out, I’ve taken to turning my forgotten fruit into jam; you don’t need mountains of fruit, or time, to do this. Fruit that has gone past its freshest can still be turned into something delicious. Make sure your pineapple is ripe and sweet. When making jam, no amount of extra sugar will make up for bland fruit. Prep 30 minCook 35 minMakes 10 scones, plus 1 jar of jam For the jam400g fresh pineapple250g ginger beer (I use Crabbie’s)4 tbsp apple pectin (I use Certo)125g granulated or caster sugar1 tbsp lemon juice For the scones75g cold unsalted butter250g plain flour, plus extra for dusting50g caster sugar2 tsp bicarbonate of soda4 tsp ground ginger¾ tsp salt40g currants225g Greek yoghurtMilk, for brushing 200g clotted cream or mascarpone, to serve Start by making the jam. Put a saucer in the freezer. Peel and finely chop the pineapple, then put in a medium-sized saucepan with the other jam ingredients. Bring to a boil, then cover and simmer for 10 minutes to soften the fruit. Remove the lid and leave to simmer for a further 10-15 minutes, until most of the liquid has reduced. To check that the jam has reached setting point, remove the saucer from the freezer and dab a small amount of jam on to it; if the jam wrinkles when pushed with your finger, it is ready. If it is still runny, return the pan to the heat, simmer again for a few minutes, then test again. To make the scones, rub the butter into the flour with your fingers until it resembles breadcrumbs (you can do this in a food processor, if you like), then add the remaining dry ingredients, followed by the yoghurt. Mix just enough to bring the dough together, but try to handle it as little as possible – any prolonged kneading will give you a chewy texture. Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Generously dust your work surface and rolling pin, then gently roll out the dough. Divide into 10 scones: you can do this with a cookie cutter, but I’m not fussed about wonky shapes, so I use a sharp knife. Arrange the scones on a baking sheet lined with greaseproof paper. Brush the tops with a little milk, then bake for 12 minutes, until risen and the tops have turned hazelnut-brown. To serve, halve the scones, slather with clotted cream or mascarpone and add a dollop of pineapple jam.