David de Gea A confident start to the new season with good positioning and fine saves from Barkley, Emerson and Mount. 7 Aaron Wan-Bissaka The £45m summer signing made an immediate impression. Pulled inside a few times but dominant in his battles. 8 Victor Lindelöf A polished display and an important influence on the two debutants either side of him in United’s defence. Booked. 7 Harry Maguire A serene start to life as the world’s most expensive defender. Won every header, distributed cleanly and instigated the crucial second goal. 8 Luke Shaw Exposed several times in the first half by a lack of protection around him but handled the pressure well. 7 Paul Pogba Controlled midfield with a masterful display. Put the team first and delivered beautiful passes for the third and fourth goals. 8 Scott McTominay Tactically disciplined and dovetailed neatly with Pogba. The pair’s understanding grew impressively during the game. 7 Jesse Lingard Anonymous to start with out on the right but prospered when shifted inside. A more physical presence than usual. Booked. 7 Andreas Pereira Took his opportunity well with a valuable part in the first two goals and a hand in limiting Jorginho’s influence on midfield. 7 Marcus Rashford Did not look comfortable stationed out on the left but flourished centrally. His pace and touch polished United’s counterattacks. 8 Anthony Martial Showed a finisher’s instinct to hold off Azpilicueta and convert the second goal. More suited than Rashford to playing out wide. Booked. 7 Substitutes: Daniel James (for Pereira 74) 7, Juan Mata (for Rashford 86) 5, Mason Greenwood (for Lingard 86) 5. Kepa Arrizabalaga No chance with the penalty but beaten too easily when Martial took the game away from Chelsea. 6 César Azpilicueta The visitors’ best defender until switching off with serious consequences for the second and third goals. 5 Andreas Christensen Alert for several interceptions and strong in the air, although slow to react on the second goal and the counterattack. 6 Kurt Zouma A nervous, clumsy and costly display from a defender trying to impress after two seasons away. Booked. 4 Emerson Justified his selection over Marcos Alonso by bringing energy and greater threat. Denied by the woodwork and twice by De Gea. 7 Jorginho Tidier and more creative in possession than most but frequently overrun in the second half. Booked. 6 Mateo Kovacic Exerted little influence on the midfield battle. Allowed Pogba too much freedom to dictate proceedings. 6 Pedro Reflected Chelsea’s day: sharp and inventive early on but wasteful and erratic as the game wore on. 5 Mason Mount Pressed well when Chelsea were on top only to fade after the penalty. Indecisive in front of goal. 6 Ross Barkley Looked lean and keen to get on the front foot but had little joy against Wan-Bissaka. 6 Tammy Abraham A starting role was a vote of confidence and, though unlucky to hit the post, his hold-up play needs to improve. Booked. 6 Substitutes: Christian Pulisic (for Barkley 58) 6, Olivier Giroud (for Abraham 66) 5, N’Golo Kanté (for Jorginho 73) 5.