The Solario Stakes has subsequent winners of the Derby, Breeders’ Cup Classic and Sussex Stakes on its recent roll of honour but the latest renewal may say more about a colt that was not in the field. Positive showed courage as well as quality to edge past Kameko by a nose with Charlie Appleby’s Al Suhail in third. Appleby’s stable, though, also houses Pinatubo, the 2,000 Guineas favourite, who was five lengths too good for Positive at Glorious Goodwood last month. That form is the reason why Positive, who is trained by Clive Cox, is still among the 33-1 outsiders for next year’s Guineas, though with three runs behind him after his first Group Two victory here he still has plenty of time to close the gap on Pinatubo. Positive could yet meet him again in the Dewhurst Stakes in mid-October, while the Prix Jean-Luc Lagardère on Arc day is also under consideration. “He’s still a work in progress and he’ll be better next year,” Cox said. “It was close at the line but they went a good gallop and it was a good time, so we can be no more than pleased with him. “He’s well entered, he’s in the [Group One] Dewhurst, the Champagne Stakes [at Doncaster] and also the Lagardère, so we’re covering all the bases.” Kameko, who could yet prove to have been the best horse in the race, looked inexperienced on his second start but staged a strong rally in the closing stages to get to within an inch of victory. He has an entry in the Group Two Royal Lodge Stakes at Newmarket on 28 September. Lavender’s Blue could also have a Group One target next time up after returning to form to win the Group Three Atalanta Stakes on her first start since finishing last of 14 in the Oaks at Epsom in June. Jim Crowley, the brother-in-law of the filly’s trainer, Amanda Perrett, travelled well from the off as Jubiloso, the 4-5 favourite, made the running under Ryan Moore. The odds-on shot started to feel the pinch inside the final quarter-mile, however, and having briefly looked as if he might be caught in a pocket, Crowley squeezed through a narrow gap to win quite cosily. Abba’s first new material for 37 years is expected to be released in either September or October so it promises to be a big couple of months for Benny Andersson, who owns Lavender’s Blue. He is expected to be at Newmarket when she lines up for the Group One Sun Chariot Stakes – which is, like Saturday’s race, over a mile – on 5 October. Brighton 2.00 Pink Iceburg 2.30 Spanish Angel 3.00 Cent Flying (nap)3.30 Ziggle Pops 4.00 Joyful Dream (nb) 4.30 Cafe Sydney5.00 Luna Magic Worcester 2.10 Max O 2.40 Go Another One 3.10 Present Chief3.40 Rubys Cube 4.10 Doubly Clever 4.40 Ballygown Bay 5.10 Hallings Comet “It was probably a mistake in hindsight to go for the Oaks,” Perrett said. “But we’re back in winning ways now and there’s lots to look forward to. “She’s done nothing wrong today and she deserves her chance at Newmarket, so long as the ground isn’t too soft. Benny is on the phone today but he’s very excited and he’ll be back for Newmarket probably.” At Beverley, Judicial retained his unbeaten record at the track with a three-quarter-length success in the Beverley Bullet, his third win in three starts at the course. “He’s a five-and-a-half-furlong horse and he likes a hill,” Steve Brown, husband and assistant to Judicial’s trainer, Julie Camacho, said. “They tend to go a good gallop here. It’s probably getting a bit too much for the speed horses inside the final furlong but he kicks in. He’s three-for-three now and we’d like to race here every week.”