Dóra MaurerThis Hungarian artist mixes formal beauty with dissident chaos in an impressive range of works from rigorous film and photography to joyfully liberated paintings.• Tate Modern, London, until 5 July Damien HirstYou can’t ignore Hirst’s colossal bronze sculptures with their visceral images of exposed bodies – might put you off your picnic though.• Yorkshire Sculpture Park, until 29 September Sweet HarmonyArtists including Jeremy Deller and Conrad Shawcross remember acid house.• Saatchi Gallery, London, until 14 December The MoonHumanity’s obsession with Earth’s satellite is explored in this blockbuster marking the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11.• National Maritime Museum, London, until 5 January Wild and MajesticThis show recreates the cult of Scotland in the Romantic age when Highland landscapes and the novels of Walter Scott shaped an image that’s still influential.• National Museum of Scotland, Edinburgh, until 10 November The Horse Fair (1855) by Rosa Bonheur This is one of the most famous scenes by Rosa Bonheur, whose depictions of horses were celebrated in 19th-century France. She had a big success at the 1853 Paris Salon with the original of this thunderous picture, which is now in the Metropolitan Museum in New York. The fact that the National Gallery has owned this smaller version since 1859 shows how she broke into the forefront of contemporary art in the Victorian age. These horses are infused with fury and electric passion. They are being sold but they have wildness and freedom rippling through every rearing and hoof-stamping fibre of their being. • National Gallery, London Tintagel Castle Footbridge, Cornwall, by Ney+Partners and William Matthews AssociatesKing Arthur’s supposed birthplace will be easier for visitors to reach now a striking bridge spans the Cornish cliffs from which it stretches. The steel bridge, with a path made of slate tiles, has a gap in the centre that will expand and contract depending on the weather – neatly solving a tricky balance of forces, but also symbolising a step from present to past. Sheffield’s steeliest young artists are storming the city An “astounding” portfolio of Munch, Bonnard and Vuillard prints is going on sale Sohrab Hura’s India is a violent place Black is black – or is Anish Kapoor’s less so? Artists Film International reveals startlingly unfamiliar places The end of communism has meant colourful times for Dora Maurer Brian Blomerth is taking us on a wild acid trip Photographer Terry O’Neill thinks David Bowie was his best sitter The Neave Brown award throws fresh focus on affordable housing The Edinburgh fringe staged an art heist St Ives hosted the largest collection of artists outside of London Richard Parkes Bonington is the latest artist to give Britain a tax break This long-unknown portrait is of an MP’s Nazi-fleeing granddad A controversial Australian mural has been vandalised … … while graffiti will not be free on Prague’s Lennon Wall Aram Balakjian used family photos to bring life back to his old house A 13th-century Belgian bridge is to be modernised Insect art is a 16th-century wonder Rock’n’rollers take summer holidays too All life passes through Brooklyn’s Barclays Center And we remembered Venezuelan artist Carlos Cruz-Diez … … graphic designer June Fraser … … and library founder Carry Franklin To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.