As the revitalised All Blacks showed against Australia in Auckland the world can change dramatically in the space of a week. Wales further underlined that fact here in Cardiff with a first-half display far removed from their one-paced effort at Twickenham last Sunday. Take them home, country roads, to the place they belong, and everything sounds and feels totally different. It may have been the August holidays, with the sun shining brightly outside, but under the closed roof of the leeky cauldron the final outcome was also a notable one for Warren Gatland’s squad. When the latest world rankings are released this coming week it will be Wales who officially sit on top of the pile for the first time, having won 15 of their last 16 Tests. A red-letter day indeed. No one on either side of the Severn Bridge needs reminding that winning the World Cup is the only indicator that really counts just now but the stats cannot be entirely dismissed. Crucially, this gratifying result also suggests the Six Nations grand slam champions have not entirely mislaid their mojo. Off to Turkey they now go for more warm-weather training, quietly overflowing with private delight. Bearing in mind they lost Liam Williams in the warm-up and are already without the injured Gareth Anscombe and Taulupe Faletau, this was further evidence that Wales now have the kind of depth to bother all comers. James Davies, the ebullient Scarlets flanker, lasted 24 minutes but Josh Navidi came on and slotted in seamlessly. On the other flank Aaron Wainwright did nothing to dispel the theory he could be one of the breakout stars of the World Cup. Collectively, too, Wales were two yards sharper and appreciably smarter tactically. Hoisting the ball deep and straight down the throat of Elliot Daly paid few early dividends so Dan Biggar soon switched to a cuter variety of kicks, keeping England guessing where possible. With the visitors’ discipline fraying and Anthony Watson in the sin-bin, it was no real surprise when a pinpoint Biggar cross-kick found George North in space on the left to take the hosts out to a 10-0 lead. From that point it was always going to be hard to deny Wales their 11th successive win in their steep-sided, noisy lair. England have won five of the seven meetings between the teams since the 2015 World Cup but twice within the past five months they have now failed to crack the Cardiff code. Away from Twickenham they continue to blow strangely hot and cold. If Gatland will have one concern it is that his team are still not scoring bucketloads of tries. Given Leigh Halfpenny was only called in to action at full-back at the 11th hour there were mitigating factors but, given their lineout solidity and significant possession advantage Wales should have been much further ahead as they went in to the final quarter. On the upside, they have regained the knack of being hard to beat. England were a distant second at the breakdown, their big runners were never allowed to work up a head of steam and fitness will not be a problem. Had you said even a couple of years ago that Wales would be the world’s No 1 side heading into the World Cup, you would have been laughed out of New Zealand. That does not necessarily make them favourites to lift the Webb Ellis Cup but they have long since earned the right to be seen as serious contenders. Gatland has his team – and their rivals – back where he wants them.