Benjamin Myers’s first novel since his Walter Scott prize-winning The Gallows Pole and switch from tiny indie publisher Bluemoose to Bloomsbury is an unexpectedly touching story of a friendship that conquers the barriers of age, class and gender. Set over a summer in the aftermath of the second world war, the book follows 16-year-old Robert Appleyard as he leaves his Durham colliery village to search for any work that isn’t coal mining: “an act of escapology and rebellion”. On reaching the east coast, he encounters Dulcie Piper, a woman three times his age who lives alone in a rambling cottage. They form an unlikely but symbiotic relationship, in which he gardens while she provides food, shelter and intellectual sustenance. Dulcie is a lobster-eating, hard-drinking aesthete with a German shepherd called Butler. By turns verbose, eloquent, motherly and foul-mouthed, she might have come from central casting if Myers hadn’t given her such a richly imagined past and linguistic register. “Scones without proper cream is a disaster of apocalyptic proportions,” she exclaims, and one can sense Myers’ relish in bringing her to life. As well as feeding him up, Dulcie encourages Robert to go to university and introduces him to poetry: “mankind’s way of saying that we’re not entirely alone”. In doing so, she reveals she was once the lover of Romy Landau, a tragic German poet. When Robert discovers a manuscript of Romy’s final unpublished collection (also called The Offing), it leads Dulcie to a message from beyond the grave. With its narrative relayed in retrospect by Robert, who eventually becomes the writer Dulcie wanted him to be, the book recalls JL Carr’s A Month in the Country. Myers’s sensitive portrayal of an emotionally mature man looking back at a single life-changing summer is as quietly gripping as Carr’s novella. The title, too, is resonant. The offing is “the distant stretch of sea where sky and water merge”, and it’s a perfect metaphor for invisible transition. As we read, Robert’s adolescence and adulthood meet, while he tries to comprehend a worldly and sophisticated woman who embodies fearless independence. The Offing is written with Myers’s customary grit and brio, but the moorland chiaroscuro of The Gallows Pole has given way to lucid coastal air. The flinty, flexed, occasionally knotty prose of his other books, with their vernacular authenticity, has become lyrical and Lawrentian. It is a welcome advance, one that sees Myers effortlessly extending his range. • Byron Easy by Jude Cook is published by Windmill. The Offing is published by Bloomsbury Circus (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.