A show can have the same words, same actors, same set and yet every performance will be unique. Something in the energy of the performers, the mood of the audience and any factor from the weather to the news means live art is never the same thing twice. In certain instances, such as when the show stars a five-month-old boy, as it does in Daniel Bye’s riveting two-hander, this is especially the case. There is no predicting how all the sleeping, feeding and playing will pan out – and no way to anticipate the audience’s cooing and laughter in response. This is the deal with Arthur (the name of the show and of Bye’s co-star) which has the added variant of being staged in your living room; performances are by request via the number in the fringe programme. The variables of baby and location mean no two performances could possibly be alike. With the baby’s needs beautifully integrated into the performance by co-creator Sarah Punshon (AKA Arthur’s mum), the show is about a similar set of variables. Bye’s theme is nature versus nurture and the way the exact same set of genes can produce very different-looking plants, animals and human beings, according to the tiniest environmental variant. Bye and Punshon wouldn’t be the first artists to make work inspired by parenthood, but there’s nothing self-indulgent about Arthur. Instead of pity-me stories of late-night feeds, they build a funny and thoughtful show for an audience of 10 about the qualities we inherit and bequeath, the psychological effect we have on our children and the advantage such factors as class, health and wealth bestow. Exploiting the intimacy of the event, Bye gets us to share our thoughts on the supposed uniqueness of our names and our views about parenting styles. He counters with facts, figures and anecdotes that suggest we have less control over our destiny than we like to think, as he looks back at his own family line and forward to a world in which, through reasons of good fortune, baby Arthur is likely to flourish. It’s a touching, nourishing, gently provocative show, identical yet different. Performed in your home, Edinburgh, until 25 August.