‘The other day I woke up, I was like, ‘This is the most magical place on Earth!’” The New York cabaret and comedy performer Catherine Cohen is rhapsodising about her maiden Edinburgh experience. “This was me: ‘I’m in the exact right place!’ I was gonna cry.” But the rhapsodies don’t last long. “Last night I was sobbing, I was like, ‘Why would anyone do this to themselves?!’ After this, nothing else will ever be as hard.” That’s a spot-on precis of the fringe rollercoaster, and it gives a vivid flavour of Cohen’s show The Twist… ? She’s Gorgeous, which may be the most eye-catching comedy hour on the fringe. Houston native Cohen, 27 – who performs a weekly cabaret at Alan Cumming’s club in Manhattan – is the millennial paradox made flesh, and set to music. She is a dazzling, ravening ego on legs: her signature song is called Look at Me and repeats the phrase ad absurdum. Her act is a dance of death between self-love and neurosis, sequinned and staged because, hey, make your downward spiral sexy enough and you might get enough likes to spin back up again. We meet in the Pleasance’s backstage bar mid-festival and – notwithstanding her dramatic emotional arc – she could hardly seem happier. This is a woman who has the world where she wants it, and who laughs blithely throughout our chat – even when discussing the terrifying anxieties she nightly splays across the stage. Alongside Look at Me, her songs include one about murderous revenge on a handsy date, another on her attraction to men who’re indifferent to her, as well as her ditty, Take My Money, about shopping for plus-size clothes. This isn’t traditional musical comedy. “It’s repetitive, it’s usually one joke. Henry [Koperski, her composer and pianist] always kids around that I refuse to rhyme or to write an actual joke. But it makes me laugh, so I just go with it.” Koperski exaggerates: Cohen has plenty of jokes (“I love sex because it famously has no consequences”), her mannerisms are hilariously arch and she can make her voice funny as well as beautiful. But he’s right that her lyrical schemes are capacious: Cohen often careens off-piste. Witness the riff in Take My Money on the fact that she’s always been larger than her boyfriends: “Like, if I fuck this skinny guy maybe I won’t give birth to a chubby daughter who I’ll have to fight with in the changing room …” Watch the show, and it feels like a satire on – or exposé of – self-projection millennial-style, in which “I’m wonderful” and “I’m vulnerable” jostle for stage space. Older audiences – to whom Cohen never usually plays – can find it overpowering, she reports. “A man stopped me and told me I was talking way too fast and he couldn’t understand what I was saying. I was like, ‘Thank you for the note, sir!’” Back in the day, performers (and everyone else) kept their dysfunction concealed, or at least buried deep in the subtext. “Whereas I’m like, ‘What’s subtext?’” Cohen says with a laugh. “‘Here’s text. Here’s some more text’.” She tells me what fellow US comic Naomi Ekperigin told her: “‘You’re pure id.’ And I was like, omigod, that’s it. That’s what I’ve been doing. It’s this pure, “I want, I want” character, and I’ve just been leaning into it and hoping it’s not offputting.” And where does that character come from? “It’s what I’m actually thinking,” she replies, as if it were obvious. “I want everything, I want everyone to pay attention to me. I really am addicted to my phone, and to male attention. It’s my base desires, I guess.” She hopes audiences might identify with the persona on such lurid display. “Hopefully, in sharing some of my selfish or disgusting secrets, people might be like, ‘I feel that way too,’ and feel less alone. That’s what I look for – a performer exposing themselves on stage and letting me see my insecurities reflected in them.” But mainly, she wants to make people laugh. And she needs to be on stage. “On my one day off in this whole festival, I was like, ‘Why am I so depressed?’ It’s because I didn’t do the show that day. I turn to Henry before the show every night and I’m just like, ‘This gives my life purpose’.” But for how long? Cohen is so clearly a star in the making that I fear we may lose her to the movies or to TV (for which – after appearances in Broad City and Search Party – she’s developing a version of her stage show). “I want to be a movie star,” she says, flashing the kind of smile that defies you to bet against it. Then there’s musical theatre, with which she has teenage history and an ambivalent relationship (“I’d say it’s life-ruining”), but to which her skills – like erstwhile Edinburgh fringe sensation Tim Minchin before her – are perfectly suited. “I want to do it all!” she insists – like her mentor Cumming, a fine template of a self-authored creative career. But first there’s a festival to finish – if she can muster the emotional strength. “People do this multiple years in a row? They have a death wish!” she says. “This place is crazy. But it’s heaven.” Catherine Cohen is at Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Read all of our Edinburgh festival coverage.