This is only the second play by the admired novelist William Boyd and it suggests he still has much to learn about the robust demands of theatre. His play is shrewdly observant and intermittently funny but it lacks any striking image and, at 75 minutes, seems far more suited to an intimate space like Hampstead’s Downstairs theatre, where it started, than to a main-house stage. Boyd’s point is that a whole set of relationships can unravel because of a simple argument. It all begins with a dispute between the married Meredith and Pip over a trashy movie (I longed to know which one) they have just seen. The row reveals the gulf between museum curator Meredith and her PR husband who, it transpires, is having an affair. We then see the ripple-effect of the initial argument in a series of duologues involving Meredith and her mum, Pip and his father-in-law and even the respective best friends of the warring twosome. “I argue, therefore I am,” says one character and Boyd shows how any social encounter can quickly degenerate into fractious hostility: the best scene shows Pip’s male buddy expressing his irritation at the persistent rising inflexions used by Meredith’s female chum at the end of every sentence. But plays are not only built on psychological perception and one longs to see more stirring physical action than an occasional trip to the drinks table. Director Christopher Luscombe and designer Simon Higlett do all they can to keep the play moving and the cast is good. Felicity Kendal gets star billing and captures well the waspishness of Meredith’s mum but she is only part of the ensemble. Alice Orr-Ewing as Meredith has a more prominent role and neatly suggests the character’s intellectual condescension towards her straying spouse whom Simon Harrison invests with the right insecurity. I especially liked Rupert Vansittart who, as Pip’s orthopaedic surgeon father-in-law, exudes the complacent snobbery of the golfing classes. While Boyd’s play is perfectly pleasant, it left me, like Oliver Twist, wanting more. At Theatre Royal, Bath, until 24 August.