As a boy, I used to be taken to Suffolk for holidays in a caravan in the middle of a forest. I would wake to the sound of woodpigeons and walk down to the beach barefoot, or over to the local farm to get bantams’ eggs for breakfast. The Suffolk coast I remember was a quiet place of green lanes and wide estuaries. Perhaps because it was so idyllic – a memory that could only be spoiled – I have been wary about ever going back, not least because people kept telling me it had changed and gentrified. But suddenly, 50 years later, the time felt right. On the principle that you need to go in at the deep end (and after a long, hot drive across England), I headed straight for the sea at Southwold. One of many pleasing advances since I was a kid is the way wetsuits have become ubiquitous; back then, using one would have been seen as eccentric to the point of abnormality. The North Sea is still brown, murky and, as a woman in the cafe told me, “looks like onion soup”, but at least I could stay in the water for a good while, even if the Southwold current was so strong it felt like I was swimming on the spot. I gave up and let myself drift along the shore. The line of cheerful, coloured beach huts still stretches away either side of the lighthouse, although on closer examination they have been considerably tidied up, as befitting what are now desirable properties worth tens of thousands of pounds. If only my brother and I had bought one with our pocket money instead of spending it on sweets. They still compete for the worst of punning names: Linga Longa; Ceez Ruff; Jabba the Beach Hut. The pier, too, has kept a brisk and pleasing vulgarity. Sure, the bacon butties now come on sourdough, and there are 20 flavours of ice-cream rather than just a Mr Whippy (with a flake, but only if you were well-behaved). Yet although Southwold has been through a makeover, it’s kept its intrinsic personality. A boat was leaving to head up the River Blyth. Like so many of the Suffolk rivers that I used to sail as a boy, this was (and is), in Aldeburgh-born poet George Crabbe’s phrase, “inland and winding, smooth and full and wide”. Upstream from the narrow channel that empties into the sea, it opens out into a wide expanse of marsh and lakes, with egrets, curlews and black-headed gulls – smaller, more graceful cousins to the brash herring gulls that steal chips. Beyond the marshes is Blythburgh’s Holy Trinity church, with its carved and painted angels so high up on the ceiling that the Puritan William Dowsing was not able to remove them when he stripped the interior of its decorations in 1644. Back at Walberswick harbour, kids still sit on the quayside dipping for crabs, although these days they are encouraged to put them back. If you want a dressed crab, Samantha K’s nearby beach shack sells them for less than a fiver. Along the coast at Aldeburgh – another small Suffolk port that has survived gentrification – there were long queues outside the Golden Galleon fish and chip shop. I ate mine sitting on the shingle and admiring the giant sea kale bushes. The local fishermen were getting plenty of Dover sole and skate – “so many of them, they’re cheap as chips round here,” one told me – even if plaice and cod are now scarce. Two factors added considerably to the enjoyment of my trip: there was a lot of sunshine, as there often is in East Anglia, remote from the westerlies that dump rain on Britain; and I was staying in a series of Adnams pubs and hotels up and down the coast. Being able to sleep where you drink is disinhibiting. Adnams was one of the few regional breweries not to get swamped by the corporate giants in the 1970s, and is now pre-eminent in east Suffolk, with a chain of refurbished pubs and hotels, like lighthouses along the coast. Its flagship, the Swan in Southwold, is particularly splendid, as befits its position beside the brewery. The food mecca I most wanted to revisit was the Butley Oysterage restaurant at Orford. In the 1960s, the Pinney family revitalised the nearby oyster beds and the oysters remain in my memory as the freshest and plumpest I’ve ever tasted. And they are still as sweet as can be. Apart from the tablecloths, little seems to have changed at the Oysterage, although the service was a lot friendlier than back in the day when children would be banished to a back annexe if considered too noisy. Nearby Orford Castle still stands proud as the perfect place to play hide and seek, with its dry moat and hillocks; the small village of Orford, remote on its long promontory, could compete for the finest hollyhocks in England: they stand more than two metres tall. Suffolk has always been a county with prize allotments and marrows the size of zeppelins. They come green-fingered in these parts. I drove to the bird reserve at Minsmere, one of the RSPB’s most prized possessions and, when I was a boy, a place of pilgrimage for my grandfather, as the first sightings in Britain of avocets – elegant white waders with curved bills – had recently been made there. Minsmere is renowned as a place where, at the right times of year, you can hear both nightjars and nightingales, two of the most impressive songbirds of the dusk. But as I drove through the dim overhung lanes that surround it, the birdsong that most resonated for me was that of the woodpigeon. Somehow the pigeons of Suffolk seem more mellifluous than elsewhere, their cooing deeper and more confident. Close to Minsmere and down a narrow, curling lane is the wonderfully named Eel’s Foot Inn, which has live folk music every Thursday night. The musicians were not young – I felt underage by comparison – and took turns to perform at the open mic with either a guitar or a banjo and some fine singing voices. The finest voice of all belonged to the most self-effacing performer, an older man who sang a version of Sandy Denny’s Who Knows Where the Time Goes? with affecting grace. This could have prompted a few maudlin reflections – where indeed had 50 years gone? – but instead, helped by cider and the bonhomie of the occasion, I rather liked the way time had washed me back to the Suffolk coast after plenty of adventures around the world. I felt strong enough by now to head back to the wood at Waldringfield where I had slept in a caravan as a boy. The trees had long gone, as I had been warned, pulled down by developers to make way for more housing. But the lane to Oak Tree Farm was exactly the same. I wandered down with a little trepidation as to whether the same farming family still lived there, or would remember me, but I needn’t have worried. “You’re probably surprised to see me again,” I said to Olive Parken, now in her 80s, who greeted me in her bungalow. “And you’re probably surprised I’m still alive!” Her son, Alan, rolled up in his tractor. “You won’t recognise me … ” I began, as he got out of the cab. “Yes I do. It’s Hoo.” The Suffolk tongue could never get itself around Hugh, nor wanted to. Things had gone well over the years. Alan’s father, David, told me they had expanded the farm from the 11 hectares (28 acres) he had started with to 400 hectares today. “But there’s a lot of work. And a lot of irrigation.” I walked down to the beach on the River Deben, past the poppies and the cornflowers, and was reminded of the dusty smell of the swaying wild wormwood as you brush against it on the path. There is a constant trope in travel writing: that places once had a golden age that has now been lost. All my life, people have been telling me this about many of the places I love around the world – Machu Picchu, Deià in Mallorca, the Greek islands. They then always add, “Of course, when I went there it was unspoiled and perfect.” It is all too easy to burnish the past with a glow. However, I think I prefer Suffolk now to the way it was 50 years ago. Some of the simpler pleasures may have vanished. But there is nothing wrong with having 20 varieties of ice-cream to choose from. I like my life and my television in colour. And back then, I would never have been allowed to sleep in a pub. • Accommodation was provided by Adnams (adnams.co.uk):the Cross Keys in Aldeburgh has doubles from £110 B&B; the Bell Inn in Walberswick has doubles from £100 B&B; and the Swan Hotel in Southwold has doubles from £200 B&B. Beach huts in Southwold avaialable from £120 a week (beachhutsouthwold.co.uk) Hugh Thomson’s most recent book, One Man And A Mule (Windmill Books), in which he walked across northern England, is available at the Guardian Bookshop for £8.79, including UK p&p Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.