Being broad-minded, we had an unbeliever to stay the weekend. At some point on Sunday afternoon I yelled out of the window: “You’ve got to come and see this! It’s the most astonishing game!” A languorous, world-weary voice replied from the garden: “Cricket! Always astonishing. Always historic. Always unprecedented.” She never budged. It is true that this was cricket’s second astonishing-historic-unprecedented Sunday in six weeks. It is also true it was being shown on Sky, whose policy is that everything must be treated as a-h-u even if it’s a goalless draw between Barrow and Boreham Wood. Which makes it hard to recognise an a-h-u when you see it. And on Sunday we really did (except our visitor). On such occasions, it is easy to get confused between a great game and a great finish. The World Cup final was a fairly typical 50-over contest, spiced up by the gravity of the occasion and the Stokes/Buttler‑led revival of the England innings. Planet Earth spectacularly lurched off its axis in the final moments but Headingley ’19 had more. There have been 2,358 Test matches played since 1877. In terms of closeness Headingley 2019 has a lot of competition. Two Tests have been tied, both involving Australia, against West Indies and India. Two have been drawn with the scores level and the fourth innings still in progress, the first being the “we flippin’ murdered ’em” Test in Bulawayo in 1996, named after the scorecard-defying response of England’s coach, David Lloyd, perhaps the most quoted of all his many quotable comments. There has been a one-run win (West Indies over Australia in 1993), a two- runner (Edgbaston 2005 of beloved memory) and two three‑runners, also both Ashes Tests, at Old Trafford in 1902 and Melbourne 80 years later. This time England’s win was by one wicket, which is in itself no big deal. It was the 14th in all and not even the first this year (Sri Lanka did the same to South Africa in February). Indeed, 18 Ashes Tests have been decided by one or two wickets or fewer than 20 runs. The score in these matches is 13-5 to England, and Australia’s last win was in 1925. This stat must mean something but I’m not sure what. The British ability to defy seemingly impossible odds (Betfair made them a 35-1 chance at one stage on Sunday)? England were of course 500-1 at Headingley in 1981 but that was more PR stunt than serious assessment. There is a school of thought that this long-ago win wrecked English cricket for years, making the team dependent on blind optimism rather than logic, practice and application. For God’s sake don’t pass the 13-5 figure to Downing Street. It’ll make things 10 times worse. Many superlatives have been offered these past couple of days. For Ben Stokes and his magnificent sidekick Jack Leach: Sancho Panza to his Quixote; Tonto to his Lone Ranger; Passepartout to his Phileas Fogg. Their stand passes the a-h-u exam with flying colours. Stokes took dozens of risks and got away with them brilliantly. It was indeed the stuff of fiction. But the greatest innings of all time, as some suggest? It might not be quite the same (an old fogey writes) as a few of Don Bradman’s. Assessing whether this was the greatest cricket match ever played is also tricky. Quality would be one criterion and, as we all know, England’s first-innings batting was atrocious. And Australia were without their best player. You do remember Steve Smith? But you can only play the opposition who turn up and quality is also hard to quantify. All sport is about making fewer mistakes than the opposition. Was Headingley compelling from start to finish? Almost. Australia’s second innings was a dire time but perhaps not to an Australian. And in hindsight that slow buildup of English pain was crucial to the plot – the way great detective novels accrete evidence, all pointing to the wrong suspect. Above all, because the Ashes were on the line, presumed already won and lost, the match had context. Headingley in 1981 and Edgbaston in 2005 were important battles that turned the tide at the time but both came early in the series and neither could have settled the war on their own, whoever won. The most enjoyable Test I watched involved Mike Atherton and Alec Stewart defying the West Indies quicks and conjuring a three-wicket victory in Trinidad in 1998. But that was a very personal memory and meant little in the great scheme of things. Athers was gone as captain five weeks later, something that may yet happen to Joe Root in three. The most compelling I remember was the Centenary Test at Melbourne in March 1977. The Ashes were not at stake – it was a one-off – and it was invisible from Britain but the memory of listening from my dingy flat to Derek Randall’s epic 174 is with me for ever. Hardly anyone knew the camaraderie of that occasion was greased by the fact most of the players were plotting to desert Test cricket and join the breakaway led by the tycoon Kerry Packer. The original tied Test, in Brisbane in 1960, had an impact that surged across the cricketing world. Hardly anyone saw it at the time – even Australia’s No 1 commentator, Alan McGilvray, was so certain of defeat he took an early plane home. But it set up a terrific series: the excitement, after much dourness in the 1950s, the class of the players and the amity between the teams helped rekindle enthusiasm for the game. With that match a close second, I think – for its twists, turns and thrills and its collective and individual sense of redemption – Headingley ’19 may be the best of them all. Note to readers: The above column contains no criticism of the ECB, ICC, MCC or any other component of the alphabet soup that runs cricket. Normal service will be resumed shortly.