Flames is a novel that asks for indulgence, from its first sentence: “Our mother returned to us two days after we spread her ashes over Notley Fern Gorge.” This mother, covered in “leafy appendages”, spends a few days moping around the house, morose and silent, before trudging over to the home of her estranged husband and immolating herself on his lawn. Soon we’re following her daughter Charlotte down to the wild southern edge of Tasmania as she flees her brother Levi, who wants to get hold of a special coffin that will prevent Charlotte from also coming back to life after she dies. We also follow Karl, who catches giant “Oneblood” tuna with the help of his buddy – a seal. There’s a river god who is about to be killed by the man Levi has hired to build Charlotte’s coffin, and a hardbitten, gin-hungry female detective Levi has hired to find Charlotte … and so on. This might make Flames sound tangled and daft. But within a few pages, I found myself charmed, despite my allergy to magical-realist whimsy. Most of the silliness is presented with a wink; you never feel author Robbie Arnott will loose his hand from the tiller. Who wouldn’t want to believe in a river god that can soothe his rage “by nipping the screws out the hull of an idle jetski”? And who couldn’t love his detective’s Tasmanian-tinged hardboiled twang: “The sort of road you’d call a goat track if you had something against goat tracks.” Flames feels solid, significant and emotionally resonant. I found myself welling up when Karl’s seal pal was attacked by orcas: “They took turns gripping its tail in their teeth and flinging their heads left to right, over and over again, using the lid of the ocean to break Karl’s seal into ragged chunks of brown meat.” Alas! Arnott is especially good at conjuring the fragile, changeable environment of Tasmania: “The tree ferns blotted the sky and pawed at my face. Worms and beetles churned across the bracken floor. Water throttled in a stream … all I found was a lingering distaste for wet soil.” A later description of Karl’s daughter Nichola making him smile – “She split the face he showed the world, and drew his love towards her” – perhaps you have to be there, but I found this writing entrancing. It’s not all good news. Arnott’s structure is ambitious, with every chapter taking a different point of view: third person, first person, present and past tense. Sometimes we’re in the head of a river god, sometimes a lead character, sometimes someone or something far more tangential. On the whole, this is invigorating, though I did groan when a chapter started: “He was born the instant a woman, crouching by the curl of a cold river, smacked two smooth stones together”. I had assumed it was going to be written from the perspective of “fire”. But the eventual result was unexpectedly beguiling and banished my scepticism. There are missteps. There are a couple of chapters and characters that feel fleeting. Arnott sometimes pushes too hard for humour, squeezing so hard on the jokes that you can almost see the sweat on his forehead. What’s in matriarch Mavis Midcurrent’s secret lavender icing recipe? “Just sugar, butter, purple food colouring and marijuana that Larry grows in his backyard.” There are also two female characters who become friends over the course of the novel and then – I bet you can’t guess! Yes, I still await the day when a male novelist can write about two women becoming emotionally close without also fantasising like Joey in Friends about corresponding physical proximity. This time around it felt so inevitable that Nicola and Charlotte would give in to “hard desires” and “sharp needs” that it actually came as a relief when the prose purpled and their teeth knocked together, “hard and cold”. But it’s a mark of Flames’s success that it can overcome this awkwardness. I still cared about the book. For all the fronds growing out of arms and flames coming out of characters’ eyes, this story convinced me it was about real people and an important place. By the end, it felt less like Arnott was imbuing his local landscape with magic, and more that the landscape itself was lending his book some of its strange and special power. That’s a decent trick.