An autumn general election has been a possibility since the moment Boris Johnson arrived in Downing Street. The fast-tracking of the Treasury’s spending review and the decision to prorogue parliament increase the chances of a snap poll but also guarantee two months of turmoil in the financial markets. Sterling – already down 7% since its recent high in March – looks vulnerable to further falls. Just run through the list of concerns: a head-on conflict between the executive and legislative branches of government; the increased risk of a no-deal Brexit; the possibility of a general election with a highly uncertain outcome. There would be upside for the pound in the event that the UK and the EU find a way of breaking the impasse, but the route to a deal is not immediately obvious. For the time being, there are no compelling reasons to buy sterling and plenty of reasons to sell it. It was no coincidence that the decision to suspend parliament came so swiftly after the announcement that Sajid Javid would deliver his spending plans on 4 September. By limiting the time that MPs have available to legislate against a no-deal Brexit, Johnson has made it more likely that there will be a vote of no confidence early next month. And if that leads to a general election – as it almost certainly would – the government will use all the weapons at its disposal to maximise its chances of winning. Splashing the cash is one such weapon. Indeed, it is one of the oldest tricks in the book. A government about to call a general election produces a voter-friendly budget one day and formally kicks off its campaign the next. Javid’s spending plans for 2020-21 next Wednesday won’t have quite the same impact because they merely allocate cash to Whitehall departments rather than delivering the series of tax cuts that a pre-election budget traditionally involves. But it is the next best thing and Johnson will wring every last ounce of political advantage from it. The spending review could have taken place at any time this autumn. Javid could have delayed until after the Brexit deadline day of 31 October, by which time the Treasury would know far more about the state of the economy. So while the decision to go early with the spending review doesn’t guarantee an early election, it puts the government in a stronger position to fight one either if the prime minister decides to hold one or is forced into one by a no-confidence vote. The main elements of Javid’s statement have been announced in recent weeks: more money for all the politically sensitive areas of spending: the NHS, schools, the police. But other departments – the ones that have borne the brunt of austerity over the past nine years – won’t be forgotten. Javid has the scope to spend a bit more, stick to the rule inherited from his predecessor, Philip Hammond, that borrowing adjusted for the state of the economy should be less than 2% of GDP by 2020-21, and leave something in reserve for the budget later in the autumn. Spending an extra few billion pounds will not make a material difference to the economy. But that’s not really the point. Voters are supposed to get the message both that the age of austerity is over and that the government has a plan for Britain after Brexit. The hope is that this will drown out bad economic news, of which there is likely to be plenty given that the risks of a recession have increased. Any benefits UK exporters could normally expect from a weaker pound will be negated by the moribund state of global trade, while the mothballing of investment plans by business is bound to continue. Governments like to fight elections when the economy is booming. That will definitely not be the case if one is held this autumn.