Figures released this week reported a 73% increase in the number of knife possession cases involving women and girls in England. This was accompanied by commentary about how the police and Home Office are responding to this “hidden” issue. To say I was frustrated would be an understatement. First, the problem isn’t as hidden as it used to be. Women and girls are being arrested for these offences at increasing rates – so clearly they are being identified. Back in 2008 when I first started to interview women and girls about their experiences of serious violence, various services struggled to find people for me to interview. On some occasions I was simply told that girls weren’t affected by these issues and I was wasting my time. More than 10 years on, most local authorities, police forces, youth offending teams and community organisations can identify women and girls affected by or involved in weapon-enabled crime and violence. We really have no idea if more women and girls are carrying knives than they used to – we just know that more are being apprehended for such offences. The real problem is the lack of support available: especially for those where the primary concern is their involvement in violence and not their experiences of sexual exploitation. By 2011 I had written two reports documenting the varying shades of violence that women and girls were experiencing and involved in – weapon possession, involvement in robbery, drugs supply, domestic abuse, sexual exploitation, kidnap and so on. They ranged in age from 13 to women over the age of 50. In the years that followed the services available to tackle this focused primarily on under-18s who were being sexual exploited. This limited response reflects wider challenges of trying to find support for people who in some way pose a risk of harm to others. If we could explain their experiences solely through the lens of victimisation and childhood we could find a way to help young women. The older they got, and the more they presented a risk to others (in addition to being victimised), the idea of offering support appeared a harder pill to swallow. Another important factor to note is that girls and young women under 18 only accounted for 25% of the offences reported this week. The vast majority involved are adult women. And yet much of the commentary conflated these statistics with wider concerns about youth violence and young people’s involvement in weapon carrying. In reality those figures will include women involved in prostitution who carry a knife for protection; women who are experiencing domestic abuse; women who are homeless; women struggling with alcohol or drug use who have experienced violence from dealers; and women involved in different types of offences. Which brings me to my final concern in the latest debate, which tends to circle solely around the criminal justice system. The police are identifying more women and girls carrying knives: the Home Office attempts to respond and police chiefs try to explain what they have been doing to date and what they could do in the future. Such an approach laughs in the face of persistent wider calls for a public health response to violence. Why aren’t we asking how many women arrested for such offences required mental health support, and how many were able to receive it? How many were abused in earlier childhood, the trauma of which was yet to be addressed? How many were living with violent partners and unable to find a bed in a refuge? How many were teenagers currently in the grip of exploitation that our child protection systems and wider safeguarding partnerships are struggling to combat? How many were living on the streets or sleeping with one eye open in a hostel, unable to access safe and suitable housing? How many feared robbery and violence on their journeys to school each day? What did all of the services responsible for the provision of health, transport, housing, child protection and adult safeguarding have to say about these statistics? And what is being done by government departments beyond the Home Office that set the budgets for such services? If we don’t want to be having this same conversation in another 10 years’ time we need to shift the debate, turn it into action and do it now. • Carlene Firmin is head of the contextual safeguarding programme at the University of Bedfordshire