Against Australia in particular Moeen Ali has days like these. Days like the fourth of the Edgbaston Test when he started his bowling for the morning with a beamer looped at Steve Smith’s head. The former Australia captain usually bats like he is being attacked by wasps but this time even more so as he swatted his bat around at face height. He went on to take 57 runs from Moeen in the innings as the spinner went for 130. Days like the third day at Edgbaston when Moeen, on nought, left alone a ball from Nathan Lyon that crashed into the stumps. Usman Khawaja’s most hapless Test moment came in Galle in 2016 when he let the Sri Lanka offie Dilruwan Perera hit his stumps with a straight ball twice on the same day. Moeen at home in Birmingham looked just as bad. Days like these happened all through the previous Ashes in Australia, with Moeen the bowler splashing out 115 runs per wicket and Moeen the batsman donating his own to Lyon at bargain prices. It seems antithetical that an off‑spinner can forget how to play off-spin. It’s like a burglar forgetting to lock the front door but nine dismissals to one bowler don’t lie. Lyon, in contrast, has days like day five at Edgbaston. The kind of day where he gobbles up six wickets for 49 runs to rissole England for 146 and take an Ashes lead after one Test. He would have slept well on the fourth evening knowing England had 90 overs to scrap for an unlikely draw with the pitch taking turn. In the end they lasted barely half that many. In these conditions Lyon shapes up like the bowler in charge. He has the knowledge of his consistency, the odds in his favour and the confidence he will make it count. He has developed the ability to bowl faster in recent years – more than half of his deliveries are above 88km/h, where less than a quarter used to be – but, critically, he does not lose loop or dip when he speeds up. The faster that sort of bowling comes at you, the harder it is to play. Lyon made knocking off England look like a simple operation. Pat Cummins had already bounced out Rory Burns but it was the spinner who really knocked the top off the innings. Jason Roy was always going to try imposing himself after doing so at the same venue in the World Cup but Lyon shredded the ball back through the right-hander’s gate to beat his charge and take his stumps. From there he didn’t go searching but let the wickets come to him. Where Lyon has an amazing record against left-handers, he also got right-handers. He was comfortable bowling both sides of the wicket, coming around to close off Joe Root’s ability to work to midwicket. All of his wickets came in proper off-spinning fashion: right-handers Root and Joe Denly at bat-pad, left-handers Ben Stokes, Moeen and Stuart Broad behind the wicket. Stokes is in outstanding form but Lyon gave him a delivery just as good, turning and climbing to take a thin edge from a batsman doing nothing wrong. England’s own spinner, batting with two slips and a gully, never had a chance. Moeen, it seems increasingly uncontroversial to say, gets the yips. When the pitch turns he often bowls worse. Expectation unnerves him. For much of his career he was not the primary spinner in a team and he clung to this for comfort like a childhood blanket, long past its usefulness or relevance. But Lyon used to be like this. It circles back to Matthew Wade, who has just returned to the team as a batsman. When he was the wicketkeeper in 2012 he shelled a series of chances that let South Africa bat out a draw in Adelaide. Lyon lost the confidence that he could bowl a team out on the last day. It took several years of hovering near the drop to find it. Now Lyon is four wickets from passing Dennis Lillee’s 355, which would make him Australia’s most prolific Test bowler behind Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath. Not bad for an off-spinner who spent years being undervalued. His 44 overs in the first innings took a long time to yield two wickets in one over, then the injured No 11. But he wasn’t flustered second time around. This is a plain off-spinner without flashy tricks: no doosra, no carrom ball, no arsenal of variations. There is no novelty with Lyon because he does not need it. He just gets you out and believes he is going to. If Moeen can take one thing from this chastening Test, it’s an example.