Mark Robinson is to step down as the England Women’s coach after “a wonderful four years” ended with defeat in the Ashes. The 52-year-old former Sussex coach guided England to victory in the 2017 World Cup and to the final of last year’s Women’s T20 World Cup in the Caribbean but he was unable to get the better of Australia. England won only one of seven matches in the all-forms format. Robinson said: “Although the recent Ashes was a difficult series, a few hard weeks doesn’t take anything away from what has been a wonderful four years. I’ve had so many highlights and memorable moments with the team. “Nothing could ever surpass winning the Women’s World Cup on home soil but from a pure coaching perspective reaching the T20 final last November – with a depleted team, three non-contracted players and three players 20 years old or younger – is a huge personal highlight. “It’s been exciting to watch so many players grow and to watch so many records broken but it feels the right time to take on a new challenge and to allow a different voice to come in before the next T20 World Cup in Australia.” The ECB’s director of women’s cricket, Clare Connor, said: “Mark can reflect on his time as England coach with a great deal of pride. Winning the World Cup in front of a packed Lord’s was a landmark moment for the whole game and his leadership and professionalism were an integral part ofour success. “He drove high standards across young players to become the best team in the world as well as coaching them to understand the demands of professional sport. “Mark passionately championed the development of the women’s game and we thank him for all he has contributed to England women’s cricket during such an exciting stage of our journey. However, after discussions with Mark, we have agreed that now is the right time for him to step down.” The assistant coach, Alastair Maiden, will take temporary charge for the Women’s Championship series against Pakistan in December. Robinson, who played for Sussex and Yorkshire and coached the latter for 10 years, winning two championships in the process, worked with the England Lions squad before being handed the reins of the women’s team in November 2015. He took over from head of performance Paul Shaw in the wake of his decision to stand down two months earlier. Robinson took tough decisions as he looked to raise standards, introducing changes that led to the long-serving captain Charlotte Edwards leave the international stage. The pinnacle of his reign came in July 2017 when Heather Knight led her side to a dramatic nine-run victory over India in the World Cup final as Anya Shrubsole claimed six for 46. However, a tied series in Australia later the same year saw the hosts retain the Ashes and they never looked like surrendering them in England this summer as the hosts won only one of the seven matches in the all-forms format to go down 12-4.