It was not too long ago that Leeds Rhinos supporters will have been desperate for this miserable season to end; but at this rate, they will be ruing the fact it doesn’t last for at least a few more weeks. Everyone associated with the eight-time Super League champions will have feared the worst here when, with half-an-hour remaining, the Rhinos were reduced to 12 men. Leading by just eight points at that stage, the Leeds of as recently as a few weeks ago would have perhaps collapsed. Instead, the manner in which they put a Catalans side harbouring title ambitions this season to the sword underlines the growing belief that relegation here is now highly unlikely. Four points clear of bottom-placed London, with a superior points difference to boot, this – combined with last week’s 44-0 win at Huddersfield – looks more like a top side, as opposed to the one that has been struggling all season. “I don’t feel like I’m dealing with a side fearful of relegation,” Richard Agar, Leeds’ interim coach, said. But as impressive as Leeds were following Brad Singleton’s dismissal, questions must be asked of how Catalans can produce performances as abject as this. They had clawed back a 16-0 deficit to trail by only eight at half-time, but any hopes of a victory vital for their own play-off hopes evaporated in spectacular fashion when they were handed a man advantage. “It looked like we were the team who were a man light,” Steve McNamara, the Catalans coach, said. They were outplayed for the opening half-hour, with tries for Ash Handley and Rhyse Martin, coupled with four goals from the back-rower, making it 16-0. Mickael Goudemand’s try helped narrow the gap to eight - but what followed after half-time was spectacular. Leeds had to survive the first 10 minutes of the second half without Konrad Hurrell following a sin-bin, but when Singleton was sent off shortly after he returned, the Rhinos were then under huge pressure. “It was a moment that galvanised us,” Agar added. Within five minutes of that, they went further ahead when Handley scored his second. As McNamara said, Leeds now looked like the team a man up. Brad Dwyer’s run close to the line then enabled Richie Myler to score, and the scrum-half then claimed his second after his half-back partner, Robert Lui, ghosted through before Lui’s wonderful pass sent Luke Briscoe over in the corner. Leeds Walker; Briscoe, Newman, Hurrell, Handley; Lui, Myler; Seumanufagai, Lunt, Cuthbertson, Ferres, Martin, Merrin. Interchange Donaldson, Singleton, Dwyer, Sutcliffe. Tries Handley 2, Martin, Myler 2, Lui, Briscoe. Goals Martin 10. Catalans Gigot; Mead, Romano, Wiliame, Tierney; Bird, Langi; Bousquet, Da Costa, Simon, Edwards, Whitley, Casty. Try Goudemand. Goals Gigot 2. Interchange Goudemand, Albert, Maria, Kasiano. Referee R Hicks. Attendance 11, 336