The $325,000 Sinquefield Cup at Saint Louis moves into its second half this weekend as the draw-dominated event contrasts with the combative play from the identical 12 grandmasters at Zagreb only last month. The games are viewable free and live online, with grandmaster and computer commentaries, each day at 7pm from Friday onwards. After five of the 11 rounds there were only four decisive results from 30 games. Fabiano Catuana (US), Vishy Anand (India) and Ding Liren (China) led with 3/5. Magnus Carlsen was half a point behind as the world champion opted for his safety-first trademark grinds to help him recover from his 10 defeats at last week’s speed events. His unbeaten run in classical remains intact, and at 84 games is within striking distance of Ding’s record of 100. One explanation for the draws is simply the Missouri heat, over 30 degrees. Another is that Zagreb, unlike Saint Louis, was a true run race where the Russian No 1, Ian Nepomniachtchi, began with three straight wins before Carlsen took over, encouraging others to join the chase. Significantly, the world champion has implied that his push for victory at Saint Louis will start this weekend following Thursday’s rest day. Before that, Carlsen acted the straight guy in Sergey Karjakin’s witty stalemate draw with 10 men still on the board. Ding has won the most polished game so far, steadily outplaying Anish Giri before a decisive attack on the Dutchman’s king. China’s world No 3 is already virtually sure of a rating place in the eight-player candidates in early 2020, and at this stage is arguably the favourite to challenge Carlsen later next year. China’s ambition has long been to dominate all major championships, and Beijing already holds the women’s crown and both Olympiad titles. Russia has announced that chess is to become a compulsory subject in its schools. Olga Vasilieva, the Minister of Education and Science, said: “Children playing chess have better academic performance. Engagement with chess helps them with mental development.” Starting in September, all Russian first graders will study chess for at least 33 hours per year over four years. Chess replaces the third period of physical education class. In the UK, Chess in Schools and Communities provides chess instructors in over 800 schools. The charity, which also organises the annual London Classic and Grand Tour finals at Olympia where Carlsen will be favourite this year, is strongest in the inner cities with 20 schools involved in Newham and 14 in Hackney. Armenia in 2011 was the first country in the world to make chess compulsory in schools, followed by Hungary in 2013. Their decisions were sparked by national achievements, Armenia because of its three Olympiad victories between 2006 and 2012, and Hungary through Judit Polgar, the all-time No 1 woman. Success is hard to measure and depends on the criteria used, but sparking potential masters requires a more specialised approach. The USSR’s Young Pioneer Palaces. England’s 1970s junior squad, China’s chess schools, and India’s pre-teen semi-professional groups have all fostered very rapid progress in the critical years between age 10 and 13. 3633 1 Kc4?? b5+! and White resigned. He had planned 2 a5xb6 en passant guarding the rook, overlooking that 2...Nxb6 is check.