Jürgen Klopp was quick to play down a rare outbreak of dissent in Liverpool’s ranks as his side resumed the Premier League leadership with a 3-0 win at Burnley. When Sadio Mané was withdrawn five minutes from time the Senegal striker was clearly furious, arguing vehemently with the Liverpool back-room staff as he took his place on the bench. The Liverpool manager would not confirm that his player was upset about Mohamed Salah not passing to better-placed teammates on a couple of occasions – including Mané himself near the end – but he did say he knew what the problem was and it was not the substitution. “Mané is an emotional guy, something went not like he wanted,” Klopp said. “It was obvious he was upset, he cannot hide his emotions at times and I don’t mind that. It happens sometimes in football and he didn’t say any wrong words. We are all still friends. We spoke in the dressing room and he is fine, everything is good and we completely like each other.” Liverpool’s 13th successive league victory established a club record and, though their task was made relatively simple when Burnley conceded twice towards the end of the first half, Klopp felt his players had worked hard for the win. “Formation-wise, the boys were disciplined as hell,” he said. “Burnley are so good at getting early crosses in they can make it really difficult if you are not quick. I couldn’t believe how many times we had to head the ball away. We might have got a bit lucky with the first goal but we forced that situation. If we have set a new record, I am happy. The players deserve it. This team wants to write their own stories.” Sean Dyche agreed Liverpool had been lucky with the first goal, a freakish deflection off Chris Wood, but admitted their second had stemmed from Ben Mee’s mistake. “Apart from that the margins were quite tight,” Burnley’s manager said. “My only gripe is giving the ball away so cheaply. You can’t do that against a side so quick on the transition and so clinical when they get a chance. I do think Liverpool and Man City are the best in the country at that. If you turn the ball over in a bad position, you are going to get punished, and that’s what happened to us.”