The first person to run on to the Wembley pitch when the hooter sounded after Warrington’s surprise but thoroughly deserved 18-4 victory over St Helens on Saturday was a young man from Leicestershire who had been watching from the stands a year ago when the Wire had lost to Catalans. This was no over-exuberant fan, but forward Matt Davis, whose excitement as he raced from the sidelines to leap on to his new teammates, was understandable. The 22-year-old was one of a few Warrington players making his Wembley debut – and winning the Challenge Cup at the first attempt explained his joy. This time last year, as Warrington were freezing against Catalans under the arch, Davis was impressing in the Super 8s a couple of miles away with London Broncos. After moving to one of Super League’s most progressive clubs, earlier this season he was back in the Championship on loan at Rochdale and before another spell with the Broncos. Yet he looked at home on the grandest of stages. “Last year I was in the stands with my brothers and some boys I played with at London,” he explained in the tunnel after the game on Saturday evening. “I’d already signed for Warrington and I was a bit upset for them losing. I worked hard in pre-season and had to earn my trade down at Rochdale, which was very tough. I went from beating them by 80 points at the end of last season [with London] to having to play for them and still getting beat by 80 points! I went back to the Broncos for a few weeks and I’m really appreciative of that. Warrington saw that I played about four games of 65-70 minutes and thought: ‘Matty can play a bit actually.’” Despite only having a handful of Super League appearances to his name, Davis played his part in a flawless Warrington display that suffocated Saints on a stifling afternoon. “It’s very surreal,” said the former Leicester Tigers junior. “It’s massive for me and my family. Just being here and winning this. I’ve done some hours up and own the M1 for this! Even with three minutes to go I wasn’t even sure we were going to win it. I was pacing up the sideline. I’d only played 25 to 30 minutes so I had energy was to burn.” Having played in five Wembley finals since St Helens were last at Wembley in 2008, Warrington were understandably less bothered by the occasion than the outcome. Saints’ huge number of Wembley virgins took its toll, the energy sucked out of them after a terrific start. St Helens have lost six of the eight major finals they have reached since beating Catalans in the first final at the new Wembley. Bizarrely, they have won all 26 games they have played in Lancashire and Yorkshire this season and lost the other four (two in Ealing, one in Perpignan and now one at Wembley). How they react in the Super League denouement is anyone’s guess. On a roasting day, when the unusual smell of suncream wafted through the air and the walk from the tube to the stadium left you looking like you’d done a 20-minute spell in the pack in Perpignan, Saints started like a train, the outside backs awesomely fast and dynamic. But Warrington hung in there, took over possession and took control as Saints melted. “Saints normally get a roll on but we contained their back five,” explained Davis, who was later mobbed by his former Broncos teammates in the stands. “It was definitely in the balance at half time and we knew Saints would come back. Every team does, even the worst teams have five or 10 minutes. They had it but we contained them to just four points, which was massive.” Lachlan Coote’s Don Fox moment, missing a simple conversion after St Helens had scored the try they desperately needed, triggered a calamitous five minutes in which all momentum was lost. Defeat hit St Helens hard. Centre Kevin Naiqama, one of their best players on the day and a man who leads Fiji with class and distinction, lay alone, desolate, spread-eagled on the turf as Warrington collected their winners’ medals, his runners-up version in his hand, his eyes closed to the heavens. He was still there minutes later, his teammates giving him the space his efforts deserved. This was an international event. Thirty of the players had played international rugby: 14 for England plus representatives of New Zealand, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, France, Fiji, Samoa, USA, Cook Islands. Opening try scorer Joe Philbin has played for Ireland and England Knights. Scotland full-back Lachlan Coote had been fantastic for half an hour until his dropped ball gave Wire the base from which Tongan-Kiwi Ben Murdoch-Masila plundered the second, after which he made more muck ups than he has all season. Scottish custodians and Alan Rough got a mention in the press box. Yes, the Eagles always win at Wembley. But Saturday was a fine reward to the loyalty of both Sheffield and Widnes fans, who have seen their clubs teeter on the brink of closure in recent times. It may have surprised some who hung around afterwards to see the Eagles lift the 1895 Cup with a 36-18 win given they had a couple of hundred fans there, compared to the thousands clad in Widnes black, white and green in Wembley’s north west corner. They made an extraordinary noise and must still have been glad to have been there, even as they drifted back down Wembley Way as darkness descended, having seen their team lose and bitter rivals Warrington win. But Sheffield are a better side than Widnes, as their league record shows. Widnes, baring a Barrow miracle, have at least survived to start again next season in the Championship. The Viking hordes will be thankful for small mercies. Despite the ground being only two-thirds full, Wembley Way was as usual packed with fans of every club, sporting jerseys of every Super League and NRL club and the far more obscure, including Brooklyn Kings, and the town of Widnes appeared to have emptied. The route was plastered with adverts for Coral but, unlike previous sponsors Ladbroke, who invested in huge pictures of the players and club branding, there was no mention of the event or participants. A disappointing triumph for base commerce over ceremony, crass over class. Likewise, inside Wembley RFL president Tony Adams – whose Sporting Chance organisation has done so much to help athletes with addictions – stood alongside Prince Harry for the national anthem as a flickering ticker advert ran around Club Wembley repeatedly flashing the suggestion that the smart money is on Coral. Not smart. Nor was leaving two blocks either side of the tunnel almost empty until the Widnes and Sheffield parries arrived. While the opposite side was three-quarters full, the cameras repeatedly dwelled on the benches surrounded by empty red seats. In balance to all those negatives, the RFL got a lot right. Fans on the southbound tube to Wembley passed The Hive, unhappy home for two years of London Broncos, where hundreds of kids were playing in the London Rugby League festival before parading around the Wembley pitch. Dozens of former Wembley winners were there as guests; huge flags of clubs such as Doncaster, York, Dewsbury and Keighley were used to cover the top tier seats; fan Adam Hills read out the Warrington team with panache; there was applause for the recently lost Batley youngster Archie Bruce; and Abide With Me choked me yet again. Moving the final from the August bank holiday weekend to mid-July can’t help but increase the attendance. There are suggestions the RFL should move the Challenge Cup to a smaller venue but, if they do, it will never come back. Lest we forget what a joy it is to be there among 60,000 fellow rugby league fans enjoying another fine game on a glorious afternoon at the national stadium. We should be thankful for that. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook