Judging by the frequency with which it’s used on drinks labels, “fruity” must be one of the favourite descriptors out there, despite the fact that it’s so vague as to be almost meaningless. What kind of fruit? Blackcurrant or lemon? Raspberry or plum? It’s basically the wine world’s way of saying: “This bottle is nice.” Mind you, it’s not just wine: fruit is added to practically everything these days – beer, cider, vodka, tonic, gin … Gin, of course. Not a week goes past without the launch of a new fruit gin, many of which have lost sight of the other botanicals – the new Greenall’s Blueberry Gin “infused with sweet natural blueberries” (as opposed to what, exactly?) being a classic example. It’s much better and cheaper to do what my pal Chris does at his pub, The Butlers Arms in Sutton Coldfield, and infuse your own. These days, even the display fridge in the average cafe is stuffed with enough fruit drinks to make me come over all grumpy-old-woman about the unnecessary added calories and the fact that young tastebuds are being desensitised to sugar. Nothing new there, of course. It’s just that these bottles are more enticing – and more expensive – than they ever were. Even water, it seems, has to be flavoured and, of course, sweetened: Volvic Cherry, for example, has 5.7g sugar in a serving. And watch out for pre-mix drinks that are invariably sweeter than you’d think. I really like Edinburgh gin as a rule, but their Rhubarb & Ginger is horrid. Even if you’re quietly going about your business trying to catch a train, there’s no escape. At my local station the other day, they were handing out free chilled fruit teas called Fuze, which turned out to be made by – who else? – Coca-Cola. Each 150ml can of the mango and camomile brew contains 6.5g sugar, which is more than a teaspoon. Again, you could easily make your own cheaper, less sweet alternative. Not having much of a sweet tooth, I like my fruit with a bit of balancing sharpness, so given the chance, I go for kombuchas and sour beers. Try the Envoy Fruit Sour Pale (£3.10 beermerchants.com, 4%) from a splendid collaboration between 12 British and European brewers called the Citizens of Everywhere Project. This one was made by the Gipsy Hill Brewing Company in south London and Denmark’s To Øl, and is infused with peaches and nectarines. “Goes well with freedom of movement,” they cheekily put on the back of the can. Nigel Farage, you should try it. Melonade £16.45 The Whisky Exchange, 12% (70cl). Don’t be put off by the name: this French aperitif made from melon de Cavaillon is ridiculously delicious. Serve over ice. Black Cow Vodka & English Strawberries £21.95 31dover.com, £28 selected Sainsbury’s, 37.5% (70cl). The perfect summer riff on this innovative Dorset milk vodka. Like strawberries and cream in a glass. Remedy Organic Kombucha Raspberry Lemonade £1.99 (250ml) Holland & Barrett, £2.99 (330ml) Planet Organic. A not-too-scary introduction to kombucha with the flavour of a sour beer. Virtuously raw, vegan and unpasteurised. Something & Nothing Yuzu Seltzer £17.50 (12 x 330ml cans) somethingandnothing.co, £1.49 a can Selfridge’s, Wholefoods. Really refreshing, low-sugar citrus drink with a fresh, natural yuzu (Japanese citrus fruit) flavour. For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.