There was no mistaking the optimism around Villa Park before kick-off. This was the hosts’ first Premier League home match in more than three years and, with a revamped team guided by a manager and captain who both used to be regulars in the Holte End, the locals had much to be excited about. The players were roared on to the pitch and then … oops! Villa conceded a penalty after 46 seconds. Things soon got worse for the hosts. But even though they wound up with no points, Villa improved as the match progressed. Their fans need not abandon all that hope. The start, though, sure was poxy. After Callum Wilson beat Tom Heaton to a through-ball and got clattered by the goalkeeper, Josh King scored from the penalty spot. Ten minutes later a long-range shot by the Liverpool loanee Harry Wilson deflected off Tyrone Mings and flew into the net. The ball had come to Wilson via an ill-judged dummy by Douglas Luiz, who had an eventful first start for Villa since joining from Manchester City. He made several errors that could be attributed to a lack of familiarity with his new teammates but showed his class with a sumptuous goal in the second half. With 11 new signings in his squad, Dean Smith no doubt expected teething trouble but he waved off that explanation, insisting that “mistakes can happen in any game”. Villa must cut them out quickly – they cannot keep allowing teams to establish leads as effortlessly as Bournemouth did in this match. Villa had plenty of the play after that and, as they did in the defeat at Spurs, they produced positives. John McGinn was integral to much of what they did well. The Scot threatened even before Bournemouth’s second goal, fizzing a shot from 20 yards over the bar. He went close two more times in the first half, once thwarted by Aaron Ramsdale and once lashing a half-volley into the side-netting. Trezeguet went closer before half-time after good service by Wesley but Nathan Aké blocked on the line. That came moments after Bournemouth nearly nicked a third goal, Heaton denying Harry Wilson after Douglas Luiz gave away possession again. Douglas Luiz was not the only holding midfielder to struggle. Philip Billing committed so many fouls that he was substituted at half-time to avoid abusing the leniency of a referee who showed him only a yellow card. Villa dominated in the second period but could not break through a defence well led by Aké. Jack Grealish curled a shot wide from the edge of the area. Then he headed over from six yards after a cross by Ahmed Elmohamady. In the 71st minute Douglas Luiz collected a pass from Grealish before curling a wonderful shot into the top corner from over 20 yards. Villa pressed hard for an equaliser but in vain.