Guy Verhofstadt (Opinion, 1 August) says: “Attempts to put pressure on Ireland will only be met with waves of solidarity from the rest of the EU.” He could add that that solidarity will include the political leadership of the US. The Irish American constituency is a strong one, recognised by both Democrats and Republicans, and the US’s involvement in the Good Friday agreement makes it a live issue there. Add to that the prospect of a US–UK deal that opens the door for US medical insurance and the Democrats would love to see a lobby that did so much to harm Clinton and Obama defeated. Boris Johnson has brought unity – the unity of Washington and Brussels against us.Mary Pimm and Nik WoodLondon • Ministers have evidently been instructed to parrot at every opportunity that the Irish backstop is “undemocratic” and must be scrapped as a precondition for further talks with the EU. Polly Toynbee rightly dismisses this approach as a nonsense (Johnson’s crew will repel voters – there’s no need to fear him, 30 July). Johnson and his cabinet seem to be unaware that the final version of the backstop in the withdrawal agreement is not an EU invention imposed on this country. The original version, agreed between the EU and the UK, only affected Northern Ireland. It was changed to cover the UK as a whole because the UK insisted, under pressure from the DUP. If the freely negotiated backstop is to be regarded as undemocratic, and must be removed, what are we to make of the elevation of Boris Johnson to prime minister with the support of about 0.2% of the UK electorate? Mike PenderCardiff • Much is being made of the backstop and “people’s vote”. I have one simple solution to both. Given that 55% of the people in Northern Ireland voted remain in the 2016 “once in a generation” referendum, an exception to that government assertion could be made for them alone, with another referendum and a clear binary question: “Do you wish to remain in the EU or do you wish to remain in the UK”? The two, we are constantly told, are mutually exclusive, so this decision has to be made sometime. Given that all the predicted problems associated with the backstop (many artificially manufactured by those intent on preventing Brexit of course) will mostly affect the 1.88 million inhabitants of that province, does this not seem a fair and (we hope) final way of killing those two challenging political birds with one stone? Then the rest of the leave-voting majority in the UK can perhaps finally see the delivery of what we voted for over three years ago and can get on with the rest of our lives, unencumbered by the tiresome and incessant debate over these two apparently insurmountable issues.Geoffrey LazellBressingham, Norfolk • Guy Verhofstadt says EU unity will not be broken by intimidation. Over hundreds of years the English have treated the Irish with disdain. And although we may have forgotten the million people who died of famine in the 1840s uncared for by the English landowners, the Irish have not. The roots of the Troubles were firmly set in the failure of Westminster to address religious discrimination and trying to appease Ulster Protestants. And now, to appease their English and Ulster Protestant supporters, the Tories are trying to get the EU to dump Ireland and the Good Friday agreement. If the Troubles return to Belfast or London it won’t be hard to understand why.John Beer Farnham, Surrey • I come from Derry in Northern Ireland and I grew up through the Troubles. I have seen buildings explode and debris fly through the air. I have seen my friends lying in their coffins having died violent deaths and the uncomprehending grief on the faces of the brothers and sisters, the mums and dads. I never want to see such things again. The Good Friday agreement has ensured relative peace and normality on the island of Ireland for 20 years. The people of Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland voted overwhelmingly for it in separate referendums. We must not allow the brutish rightwing government in Westminster, supported by the DUP, to destroy what has been achieved in Ireland (Johnson sets UK on collision course with EU over backstop, 27 July). Whether it is abortion, gay rights or Brexit, the DUP is no longer in step with the people of Northern Ireland. It is ironic that the interests of the people of Northern Ireland are now best served by a Dublin government led by Leo Varadkar. The frictionless border and the Good Friday agreement must be supported and sustained whatever the outcome of Brexit.Daniel TaylorBrighton • Sinn Féin’s Mary Lou McDonald said this week that Johnson needed to stop being “the DUP’s gofer” (Sinn Féin warns Johnson: change is in the air, 1 August). The only reason that the Tory–DUP alliance has a majority of one is that Sinn Féin’s seven MPs refuse to take up their seats in parliament. I understand the Féin abstentionist pledge, most recently articulated by Alex Maskey MP (I’m a Sinn Féin MP. This is why I won’t go to Westminster, even over Brexit, 6 March 2018), but surely Sinn Féin cannot stick to this position and at the same time campaign against a no-deal Brexit and against a hard border. Such illogicality is the sort of stuff we expect from Johnson. Why is Sinn Féin being given such an easy ride on this in Ireland and in the UK? The facts have changed since the last election in 2017. Sinn Féin should take up its Westminster seats for the specific purpose of voting down a no-deal Brexit and a hard border for the good of all the people of Ireland.John BirtillGuisborough, North Yorkshire • Séamas O’Reilly (Leo Varadkar looks like an adult because the UK is acting like a spoilt toddler, 30 July) and Roy Greenslade (Blaming Leo Varadkar for no deal is bizarre – even for Britain’s media, 31 July) write worryingly about offensive attitudes towards Ireland in parts of the UK’s politics and media. But two things spring to mind. First, Leo Varadkar’s personal style is reserved and polite (the latter quality being especially highly valued in Irish society). If, indeed, “Tories of influence” mistake his pleasant and mild demeanour for meaning that “Varadkar isn’t bright”, then Boris Johnson’s government is in for a rude awakening – the taoiseach will eat the prime minister and his extremist Brexiter friends for breakfast. Second, if the British media is truly contemplating declaring “open season” on Ireland, it suggests delusional levels of arrogance among certain very influential British people. Britain’s embarrassing superiority complex has always been ludicrous. But if the same supercilious conceit persists even after the international Brexit humiliation, it will make the UK a global laughing stock. Joe McCarthyDublin, Ireland • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition