Liverpool have been dealt a sizeable blow after Alisson was ruled out for a “few weeks” with the calf injury he suffered in Friday’s win over Norwich. The opening-day victory was marred by Jürgen Klopp’s first-choice goalkeeper having to be taken off after 39 minutes. The newly signed Adrián came on for his debut and the Spaniard looks set to have an extended run in the team. He is expected to start Wednesday’s European Super Cup final against Chelsea in Istanbul. “It’s not too cool. It’s a calf injury which takes him obviously out for a while,” Klopp told Liverpool’s website. “I don’t want to make now [an] exact prognosis on when he will be back but it will not be Wednesday for sure, so now then we have to see. It takes a while. It takes a couple weeks for sure, and we have to see. “I saw already like ‘six weeks’ and stuff like this but Ali was not a lot injured in his career so I would like to wait a little bit to see how he develops in that process now. But he is not in for the next few weeks.” The 32-year-old Adrián has considerable Premier League experience having signed on a free following six years at West Ham. Klopp, though, has only limited options to deputise for Adrián should he also be ruled out. Caoimhin Kelleher was on the bench when Liverpool won a sixth European Cup in May but is 20 and has never featured for the first team. The 35-year-old Andy Lonergan will also be back-up to Adrián. As Kelleher is also currently injured Lonergan, a free agent who has played for 12 clubs and will sign a short-term deal, is expected to be the substitute goalkeeper on Wednesday. Klopp said: “The situation was even more difficult a few weeks ago because of injuries but Caoimhin Kelleher is now in his final steps for being completely back. He’s training only [for] five days or so, catching balls and all that stuff, it looks all good but of course we have to find a solution in the short term and that will be, if nothing happens from now to then, Andy Lonergan. “He was in with us, he’s a brilliant character, a really nice lad and helped us a lot in the pre-season and now we decided to work together with him. So that’s a very experienced solution but, in the moment when Caoimhin is back, then obviously Adrián is No 1, Caoimhin probably No 2 but we have to see how then he can have some games with the under-23s or under-21s [so] that he gets match practice as well. We have to see how that works but that’s then how we cover that situation.”