My partner hated the idea of having a wedding, until we went to one that changed his mind. There was no church, no patriarchal cliches, no stiff sense of formality. My best friend stood with her husband and his uncle – their celebrant – as he married them (unofficially) on a small hillock in the sunshine, while 50 or so of their closest friends and family cried, laughed and sang. “I could actually see us getting married one day, if we can do it like this,” my then boyfriend said to me. He had had a few drinks by that point, but I held him to it. Less than a year later, we shamelessly ripped off their idea. We stood in a field in the middle of a circle formed by our favourite people, as our friend, whom we dubbed “the rabbi figure”, very, very unofficially married us. (Two months earlier, a real rabbi had done it legally.) Since then, several of our guests have done the same: at one wedding, the celebrant told guests he had once fancied the groom; at another, the celebrant declared, to raucous laughter and applause: “By absolutely no power vested in me, I now pronounce you man and wife.” Increasing numbers of couples are choosing friends and family as a celebrant: the Wedding Report, which tracks industry data in the US, showed that in 2018, 32% of couples were married by a loved one, a proportion that has more than doubled in under a decade. In the UK, the wedding trends expert Lisa Forde says: “More and more couples seem to be opting for a register office, then having a loved one marry them on their wedding day.” She suggests several reasons behind this: these couples are less religious; they want their day to feel more personal; and they want to marry in unusual, often outdoor venues (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, a civil wedding must take place at a licensed venue under a permanent roof; in Scotland, couples can marry anywhere). Julia Braime, the editor of the bridal magazine Unveiled and the founder of the website Brides Up North, agrees; she points to “the emerging confidence of couples who want to eschew traditional roles”. When the Guardian asked readers to share their experiences of unofficial celebrants, stories came pouring in about ceremonies conducted by friends, siblings, parents, company CEOs, even scout leaders. For some, it is about intimacy: Tom Pearce, 34, asked his sister to do it, saying: “We worked really hard to make sure that our day was as personal as possible – to then invite a completely unknown person to perform the most intimate moment seemed to fly in the face of that.” For Fiona Harrison, 47, and her husband, it was a way of recognising the role their closest friends had played in their lives: “Nancy and Dave have been with us through everything life throws at people in their nearly-50s: deaths, births, moments of absolute joy. Without them, I doubt we’d have made it through the minefield of our relationship,” she says. But how does a couple decide who will be the right loved one to officiate? And can a wedding that is not legally binding feel as important and meaningful as one that is? Belinda Hanssen, 51, Mike Hanssen, 46, and Michael McVey, 52, met each other through a round-the-world yacht race in 2009. The intensity of Belinda and Mike’s relationship, and the friendship that bonds the couple, who live in Australia, with McVey (as they call him), who lives in Cheshire, was forged in the hard graft, the seclusion – and, for McVey, the nausea – of life at sea. McVey raced in the same boat as Belinda. He says: “You’re spending 24 hours a day in each other’s company. It’s almost like being in a jail cell: you can’t get off; you’re attached at the hip. And during quiet periods of reflection, while you’re on the water, you’ve got nothing else to do but talk. If you add that time together, it’s probably more than you’ve spent with your oldest friend.” It’s a good job, Belinda says, that they share a sense of humour. Mike’s boat was faster, but he always met the others in the ports along the route, Belinda explains. “It was quite cute with Mike and me. We’d set sail and email each other once a day, and if I didn’t get an email from him, well, there was hell to pay – McVey used to get the brunt of that.” Mike laughs, adding: “I always loved getting to port first, waiting for Belinda on the dockside. It was very romantic, providing I didn’t have too many drinks beforehand.” Belinda gives a husky laugh: “Don’t listen to him: he was always there, waiting on the quayside when my boat turned up. Always.” They talked of marriage, but Belinda, who has an adult daughter, says she had to be “very patient”, as Mike had recently divorced. Almost 10 years after the starting gun was fired, on 30 November 2018, the couple were married by McVey in Byron Bay, Australia. There were only 20 people there to see it: exactly the relaxed, informal atmosphere the couple wanted. Mike says: “When it comes to weddings, there are all these standards you’ve got to abide by – to invite this family, to have that cake – it gets blown out of all proportion and, before you know it, it has no feeling whatsoever. We went completely the opposite way.” They invited only three guests each, plus partners and children, an official celebrant to make it legal, and their unofficial celebrant, McVey. I didn’t want someone we didn’t know marrying us – I wanted someone who knew the both of us inside out They all share a vivid memory of Belinda walking, or rather bouncing, down the aisle. From the window of the honeymoon suite where she was getting ready with her daughter and granddaughter, she had watched her husband and friend milling around, looking nervous. She says: “I walked out, almost on a high, really over-the-top happy, and I started singing along to the music, dancing and laughing. And then I saw these two were in tears.” McVey’s voice is thick with emotion as he remembers: “The day was almost heavy with love and joy – an experience I don’t believe I will feel again. It was the honour of a lifetime.” He followed a traditional western marriage service, sharing his memories of the couple and then introducing their vows, before declaring: “You may now kiss the bride!” Belinda says: “McVey had been there from the very start and our lives have become so entwined. We’ve had umpteen holidays together. His sons stayed with us in Australia and he is godfather to my granddaughter. I didn’t want someone we didn’t know marrying us – I wanted someone who knew the both of us inside out and could celebrate as much as we were.” There is a moment of quiet as the four of us absorb the emotion, before Belinda laughs her throaty laugh and calls out: “Dry your eyes, McVey!” Keya Advani, 34, and Andrew Saunders, 35, met at university in New York. They married in 2014 in Jamaica and then India and now live in London with their one-year-old daughter. Keya says: “I think it’s part of the immigrant experience, to have to find new and innovative ways of being married.” They certainly did that. After they met, the couple lived in the same country for only four months before Andrew moved back to Jamaica, while Keya later moved back to India. Over the following eight years, they spent their savings on flights to see each other. In between, Andrew says, they spoke a lot – “and I mean a lot. We probably averaged five hours at least a day. Going to sleep in different time zones, we’d say good night on Skype, leave it on and then wake up and talk to each other. So there was a presence in each other’s lives the whole time – just digitally.” Every day, Lance Rochester, 34, who grew up next door to Andrew in Jamaica and is more family than friend, would walk into Andrew’s house and say: “Hi, Keya,” knowing that she would respond – only on Skype. When Keya and Andrew decided to marry, they wanted to do it in a way that reflected who they are. While Andrew’s parents are religious Christians, he is not. Keya comes from an atheist background, but elements of the Hindu tradition are important to her. Over Skype, they designed two ceremonies rooted in their cultures that also expressed their differences, made up of speeches and blessings from loved ones, including Lance, who says it was meaningful “to be part of sending a message, that they were going to do this as they see fit.” In Jamaica, a week after the legal ceremony, Lance welcomed guests to Keya and Andrew’s wedding and told them that this was not going to be a traditional service. Keya walked down the aisle with her mother. There were speeches from loved ones, then Keya and Andrew read out their vows, which they had written together on Google Docs in different countries, Andrew writing one sentence, Keya the next, as a conversation unfolded between them. Then came the moment when the priest would normally say: “You may kiss the bride.” Keya says: “I was very conscious about the patriarchal symbolism, and I wanted to challenge that.” So instead it was Keya who declared: “You may now kiss the bride,” to laughter and cheers. Six months later came the Indian wedding. In traditional Hindu ceremonies, Keya explains, the pandit (priest) chants in Sanskrit and lights a fire while the couple walk around it seven times, each circle representing a different aspect of their commitment. For their ceremony, Keya and Andrew identified seven fundamental pillars of their relationship: love, independence, intellect, growth, family, friendship and “the little things”. They assigned each pillar to a different loved one, who, during the ceremony, spoke about what they felt their pillar meant for the couple, then lit a candle and placed it in a big bowl of water, which Keya and Andrew circled. Finally, the couple exchanged flower garlands, echoing the culmination of the Hindu ceremony. For Andrew, being married by Lance and other friends and family, including Lance’s wife, Lora, was more than just symbolic. “You get more, what I call, tangled up. Your families have met, they’ve hugged; your friends have met, they’ve begun making their own relationships. So, if you were to separate, there are all those threads trying to hold you together.” For Keya, too, it made their weddings more meaningful. “There is this rhetoric of your wedding day being the most special day of your life and, for me, it’s like, why? It’s not because I’ve been waiting my whole life to get married – I didn’t particularly care. The reason it turned out to be one of the most special days is because of our ceremonies and the people who married us.” “She made a beeline for me,” says Emma King-Jones from her home in Bath, laughing as she tells how she met her wife, Claire King-Jones, at the school where they taught in 2011. It was soon after that that Emma, 38, from Bath, introduced Claire to her two of her best friends, Angus Harrison, 33, and Lily Eastwood, 31, who live in London. Emma says Claire was “brilliant, enthusiastic and kind, really interested in the world – and the love of my life. I’d had a tough time because of a difficult relationship and she really reminded me that life is for living.” Emma proposed in February 2015, on a hike in the Peak District, while they ate their packed lunch looking out over the Hope Valley. They had planned a long engagement, but their plans had to change. In March 2016, Claire was diagnosed with a rare form of skin cancer. There was hope that treatment would work, but the oncologist advised them to move their wedding forward. Within a month, they were legally married at Bath’s register office, their wedding arranged for May 2016. The kiss was just hilarious – you barely waited for Lily to say: ‘Do you, Claire, take Emma…’ before you started necking Emma and Claire knew they could trust Lily and Angus to make their wedding a celebration, despite the circumstances. As they planned the ceremony, the celebrants knew they had a huge responsibility to get it right. Lily remembers: “We wanted everyone to laugh, but we also wanted them to recognise the seriousness of what the day meant. Everyone knew that it potentially wasn’t going to be a long marriage, so it felt even more important to be present, to recognise how special this moment was.” Angus adds: “I just wanted to find out exactly what they wanted from me and then deliver that. That was all I cared about – it didn’t matter if they wanted me to stand on my head naked; it was going to happen.” Emma laughs and says: “I can’t believe we didn’t think to ask you to do that.” Emma was concerned that Claire might feel tired, or that someone would get upset during the day, but says, “I had no nerves at all about Lily and Angus.” The service began with jokes and anecdotes and continued with readings from Claire’s siblings and friends of the couple. “It was really beautiful,” Emma says, “and there were lots of laughs. I do think it was perfect.” Angus remembers: “The kiss was just hilarious – you barely waited for Lily to say: ‘Do you, Claire, take Emma…’ before you started necking.” Shortly before the wedding, Claire thought her tumour had grown back, but she didn’t tell anyone, including Emma. In July, her oncologist confirmed that the treatment wasn’t helping. Emma stopped working and they spent the rest of their time together. She says: “We did slightly bonkers things, like moving into a flat in one of the most beautiful roads in Bath, and we bought a puppy, who is asleep on the bed next to me now.” They saw as many friends and family as they could manage. They were married for four and a half months before Claire died in October 2016, aged 32, with Emma beside her. I ask Emma how she is doing. She says: “I’ve built a life for myself. I still miss her every day, constantly, but I have really brilliant friends, these two [Angus and Lily] included. I’ve got lots of people in my life, I’ve got the dog, I’ve got a job that I love. I’m OK. There comes a point with grief where you don’t stop and sit down and think about her, she’s just sort of there. But I do think about the wedding a lot.” Having Lily and Angus as celebrants was, she says, “a sign of how deep the friendship is, because, for the rest of my life, they’ll be the people who married me. It was saying: ‘You’re friends for life; we’re keeping hold of you.’ It was the most precious thing. I’m incredibly grateful for that day.” • If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).