There is broad agreement that sadly the most likely outcome is for the 134‑year‑old club to fall into liquidation. The calamitous expulsion from the EFL means no football will be played by Bury, so it has no trading business with which to earn any money. The company voluntary arrangement (CVA) is thought very unlikely to complete, and a liquidator would be appointed to deal with the debts. Bury did sell season tickets to supporters for this League One season; those fans are now creditors, having paid substantial money to watch matches that will now not take place. Simon Barker, assistant chief executive of the Professional Footballers Association, told the Guardian that Bury have only four contracted players, and that the EFL has confirmed they are now free to leave. Bury still have 16 academy scholars, who are also free to leave; Barker said he had been talking to concerned parents about their position, and how the educational element of their football scholarship can be completed. The PFA made loans to Bury players to cover some of the wages they were not paid in March, April, May and June, Barker said. Players were, as the captain Stephen Dawson has said publicly, suffering considerable financial hardship due to the unpaid wages, including genuine worries that their houses would be repossessed because they could not pay their mortgages, he said. Barker, who described Bury’s expulsion and likely demise as “very, very sad”, explained that player contracts stipulate that non-payment of wages represents gross misconduct by a club, so last season’s promoted, unpaid players were able to give 14 days notice and leave. That is a crucial question if there is any chance of Bury having a revived future. The club’s home since 1885 and most important asset is mortgaged to a company, Capital Bridging Finance Solutions (“Capital”), for £3.7m, after loans were taken out by the previous owner, Stewart Day. Capital almost certainly has the legal right to take possession of the ground for non‑payment of their interest, but Bury council has said it is protected for sporting purposes and no development would be allowed on it. Capital is understood to have declined substantially less than £3.7m to release the mortgage, but any revived Bury FC would seek a deal to play at its historic home. The supporters trust, Forever Bury, has said it is discussing the possibility of forming what is now described as a “phoenix club” following the model of AFC Wimbledon, established by fans in 2002 after the Football League allowed Wimbledon to move to Milton Keynes. AFC Wimbledon have been an inspirational success, winning promotion to League One after starting in the football pyramid’s ninth tier. Bury fans, however, contemplating the end of a 134-year history, will be aware how arduous the road back will be.