The leader of Portsmouth council has called the government’s £9m no-deal funding pledge to councils “too little, too late” and said his own council alone had spent £4m preparing the port for potentially thousands more lorries attempting to exit. The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government announced overnight that it would allocate £9m to councils to help ensure they are staffed to deal with any issues at ports. The port of Calais alone has spent £20m on no-deal contingency planning, though MHCLG has insisted it has already spent significant sums on council’s no-deal preparations and that new infrastructure could be covered by the Treasury. Gerald Vernon-Jackson, the Liberal Democrat leader of the council, said it had so far only been refunded £350,000 of its no-deal preparations spending. The council had been advised that just an extra two-minute delay could mean 60 extra lorries queueing directly on to the motorway. “The government has been happy to give money to ferry companies that have no ferries, that was £20m, but they have not helped local authorities get ready and we have had to plan to make sure if there is a no-deal Brexit that the whole of the M27 doesn’t grind to a halt because of queues of lorries trying to get into the port who can’t get in,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday. Liberal Democrats: Their first choice would be legislation to extend article 50 then call a second referendum. If this did not work the party would support the no-confidence motion, but rather than installing Corbyn, the Lib Dems would seek a cross-party government led by a backbench grandee, such as Ken Clarke or Harriet Harman. It is not clear if the party would try to block a temporary Corbyn government. SNP: The Scottish National party supports a no-confidence motion. They have said they will talk to Corbyn about his plan, despite their differences over Brexit. The party’s leader, Nicola Sturgeon, has criticised Lib Dem leader Jo Swinson's stance. Plaid Cymru: Liz Saville Roberts, Westminster leader for the party, has indicated she could back the Corbyn plan, but would prefer an immediate second referendum rather than general election. Independent Group for Change/Independents: The group formerly known as the TIGers, now split and reduced in number after two joined the Liberal Democrats, seem wary of the Corbyn plan, with some MPs saying they could not support him. Greens: Caroline Lucas, the Green party’s sole MP has taken a similar view to Saville Roberts, and has also appealed to Swinson to reconsider backing a temporary Corbyn-led government. Rebel Tories: Conservative party MP Guto Bebb has said that even a Corbyn government would be preferable to no deal. But it seems hard to see many other Tories following him. Former Labour independents: Ian Austin, a long-time Corbyn foe, has already ruled out supporting his plan for a temporary government, and it is hard to see MPs such as Frank Field, John Woodcock, and others, doing so either. Peter Walker Political correspondent Vernon-Jackson said preparations, including triage points and lorry parks, had cost the council millions. “We’ve been out and spent the money anyway.We can’t allow government inaction and inefficiency to crucify Portsmouth,” he said. Asked if the logjam could be averted, he said: “We hope so, but we don’t know. We do 500 lorries a day, Dover dwarfs us – they do 10,000. But we’ve been told to expect up to 2,000 extra lorries a day turning up in Portsmouth because they can’t get through Dover.” MHCLG said Kent council would be given £2.6m of the available funding because of the pressures around the port of Dover, and an additional £5m split between other local authorities which either have or are near a major air, land or sea port. The final £4m is set to be spent on “local resilience forums” across England, which are supporting Brexit preparations for public services, with just £1.7m to be split between devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, said the funds would “help local areas get ready for Brexit, whatever the circumstances” and said that the ministry had “stepped up our preparedness significantly in recent weeks, including by asking every council to appoint a Brexit lead officer”. Jenrick said Portsmouth city council would be getting an additional £286,000, well short of the £4m spent by the council but said that sum was “purely for staff, communications and planning”. Jenrick defended the amount announced on Wednesday, saying: “We’ve been giving significant amounts of money to local authorities … with the money we’re announcing today we’ll have given £77m to local authorities across the country to prepare for our departure,” he told the Today programme. “This is not money for hard infrastructure, that could come from the chancellor’s additional £2.1bn he’s announced.”