Frank Lampard stood in his technical area until the bitter end, a picture of tension as he urged his players on and applauded every tackle. This is what the job has done to Chelsea’s new manager. He was a bag of nerves until the sweet sound of Martin Atkinson’s final whistle allowed him to march across the pitch and milk the applause of the adoring travelling support. After four games Lampard is finally off the mark, though he will know there is still plenty of room for improvement after gaining his first competitive win. Tammy Abraham was the hero for Chelsea, notching his first goals for the club with two classy finishes, and there was also another outstanding performance from Mason Mount. Yet better sides than Norwich will surely have taken note of the defensive frailties which meant Chelsea never truly felt safe. The chaos of the opening period summed up Chelsea’s erratic start to the season. While there were bursts of electrifying attacking play, not least when Mount was drifting inside from left midfield and threatening with a shot or a cute pass, they were undermined by a lack of ruthlessness in front of goal and the absence of the injured N’Golo Kanté left a one-paced midfield unable to stop Norwich from pulling a vulnerable defence apart. Lampard’s head must have been swimming once the first half was over. After three minutes he stood in his technical area, arms outstretched as a jubilant Abraham cantered towards him after scoring his first goal of the season. The striker had justified his manager’s faith in him by giving Chelsea an early lead, meeting a Cesar Azpilicueta cross with a firm low volley that fizzed satisfyingly past Tim Krul, and for a brief moment it seemed Lampard’s young side were on the right track. They had even found a way to make a moment of ill fortune work in their favour. Lampard had been forced to shift Mount to the left when Pedro suffered a hamstring injury in the warm-up and the youngster played a prominent role in the opening goal, opening up the pitch with a lovely pass out to Christian Pulisic, who combined with Azpilicueta to tee up Abraham. Potential in attack means nothing without substance in defence, however, and the visitors were only ahead for three minutes. With Mateo Kovacic and Jorginho offering minimal resistance at the base of Chelsea’s midfield, Emiliano Buendia chopped a pass through to Teemu Pukki and the striker crossed for Todd Cantwell to bundle in the equaliser from close range. Carrow Road roared, sensing that Chelsea were there for the taking, but the hosts were behind again in the 17th minute. Released by Ross Barkley, a clever touch took Mount inside the Norwich area and there was never any sense that he would spurn the opportunity as he opened up his body and used the inside of his right foot score his second goal of the season. In previous years that would have been that. There would have been no prospect of Norwich equalising again. The Chelsea sides that Lampard played in would have kept insubordinate opponents at arm’s length, scored again and sailed to three easy points. The class of 2019 are a slightly softer touch. Abraham, Andreas Christensen and Jorginho all wasted opportunities to pull Chelsea clear and, in the absence of a killer blow, Norwich equalised again. Buendia skipped into space that would usually have been patrolled by Kanté and slipped a pass behind Kurt Zouma, who was unable to react in time as Pukki ran clear and fired a low shot underneath Kepa Arrizabalaga for his fifth goal in three games. The second half was quieter, more controlled, though both sides continued to chase a winning goal. Just when it seemed that Norwich had the edge, however, Chelsea countered, Kovacic fed Abraham and the striker’s shot from 20 yards eluded the unsighted Krul’s late dive. Still Chelsea struggled to close the game out. Much to Lampard’s relief, however Ben Godfrey’s late header bounced back off the bar and he finally had something of substance to celebrate.