Muddy Waters is a splendid name for a short-selling hedge fund that claims to spot accounting shenanigans at listed companies. Carson Block, its founder, doesn’t get it right every time, but he has a big following. That partly explains the thumping 46% fall in Burford Capital’s share price after one of the hottest stocks on London’s alternative investment market received the Muddy treatment. Over 24 pages, the hedgie alleged “aggressive” accounting practices. Burford Capital reacted with fury and, perhaps inevitably for a company that makes its living by funding other people’s court cases, said it had summoned lawyers and experts to investigate possible “market manipulation”. It should calm down. Grumbling about short-sellers is pointless. These creatures may be unlovely but they’ve always been part of the stock market. The only effective defence is point-by-point rebuttal. Burford says a detailed response will follow, and so it should. In April, the broker Canaccord, which is not in the shorting game, published a detailed report (much less feverish than Muddy Waters’s) that highlighted 20 “under-appreciated” areas of concern for Burford investors. Canaccord acknowledged that the company was generating “attractive” returns from its “impressive, market-leading position” but challenged the claim of an 85% return on invested capital. In other words, some of the accounting questions are not new. Burford can say, accurately, that it’s had a clean audit from Ernst & Young every year since 2010 but it can’t expect to settle the debate so easily. In the weird world of litigation funding, companies ascribe a present value to ongoing court cases, which leaves room to debate delicate areas such as cash returns versus paper profits. Sir Peter Middleton, former chairman of Barclays, chairs Burford and should know the form. Maximum disclosure, plus full engagement, is the only option. Hargreaves Lansdown’s bosses will no longer defend the indefensible. Four top executives, including chief Chris Hill and research director Mark Dampier, won’t get a bonus this year, presumably to avoid further enraging those clients locked into Neil Woodford’s gated investment fund. Better late than never, of course, but Hill’s previous stance on personal bonuses was ridiculous. He had wanted to defer his payment, and by implication his senior colleagues’, until Woodford would be able to reopen his equity income fund. Put another way, Hill & co had intended to wait until the noise dies down and then take a full bonus. Come on, that was never going to fly. Now that a degree of reality has arrived in the boardroom, Hill needs to use Thursday’s results statement to explain what Hargreaves thinks it got wrong in its relationship with Woodford. To date, it’s been hard to tell. We’ve heard a general apology to the locked-in Woodford investors, accompanied by a waiving of Hargreaves’s fees on the frozen fund (but not on the multi-manager funds that include Woodford). But Hill still struggles to acknowledge Hargreaves’s role as cheerleader for Woodford, a point that is screamingly obvious to outsiders. If Hill wants to show he has learned something from the fiasco, he should order a root-and-branch overhaul of Hargreaves’s influential Wealth 50 “best buy” list that is pitched as a piece of independent research but reads more like a collection of puff pieces for supposedly “star” fund managers. This same mindset, one suspects, led Hargreaves to swallow its concerns about the number of illiquid holdings in Woodford’s portfolio and keep the “best buy” sticker in place. “The shortcomings of one fund should not detract from the benefits of favourite fund lists like the Wealth 50,” Hill has said. Well, yes, punters like recommendations. But they also expect to read healthy scepticism. That quality has always been hard to spot in Hargreaves’s “research”. After the shocker with Woodford, it is desperately needed.