Alan Johnson was delighted recently to be described as an “author and former politician”. The 69-year-old laughs: “You can put that on my gravestone, that’s fine.” A Labour MP for 20 years (he stood down in 2017) and cabinet minister (notably as home secretary, and secretary of state for education and for health), Johnson’s first book, This Boy, came out in 2013. It won both the Ondaatje and Orwell prizes. That, and three subsequent memoirs, have sold more than half a million copies. His latest, In My Life, which charts his early years through the music that obsessed him, has just been published in paperback and in the autumn he will take his one-man theatre show on a UK tour. The books have been hugely successful, but they are not what we’ve come to expect from political memoirs, are they?I didn’t want to write a traditional political memoir, where you refight the battles you had 20 years ago on esoteric issues that everyone’s forgotten about. Self-justification. One critic said that I only spent 40 pages on my 11-year ministerial career, but that was deliberate. Generally I’m not keen on either bitterness – which doesn’t come off the page very well – or some kind of exposé, which has been done hundreds of times before by people that shared those years in government with me. I never read them, so I didn’t want to write one. There are some lovely stories in In My Life about your own short-lived music career: the bands you were in, sending tracks to Elvis Costello. How close were you to making it?Oh, pretentious little git I was, I thought I was the face of ’67. I thought I had songwriting ability, I was a passable guitarist, I had good looks, slim and elegant and all that, and I thought it was going to happen. I had that audition for Peter Jay and the Jaywalkers, who were a very big band, and I got right to the final two. And I made the record [with his band the Area]. Both of those things happened when I was 16. Would time be kind to the material?Erm, the record, which you can actually get on YouTube, was written by two other guys in the band; I wrote the B-side. It was rubbish, really. I thought I could make it as a songwriter if I could get people to listen to my songs but, as I write in the book, I sent that tape off to Elvis Costello in 1982 and I’m still waiting for a reply. You left school at 15, were married at 18, had three kids by the age of 20. You were working 70 hours a week as a postman. Did you just have to get on with earning a living?Oh, I had an amazingly charmed life. When I was 19, I ended up on a lovely council estate in Slough – front garden, back garden, indoor toilet – a job for life at the post office provided you get up at 4am. And a strong union to defend my interests. I consider myself blessed. Only a tiny percentage went to university: 2% when I was born, 6% when I left school. Like millions of working-class kids, you might as well have thought about going to Pluto for three years. Do you miss politics now or was it the right time to go?Well, curiously, I’ve got a bit of a streak in me that is attracted to the really difficult issues. Being part of trying to solve that. But I did it for 20 years so, in that sense, my race was well and truly run. And indeed now in today’s Labour party there’s no one that attracts more visceral hatred than ministers who served under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. They hate us more than they hate the Tories. “Blairite” is a term of abuse more than any swear word. And he was the most successful leader we’ve ever had, who won three elections, but there you go. What did you think of Alastair Campbell’s comments last week that the Labour party is in danger of being destroyed as a “serious political force”?Yeah, we’re heading for disaster and everybody knows that. The simple problem we’ve got is that Jeremy Corbyn is not a leader. He’s never going to be a leader, never wanted to be a leader, is totally uncomfortable in the role as leader. And on Europe he’s a total disaster. So I think Alastair Campbell’s right. Who would do a better job as Labour leader?Practically anyone, actually. Because Jeremy is not just pious and sanctimonious, he’s useless at leading, which is why he has people around him to do his shoelaces up, pull his strings. And we’ve got such good women in particular on our benches, whether it’s Rachel Reeves, Yvette Cooper, Lisa Nandy or Stella Creasy. There’s a whole list of them that would do a much better job. What’s your take on the first few days of Boris Johnson as prime minister?I think he’s got himself into a position almost by accident where he’s going to have to find the compromise that he says he’s so dreading. But if he genuinely does intend to crash out – if it’s not a one-in-a-million chance of crashing out without a deal – then he’s finished. And he’ll go down as the worst prime minister since Theresa May, and she’s the worst prime minister since David Cameron and he’s the worst prime minister since Lord North. So he’ll carry on that progression. Does music still excite you now?The kids hate it, of course, when anyone of a bygone generation likes their music, but I’m afraid I do like St Vincent, Everything Everything, John Grant. And what are you reading?That book everyone’s talking about, Fleishman Is in Trouble by Taffy Brodesser-Akner; it’s very good. I’m also reading a biography of Stalin at the same time – just so I understand the Labour party better! Alan Johnson’s In My Life tour runs from 18 September to 30 November