Jofra Archer is one day into his Test career but already on a revenge mission after a bouncer barrage from Australia left England’s batsmen reeling at Lord’s. England, 1-0 down in the Ashes series and having lost the opening day of the second Test to rain, were bowled out for 258, with the tourists set to resume on 30 for one. While the Australia captain, Tim Paine, opted to make first use of the pitch, his attack’s success owed as much to the short ball as seam movement. Rory Burns, Joe Denly and Chris Woakes were among those struck by short-pitched deliveries from Josh Hazlewood and Pat Cummins, as the impressive fast bowling pair took three wickets apiece. But Burns, caught at short-leg by a ball from Cummins aimed at his ribs, believes the inclusion of Archer means the hosts now possess the tools with which to return fire. Burns, who followed his maiden Test hundred at Edgbaston by top-scoring with 53, said: “It’s nice to get in a scrap. It’s just getting in amongst it and trying to tough it out. I’ve batted a few balls in this series and they are looking at different ways of getting me out. Nathan Lyon ran past me this morning and mentioned [bouncers] after about three balls, so I was well prepared.” Asked about the similar treatment that was handed out to the lower order, Burns replied: “It’s quite an obvious tactic and the boys are preparing for it. Luckily we can dish out some of our own in this game. It should be pretty interesting. [Archer] copped a fair few and so he’s looking forward to getting his own back.” England will need such spirit if they are to prevent Australia taking control on day three. Stuart Broad’s late removal of David Warner for the third time in three innings – bowled through the gate by a ball that seamed – lifted the crowd during a testing final hour for Australia, with Archer denied the opener’s wicket in the previous over after England failed to hear a nick behind. Archer was clocked at 92mph in his first outing – the fastest ball of the day – and the spinner Lyon, asked if he was looking forward to facing him, replied: “Mate, I can’t bat, what do you reckon? I’m No 10, they have a world-class bowling attack and Jofra is world class – the whole world knows that. But I want to challenge myself against the best in the world, so I’ll give it a go.” There was a milestone for Lyon earlier in the day, with the off-spinner taking three wickets to draw level with Dennis Lillee’s haul of 355. Only Glenn McGrath (563) and Shane Warne (708) sit higher on Australia’s all-time list. Lyon said: “I really struggle to see myself up with the likes of Warne and McGrath. It doesn’t sit well with me. Those guys are legends. I don’t think we’ve had the best day to be honest. Hazlewood was exceptional and the spell from Cummins after tea really set the tone. But for the standards we set, we weren’t good enough.” Beyond the action day two at Lord’s was also a huge success for the Ruth Strauss Foundation. The charity was set up in the memory of the wife of Andrew Strauss, England’s former Test captain, and looks to generate funds for research into rare forms of lung cancer. After asking spectators to wear red and donate, the total raised reached £382,462 by the close.