Donald Trump is likely to receive a cool reception, at best, when he touches down in El Paso, Texas, on Wednesday, three days after a 21-year-old gunman who invoked the language of white supremacy killed 22 people and wounded 24 more in a suburban Walmart superstore there. The president could also face protests in Dayton, Ohio, the location of the second of two mass shootings at the weekend, where nine were killed by a man who investigators said on Tuesday explored violent ideologies. On Monday, Beto O’Rourke, the Democratic presidential 2020 contender, El Paso native and former congressman, said the president should stay away, saying flatly that Trump “has no place here”. “He’s helped to create what we saw in El Paso on Saturday,” O’Rourke said, referring to anti-immigration sentiment expressed by the gunman, who is in police custody. “He’s helped to produce the suffering that we are experiencing right now. This community needs to heal,” he added. The congresswoman Veronica Escobar, who succeeded O’Rourke in representing the El Paso area in Congress, said that Trump was not welcome in El Paso. Trump, who has not directly addressed the El Paso suspect’s manifesto and has deflected calls for enhanced background checks on members of the public buying military-style weapons, is on Wednesday expected to visit the sites of the El Paso massacre and, in Ohio, the city of Dayton, where another mass shooting occurred just 13 hours after the Texas tragedy, killing nine and injuring dozens. Trump did not seek to calm the anger, and instead has sought to shift the focus from scrutiny over his racist sentiments, some of which were repeated in the gunman’s manifesto, to the reported left-leaning political views of the Ohio shooter. Police have said the Ohio shooting showed “no indication” of a racial motive. Trump also responded to O’Rourke on the eve of the visit by criticising the presidential candidate’s name. He tweeted: “Beto (phony name to indicate Hispanic heritage) O’Rourke, who is embarrassed by my last visit to the Great State of Texas, where I trounced him, and is now even more embarrassed by polling at 1% in the Democrat Primary, should respect the victims & law enforcement - & be quiet!” Trump’s visit to El Paso, a majority-Latino city of 683,000 on the US-Mexico border , was confirmed by the Republican mayor, Dee Margo, will take place on Wednesday afternoon, after he visits Dayton. Trump has used previous visits to El Paso to advance his anti-immigration agenda. During this year’s State of the Union address, the president stated incorrectly that the city was “once considered one of our nation’s most dangerous cities” until a border fence was erected. This year, Trump and O’Rourke held dueling rallies there. But while Margo said he would welcome Trump in an official capacity, he warned the president against making further inflammatory statements about the city. “I will continue to challenge any harmful and inaccurate statements made about El Paso,” Margo said. “We will not allow anyone to portray El Paso in a way that is not consistent with our history and values.” Margo stopped short of discouraging the president from visiting, but the Dayton mayor, Nan Whaley, has encouraged residents there to protest. She plans to tell Trump “how unhelpful he’s been” on the issue of gun control. “I know he has made this bed, and he’s got to lie in it,” Whaley told reporters on Tuesday. “His rhetoric has been painful for many in our community, and I think the people should stand up and say they are not happy if they are not happy he’s coming.” Whaley’s stand is more in keeping with El Paso’s state and city Democrats who have joined with O’Rourke in openly opposing Trump’s presence. Escobar on Tuesday told MSNBC’s Morning Joe that the president was “not welcome” in El Paso because of his incendiary rhetoric about Latinos and immigrants who “have been dehumanized by the president and his enablers”. “Words have consequences. The president has made my community and my people the enemy,” Escobar said. “He has told the country that we are people to be feared, people to be hated.” Escobar added that she hoped the president had “the self-awareness to understand … and so I would ask his staff and his team to consider the fact that his words and his actions have played a role in this.” Late on Tuesday, Escobar said she had turned down an invitation to meet with the president during his visit. “I refuse to be an accessory to his visit. I refuse to join without a dialogue about the pain his racist and hateful words & actions have caused our community and country,” she said on Twitter. The El Paso county commissioner, David Stout, said a presidential visit was “the last thing” the city need to deal with. “I think even though the president denounced hate and racism, the basis for the attack here in El Paso, it didn’t seem he was very concerned about some of the things he says and tweets and the role of some of his anti-immigrant rhetoric,” Stout said. But Republicans in the city accused Democrats of making Trump’s visit “a political event for their benefit”. “Clearly it is going to help with people healing, and this is a time of healing,” Adolpho Telles, chairman of the El Paso county Republican party, told CNN.