Real Madrid stumbled to a 1-1 draw against Real Valladolid in their first home game of the La Liga season on Saturday after the visitors levelled with an 88th-minute strike from former Barcelona trainee Sergi Guardiola. Karim Benzema looked to have won the game for Real when he gave them a deserved lead in the 82nd minute with a splendid piece of skill, controlling a pass with his back to goal and swivelling before striking into the far corner. Luka Jovic had gone close to breaking the deadlock earlier in the game when he headed against the crossbar barely a minute after coming off the bench, while Gareth Bale and James Rodríguez missed chances earlier in the game. Valladolid had offered little in attack but grabbed a shock equaliser with only their second shot on target when Guardiola struck through the legs of Thibaut Courtois to complete a swift counterattack after Toni Kroos had surrendered possession. Lionel Messi has been left out of Barcelona’s squad to face Real Betis on Sunday despite returning to training this week after recovering from a right calf injury. In Serie A last season’s runners-up, Napoli, hit back from conceding a contentious early penalty to win 4-3 at new-look Fiorentina in a hugely entertaining start to their campaign on Saturday. Fiorentina’s new signing Erick Pulgar scored in the ninth minute from a penalty awarded with the help of a long VAR review after the ball was kicked against the arm of Piotr Zielinksi at point-blank range Dries Mertens levelled with Napoli’s first real attack of the game in the 38th minute and then won a penalty, which was also controversially awarded and converted by Lorenzo Insigne, five minutes later. Nikola Milenkovic headed Fiorentina back on level terms in the 52nd minute only for José Callejón to put Napoli back in front four minutes later. The new signing Kevin-Prince Boateng came off the bench to equalise for Fiorentina in the 65th minute before Insigne headed the winner for Napoli two minutes after that. Giorgio Chiellini scored early as Juventus won 1-0 at Parma to kick off their bid for a record-extending ninth straight title in the league opener. While Cristiano Ronaldo missed a series of chances and had a goal disallowed by the VAR due to an almost imperceptible offside call, Chiellini netted in the 21st minute following a corner. Showing only shades of the high-speed passing game preferred by new coach Maurizio Sarri and with prized signing Matthijs de Ligt left on the bench, Juventus controlled their lead on a stuffy night at the Ennio Tardini stadium. “It was hot out there and that led to quite a few errors, but in the first half it was a good performance against a tough Parma side on their own turf,” said Juve’s assistant coach Giovanni Martusciello, who directed the squad in the absence of Sarri, who has pneumonia. “The first match of the season always has question marks and we could’ve done better with the first-half chances, but overall that’s fine.” Next weekend Juventus host Napoli. In Germany Robert Lewandowski scored a hat-trick and Philippe Coutinho made his Bundesliga debut as Bayern Munich eased to a 3-0 win at Schalke. Coutinho, who completed his loan move from Barcelona on Monday, came on for an unhappy looking Thomas Müller with more than half an hour remaining, but had to be content with a co-starring role as Lewandowski stole the limelight. The Polish striker opened the scoring with a penalty in the 20th minute, doubled Bayern’s lead with a brilliant free-kick in the 50th, and claimed his fifth league goal in two games with a fine turn and finish in the 75th. Bayer Leverkusen scored three times in the first half to ease past hosts Fortuna Düsseldorf 3-1 and join leaders Borussia Dortmund with maximum points from their first two matches. A sixth-minute own goal from Lewis Baker put the visitors ahead and Charles Aránguiz added another goal in the 33rd. Kevin Volland, who was also involved in the first goal, set up Karim Bellarabi for their third six minutes later. Fortuna cut the deficit in the 82nd through Alfredo Morales. Freiburg are also on six points after coming from a goal down to beat promoted Paderborn 3-1 while Borussia Mönchengladbach, on four points, did the same for a 3-1 victory at Mainz.