All part of the plan? Who can second-guess the workings of Eddie Jones’s mind but certainly, if last weekend England produced one of the more impressive outings by a second team, this was far more the sort of performance these awkward warm-up fixtures tend to elicit. It was not entirely without merit and they were more comfortable than they have been in defence of late, but for all the sporadic flashes in attack, here was a rare thing: 80 minutes from this England vintage without a try. Surely not part of Eddie’s plan, but it is easier to imagine him content to step aside and usher Wales to the top of the world rankings, just as the World Cup heaves into view. “They’re favourites for the World Cup now,” he said matter-of-factly and with a credible attempt at a straight face. “I don’t have anything else to say, mate. You go No 1, you’re favourites for the World Cup.” No other rugby players in the world currently strutting their stuff – bar those who wear the most famous of the black jerseys – know what it is like up there at the top: the best team in the world, whom everyone wants to beat. England could have climbed to the summit themselves if they had won by 16 points or more. They played as if that were the furthest concern from their minds. No one yet has discerned the unanswerable logic of Jones’s decision to announce his 31 so early. Perhaps the confirmation last Monday of their tickets to Japan takes the pressure off those selected, perhaps it dulls the edge. Certainly it took England until well into the second half here to begin to match the snap and urgency of last week. Even without that intensity, though, they look comfortably superior to the best team in the world with ball in hand. Offloading among the forwards was one of the hallmarks of England’s most successful team, at the turn of the century, and it is an ability this lot are developing nicely. Theirs, too, were the only line breaks of note in either half, even if they never looked particularly as though they would finish one. Their scrum, as last week, was a reliable source of penalties, of which they were awarded a total of 12 in the second half, George Ford converting two. Their driven lineouts, though, were less impressive. But the real damage was done in the last 10 minutes of the first half. If England looked comfortable for once defensively, this is not a Wales team that asks many searching questions in attack. Nor did it particularly have to be, the aerial route causing England by far the most bother. And well it might. Not one of England’s back three could be described as authoritative under the high ball, with young Joe Cokanasiga flirting dangerously with the label of liability in that department. Wales’s try towards the end of the first half was instructive of what had gone before, featuring as it did English indiscipline, Welsh kicking and a certain vacancy on England’s flanks. Literally so on the right, from where Anthony Watson was banished for his rather unsubtle attempt to disguise a deliberate knockdown as part of his tackle of Hadleigh Parkes. No one was buying that, and off Watson trudged for a spell in the bin. He had not even reached the touchline (and there are those who argue play should not have restarted until he had) when Dan Biggar took the penalty quickly, across to England’s vacant left, where Josh Adams was free to gather and gallop at his leisure. At the next tackle, Biggar sent the ball back to England’s unmanned right, where Watson might have been, for George North to score at his leisure. England were down to 13 at the time, because Willi Heinz had left for a head-injury assessment and was yet to be replaced. That most definitely is something that ought to have given the game pause. Jones’s supreme indifference about the oversight was a reminder of how low the stakes were. As was his mood afterwards, which was practically buoyant. “I thought it was a brilliant World Cup prep game for us. We deliberately started with a young team. The result’s the result, but for us it’s a big step forward.” Whether part of the plan or not, a tryless defeat was made to feel as if it just could have been. Jones has a knack for such spin. The awkward jockeying for position goes on, ahead of you know what.