Pinterest shares soared after its second-ever quarterly earnings report exceeded expectations on Thursday, representing tentative success for another Silicon Valley “unicorn”. Pinterest joined a number of other tech “unicorns” – private companies valued at over $1bn – to list on the US stock markets when it filed to go public in March 2019. Its better-than-projected revenue and user growth caused shares to jump as much as 17% after markets closed for the day. Revenue rose 62% to $261.2m, better than the $235.8m analysts estimated on average. Its user numbers increased 30% year-over-year to 300m during the quarter. The performance represented an ability to scale user growth and expand to new markets, the eMarketer analyst Andrew Lipsman said. “Pinterest’s blowout quarter on the top and bottom lines was especially important in light of its post-IPO stumble in its first quarterly earnings,” he said. Executives at the image-sharing and shopping platform said the company expanded new features in the quarter, including improved search recommendations, shoppable products, and more video content. On 22 July, the company launched “emotional wellbeing” activities that users can participate in on the app, including meditation and “self-compassion” exercises. The business is working hard to expand its global footprint and it’s paying off. International revenue is up 199% following efforts to globalize its ads business, while international users are up 38%, compared with a 13% rise in US users. As tech firms face increased scrutiny over privacy violations, the company’s CEO, Ben Silbermann, emphasized Pinterest’s privacy efforts, which include the ability to opt out of advertisement targeting and options to make Pinterest boards private. Silbermann added that the company was developing a mobile interface to allow small businesses to advertise on the platform and increase ad revenue. “We constantly aim to make Pinterest more personal, relevant and useful to our users,” he said on an earnings call following the report.