A rescue ship carrying 121 migrants in the Mediterranean has called on the French, German and Spanish governments to intervene after Italy and Malta denied it access to their ports. The Open Arms ship, which is operated by the Spanish-based NGO Proactiva Open Arms, has been in international waters for eight days. Among those on board are 32 children, including nine-month-old twins. Óscar Camps, the director of the NGO, has appealed directly to European leaders to resolve the crisis. Under the existing EU agreement, migrants rescued in the open sea should be taken to the nearest safe haven, in this case Malta or Italy. Although the Italian government allowed two heavily pregnant women and the sister of one of them to disembark, it told the NGO that if it attempted to dock in an Italian port it would face a €50,000 (£46,000) fine and the ship would be confiscated. “Ninety percent of those on board have been raped and tortured and need urgent medical assistance,” Camps told El Mundo newspaper. Four Spanish regions – Extremadura, Valencia, the Basque country and Catalonia – have offered to receive the migrants but any decision rests with the acting Spanish government led by Pedro Sánchez. Sánchez won praise in June 2018 when he allowed 630 migrants on the rescue ship Aquarius to disembark in Valencia. However, the Open Arms situation leaves him in a quandary as he faces a third attempt to form a government next month. In January, Sánchez’s government banned the Open Arms from leaving port on the grounds that it failed to meet legal and security requirements. For six months it remained moored in Barcelona. Then in June it disobeyed the order and resumed its rescue mission in the Mediterranean. Sánchez is thought not to want to accede to Open Arms’ request for a Spanish haven when the NGO has openly defied him. On the other hand, his party, in power in the regional governments of Extremadura and Valencia, has urged him to act. “We have no obligation to receive them,” Sánchez’s deputy, Carmen Calvo, said on Wednesday, indicating that Spain had moved towards taking a hard line similar to Italy’s on the issue. Matteo Salvini, the Italian interior minister, accused Open Arms of using its rescue mission as “political provocation”, adding that the ship had plenty of time to reach Spain, where it is flagged, and where “several mayors are willing to receive it”. According to the UN refugee agency, 2,287 people died attempting to cross the Mediterranean to Europe in 2018.