In the most closely contested relegation battle in Super League history results are really all that matters. In that regard this was job done for Leeds – but, given the miserable season the eight-time champions have endured hitherto, this magnificent performance is cause for celebration and optimism for everyone connected with the club. Leeds are only two points clear of bottom-placed London but there were enough traits here to suggest the unlikeliest of relegations for one of the game’s most famous clubs is looking less likely. “I see a team we’re not having to pick up off the floor any more,” the Leeds coach, Richard Agar, said after this destructive display. In hindsight Leeds had done enough by half-time to see off a miserable Huddersfield side, who remain only one win clear of the relegation zone themselves. Tries from Adam Cuthbertson, Tom Briscoe and Konrad Hurrell made it 16-0 to the visitors, before Brad Dwyer’s instinctive finish on the stroke of the interval gave them a commanding 22-point lead. There would be no way back from there for the Giants. “One team looked like they were fighting for survival and the other didn’t,” Simon Woolford, the Huddersfield coach, said. “It’s embarrassing and simply unacceptable.” His side had to score first after half-time to stand any chance of victory – but instead, a shocking pass in midfield found its way to Ash Handley, who raced 50 metres unchallenged to put the game out of sight. Leeds only got better after that. Hurrell’s second, a rampaging solo effort, came next before two wonderful team tries in the closing minutes. The first was finished by Handley, before a superb break downfield led to Liam Sutcliffe crossing in the corner to put the seal on a performance that suggests Leeds have enough to survive, irrespective of what happens around them. Wakefield remain on 18 points with Leeds and Huddersfield after suffering a 26-6 defeat at St Helens, who could win the League Leaders’ Shield on Saturday should Warrington lose to Catalans. Huddersfield McIntosh; McGillvary, I Senior, Wardle, L Senior; Gaskell, Frawley; Walne, Leeming, English, Ta’ai, Mellor, Lawrence. Interchange O’Brien, Roberts, Matagi, Murphy. Leeds Walker; Briscoe, Newman, Hurrell, Handley; Lui, Myler; Cuthbertson, Lunt, Seumanufagai, Ferres, Martin, Merrin. Interchange Dwyer, Singleton, Donaldson, Sutcliffe. Tries Cuthbertson, Briscoe, Hurrell 2, Dwyer, Handley 2, Sutcliffe. Goals Martin 6. Referee R Hicks Attendance 6,809.