Ben Jonson’s 1614 comedy is an unwieldy beast at the best of times. But a carnivalesque satire that cries out to occupy the Globe’s main, open-air theatre is instead done in its intimate, indoor playhouse. Although the space has been reconfigured and electricity has replaced the usual candles, Blanche McIntyre’s production sheds little light and resembles an attempt to cram the contents of a house into a single trunk. Two things are obvious about Jonson’s comedy. One is that it is a palpably Jacobean play that attempts to convey the riotous vice of a contemporary London fair while showing how its middle-class visitors are either gulled or humiliated. While putting the play into modern dress, McIntyre finds no exact equivalent for Jonson’s original setting: Zeal-of-the-Land Busy, for instance, is a precise portrait of a hypocritical Banbury puritan here improbably turned into a portly American evangelist. The other point is that Jonson offers a fantastic gallery of eccentrics that even Dickens might have envied. By having 12 actors portray 30 characters, the production involves frantic doubling and creates confusion: typically, Joshua Lacey is one minute playing a protective husband and the next a randy cutpurse mauling the former’s wife. A few performances transcend the merry muddle. Dickon Tyrrell is a model of sobriety as a snooping Justice of the Peace whose idea of disguise is to don a beret and funny specs and who, having come to censure depravity, ends up in the stocks. Boadicea Ricketts switches neatly between a proctor’s pregnant wife and a cheery balladeer. There is also good work from Richard Katz as a single-minded security guard and an obsessive puppeteer and from Jude Owusu as an opportunistic gamester and a leather-skirted female punk. But the language of the play, with its references to vapours, trillibubs and Mad Arthur of Bradley, remains rooted in the world of Jacobean city comedy for which McIntyre’s hectic production fails to find a plausible modern parallel. At Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 12 October.