British households are more worried about losing their jobs than at any time in the past five and a half years, according to official figures, in a sign of the pressure on workers across the country. Despite unemployment falling to the lowest point since the mid 1970s, the Office for National Statistics said people’s expectations for rising joblessness in the year ahead have been climbing. According to consumer confidence surveys used by the government statistics agency to compile a dashboard of economic wellbeing, expectations of rising unemployment have hit the highest level since June 2013. The findings come as Brexit looms and the risks of recession mount. Faced with the threat of a disorderly no-deal departure at the end of October and a global economic slowdown, the UK economy contracted in the three months to June for the first time since 2012, putting the country on the brink of recession. Two consecutive quarters of contraction are regarded by economists as a recession. Amanda Mackenzie, chief executive of the charity Business in the Community, said: “Prescient Brits have been expecting higher unemployment and for the general economic situation to deteriorate, and following last week’s negative GDP number they may well be proven right. “With a no-deal Brexit looming, the UK economy is arguably at its most crucial juncture for a decade and it’s no surprise people feel less secure about their jobs and the broader economic picture.” The ONS said objective measures of economic wellbeing had risen over the three months to March, with an improving picture for household income, wealth and spending per head. However, it said households remained negative about the general economy. Expectations for the country’s general economic situation for the year ahead are now worse than at any point since the final quarter of 2011, it said. The lack of confidence over the jobs market comes as Britain faces the weakest decade for wage growth since the final years of the Napoleonic wars. Pay growth has started to accelerate in recent months, however average wages after inflation remain below the level seen before the 2008 financial crisis. Some economists argue that workers lack sufficient bargaining power to demand higher wages as employment in modern Britain becomes increasingly precarious. Workers expecting unemployment to rise could further undermine confidence to demand pay rises. Although British households have become more gloomy about the jobs market and the general economy, the ONS said overall wellbeing levels were little changed over the past year. According to its happiness surveys, household anxiety levels were stable in the year to March. The statistics body’s happiness index – measured on a scale of 0 to 10 for the average happiness of the nation – increased from 7.52 to 7.56 on the year to March. Despite the marginal national improvement, about 4.2 million people continued to report low levels of happiness.