The Guardian columnist and activist Owen Jones has been physically assaulted in London while celebrating his 34th birthday with friends. In an attack he said was “a blatant premeditated assault”, Jones said he was kicked, punched and thrown to the ground by a group of men in the early hours of Saturday morning. On Twitter, Jones wrote: “Six of us left the pub at 3am and were saying our goodbyes 30 metres away, then a group of three to four men left the pub, made a beeline for me, kicked me in the back, threw me on the ground, slamming my head, and kicked me in the skull. My friends were punched trying to defend me. “The group then scarpered: I don’t know if they said anything in the melee. I’m fine other than a big bump on my head and a cut back. Given the far-right attacks I’ve had in the streets, and generally escalating far right threats I’ve had, I’m in no doubt as to what this is.” He added: “What happened – to be clear – is they spotted me in the pub, waited for us to leave, and then launched their attack when we were away from the pub – it was planned, not a random attack ... The far-right menace is growing, it’s real, it’s violent and it’s targeting minorities and leftists. We can’t let them intimidate us, and we will defeat them.” Earlier in the year, Jones was covertly photographed in a London pub by a far-right activist who posted a picture of the columnist online with a threatening message that read: “do not underestimate me … I can get that close to your like minded people … I even know your address of all you radicals [sic]”. The Metropolitan police said: “[A man in his thirties] was attacked by up to four males who also assaulted his friends when they attempted to intervene. None of those injured required hospital treatment or London ambulance service. No arrests have been made.” Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of the Guardian and Observer, said: “We deplore the outrageous attack on Owen Jones that took place late last night. Violent assaults on journalists or activists have no place in a democratic society.” Labour MP Diane Abbott condemned the attack on Twitter, saying: “Shocking to hear about this attack on you & your friends. The times we live in are increasingly dark and dangerous. You have all my love & support. Solidarity.” Jones thanked his friends “who were assaulted defending me and who I love very much”.