Shayna Jack emerged from more nearly five hours of talks with Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority officials vowing to “leave no stone unturned” in the fight to clear her name after failing a drug test. The 20-year-old, flanked by her lawyer Paul Horvarth and her mother, faced the media for the first time since news broke that she had tested positive for the banned substance Ligandrol, a muscle growth agent, during an Australian swim camp ahead of the world championships in South Korea. Jack, who is facing a four-year ban and potentially the end of her career, denies knowingly taking the drug but faces an uphill battle to avoid serving the full ban. “I’m really happy with how everything’s going and I’m not going to stop until I’ve proved my innocence,” she said. “I’ll fight to get myself back in the pool because that’s my dream and I’m never going to let that go.” When pressed, she refused to speculate on how the banned substance got into her system. “It’s still an ongoing investigation so we can’t clear that with anyone at the moment,” she said. “We’re still looking into it but we’re not going to leave any stone unturned.” Jack returned a positive A sample weeks before the world championships in South Korea, forcing her to quit the Dolphins’ training camp citing “personal reasons”. It became public that she had failed a drug test only when news leaked of her B test result midway through the championships in Gwangju. Swimming Australia faced accusations of covering up the test results and allowing Mack Horton – who, like the rest of the team, was oblivious to the reasons for Jack’s sudden withdrawal – to stage a high-profile anti-doping protest against the Chinese swimmer, Sun Yang. But Jack denied any rift between her and the national swimming body and said on Friday afternoon that they were united and had been working together on the case. “Swimming Australia has been nothing but supportive towards me and we have been a unit through the whole process, every decision we have made has been together, and we are very happy with every decision we have made,” Jack said. It is expected Asada will provide Jack’s legal team with a letter outlining the case against her in four to six weeks. “We will leave no stone unturned in preparing her defence to this case,” said Horvarth, who added that Jack had been “very honest to date” with officials. Jack has already been banned from the lucrative International Swimming League after her positive result.