Howard University is bringing back its long-dormant college golf program with an assist from Stephen Curry. The Golden State Warriors star announced a seven-figure donation on Monday to establish the first Division I men’s and women’s golf teams in the 152-year history of the historically black university in Washington DC. “No matter where you come from or what socioeconomic background you had, we all were that kid once upon a time that was just excited about finding out who they were as a person through athletics,” the Golden State Warriors guard told the Washington Post. .@StephenCurry30 is here and we are ready for the #HowardUGolf festivities. With his support, today we kick off the first-ever NCAA Division 1 Men’s and Women’s Golf Program at a Howard University. @HowardAD_KD @HUPrez17 pic.twitter.com/2FN8ZLZ7cQ Howard athletic director Kery Davis said Curry’s donation “was sort of a jolt for us”. The school has not offered the sport since a Division II golf team folded in the 1970s. “Golf has always been a game of privilege,” Davis said. “An association with the sport can break down barriers.” Davis told the Post that it will take about a year to hire coaches, recruit student-athletes and find a course to practice and play on. “Golf is a sport that has changed my life in ways that are less tangible, but just as impactful,” Curry said in a release. “It’s a discipline that challenges your mental wherewithal from patience to focus, and is impossible to truly master, so when you hear about these passionate student athletes who have the talent but don’t have a fair shot at the game, it’s tough. I feel really honored to play a small role in the rich history of Howard University.” The announcement took place on Monday in the nation’s capital at Langston Golf Course, the second racially desegregated golf course in the District of Columbia. “Howard University is honored to partner with NBA champion Stephen Curry to launch what is sure to become one of the best golf programs in the country,” university president Wayne AI Frederick said. “This program will expose the campus to a game with numerous benefits. Golf is unique because it can be played through various ages of life. Grandfathers can play with granddaughters.” A longtime golfer, Curry is a semi-regular on the pro-am circuit and shot an opening-round 4-over 74 in his professional golf debut playing on an exemption at the Web.com Tour’s Ellie Mae Classic in 2017. The two-time NBA Most Valuable Player made his foray into television as an executive producer and on-air resident pro for the mini-golf reality competition series Holey Money, which premiered to top ratings in June.