With its elegant Regency buildings, handsome Cotswolds setting and a celebrated literary festival, Cheltenham is not an obvious location for political conflict. But last Thursday protesters gathered outside the office of the local Conservative MP, Alex Chalk, to voice their anger at Boris Johnson’s decision – delivered by the Queen – to prorogue parliament, and thus shorten the amount of time for MPs to pass legislation preventing a no-deal Brexit. “Remainers storm MP’s office” screamed the Sun, under a tag of “Red rabble”. In reality, a couple of hecklers aside, the crowd listened in respectful silence as Chalk, a Remainer who opposes prorogation, attempted to explain his rather contorted position. The “rabble” was about as threatening as a librarians’ picnic. Although it’s a Conservative seat, Cheltenham voted 57-43 in favour of Remain in the referendum and, led by the pressure group Cheltenham for Europe, the town has been host to a strong anti-Brexit campaign. Clearly discomfited, Chalk found himself having to declare that he was not going to resign the whip. According to local councillor Max Wilkinson, who is the prospective Liberal Democrat candidate for the constituency, Chalk is a man of “malleable principles”. “First he was a Eurosceptic. Then he pivoted to reluctant Remainer. Then he voted for all of the Brexit legislation the government set out. Now he stands outside his constituency office telling everyone he’s against no deal and prorogation, while taking a job as private secretary for Dominic Raab, who is one of the biggest exponents of a no-deal Brexit around. He’s putting his career ahead of what he says are his principles.” The problem with principles is that everyone thinks theirs are the right ones. Seldom has this particular principle been more persuasively demonstrated than in the Brexit fiasco. As each political grouping has been unwilling to concede ground on their principled stands, parliament has been stuck in deadlock. And Johnson is now attempting to break that deadlock by means that, as the activist Gina Miller’s lawyers noted in a letter sent to the prime minister, are “contrary to fundamental constitutional principles”. For all the outrage and claims of coups and civil wars, there is, says the constitutional expert Vernon Bogdanor, an inexorable outcome to the parliamentary impasse. “If you vote for Brexit and then vote down the only deal the EU says is available, in logic the only way of achieving Brexit is without a deal.” He suggests that more than three years down the line, people are “more interested in the substance of Brexit than the procedures”. Certainly on the streets of Cheltenham there were plenty of people who seem unconcerned about parliament’s suspension. Susan Mackay voted Remain but now she just wants the country to get on with Brexit. “[Johnson] has probably done the right thing,” she says. A floating voter, she says she’ll vote Tory in the next election because she thinks Johnson is a strong leader. Her intention will be welcomed by Tory party HQ: Cheltenham has shuttled between the Tories and Lib Dems for decades and Jo Swinson will be targeting seats like it with zeal at the next election. Mark Wallace, a former soldier, can’t see the problem with proroguing parliament. “It’s not anti-democratic at all,” he insists. He voted Leave but he’s particularly keen to get out of the EU as soon as possible because, he says, the medicines he needs are becoming increasingly difficult to get. But won’t that be a much greater problem if the UK leaves without a deal? “No,” he says, arguing that the country will then be free to make whatever arrangements it wants. Another lesson that Brexit has taught us is that, when convinced of their cause, people can recruit any circumstances or developments, however unpromising, to support it. On the promenade or “prom”, the rather upmarket section of the shopping district, I meet Jan, who is a Labour supporter. She’s in a small minority in Cheltenham, which has always been either a Conservative or Liberal seat. “I think it’s outrageous,” she says of the prorogation. “It’s undemocratic. I want to see proportional representation.” So do many Labour voters and even policy-makers, but Labour also hopes to win the next election and, as John McDonnell has said, no government seeks to reform the system that got them elected. You’d better keep quiet if you want to keep your friends What’s notable is that very few people I speak to are uncertain or undecided. Opinions are forthright and polarised. “There’s a great deal of friction here,” says a stall-holder, who doesn’t want to be named for fear of losing custom – he’s a closeted Brexiter. “You’d better keep quiet if you want to keep your friends.” Of course, Cheltenham being a constituent part of that mythical land middle Britain, the Friday lunchtime shoppers couldn’t appear more homogeneous or less disposed to political feuding. But something has changed in Britain. A loose yet accommodating sense of shared values – or, indeed, principles – seems to have been lost. And it’s hard to imagine how it might be regained. The referendum has not only divided the country but has made compromise and understanding seem a mark of weakness. “People want politicians to stand up for what they believe in,” says Wilkinson. This is true. But they also want them to sit down and get on with running the country. Embodying these dual desires is Andrew White, a retired policeman. A Lib Dem voter, he acknowledges the strategic thinking behind Johnson’s outlandish move. “I understand the brinkmanship. I can see his game bBut I don’t like him,” he says. “I’ll support him in trying to get a deal, but when we come out without one I’m going to be really pissed off.” He will be far from the only one.