“We are challenged,” said Joy FM’s president, Melinda Rich, in a memo to staff last week. The community LGBTI radio station in Melbourne has been operating for 25 years and has about 550,000 listeners a month, but last week it let go two of its staff after failing to raise enough money through sponsorship and its latest radiothon. It’s not the end of Joy, and many of its challenges are unique – it needs to move to the Victorian government’s new pride centre at the end of next year, and replace old equipment – but many are also common to other LGBTI media organisations. In May, just before its 40th anniversary, Sydney’s Star Observer went into voluntary administration saying advertisers had been slow to pay bills. In stepped City Hub’s founder, Lawrence Gibbons, in June to rescue the monthly print and online publication under a new company, Out Publications. But others have not been so lucky. Last month Gay Star News in the UK went into insolvency after eight years and staff were told just before pay day. It was a similar story: lack of support from business and a side of concern over Brexit. The founders blamed businesses that were keen to splash their logos with the rainbow flag during pride month, but contributed very little to the LGBTI community in real dollar terms. Historically LGBTI media has shone a light and provided a voice for the community that was missing from major media outlets. Star Observer started a year after the Sydney Morning Herald published the names of people arrested in the Mardi Gras protest in 1978. But 40 years on, queer media finds itself in a new world where, in many western countries they have traditionally operated in, marriage equality has happened, mainstream media outlets are increasingly reporting on LGBTI issues, and companies are keen to show they support LGBTI people. However, the financial support for community-based LGBTI media is not matching the enthusiasm. This month Andrew Potts was brought back as Star Observer’s editor after seven years during which he worked for Gay Star News as well as DNA magazine. He says there was still a big readership for LGBTI media but it was difficult to monetise. “Magazines like DNA that can charge a cover price and be sold in newsagents don’t face the same challenges, and I think will continue to be successful,” he says. “But there will always be a need for LGBTI community news.” It is not a case of people going out less, which might affect the advertising for nightclubs and bars, but he says many gay venues are now owned by large corporate entities that may not be as LGBTI focused. David McCarthy, a former Joy president and current host and director, says the financial situation has always been a challenge, but often it’s difficult just getting a foot in the door to find sponsors. “As often is the case in media, it’s all about network. Increasingly … advertising and sponsorship is handled by agency, and agencies are notoriously hard to crack,” he says. It isn’t just a financial problem. Elias Jashan, a former Star Observer editor who now lives in the UK, says post-marriage equality queer media in western countries is going through “an identity crisis” that is changing the way it covers stories. “I feel like there’s been more of a drive towards celebrity-driven or aggregate-style news than ever before due to intense pressure to compete with better-funded media outlets,” he says. “Perhaps marriage equality has been achieved. But here’s the kicker: there are still many other things we have to fight for before we have full equality and equity.” Shannon Power, a senior journalist and editor who has worked for Star Observer and Gay Star News, says there is increased pressure for LGBTI publications to churn out content for hits, but at the same time they need to properly represent and write stories for diverse communities. “The introduction of LGBTI media with a more global focus has resulted in that media becoming more traditional and mainstream,” she says. “That means there is not as much focus on the ‘local’ or lesser-known issues. LGBTI media has lost focus on the niches within the community and now provides a more general news service to LGBTI people.” Marriage equality is not the end of discrimination, Power says, pointing to the recent attack on a lesbian couple on a bus in the UK, but the perceived increasing acceptance of LGBTI people and their representation in mainstream media does mean the community does not need LGBTI media, Power says. “The reality is nothing could be further from the truth.” The postal survey and marriage equality campaign brought in big support from corporate sponsors, readers and listeners, but that was an easier pitch for advertising than ongoing support. “During marriage equality we got a lot more support and a lot more listeners,” McCarthy says. “Corporates want to support but you’ve got to make a pitch that works for them.” In Australia, the looming fight over the right for religious people to express anti-LGBTI views without repercussions, and the right for religious organisations to fire or refuse to hire LGBTI people, means giving LGBTI people a voice in the debate is more important than ever, McCarthy says. Potts says that when he first worked at Star Observer news of LGBTI hate crimes would “literally arrive bleeding” from the streets, something thankfully rarer in 2019. Marriage equality went mainstream, he says, leaving LGBTI media to pick up issues not as well covered by mainstream media. “For the more marginalised members of our community, such as transgender and intersex people or polyamorous people who are yet to be embraced by the mainstream media, we continue to print their news,” he says. This week One Nation’s leader in NSW, Mark Latham, launched a booklet to be sent to parent groups in schools warning against the teaching of “radical gender theory”. In the Sydney Morning Herald this was reported as Latham sending “anti-PC packs”. Star Observer reported the packs as “anti-trans propaganda” and highlighted the high suicide rate for young trans people, as well as detail on the programs actually offered in schools. A freelance Australian LGBTI journalist, Jesse Jones, says LGBTI media covers stories differently from the mainstream, and it shows. “We’re the ones who are best placed to get it right ... You see so many articles about trans issues, for example, obviously written by a cis person with no familiarity, that can be anywhere from ignorant to outrageously offensive,” he says. Power says mainstream media reporting more on LGBTI issues does not mean they are doing a better job of it than LGBTI publications. “When you consume stories in LGBTI media you can be certain the people who created that story are passionate about the issues they’re reporting on,” Power says. “We don’t work in niche media for the money or glory. They don’t exist for LGBTI journalists. We do it because we know we are providing a vital service and are agents of affecting change.”