Burford Capital has accused a US hedge fund of making “false and misleading” claims that wiped more than £1bn off its value, and warned the accusations could amount to market manipulation. Burford, which specialises in funding lawsuits and taking a cut of the proceeds, issued a nine-page rebuttal on Thursday after its shares plunged 65% over a 24-hour period. The stock had been hammered after the hedge fund Muddy Waters took a short position on its stock, betting that its price would fall, and publicly accused Burford of misleading investors through murky accounting. The AIM-listed firm, which counts under-pressure fund manager Neil Woodford among its largest investors, also held a conference call for investors in an effort to quash concerns over its financial position. Its concerted defence helped shares recover some of their losses, which closed up 26% at 760p per share on Thursday, valuing the business at £1.6bn and clawing back around £300m from the earlier rout. The stock had been a bright spot in Woodford’s portfolio, but its dramatic decline earlier this week was a further blow and wiped millions of pounds from the value of his flagship equity income fund. That fund was gated in June following a series of bad market bets that prompted a surge in redemptions which he struggled to fulfil. A strongly worded letter by Burford Capital said the Muddy Waters report was “false and misleading,” and full of “factual inaccuracies, simple analytical errors and selective use of information”. Burford said claims by Muddy Waters that it was “arguably insolvent” were baseless. The letter added that Burford was in a strong financial position, with $400m (£330m) available in cash and liquid assets, and could easily take on more debt. It used standard accounting methods that were transparent and deployed across the financial industry, and had been given the stamp of approval by EY auditors for nearly a decade, it said. The US hedge fund claimed Burford was “masquerading” as a strong company despite deriving most of its profits since 2012 from just four legal cases. However, Burford said even if it removed the four best cases from its accounts, its returns on litigations it funded would still be 33%. Burford also defended the fact that its finance chief, Elizabeth O’Connell, was married to its chief executive, Christopher Bogart, saying the relationship was “longstanding, disclosed and well-known”. “I’m very sorry for the shareholders that have been victimised by this … particularly the ones that sold into a declining market in the past couple of days,” Burford’s chief investment officer, Jonathan Molot, told investors on Thursday. “I can tell you for me and the team, the long-term prospects for Burford are quite promising and I’m very bullish on this company and there’s no validity to anything in the report … there is no smoking gun.” The litigation funder warned that its own investigation into Muddy Waters’ actions “already shows the hallmarks of market manipulation” and said it was exploring its next steps. “Short attacks such as this are a fundamental menace to an orderly market and to the value inherent in long-term investing in companies such as Burford that are revolutionising industries,” Burford said. Muddy Waters said it was reviewing Burford’s response. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Muddy Waters’ founder, Carson Block, admitted it had a financial motive in targeting Burford, but said this was no different from any other investment move. “Of course we have a financial motive and they have a financial motive. Everybody who’s doing this has a financial motive: every investor who makes a buy, sell, hold decision has a financial motive.”