Amnesty International has criticised the decision to sanction Anthony Joshua’s rematch with Andy Ruiz Jr in Saudi Arabia, citing human rights violations, the murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi and the ongoing war in Yemen. The fight, scheduled to take place in Diriyah on the outskirts of the capital Riyadh on 7 December, was approved by the International Boxing Federation, World Boxing Association and World Boxing Organisation on Friday and announced by Joshua’s promoters Matchroom Sport. Joshua, who will be looking to regain the heavyweight titles from Ruiz after surprisingly losing his first professional fight in New York at Madison Square Garden on 1 June, welcomed the announcement on social media with the message: “Neutral grounds - LETS GO.” But Amnesty International UK’s head of campaigns, Felix Jakens, called for the 29-year-old to “inform himself of the human rights situation and be prepared to speak out about Saudi Arabia’s abysmal human rights record”. “If Anthony Joshua fights Andy Ruiz Jr in Saudi Arabia, it’s likely to be yet another opportunity for the Saudi authorities to try to ‘sportswash’ their severely tarnished image,” he added. “Despite some long-overdue reforms on women’s rights, Saudi Arabia is currently in the grip of a sweeping human rights crackdown, with women’s rights activists, lawyers and members of the Shia minority community all being targeted. “There’s been no justice over the gruesome murder of Jamal Khashoggi and the Saudi-led military coalition in Yemen is carrying out indiscriminate attacks on homes, hospitals and market-places with horrific consequences for Yemeni civilians.” Amnesty also voiced criticism over the fight between Amir Khan and the Australian Billy Dib which took place in Saudi Arabia last month, with the British boxer claiming he has signed a deal to face Manny Pacquiao there later this year. Last year the middle-east sovereign state also hosted the World Boxing Super Series super-middleweight final between the British pair Callum Smith and George Groves in Jeddah’s King Abdullah Sports City Arena. The Principality Stadium in Cardiff was among the venues proposed for the rematch but Ruiz had insisted the bout must take place either back in the US or on neutral territory.