The next Danish crime thriller off the rack introduces itself with breathtaking, filmic opening credits that give way to the noirest of Scandi-noir plots. Handsome, conflicted detective Jan Michelsen (Kenneth M Christensen) discovers a link between the missing persons case he’s investigating in the suburbs of Copenhagen and a similar disappearance in the same area 10 years before. Could a serial killer with a penchant for young blond women be on the loose? This slow-burning mystery opens with a gripping double bill. Mike Bradley Ewan McGregor narrates a poetic appreciation of the ancient archipelago, which lies 100 miles from mainland Britain. Superbly photographed, it follows a year in the life of the islands and their animal inhabitants, including puffins, orcas and octopus-golloping otters. MB Simon Cowell’s latest plan is to squeeze the biggest acts of 13 series of BGT plus their global equivalents through his light-entertainment mangle. Fans will be sated by the return of Paul Potts and Boogie Storm, up against Ukrainian sand artist Kseniya Simonova and US daredevil duo Bello and Annaliese Nock. Hannah Verdier You’d think by now that C5 would have run out of shows about Nazis, but the final film in this masterful series is proof that there is much left to say on the subject. Expert perspectives and archive footage combine in a chronicle of how Hitler finally plunged Germany into his very own Twilight of the Gods. MB The big-money quiz continues. Like him or not (and apparently plenty of people don’t), Jeremy Clarkson seems firmly established in the hot seat now, and even if his brand of presentational snark isn’t for you, the format of the competition remains pretty much unimprovable. Expect more of the usual theatrical tension. Phil Harrison Episode two of rappers Krept and Konan’s search for the first act to sign to their record label, with the would-be stars collaborating on tracks and then facing off in rap battles. With NSG and Ghetts helping to judge, could laidback Smooth and perennially nervous J Lucia come unstuck? Hannah J Davies Is Anybody There? 12.05am, BBC TwoIn a 1980s north-east coastal town, young Edward (Bill Milner) lives with his parents (Anne-Marie Duff and David Morrissey) in the old people’s home they run. Then in crashes Michael Caine’s fading conjuror and sparks fly, as Edward ponders life after death. Caine and the boy make a touching pair in this bittersweet drama. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Southampton v Man United 12noon, BT Sport 1. Burnley v Liverpool 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Rowing: World Championships 1.15pm, BBC One. Live coverage of the Olympic-qualifying event in Ottensheim. Rugby Union: Wales v Ireland 2pm, Channel 4. The first of two World Cup warm-ups between the nations.