A widescale murder investigation is under way, with 10 suspects arrested including a 13-year-old boy, after a newlywed police officer was struck by a vehicle and killed in the line of duty in Berkshire. PC Andrew Harper of Thames Valley police was responding to reports of a burglary with a crewmate when he was dragged along the road by a vehicle after leaving his car at a crossroads on the A4 near Sulhamstead at 11.30pm on Thursday. The 28-year-old, who married four weeks ago, was described as a popular and well-regarded officer who had been with the police service since 2010. Harper’s death comes as concerns mount over the threat to officers. Last week, a Metropolitan police officer, Stuart Outten, survived a machete attack after stopping a van in east London and a West Midlands police officer, Gareth Phillips, was run over by a suspected car thief in Birmingham. Phillips remains in hospital. In the year to the end of March 2019, there were more than 30,000 assaults on police officers in England and Wales including British Transport Police. Assaults on officers that resulted in injuries rose by 27% from the previous year. Maureen Shrimpton, Harper’s grandmother, posted on Facebook: Boris Johnson was among public figures who paid tribute to the officer. The The prime minister said the death was “the most powerful reminder that police officers up and down the country put themselves at risk every single day to keep us safe”. Thames Valley police’s flags were flying at half mast on Friday and its chief constable, John Campbell, told a press conference that Harper had been dragged along the road by a vehicle near where Ufton Lane and Lambdens Hill meet the A4, leaving a “distressing scene”. He noted the recent attacks and the threat to officers. “Police officers, day in day out, face the kind of challenges and physical violence that often result in assault,” he said. Ten suspects – all male and aged between 13 and 30 – have been arrested on suspicion of murder and are in police custody. They were arrested at a number of locations within an hour of the incident. Campbell said Harper was a “highly regarded, popular member of the team” and his death was a “significant loss” to the force. “The officer was well known across the force so it is felt very personally and it is felt very personally by the whole police family across the UK,” he said. Harper joined as a special constable in 2010 before becoming a police officer a year later, serving in the roads policing proactive unit based at Abingdon police station. Throughout Friday, two blue and white tents were erected at the scene of Harper’s death and forensic investigators gathered items from the road and took photographs. Police were also searching the inside of a grey BMW on Ufton Lane. Campbell said a postmortem was being conduced to confirm the cause of death. He could not confirm or deny whether Harper had been involved in a pursuit or whether a “stinger” – a device that punctures the tyres of moving vehicles – had been used. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said it had been made aware of the death as routine procedure but no investigation was under way. Andy Fiddler from the Thames Valley police federation, which represents rank and file officers, said: “This is totally devastating news. All our thoughts – and the thoughts of the entire police family across the UK – are with the family, friends and close colleagues of PC Andrew Harper who died last night. “Police officers go to work each and every day to do their duty. We are courageous, caring and compassionate. Sadly on very rare and horrendous occasions a colleague makes the ultimate sacrifice. We will ensure that heroism is never forgotten.”He said the federation was offering full support to Harper’s family and colleagues. Harper is the first officer to be killed on duty since March 2017, when unarmed PC Keith Palmer was stabbed by Khalid Masood during the Westminster Bridge terror attack. The home secretary, Priti Patel, said: “I’m devastated and appalled by the tragic death of PC Andrew Harper and my thoughts are with his loved ones, colleagues and the community he served with great pride at this immensely difficult time. “PC Harper died in the line of duty protecting the public and his incredible bravery and extraordinary sacrifice will not be forgotten.” The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said said: “I’m totally shocked at Andrew Harper’s death, and my immediate thoughts are condolences to his family and to his colleagues who must be going through some awful moments.”