Isn’t life grand?! There you can be, all mopey about Brexit and Trump and the Amazon burning, then along comes something like Carnival Row and cheers you right up! First there’s some portentous, pre-credit scrolling text to give us the set-up for this steampunk fairytale: “For ages the homeland of the Fae was a place of myth and legend. Until the many empires of man arrived and warred for control of its riches …” It goes on for a supremely confident length of time. The short version is that the Burgue and the Pact were at war in Fairyland but seven years ago the Burgue withdrew, leaving the Fae to their enemy’s tender mercies. It only gets better – or worse – from here. The action finally begins in Pact-occupied Anoun in Tirnanoc (I told you!), where a horde of actors with fairy wings stapled to their backs and dreams of better things in their heads are trying to outrun the marauders. A tough Fae descends to help. It is, I could not be more delighted to tell you, Cara Delevingne! With – and Amazon Prime ambassador, you are really spoiling us – an Irish accent! She is a sparrowhawk and her name is Vignette Stonemoss. Vignette’s vocation is arranging boats to take desperate refugees to the relative safety of the Burgue, whose industrio-Victorian architecture and multispecies populace pitches it somewhere between Total Recall’s Venusville and Dickensian fever dream. There they will be sold on as virtual slaves to work off their debts to the shipowner, or find themselves scavenging a living in the brothel-heavy environs of Carnival Row. The Burgue is increasingly reluctant to take them in, and baldly scripted arguments rage about how much responsibility the republic has to the migrants it helped create versus the needs of the natives who feel their wages are being undercut and jobs taken. GOOD. I am not here for nuance. I likes my parallels served straight. Cara’s ship goes down (“Storm wrecks migrant vessel” shouts a headline in the In Case You’ve Not Got the Point Yet Times). Only she and the photo she clutches of a meeeesteeerious young soldier who is the spitting image of Orlando Bloom survive. That reminds me – Orlando Bloom’s in it! His name is Philostrate Facelovely (I think) and Vignotte Cheesemass thinks he’s dead but he is not! He is an effortfully gravel-voiced police inspector in the Burgue investigating a series of attacks on “pix” (pejorative term for Fae refugees) in between banging his landlady’s daughter and refusing to tell her about his wartime experiences in – get this! – Anoun, Tirnanoc. Near the end of the first episode, Evocative Nounpair discovers Philo Bloom is not dead and flaps on over to fight-or-the-other-thing him. After that the thing really takes flight, even though Bloom must surely be regretting his exhausting vocal choices by now. It’s great fun. Too crass to care about, too serious to take seriously. Still, for all that, it is a solidly crafted creation with only the set designers working even harder than the leads.