We all make mistakes but most of us manage to do so without attracting too much attention. However, this luxury is not given to Test cricketers – even in the post free-to-air era. Moeen Ali is rediscovering this after his moon ball, his misguided leave and his wayward second-innings bowling at Edgbaston; so, too, is Jason Roy, who swung and missed so memorably when producing a poor imitation of Virender Sehwag at the crease. Playing international cricket is a great job; it is also a cruel one. It is an easier game in the press box. In my eagerness to feel some empathy with a few of our Test players, let me admit to splitting an infinitive in 2001 and more recently, just before the start of the first Test against Australia in a typical bit of journalistic smart-arsery, there was this pontification: “If England can get to 80 for two on a regular basis they will win the series.” Well, at Edgbaston England were 154 for one at the high point of their first innings and 80 for two in their second. They ended up being thrashed by 251 runs. The game can make fools of us all. Three weeks after their World Cup win England’s cricketers are being castigated; Steve Smith, a pariah in his own country not so long ago, is now canonised. And there are still four Tests to go. None of us is safe. If England score more runs than Australia on a regular basis, they might win the series. Suddenly there is gloom and despondency. Only twice since 1954-55 have England won an Ashes series after losing the first Test and that happened in the miraculous years of 1981 and 2005. Before the contest resumes next Wednesday at Lord’s the England selectors have some agonising to do, not over whether to make changes but on how many would be appropriate. It is clear that Jimmy Anderson will be missing, probably for the rest of the series, possibly for the rest of time. Jofra Archer is primed to take his place. Until Tuesday against Gloucestershire’s second XI he had not bowled with a red ball – and therefore had not delivered more than 10 overs in a day – since last September. He is a brilliant prospect but expectations of him should be measured. The same applies to Jack Leach, if he is selected to replace Moeen. There is a fair chance this will happen. Everyone wants Moeen to succeed. He is the most endearing and dependable of characters, who gives so much to the squad around the dressing room, where he is a rock‑solid presence. Yet on the field the opposite applies at the moment. There is no knowing what he is going to do. He cut a forlorn figure at Edgbaston. He bowled more than adequately in the first innings but his inability to put pressure on the Australia batsmen on Saturday night and Sunday morning when conditions were helpful for finger spinners was critical and soon to be highlighted by Nathan Lyon’s performance on the final day. The recall of Leach would not be a cast-iron solution. In the past month he has bowled three overs for 26 runs against Ireland. This is not the ideal workload going into a vital Ashes Test – though this situation will be exacerbated to a far greater extent next summer, when the middle three months of the season will be dominated by the T20 Blast and the Hundred. One imagines the ECB has thought of that but prefers the money. So Leach is hardly in the groove – and the same would apply to any batsman Ed Smith might like to draft into his squad. There is another snag. The Australia top six contains four left-handers, which encourages the selection of an off-spinner. The advent of the DRS leads to so many lbws for the finger spinner turning the ball away from the bat and that threat changes how the batsmen play. The stats demonstrate that the off-spinners, Lyon and Moeen, are much more effective against left-handed batsmen and that was confirmed at Edgbaston – when Lyon was bowling. Leach, a left-armer, is the obvious option to replace Moeen, given there is a dearth of credible off-spinning candidates, but he is not the ideal one. There will also be discussions about England’s batting. The middle order, an area where England were supposed to be superior, did not fire in the first Test, with Jos Buttler and Jonny Bairstow both looking out of sorts. However, it is highly unlikely that England will dispense with them so early in the series, especially since any potential replacements are currently contemplating how to clear the nearest boundary.