Aston Villa have announced the double signing of the England goalkeeper Tom Heaton from Burnley and the Zimbabwean international midfielder Marvelous Nakamba from Club Brugge. Heaton’s signing, believed to be for a fee of around £8m, and Nakamba’s reported £11m price takes Villa’s number of signings since promotion to 13 and takes their spending this summer to more than £140m. “He’s done fantastically well for Burnley over the past few years and his experience and knowledge of the Premier League will be a major asset to us this season,” said Villa’s head coach, Dean Smith of 33-year-old Heaton, who had been Sean Dyche’s club captain at Turf Moor and leaves Burnley after six years and 188 appearances.Nakamba, 25, began his European career with Nancy before a spell at Vitesse Arnhem won him a move to play Champions League football with Club Brugge. “He’s very mobile, he’s very good in possession and he will fit in with our style of play,” said Smith. Meanwhile, Bournemouth have completed a fourth summer signing, bringing in Dutch international winger Arnaut Danjuma, also from Club Brugge, who follows the arrivals of Lloyd Kelly, Jack Stacey and Philip Billing into Eddie Howe’s squad. Danjuma came through the ranks at PSV Eindhoven, only to end up in Belgium via a spell at Eredivisie side NEC Nijmegen. “Coming to Bournemouth is a really good step up for me,” the 22-year-old told the club’s website. “The Premier League is a great place to play your football, especially at a club like this. I think the way the team plays suits my style, I like to attack and I cannot wait to get started.” The winger’s arrival boosts Howe’s attacking options with David Brooks ruled out for up to three months. Elsewhere, Newcastle goalkeeper Freddie Woodman has joined Swansea on loan after signing a contract extension until 2021, while two players have left Chelsea. Midfielder Kasey Palmer has signed for Bristol City on a permanent deal, while defender Dujon Sterling has joined Wigan on loan.