There are things you can learn about yourself only in extremis: when your plane ditches in the Arctic tundra, for instance. Instead of the untapped action hero you’ve always suspected lives inside you, you discover you’re actually the scene-one extra who would rather succumb to a rapid and surprisingly comfortable hypothermia. At least you’re leaving the real fighters something to eat. For those of us too young to have experienced Headingley ’81 – or, as it shall be known from now on, the other Headingley – this weekend’s game was our great examination. Our Test of character, if you will. What kind of fans were we? Were we Ripley in Alien, running out of crew members yet still fighting our way through the darkness in the face of a deadly fear? Or the lawyer in Jurassic Park, cowering in a toilet cubicle until we inevitably got eaten? Plenty of England fans woke up on Monday morning to the warm embrace of post-adrenal joy, only to find it instantly contaminated by the remembrance of tweets past. Had they really told @root66 that he should do the decent thing and abdicate in favour of Eoin Morgan? It was even worse for Aussies. At least in ’81 no one could keep a screenshot of your text, crowing across 10 time zones, that England had all the spine of a gelatinous zooplankton. I suspect that in this age of information – when the wealthy can have their entire genome mapped and the rest of us can find out we’re a little bit Scandinavian and should probably eat less mashed potato – that everything cricket fans need to know about themselves can be revealed through a statistical breakdown of what parts of the game they consumed live. Given the right questionnaire, the guys at CricViz could construct you a profile far more revealing than your Myers-Briggs results. England fans, at which first-innings wicket did you switch off your TV/mute your radio/rip the broadband cable from the wall in anger and throw the router out of the window? One point for each you stuck around for. Australians, answer truthfully – on what day did you stop bothering to stay up for the evening session? Score zero if you went to bed before the start of play on Sunday. Once England were two down, there were plenty of home fans who just wanted the thing over quickly Most fans – those with game awareness, a knowledge of cricketing history, and any grasp on reality – were mentally FedExing the Ashes back to Australia by day three. (Let’s be honest, plenty of us had filled out the shipping form at 138 for six on the first day of actual play at Lord’s.) But it was the run chase – some of us are still boggling at that term, which always felt entirely inappropriate for the situation – that separated the men from the boys, the girls from the women, and the grumpy-wumpy misery‑guts from the never-say-die diehards. Once England were two down, there were plenty of home fans who just wanted the thing over quickly. Finish it off, Pat Cummins. Put us out of our misery, Nathan Lyon. Don’t leave us lying here, two shots to the gut, to bleed out a slow, painful and undignified end. It was a sign of respect to turn off the telly then, to draw a veil over whatever innings Joe Denly was scratching out, to give Joe Root his privacy. I can’t be the only person who spent Saturday afternoon watching nothing more than guilty snatches of England’s batting, firing the screen up for a hit of score (wait, is that really still a 2 after the hyphen?). Watching a single delivery I was sure would splatter the stumps, before I lurched at the standby button to make sure the charm wasn’t broken. By the next morning, the spell had worn off. I’d woken up to the sober thought of a fresh pace attack and an imminent new ball and a psychological crack in England’s middle order so deep you could abseil Carl Jung down it. At this stage, we sceptics, cynics, and out-and-out pessimists knew: it was the righteous and responsible thing to puncture not only our own unhealthy fantasies but everyone else’s, too. We’d lived through the 90s. We’d seen our share of impossible fourth-innings totals. Hence the regrettable tweets. Of course we’d forgotten one thing: this is a summer of miracles. We lived through one just six weeks ago and yet, like the Israelites fresh out of Egypt, had forgotten it already. We had doubted. We did not deserve to see Ben Stokes come into his full glory. This is all by way of explanation for what happened to me on Sunday afternoon. I can only assume it was divine intervention that delayed my flight to Edinburgh just long enough that the last thing I saw was Chris Woakes getting out. By the time I landed an hour later, England were only 18 runs away, and I had missed most of the firework finale of one of the greatest Test innings the world will ever see. Still, England won, and I don’t regret a thing. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions And you can listen to The Spin podcast too.  To subscribe to The Spin, just visit this page and follow the instructions. • This story has been updated