Tottenham are going into the season having significantly strengthened their squad but Mauricio Pochettino remains wary of European rivals poaching his players before the transfer window closes on the continent, with Christian Eriksen the main target. The Spurs manager describes himself as “happy plus” after signing Giovani Lo Celso and Ryan Sessegnon, adding to the recruitment of Tanguy Ndombele earlier in the summer. But with the window still open in Europe until 2 September, he would not rule out departures in the coming weeks. “Sometimes it’s going to be difficult‚“ Pochettino said. “Any club from Europe can create a big problem. They have many different objectives, different challenges and different thoughts. That is why it surprised me when they decided to close the window in England earlier. It gives Europe the opportunity to create problems here and I think it’s not common sense.” Without mentioning Eriksen by name, Pochettino said Spurs were “vulnerable” to losing players with only a year remaining on their contracts. The Danish playmaker is one of those players and is believed to want to move to Spain having declared he would like to “try something new”. “I’m so happy with the squad today. I was happy before and now I’m happy plus. I’m a happy man,” Pochettino said. “But I think it can be possible that we are more vulnerable. It’s about the decision between the club and of course the player. I am going to coach the player. I don’t know what is going on between the clubs. This is my sixth season and you know I am not involved in negotiations, in deals with agents. I don’t have an agent, I don’t deal with agents. I don’t deal with money, I deal with nothing related to contracts.” Pochettino revealed he had addressed his squad before the season, reminding them that are all “top players” playing for a club that reached the Champions League final last season. But while he expects his team to be competitive in the Premier League, Pochettino says he will personally no longer be satisfied with just a top-four finish in the division. His own definition of success, he says, will be if Spurs win a trophy. That includes the Carabao Cup and FA Cup, two competitions that have previously been lower down his list of priorities. “My personal feeling, now I’m about to start my sixth season, is that a good season for us is to lift a trophy,” he said. “Carabao Cup, FA Cup, Premier League, Champions League, you know. It’s not to put pressure on the team or the club but if you ask me to be successful this season is not [just] to finish in the top four. For me it’s to win some title. Because if not, after last season and the [Champions League] final, the semi-final of the Carabao Cup, it’s like ‘come on, we are always there but we cannot touch the glory’.” Spurs play Aston Villa in their opening fixture on Saturday and will be without Sessegnon, who is continuing his recovery from a hamstring injury. The same problem afflicts Dele Alli, though his rehabilitation is progressing well, according to the club. Son Heung-min will also miss out, the Korean serving the second match of a three-game suspension. One likely starter is Lucas Moura, the Brazilian having also agreed a one-year extension to his contract at the club. “It’s very good news for me,” said the forward who is now contracted until 2024. “I’m so happy here. I feel so comfortable. I am so thankful for everything the club has given me. Now I just need to give my best and bring a lot more for this club.”