Political leaders in Italy are meeting on Monday to discuss a no-confidence vote in the government after Matteo Salvini’s far-right League party dramatically withdrew support for its fractious coalition with the anti-establishment Five Star Movement (M5S) in a push for snap elections. Salvini is eager to capitalise on his popularity and wants the no-confidence vote this week, but factions within M5S and the opposition Democratic party (PD) are attempting to scupper his move knowing the League could seize power. Salvini, who is deputy prime minister and interior minister, has also threatened to withdraw his seven ministers in order to topple an administration that he says is no longer viable. If the heads of the political groups back a no-confidence motion in prime minister Giuseppe Conte’s government, the next step is to set a date for the vote. This could happen by 20 August, with elections needing to be held within 45 to 70 days. If no agreement is reached, the decision would have to go to a full vote in the senate. Luigi Di Maio, the M5S leader, rallied his MPs on Monday morning and reportedly accused Salvini of betraying the government contract for his own interests. Di Maio said on Friday that he favoured a return to the polls, but he now says he first wants parliament to adopt a reform to cut the number of senators and deputies from 951 to 605. Some in his party have been working with counterparts in the rival PD to carve out a caretaker government to pass the 2020 budget. The PD faction is led by the former prime minister Matteo Renzi, who still wields influence within the party but is unpopular with voters. The PD leader, Nicola Zingaretti, has ruled out such a move, saying it would be a “gift to the dangerous right”, while appealing for unity within his party. Beppe Grillo, the founder of M5S, called Renzi a vulture. Salvatore Margiotta, a PD MP, said: “It’s true that there have been talks … but every hour the emotions change.” The decision to dissolve the government and call fresh elections rests with the president, Sergio Mattarella. He could install a technical government, but that option also tends to be unpopular with voters. Salvini has been touring Italy’s beaches since last week, calling on supporters to give the League, which is nearing 39% in polls, “full power” to “save Italy”. He said he would meet his allies, the Brothers of Italy and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, this week. The three parties joined forces before national elections in March 2018 and compete together at regional level. A coalition between the League and the Brothers of Italy, a party with a neo-fascist lineage, would create a fully far-right government in a major western European nation. “We genuinely rule out that there is any life left in this parliament and we consider elections in October as a baseline scenario,” Policy Sonar, a Rome-based political consultancy, said in a note. Franco Pavoncello, a political science professor and the president of John Cabot University in Rome, said: “There are people who don’t want elections right away, others who want them desperately and others who are sort of neutral. But I think it’s a long way to Tipperary for the elections … the last time Italy held a vote in the autumn was in 1919, just before Benito Mussolini’s victory.”