The clock was ticking for the Five Star Movement (M5S) and Democratic party (PD) to form a pact on Tuesday, as the anti-establishment party first cancelled a meeting with its longstanding centre-left enemy and then resumed talks. M5S had stalled progress due to a clash over whether Giuseppe Conte would be reinstated as prime minister. The two parties have until Wednesday evening to come up with a convincing pact that could take the government through until 2023. “We positively welcome the openings from authoritative members of the PD on the future role of prime minister Conte,” the party said in a statement. “We are ready for a dialogue on policies … above all, M5S wants to talk about solutions for the country.” M5S cancelled a meeting with the PD on Tuesday, threatening to abandon the talks completely unless the party accepted Conte as leader of the potential coalition. Conte participated in discussions between M5S leader, Luigi Di Maio, and his PD counterpart, Nicola Zingaretti, that lasted into the early hours on Tuesday. A source close to the discussions said the main issue was Di Maio’s refusal to step down as deputy prime minister in exchange for Conte resuming the top role. There were also clashes over who should lead the various ministries. Despite the statement, Di Maio and Zingaretti – who was meeting senior PD members late on Tuesday afternoon – have not yet been in contact. Both leaders have been under pressure to make a deal in a bid to avert elections that could create western Europe’s first fully far-right government, despite their personal reservations and resistance from factions within their parties. The chaos was prompted by Matteo Salvini, who dramatically withdrew his far-right League party from the alliance with M5S this month as he sought to exploit his high popularity to force snap elections in a bid to become the next prime minister. President Sergio Mattarella, who has the power to dissolve parliament and call new elections, resumed consultations on Tuesday afternoon, beginning with the presidents of each house of parliament and leaders of the smaller parties. Italy’s main parties will report back to Mattarella throughout Wednesday. Mattarella said last week that unless a strong new parliamentary majority can be formed, he would call snap elections. Conte, a 55-year-old lawyer, has accumulated many fans since his blistering attack against Salvini in the Senate last week. Not least Donald Trump, the US president, who gave his endorsement on Twitter. “Starting to look good for the highly respected Prime Minister of the Italian Republic, Giuseppe Conte,” Trump tweeted. “Represented Italy powerfully at the G7. Loves his Country greatly & works well with the USA. A very talented man who will hopefully remain Prime Minister!” Conte met Trump in the US last year, and the pair were reunited at the G7 summit in Biarritz.