I was surprised to be informed by Martin Kettle that my homeland might be minded to depart the union (the British one) (How Johnson’s Brexit could tear the United Kingdom apart, 1 August). The litany of Brexit-related harms, risks and plagues that has been compiled since the beginning of the EU membership referendum campaign is, of course, long and varied, but of the items on that litany, Welsh independence is one of the more extraterrestrial ideas. For the avoidance of doubt, Wales is firmly attached to the union. The notion that it might break away as a consequence of Brexit and Boris Johnson is faintly absurd. A majority in Wales voted in favour of Brexit in 2016. In the recent European election, Plaid Cymru – the party that would presumably deliver a grateful nation from its servitude – won 19.6% of the vote. The Brexit party won 32.5%. If there is a silent majority in Wales in favour of simultaneous secession from the union with the Saeson and perpetuation of the one with the European project, its silence is deafening. Measurable support for Welsh independence has never been more than anaemic. Dafydd Elis-Thomas, the veteran Plaid Cymru politician, once described the prospect as a mirage. It has always been so, and is highly likely to remain so.Deri HughesLondon • I hope Welsh farmers were reassured by the government’s assertions that they will be able to offset a “no deal” loss of trade with new markets like Japan (Sheep farmers left in dark over how they can avoid no-deal catastrophe, 13 July). Have they forgotten that Japan has New Zealand on its doorstep? Quite apart from any tariffs, whenever a trade deal could be negotiated, the price of Welsh lamb would be increased by the long-distance costs of refrigerated transit. Not to mention the effects on global warming. It would be no consolation to farmers – or anyone else likely to lose their jobs – that “they voted leave in 2016 so it would be undemocratic for them to be allowed to change their minds.” Besides which, the government refuses to acknowledge that a no-deal outcome does not, and never did, have a mandate. The propaganda at the time meant most people expected not only a deal but a favourable deal. Boris Johnson should live up to his promises or give us another vote on “no deal”.Gloria BrownLlaneglwys, Powys • Alun Cairns, the secretary of state for Wales, claimed UK farmers could export their sheep and lamb to Japan instead of Europe in the event of a no-deal Brexit. This scarcely believable statement epitomises the lack of understanding of a no-deal solution. The extra cost of shipping to Japan will be huge and totally illogical when our prime markets are a short distance from Dover, and many major EU cities are within only a few hours’ distribution, covering 100 million-plus customers. It puzzles me that we can so readily ignore our EU customers and the impact it has on UK economy, the jobs in the supply and distribution chain and on the livelihood of many in the farming industry.John KellyLiverpool • The suggestion by Alun Cairns that sheep farmers can compensate for the loss of their major EU markets by exporting lamb to Japan is unfounded and economically illiterate, 13 July). Lamb is not a traditional part of the Japanese diet, which is dominated by fish and plant-based foods. On average, the Japanese consume 0.1kg of lamb a year compared with 15.4kg of pork. A survey by the trade body Meat and Livestock Australia showed that 35% of Japanese consumers don’t know how to cook lamb and 47% are unfamiliar with it. For good or bad, lamb is very unpopular in Japan being widely described as “stinky”. Moreover, 40% of what little lamb is eaten in Japan is already imported from the nearer suppliers Australia and New Zealand. Post-Brexit policy is being made on the hoof and is based on a fantasy. Time to give it the chop.Neil BatemanIpswich, Suffolk • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition