Leeds continued their excellent start to the season and stayed top after a strolling 3-0 win at struggling Stoke. Goals from Stuart Dallas, a tap-in from Ezgjan Alioski after fine work from Patrick Bamford, who scored the third, ensured Marcelo Bielsa’s side stay unbeaten. Stoke have collected just one point and manager Nathan Jones saw no return on dropping England goalkeeper Jack Butland and midfielder Joe Allen. Charlton are themselves still unbeaten and just two points behind. Conor Gallagher’s third goal of the season, against the run of play, secured a 1-0 victory at the Valley over Brentford. Sheffield Wednesday dropped out of the top six after losing 2-1 at Preston, where they have not won since 2012, after two penalties from Daniel Johnson. Fulham’s run of three successive wins was brought to a halt by two goals from Nottingham Forest’s Lewis Grabban, the first coming in just the fourth minute. Aleksandar Mitrovic’s late strike served only as a consolation for the Cottagers. Huddersfield, still without a manager after Jan Siewert’s sacking early last week, lost 2-0 at home to Reading. The Royals waited until the 71st minute to score through Ovie Ejaria before Michael Morrison headed in 13 minutes later. Huddersfield are only above Stoke on goal difference. Bristol City are up to fourth place after late goals from Benik Afobe and Reece Burke secured a 3-1 win at Hull. Afobe, on loan from Stoke, opened the scoring for City. Middlesbrough were in the lead for just six minutes after Paddy McNair’s 70th minute strike before Tom Bradshaw, with his first touch after coming on as a sub, equalised for Millwall in a 1-1 draw. Wigan stay rooted in the bottom three after losing 3-1 at QPR. The Hoops recovered from Cédric Kipré’s second-minute strike with Nahki Wells’ effort from close range, an Ebere Eze free-kick and a goal from substitute Jordan Hugill completing the turnaround. Teetering above are Barnsley, who lost 3-1 at home to Luton. The Hatters were three goals up by the 31st minute as Jacob Butterfield, James Collins and Harry Cornick all scored. Barnsley, unable to win since the opening day, got their sole goal via Mallik Wilks. Blackburn and Cardiff, 14th and 15th respectively, fought out a 0-0 draw at Ewood Park. Derby 1-1 West Brom, Barnsley 1-3 Luton, Blackburn 0-0 Cardiff, Charlton 1-0 Brentford, Fulham 1-2 Nottm Forest, Huddersfield 0-2 Reading, Hull 1-3 Bristol City, Middlesbrough 1-1 Millwall, Preston 2-1 Sheff Wed, QPR 3-1 Wigan, Stoke 0-3 Leed The top of the third tier could not be closer, with no fewer than five teams level on 11 points, and sixth-placed Fleetwood, who beat Accrington 2-0, on 10 points. Leading on goal difference are Ipswich, having shown no mercy to managerless, troubled Bolton. The Trotters were again forced to field a highly youthful team and were playing in front of the lowest league crowd in the 22-year history of their current stadium. James Norwood and Kayden Jackson both scored twice for Town, with Gwion Edwards getting the other. Blackpool blew the chance to be top after drawing 0-0 at Rochdale. The thriller of the day came in third-placed Wycombe’s 4-3 defeat of Southend. Goals in the 89th and 90th minute from Anthony Stewart and Scott Kashket, respectively, took the three points. Southend no points, with only crisis clubs Bolton and Bury below them. Chris Maguire scored all three goals in a 3-1 win for Sunderland against AFC Wimbledon, to land a third successive win. And completing that leading quintet are Coventry, who beat Gillingham 1-0. Doncaster 2-1 Lincoln, Bolton 0-5 Ipswich, Bristol Rovers 3-1 Oxford, Coventry 1-0 Gillingham, Fleetwood 2-0 Accrington, MK Dons 0-4 Peterborough, Rochdale 0-0 Blackpool, Shrewsbury 0-0 Burton, Sunderland 3-1 Wimbledon, Wycombe 4-3 Southend There is a distinct West Country flavour to the promotion positions. A 3-2 win for Exeter at Morecambe, the winner coming via Nicky Law, kept them top, above Devon rivals Plymouth, who beat Walsall 3-0, with Ryan Taylor scoring twice. His first gave Argyle an early lead, only for a 69-minute wait for Antoni Sarcevic to score the second … before he was sent off. Forest Green are third after late drama at Bradford. Joseph Mills headed the winner in the third minute of added time, and his brother, Matt Mills, was dismissed five minutes later after a second bookable offence. Daryl McMahon celebrated his first win as Macclesfield manager after Joe Ironside’s goal secured a 1-0 defeat of rock-bottom Scunthorpe. Macc are in fourth. Bradford City 0-1 Forest Green, Cambridge 1-2 Oldham, Carlisle 2-2 Salford, Cheltenham 2-2 Swindon, Colchester 1-0 Northampton, Grimsby 5-2 Port Vale, Leyton Orient 2-3 Crawley, Macclesfield 1-0 Scunthorpe, Mansfield 0-0 Stevenage, Morecambe 2-3 Exeter, Newport 1-0 Crewe, Plymouth 3-0 Walsall