Liverpool face an anxious wait to discover the extent of the calf injury that forced Alisson out of their opening Premier League win over Norwich with Jürgen Klopp desperately short of cover for the influential Brazil international. Alisson was helped off during the 4-1 victory at Anfield after damaging his calf while taking a goal kick in the first half. Klopp confirmed the £65m keeper will miss Wednesday’s Uefa Super Cup final against Chelsea in Istanbul but must wait on the results of a scan on Saturday before discovering how long his first-choice keeper will be on the sidelines. The Liverpool manager said: “There is nothing negative to say about the game except for Ali’s injury. That is not good for us, but we have to see how serious it is and then we have to deal with it. It is the calf. He couldn’t carry on and that is not a good sign. He will not play on Wednesday, I can say that already with all my experience. A tear? Maybe but you cannot say that without the scan. He is injured for sure. We have to see how much.” Alisson was replaced by recent signing Adrián in the Liverpool goal but with young goalkeepers Caoimhin Kelleher and Vitezslav Jaros both injured, the former West Ham player is Klopp’s only available option at present. Former Bolton keeper Andy Lonergan joined Liverpool on their pre-season tour of the United States and Liverpool may be forced to look for a free agent depending on the length of Alisson’s absence. Klopp added: “Kelleher broke his hand and is back in training but is not 100%. Varos had an elbow injury. We are a bit short. Adrián is a very confident guy. He didn’t want to sit only on the bench for the next couple of years. He made himself ready but in a situation like this you want someone who has played the league, is ready, a calm guy good with his feet which is really important for us. But we don’t want a situation where one goalie is fit.” The Liverpool manager, however, was otherwise satisfied with his team’s performance on the opening night of the new Premier League season. “If someone had said before the game we would have won 4-1 I would have taken it easily,” he added. “And that we would have played the first 60 minutes like we did I would have taken it. We played an opponent who will cause problems, the way they play is really good. They are cheeky as hell.”