Johnson’s “It’s just about a Queen’s speech” is as insulting as “We just came to look at Salisbury cathedral”.Kath HowardTelford, Shropshire • Heartbreaking. Pure Caravaggio. Aesthetic delight. Moral dilemma (Eyewitness, 30 August).Polly DevlinLondon • Margaret Sargent (Letters, 29 August) asks if somebody could define democracy for her. Is a country where 90% of the press is rightwing truly a democracy?Barry NormanLeeds • Over recent years I’ve kept calm and let it pass when you youngsters at the Guardian first published a photo of John Entwistle of the Who and said it was Pete Townshend; then pictured a Vespa and called it a Lambretta. But… Oh no… a photo of the Kinks where you give three out of four of them the wrong names (Brothers are talking again and working on new songs, 28 August). Guardian: You really got me goin’ now!Alan Broughton (70-year-old mod)Salford, Greater Manchester • One of the greatest innings must be Gordon Greenidge’s in 1984 at Lord’s (Letters, 30 August). With the West Indies facing an almost impossible 342 to win, he scored 214 not out to enable them to beat England.David Waldman Cambridge • Good to see that the notice “No pies are left in this vehicle overnight” has spread as far south as Cheshire (Letters, 29 August). The sticker started years ago and still is common in the pie centre of the world, Wigan. Ian Winstanley Wigan • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.