Josh Hazlewood fancies England will take time to recover from the scars of their 67 all out Headingley horror show as Australia now look to finish them off and retain the Ashes with two Tests to spare. Hazlewood was part of the touring side that was bowled out for 60 on the first morning at Trent Bridge four years ago but can now look back on figures of five for 30 that helped roll England for their lowest Ashes total since being 52 all out in Don Bradman’s last Test at the Oval in 1948. And so while Graham Thorpe, England’s batting coach, was trying to remain upbeat in the aftermath of his side’s devastating morning, claiming a target of 330 may still be achievable, Hazlewood believes the psychological damage is already done. He said: “I guess we might be starting with a few scars there. I mean, 60-odd is hard work to come back from during a Test. I don’t think many teams are winning from there. It makes it difficult, so if we start well again next innings, they might think here we go again. So it’s about creating that doubt in the mind. The way we have gone about it, it’s not letting the foot off now. It’s to keep going.” Hazlewood said that, despite England disintegrating in 27.5 overs, it almost did not feel like a collapse because the scoreboard was so stagnant. This has been Australia’s plan all series, to stay patient and disciplined with their lines and prey on impatience from the hosts. Australia have also successfully suppressed Joe Root’s output, with the England captain now reflecting on successive ducks in the series after Hazlewood angled the ball in, extracted a smidgeon of away movement and an edge gave David Warner the second of four catches for the innings at slip. “I certainly like him in there as early as possible,” Hazlewood replied, when asked about Root’s move to No 3 this series. “He’s the captain, he’s got the best average, he’s their best batsman going by numbers. So if we can get him I think they can be vulnerable at times. It’s the same as any other team – if their best batter’s out you feel a bit more relaxed about your business.” On sitting in and waiting for errors from England’s batsmen, he added: “That’s probably the general plan. They’re all great one-day cricketers, some are great Test cricketers, so I think they love to feel bat on ball, especially through that middle order. So if we can dry up the runs and force a mistake, which we saw a couple of today, then that’s fantastic.” As well as confirming Jofra Archer is OK after a bout of cramp in the evening session, with the match situation still live Thorpe held off from letting rip about his charges beyond concessions about “poor shot selection” and being “exposed”. There have been three successful run chases at Headingley north of 300 runs, the highest being the 404 for three by a Bradman-inspired Australia in 1948, and the most recent being West Indies knocking off 322 two years ago thanks to twin centuries in the match from Shai Hope. Australia’s lead sits at 283 with four wickets remaining, but with England having now been bowled out for less than 100 four times in the last 18 months, Thorpe’s suggestion that “a few of our lads can do something special” felt hugely optimistic. Since Root made his debut in 2012, Haseeb Hameed remains the only other specialist batsman to come in to the England side and average over 40. During the morning session, as the wickets were tumbling, Lancashire announced the opener was being released at the end of the season after three years of flatlining scores.