The year 1911 was a vintage one for opera. Bartók composed Bluebeard’s Castle, Strauss’s Der Rosenkavalier and Ravel’s L’Heure Espagnole made their debuts. All three are now repertory fixtures. The same can’t be said for Treemonisha, another work that premiered in 1911 and one of the rarities at this year’s ever-resourceful Grimeborn, a musical theatre and opera festival in east London. This three-acter is by Scott Joplin, the self-styled king of ragtime, and it was his second attempt in the genre. He called his first a ragtime opera, and its score is sadly lost, but in Treemonisha Joplin wanted to show his credentials as a serious composer in a European vein, even writing his own libretto in a gesture to Richard Wagner. Treemonisha is a long way from Bayreuth. Its touches of Wagnerian harmony mingle with middle-period Verdi, perhaps a dash of Schubert, plenty of Tin Pan Alley and, inevitably, explosions of ragtime. In the Spectra Ensemble’s reduction for Grimeborn, we get none of the symphonic heft Joplin was so keen to exploit. But there were excellent performances by the six musicians, led by flautist and music director Matthew Lynch. Berginald Rash’s clarinet playing was especially stylish. The singing was mixed. Joplin’s solo lines are surprisingly angular and, aside from a few strophic numbers, often bitty – hard to pull off without more luxurious orchestral support. Nevertheless, Grace Nyandoro as Treemonisha was a sweetly reluctant heroine, all hand-wringing and lip-pursing, her soprano metallic and hyper-focused, as she survives abduction to demonstrate the value of education. Caroline Modiba made a classy turn as her friend Lucy, her mezzo even and beautifully creamy. As her parents, Rodney Earl Clarke and Samantha Houston were dramatically effective. Tenor Edwin Cotton’s hero Remus was energetic if strained in the higher reaches, while Njabulo Madlala’s Zodzetrick boasted vocal weight that was lacking elsewhere and made for a persuasive villain. The best of the lot was the four-piece chorus. Their voices blended seamlessly and they danced with utter commitment, breathing life into Cecilia Stinton’s economical production and Joplin’s often pedestrian libretto – and offering a glimpse of how vibrant the opera might be if staged on a grander scale. • Treemonisha is at the Arcola, London, until 31 August. Grimeborn festival runs until 7 September.