How do you respond to this statement by the social scientist Jem Bendell: “We should be preparing for a social collapse … an uneven ending of our normal modes of sustenance, security, pleasure, identity, meaning and hope”? If you’re anything like me, your first reaction will be to stop reading. I did that numerous times before I got to the end of This Is Not a Drill; I had to put it down, walk away, take a breath, make it stop. But like it or not, there is something bracing and necessary about facing our current reality. Extinction Rebellion’s handbook is a collection of pithy, punchy essays designed to shake us out of our collective despair-induced lethargy. Authored by various thinkers from scientists to psychologists, artists to indigenous activists, it provides a devastating diagnosis: “We are in the sixth mass extinction event and we will face catastrophe if we do not act swiftly and robustly.” Crucially, the book also provides the beginnings of a prescription. The psychotherapist Susie Orbach writes about how we need to confront our feelings of despair, sorrow and rage. That is no easy task, but once we tell ourselves the truth, political action is inevitable. Roger Hallam explains how Extinction Rebellion’s founders studied previous uprisings in order to come up with a formula for achieving radical system change. Their conclusions were that conventional campaigning doesn’t work, and neither does violence. Large numbers of people need to create significant economic disruption. And they need to break the law. While there are some simple instructions here – how to block a road, how to occupy a bridge, how to feed a protest – this is much more than just a handbook. It’s a wide-ranging, thought-provoking analysis of the task facing us, which is nothing less than a paradigm shift. We have to learn new ways to live, making more from less, and acknowledging that there are only collective solutions to our current problems. And we have to do it fast. It’s a huge challenge, and it may well be an impossible one. But the message here is that, even if we can’t escape its consequences, it is not too late to escape the mindset that brought us here. After all, as Rowan Williams writes in his luminous afterword, “It might just work.” • This Is Not a Drill is published by Penguin (£7.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.