I am so depressed to hear that children are going hungry during the summer holidays due to poverty and the lack of free school meals (How holiday hunger clubs are being starved of cash, Society, 14 August). Giving to food banks is, of course, helpful but I imagine not everyone affected in this way would meet the criteria for emergency food parcels. What more can be done while we await the return of a Labour government that would do more for this group in need than the current group of self-serving, out-of-touch undesirables? I think football clubs (Premiership and Championship to start with) should step up. They are often positioned in areas of deprivation, they are not utilised fully for half the summer, they have lots of money, they have lots of large rooms, access to catering staff already trained in food prep and safety, good car parks or transport links and are always saying they want to give something back. And while they are at it, see if any of the players would don an apron, serve the sandwiches or offer a day’s pay towards costs (whichever is easier). If you are wealthy, please give to any charity helping children in poverty – what an amazing privilege to be able to help.Lisa HolcroftSolihull, West Midlands • I work for a local infrastructure charity that supports voluntary and community organisations in Newcastle and Gateshead. Both local areas have been “successful” with their holiday hunger bids, and a number of the schemes are delivered by our members. But how is it that we have come to normalise food poverty? Why should a working family not be able to afford to buy bread? Why should hard-pressed local councils (losing 60% of their central government funding from 2010-20) be forced to compete against each other for temporary funds? Why should children go hungry in school holidays? Why is it acceptable for supermarkets to have food bank collection points, for food that we buy from them? Why do we accept many young women can’t afford sanitary protection? For the last nine years we have endured austerity, poverty and increasing inequalities, and the retraction of the state. Is this where we want to be on 1 November 2019? Answers on a postcard to 10 Downing Street.Sally YoungChief executive, Newcastle Council for Voluntary Service • There remains far too much unmet need (be it for food, childcare or other support services) among families during school holidays. Two years ago, I led a cross-party group of MPs in drafting legislation, based on what we had learned from the Feeding Britain programme, which would enshrine in government policy a commitment to meet that need in its entirety. It was at this point that we gained an initial series of trials, backed up by £11m from the Department for Education, to find out the most effective means of honouring that commitment. The education secretary, Gavin Williamson, seems alert to just how great a need exists, especially in deprived areas. Almost immediately after his appointment, he visited a summer holiday project in Leeds and asked if we could meet to discuss the kind of longer-term programme he should be driving through on this front, to close the gaps that are opened up by the evil of “holiday hunger” in children’s nutrition, behaviour and attainment. When we do meet, I’ll be presenting him with a blueprint for a comprehensive programme that is backed up with sufficient funds and will deliver the results that are expected by the taxpayer: a major equalisation of children’s life chances.Frank Field MPHouse of Commons • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition