It is one of rugby’s truisms that the best teams virtually pick themselves. England’s World Cup yardstick remains the all-conquering 2003 vintage, so good even the lion-hearted Graham Rowntree and Simon Shaw could not make the original squad. The 30-strong cast assembled by Clive Woodward, not yet knighted, was packed with class and experience and embarked for Australia more in expectation than hope. Sixteen years on Eddie Jones has 31 slots to play with but there is not the same air of settled conviction heading towards Japan. Four years of sorting hat selections will finally draw to a close at a suburban Bristol secondary school on Monday without, in two or three areas, having removed question marks that have existed from the outset. Is that Jones’s fault? He would argue those left behind should have forced his hand long ago. The upshot will be a list that, while strong on paper, still prompts some wishful thinking. If Danny Cipriani and Alex Goode, the respective domestic and European players of the 2018-19 season, cannot make the cut, is the management truly maximising its resources? If Dylan Hartley, Chris Robshaw and Mike Brown are now deemed too old, why were they retained for so long? If big open-field runners such as Nathan Hughes and Alex Dombrandt are surplus beef, how many ball-carrying English back-rowers will rampage over the gainline against quality opposition if Billy Vunipola is not involved? The answers have been the same ever since Jones took charge. Eddie has a plan and anyone who does not absolutely fit that mould is yesterday’s sushi. Given he guided the Wallabies to the 2003 final, helped South Africa win the 2007 tournament as a consultant and masterminded Japan’s stunning win over South Africa in 2015, he has a reasonable track record of getting it right. Experience has certainly taught him a shortcut or two. In both his previous incarnations as a World Cup coach, with Australia and then Japan, he insisted on picking only two scrum-halves and looks set to do the same this time. It makes Ben Youngs suddenly the most important player in his 31; heaven forbid if the Leicester scrum-half is injured and leaves England gunning for a World Cup with barely a fig leaf of international No 9 experience. Hence the 11th hour rise of Gloucester’s 32-year-old Willi Heinz, the latest of approximately 57 varieties of scrum-half whom Jones has been considering. If the mature Heinz was an absolute world-beater, however, he would have been capped by his native New Zealand long ago. As it is, on the strength of a granny from Bishop’s Waltham, the Cherry and Whites captain is on the verge of edging past Saracens’ Ben Spencer and the veteran Richard Wigglesworth. England’s main pool opponents will not be overly familiar with him but, then again, neither will many of his teammates. Elsewhere it is the perennial numbers game. New Zealand have won the past two World Cups and, on each occasion, have set off with three hookers and four props. Given Mako Vunipola’s injury record this year and Ellis Genge’s streak of unpredictability, however, England seem more likely to travel with three looseheads and two tightheads, with Dan Cole and Harry Williams scrapping over the final berth. Thirteen backs and 18 forwards would also make sense, with team officials insisting Ben Te’o’s omission from Sunday’s game against Wales at Twickenham is nothing sinister. The 1999 World Cup winning coach, Jones’s compatriot Rod Macqueen, always stressed the importance of picking the right player for a position, rather than shoehorning people into the nearest available shirt. If Jones still wants England to play like the England of popular imagination – powerful up front, no nonsense and pacy behind – it should make Te’o a shoo-in. Suddenly, though, the much-travelled British Lion is in danger of losing out to Northampton’s Piers Francis, chosen to start at 12 this weekend. Good luck to the hard-working Francis, formerly of Auckland Blues, but if Jones suddenly wants an extra midfield kicking option and does not see Henry Slade as an emergency third fly-half why not pick Alex Lozowski? How ironic it would be if the world’s most decisive coach drifts into the same kind of selectorial fog that ultimately undid his predecessor, Stuart Lancaster. Had Lancaster had Dylan Hartley and a fit Manu Tuilagi available in 2015 history might just have panned out very differently; as it was, Sam Burgess’s inclusion divided opinion inside and outside the squad and the team fell through the resulting cracks. Four years on, England still do not appear totally sure about their best midfield combination, their best full-back, their optimum back-row balance or their scrum-half pecking order? It is a longer list than it should be. So how does Jones turn a potentially decent squad into something genuinely intimidating? The answer may just be staring everyone in the face. Maro Itoje starred for Saracens as a No 6 in their double-winning end-of-season surge: he could easily be deployed there for country as well as club. England’s early pool games will come thick and fast in Japan and, with Brad Shields’s fitness still uncertain, some proper back-row backup is required for Tom Curry and Sam Underhill. Another option would be to play the latter pair together, as this weekend. Against certain types of opposition, though, Itoje on the blindside would offer a different dimension. An England starting pack of M Vunipola, George, Sinckler, Lawes, Kruis, Itoje, Curry and B Vunipola would certainly pack a punch and threaten in the lineout. That scenario may yet offer Bath’s Charlie Ewels an unexpected shot as an extra lock, with Lewis Ludlam standing by if Shields fails to make it. Cole’s 85 caps may just allow him to go to a third World Cup, while Ruaridh McConnochie is the next cab off the rank should Jack Nowell’s recovery falter. As with Heinz, few would have foreseen that six months ago. It gives England a faint air of mystery that will not bother Jones in the slightest. Ultimately no one yet knows precisely how good his squad will be. One other classic rule of thumb is that a World Cup-winning side needs five or six undisputed world-class players. England have Itoje, Owen Farrell and a brace of Vunipolas, with the giant Joe Cokanasiga and Tuilagi as possible contenders. Is that enough? The final pieces of Jones’s squad jigsaw will slot into place on Monday but there remains a bigger picture to consider. Hookers Luke Cowan-Dickie, Jamie George, Jack Singleton. Props Dan Cole, Ellis Genge, Joe Marler, Kyle Sinckler, Mako Vunipola. Second-rows Charlie Ewels, Maro Itoje, George Kruis, Joe Launchbury, Courtney Lawes. Back-rows Brad Shields, Tom Curry, Sam Underhill, Mark Wilson, Billy Vunipola. Scrum-halves Ben Youngs, Willi Heinz. Fly-halves Owen Farrell, George Ford. Centres Piers Francis, Manu Tuilagi, Jonathan Joseph, Henry Slade. Back three Jonny May, Jack Nowell, Joe Cokanasiga, Elliot Daly, Anthony Watson. On injury standby Lewis Ludlam, Ruaridh McConnochie.