In the preface to The Audience, his play about the Queen’s meetings with her many prime ministers, Peter Morgan reflects that these encounters lie at the very heart of “the British constitution, the bone structure of our establishment in its most elemental form”. As apposite as this metaphor is, it should also remind us that even the strongest bones can be bruised or fractured. And, according to reports in the Sunday Times, Her Majesty has indeed had it up to here with our politicians. According to one source: “I think she’s really dismayed. I’ve heard her talking about her disappointment in the current political class and its inability to govern correctly.” At a private event held shortly after David Cameron’s resignation in 2016, she reportedly “expressed her resignation and frustration about the quality of our political leadership, and that frustration will only have grown”. If there is to be a constitutional crisis this autumn, it is much more likely to involve the courts than the palace What is happening here? First of all, those around the Queen – acting without explicit authorisation, of course, but in keeping with what they believe her private wishes to be – are seeking to reassure the public that, in the jargon of modern politics, she “gets it”. The resilience of the monarchy depends utterly upon its mostly silent understanding with the people. Evidently, at least some of the Queen’s courtiers and confidants have concluded that the time has come to send a signal – officially deniable, of course – that she shares the voters’ frustrations. This is also a shot across Boris Johnson’s bows, and a royal stink bomb thrown into his study reminding him that he should not take for granted a monarch who has reigned for 67 years. What it is not – and this cannot be stressed enough – is an explicit threat of escalation. I keep reading that the Queen may, in the weeks ahead, be “dragged into a constitutional crisis” if, as is now entirely conceivable, Johnson is forced under the complex terms of the 2011 Fixed-term Parliaments Act to hold a general election – but seeks to delay polling day until after a no-deal Brexit on 31 October. The remainer fantasy – turbocharged by Claire Foy’s performance in the first two seasons of The Crown – is that the Queen would send Johnson packing if he made this request. But it is no more than a fantasy. In practice, the monarch’s personal constitutional powers – as opposed to the extensive crown prerogatives delegated to her ministers – are minimal. And the instances in which they have been exercised are vanishingly rare. In 1910-11, for instance, Edward VII and George V had to decide whether or not to agree in advance to swamping the House of Lords with new peers if the upper house refused to pass HH Asquith’s bill limiting its powers. In 1931, George V also played a personal part in the creation of the National government. Thirty-two years later, the Queen decided to follow Harold Macmillan’s advice that the Conservative party wanted Lord Home as his successor rather than RA Butler. The last instance rather makes the point that, even in the most controversial circumstances, the monarch will accept the prime minister’s recommendations. Yes, it is clear from what Johnson’s predecessors have said about the Queen’s robust candour that she is more than capable of asking her novice prime minister the following: would it not be a little odd for an election about Brexit, triggered by the collapse of MPs’ confidence in the government’s ability to handle Brexit, and dominated by his readiness to pursue a no-deal Brexit, to be held after Brexit had taken place? One can imagine his blushes and splutterings. But if he stood his ground – which he would, however oleaginously – it is as close to unthinkable as it gets that she would deny him his request. No, if there is to be a constitutional crisis this autumn, it is more likely to involve the courts than the palace. Assume that Johnson does lose a vote of confidence on or around 3 September: this would trigger parliamentary mayhem for 14 days, as the prime minister, Jeremy Corbyn and others sought to build a new majority. Any MP who could command such support in the Commons would be entitled to ask to form a government. But – if the present relationships between the different non-Conservative forces in parliament are any guide – the chances of this are a big fat zero. The final recourse would be to seek a judicial review of Johnson’s subsequent recommendation to the Queen (assuming he was unable to regain the confidence of the Commons within 14 days) of a polling day after 31 October. Such an application would lean heavily on the general election guidance issued to civil servants, and particularly the rule that “decisions on matters of policy on which a new government might be expected to ... take a different view from the present government should be postponed until after the election, provided that such postponement would not be detrimental to the national interest or wasteful of public money”. In the final qualifying clause you can already see how the government would fight back (“a swift Brexit is in the national interest”). But the appellant would also invoke the principles of equity once championed by Lord Denning: namely that that the courts had a duty to prevent the absurdity of an election being postponed until the central issue at stake had been irreversibly settled. The judiciary, formerly vilified as “enemies of the people”, would now be asked to be their most resolute friends. The whole constitution would be on trial. Indeed, it already is. That groaning you can hear is the sound of an ancient skeleton, subject to new and grievous pressures. Get used to it. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist