For most of the 20th century J Lyons & Co Ltd lodged at the heart of Britain’s social imagination. From the 1920s you could pop into a Lyons tea shop to be served by a “nippy”, a light-footed waitress got up like a parlourmaid. If you were a working girl of the newest and nicest variety – a secretary, teacher or shop assistant – you could eat an express lunch on your own in a Lyons without risking your respectability. If you were feeling particularly smart, you could go up to “town” and stay in the art deco-ish Strand Palace or Regent’s Palace hotels, vernacular versions of elite institutions such as Claridge’s or The Savoy. In the evening you might venture out to the “Troc”, or Trocadero, in your best togs, where you could enjoy a fancy dinner and dance to a jazz band. Back home, the stream of comforts continued as you sat down with a cup of Lyons tea while your children might get a Mivvi, a sumptuous ice-cream-lolly hybrid. Customers liked knowing that the firm that provided them with so many reliable treats was run by a family, although exactly who that family was and where it came from remained hazy. The name subliminally suggested “lion” and therefore something enduringly, heraldically British. Nothing could be further from the truth. Jo Lyons was connected to the Salmon & Gluckstein dynasty whose founder had arrived in Whitechapel from Prussia via Belgium in 1843. “Lyons” rolled off the tongue better than Gluckstein or even Salmon and it also kept the two sides of the business sounding separate, in case the risky move from cigars to mass catering crashed and burned. As well as muffling the firm’s Jewish origins, “Lyons” covertly signposted its imperial reach: agents for the company scoured the American south for the best-priced tobacco and the Indian subcontinent for the tenderest tea, and took inspiration from Europe’s smartest pastry counters, before metabolising these far-flung raw materials into a brand that felt as British as a rainy afternoon in Piccadilly. Commentators would hint that the Lyons dynasty was run by sticky-fingered immigrants who put Mammon above British values. Life at Lyons Corner House wasn’t all knickerbocker glories and ladies’ fingers though. In this satisfying slab of dynastic history, Thomas Harding draws attention to the way that the family business formed and conducted itself against successive spasms of racial hatred. The original crisis that had propelled 22-year-old Samuel Gluckstein from Antwerp into London’s East End had all the hallmarks of a setup: he had been accused of swindling, that old smear of antisemites everywhere. Whitechapel proved only marginally more congenial. There may not have been pogroms, but wild fantasies about blood libel still lingered: members of the extended clan were still living there in 1888 when rumours circulated that Jack the Ripper was a demonic Jew intent on the ritual slaughter of Christian women. Things got even worse in the next century with Oswald Mosley and his louts, not to mention the terror of knowing that at least one member of the now-prominent Salmon & Gluckstein family was on Hitler’s infamous list of undesirables to be rounded up the moment German boots landed at Dover. Most insidious of all was the dog-whistle racism that appeared in the press every time some bit of the company was caught up in a little local difficulty – a strike, an accounting mishap, trouble with apprentices. Commentators always managed to hint that the Lyons dynasty was run by sticky-fingered immigrants who put Mammon above human, which is to say British, values. Naturally, the family redoubled its efforts to show that it was as patriotic as a nicely buttered scone. The Salmon & Gluckstein commitment to Britishness reached its apogee during the second world war when it turned its attention from biscuits to bombs: a seventh of all the explosives dropped by the allies came from the Lyons munitions factory at Elstow in Bedfordshire. Individual family members, meanwhile, progressed to the highest levels of public service by shedding cockney accents, acquiring university degrees and becoming Conservative MPs and knights of the realm. Harding, who is himself a scion of the family, reminds us of all the notable figures who have sprung from the same stock: Sir Keith Joseph, Nigella Lawson, Fiona Shackleton and George Monbiot, in addition to high court judges, physicians and scientists. The only person who sticks out in this story is the painter Gluck, AKA Hannah Gluckstein. It wasn’t her queer art that upset the family so much as the way that Hannah wore a three-piece suit and insisted on being addressed as Peter. What also added to Gluck’s alienation was that she had no direct access to her share of the family fortune. According to the original trust set up in the 1870s, female family members would be taken care of through dowries, pensions and allowances, but could never insist on anything approaching a birthright. Despite episodic rumblings, this arrangement lumbered on until the late 1980s when the trust finally agreed to a visit from a young female psychologist from the Tavistock Clinic to help it sort out its complicated feelings about how love and money hung together. By this time, anyway, the millions were dwindling. For the last 20 years Lyons had been obliged to sell off bits of its business. Nestlé got the Mivvis, Allied took the tea, Trust House Forte acquired the keys to the hotels. At points like this in Harding’s narrative it’s hard not to feel as if one is being asked to plough through a particularly doomy shareholders’ report. But such longueurs are a small price to pay for this mostly brisk, accessible account of how one Anglo-Jewish dynasty provided 20th-century Britain with the materials it required to imagine itself fondly as a land of cosy comfort. • Legacy by Thomas Harding is published by Heinemann (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.