It was an unwritten law of postwar Britain that all large parks should contain a commissioned Henry Moore sculpture and, as chance would have it, Sandettie Light Vessel Automatic – a gathering of new poet laureate Simon Armitage’s own bulging file of commissioned work – features a series of “Henry Moore Poems”. From the outset of his career Armitage’s great exemplar has been a fellow Yorkshireman – Ted Hughes – but that laureate approached the commissioned poem in a very different spirit. He rose to the challenge of hymning the Queen Mother by painting her, in Rain Charm for the Duchy, as godmother of the salmon. Armitage by contrast opens a sequence on Branwell Brontë by comparing him to Manchester United midfielder Paul Pogba. Yet the tug of tradition stays strong. A sequence of poems on the first world war gravitates rapidly to the familiar iconography of poppy and war memorial. A more successful war sequence is “The Not Dead”, inspired by veterans who had served in Malaya, Bosnia and Iraq. Among Armitage’s talents has always been his ability to set up easy-going conversational rhythms, then use them to power through difficult material, as in “The Manhunt”, where the soldier’s partner conducts a search to find the root of his post-traumatic stress disorder (“a sweating, unexploded mine / buried deep in his mind, around which // every nerve in his body had tightened and closed. / Then, and only then, did I come close”). “The poem is the cry of its occasion,” wrote Wallace Stevens, and these poems are noticeably keen to talk us through the occasions, whether in the copious endnotes or within their own text. An Ian Hamilton Finlay commission for an inscribed poem might have resulted in a boulder with a single word on it, but Armitage’s “In Memory of Water” comes with a prose introduction explaining where the inscribed rocks are, a post-project essay, and a postscript recounting the destruction of one of the stones during a flood. The poems previously published in Walking Home and Walking Away contain some of the sharpest landscape writing here, with clear echoes of Hughes’s Remains of Elmet, but hemmed in again with travelogue prose, carefully orienting the reader even as the poet himself gets lost. The final stretch of this book contains some of its strongest work. The sequence “Flit” is inspired by a fictional flight from Britain in 2017 and relocation in the equally fictional European state of Ysp, where the poet takes up residency in a former leprosy hospital and translates the work of the Yspian national bard “HK”. There is a long tradition of modern poets throwing their voices by way of fake translations – Christopher Reid’s Katerina Brac makes a cameo appearance here – but Armitage reinvigorates the genre with gusto. The Yspian poems abound in social comedy (the poet who retired from a lifetime of versifying “and ploughed the profits // into a family restaurant”, a mock telephone interview with David Bowie), and at times the line is blurred between parody and a breakthrough into something more unexpected and unnerving. Set on the south coast, the final poem, “The Brink”, addresses Britain’s relationship with Europe and, sure enough, finds some topical things to say (“on a clear day they say you can see Brexit from here”). The pleasures and perils of topicality will be the rapids that Armitage the laureate poet must ride. One of his greatest strengths – his cascading facility – will become the bane of his life, if he accepts even a portion of the invitations heading towards his inbox. Has the laureateship helped even a single incumbent to do their best work? For all too many it has proved a “gaping nought”, in the words of one of Armitage’s first world war poems. What should save Armitage is his adaptability, resourcefulness and fun. The poems of Sandettie Light Vessel Automatic (a North Sea lightvessel, in case you were wondering) possess these qualities in auspicious amounts. A rail passenger in “The Brink” is told “You’re keeping your baggage with you at all times”, but if Armitage travels as light as he does in the best poems here, his tenure as laureate promises to be an interesting one. • Sandettie Light Vessel Automatic is published by Faber (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.