They were there for him. Jürgen Klopp, the manager of Liverpool, has credited Ross, Rachel, Phoebe, Monica, Joey and Chandler with teaching him English. Watching the long-running sitcom Friends helped him bridge the gaps in his language comprehension, he told BBC Radio 5 Live’s Football Daily podcast on Wednesday. “The easiest to follow for Germans in English is Friends. It’s easy conversation. You can understand pretty much each word, pretty early,” he said. Friends is, in fact, a time-honoured English teacher. Both Luis Severino of the New York Yankees baseball team, who is from the Dominican Republic, and the Venezuelan Wilmer Flores, formerly of the rival Mets, have spoken about learning colloquial language from the show. (Flores, who has said he watches Friends almost daily, even changed his walk-up music to the theme tune by the Rembrandts.) Rap Monster, AKA RM, a member of the Korean boyband BTS, has said Friends is widely used by mothers in South Korea to encourage their children’s interest in English, “even when they were eating food or playing”. He estimates that he had watched all 10 seasons at least five times, studying not only the cast’s language, but also their gestures and expressions, so as to know how to communicate American emotion. He concluded: “God bless Friends!” Any language teacher will tell you that exposure in as many forms as possible is the key to fluency; Klopp says he supplemented his time at Central Perk with English-language radio and films. A 2015 survey by the education publisher Pearson English found that, of the English learners surveyed, almost 60% used movies and TV shows to improve their skills, with 24% citing the Netflix political drama House of Cards as the series that helped them most. Next came Breaking Bad (24%) and Downton Abbey (19%). Arsenal’s Basque coach Unai Emery opts for Peaky Blinders: “It is good, but it is difficult [to understand people] from Birmingham. And it’s aggressive. But it’s good,” he says. But polling undertaken in 2012 by a leading English school, Kaplan International English, revealed Friends to be by far the most popular show with its English learners, pointing to its international syndication, catchphrases and “comedy exploits”. Jeff Astrof, an executive story editor of Friends who also wrote for several episodes, has said he was not surprised by the finding: “In New York, I had a cab driver of Middle Eastern descent say: ‘Could there be any more traffic?’ in his best Chandler dialect.” The research also found that people who said Friends helped them learn English were more likely to want to travel to the US to study the language. YouTube is replete with educational videos such as “Learn English with Friends”. The Vietnamese English learning platform eJOY praises the show’s “many scenes of daily life” and its relatable characters: Rachel, “the daughter of a businessman”; Joey, “the actor with an attractive voice”; “9-to-5 guy” Chandler; Monica, the “charismatic chef”; “mystery singer” Phoebe; and Ross. The company suggests that learners “practise speaking like your favourite character”, and cites specific episodes from which to learn how to use “nice to meet you” (The One With Chandler’s Work Laugh); “have second thoughts” (The One Where Ross and Rachel Take A Break), and “go out” (The One With Rachel’s Inadvertent Kiss). English learner platforms seem to largely sit out the contemporary debate over whether the sitcom is sexist, homophobic or otherwise problematic – but at least Klopp seems conscious of the characters’ shortcomings. Asked by the BBC which of the three male leads of Friends he most identified with, Klopp said: “No. No. No, no, no. No no no.” After a long pause, he said: “I liked the girls more than the boys,” and laughed heartily. He settled on being “a bit smarter than Joey – but my talk with girls was never as good as his”. Then Klopp added, as though well-rehearsed, in his heavy German accent: “How YOU doin’?”