Last Thursday, as water rushed over the dam wall holding back the Toddbrook reservoir, a lone Canal & River Trust employee fought against the deluge, desperately trying to lower the water level. Heavy rain had led to an excess of water cascading over the spillway above the town of Whaley Bridge in the Peak District. This would not normally be an issue, but as the torrent continued the spillway started to erode and concrete ballasts began to rip away. Barry Rudd, a volunteer with the trust, said he arrived at the dam at midday to find the employee, who has not been named “desperately trying to reduce the levels by opening the valves. He was running up and down the reservoir with a rake clearing debris and adjusting and tracking the valves but there was just so much water coming over the top it began to wash away the clay wall.” As it became apparent that 1.2m tonnes of water could engulf schools, homes and businesses in the town below, the manager of the local bowling club, who has a direct view of the dam from his home, raised the alarm and police officers and firefighters raced to the reservoir. Engineers were soon on the scene and Toddbrook sailing club quickly became a temporary command centre. Drone footage was examined and just a few hours after the leaks were spotted, thousands of residents were evacuated from their homes. On Monday – speaking four days after the evacuation – Gavin Tomlinson, the fire incident commander, said it had been a near miss. He said: “On Thursday night it very nearly went. It was leaking and we were in a situation where we had five times as much water going in than we could take out. We absolutely thought it could fail. It was a very, very tense night.” As residents were evacuated an RAF Chinook helicopter was drafted in and began to drop hundreds of bags of sand and aggregate to shore up the slipped pieces of concrete. Since then seven tonnes of water a minute have been pumped out of the structure, built in 1831, drastically lowering the threat of flooding across the valley down towards the towns and villages of the High Peak. On a whiteboard Terry McDermott, Derbyshire’s chief fire officer, explained the operation, drawing an aerial picture of the dam, highlighting the point in the sluice channel where the water had to be let out. With only one pump available in those first crucial hours, rescue workers had to scramble to get dozens more. Meanwhile, a local civil engineering company hurriedly built a temporary road around the reservoir so they could move the pumps from the dam’s north to the south. The Chinook dropped more than 1,000 sandbags and 600 bags of aggregate to plug the hole, then concrete was poured in to seal the gap. Once the water levels had begun to drop divers were sent in to place steel tubes directing water into the channel. So far 11 steel pipe hoses, 500ft long and 12 inches in diameter, have been built into the reservoir’s edge, allowing workers to pump out about 700,000 tonnes of water in four days. Boat crews were sent in to clear debris and weeds clogging up the pipes and as water levels continued to fall, workers built floating platforms to take pumps further into the reservoir. Tomlinson said the reservoir level was now five metres below normal and workers would continue to pump out water until it fell eight metres, allowing for engineers to inspect the damage. It is understood it could take up to a year for the dam to be fully repaired and locals have begun to question whether it was properly maintained. But for now McDermott, Tomlinson and their teams are breathing a sigh of relief. “We have worked every hour since it started and only today have we started to feel like we are over the worst of it,” Tomlinson said.