Police in Malaysia have deployed a helicopter and sniffer dogs in an expanded search for a 15-year-old British girl who disappeared from her bedroom at a nature resort over the weekend. The district police chief, Mohamad Nor Marzukee Besar, said the operation to find Nora Quoirin, involving more than 150 people, resumed on Tuesday morning, with a helicopter, sniffer dogs and villagers helping in an expanded search through the dense jungle. An earlier mission ending at 3am on Tuesday found no further clues. “We also searched at night but so far, there are no new leads. The operation is ongoing,” he said, adding that further updates would be given at a news conference later. Nora’s family say they discovered her missing at the Dusun eco-resort in southern Negeri Sembilan state on Sunday morning with the window left open, and considered it a criminal matter. Police have said there were no initial signs of foul play. The parents of Nora, who has learning and developmental disabilities, are an Irish-French couple who have lived in London for about 20 years, according to the Lucie Blackman Trust, a British charity support people during a crisis overseas. Her family arrived on Saturday for a two-week trip at the Dusun, a small private resort located in a durian orchard about 63km (39 miles) south of Kuala Lumpur. Haanim Bamadhaj, a resort spokesperson, said on Tuesday the Dusun management was baffled by Nora’s disappearance. Resort staff and even some guests had joined in the search, she said. “Our resort has been operating for 10 years and we have never even been robbed. We are doing our very best and praying hard,” she said. Following Nora’s disappearance, she said some guests had cancelled their bookings and that the resort had provided full refunds. Access to the resort has been blocked due to the search operation. The girl’s parents have declined to speak to the media. Villagers who joined in the search expressed concern over Quoirin’s fate. “This particular jungle, for outsiders they don’t know how to navigate, they get lost. Natives like me, we are used to this jungle,” said Bali anak Akau.