Having enjoyed his best opening 12 races, Lewis Hamilton is in position to seal his sixth world championship with his most successful season. That the title, which will move him above Juan Manuel Fangio and behind only Michael Schumacher, is in his grasp is beyond doubt. He has already won eight races, to lead his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas by 62 points, and Hamilton usually only improves on the run-in. Last year he won four of the first five races after the summer break; nine races remain, starting with this weekend’s Belgian grand prix, and with four more victories he will have surpassed his previous best of 11 in a season. Hamilton has been explicit in insisting he is taking nothing for granted yet he is in the form of his life and motivated as never before. Closing out the championship by leaving the opposition scattered and reeling will be his target as Schumacher’s record seven titles looks eminently reachable next season. This time last year Formula One looked a world away for the London-born Thai driver Alexander Albon. Yet when racing resumes he will make his debut for Red Bull in his rookie season after only 12 F1 races. He was set to compete in Formula E’s 2018-19 season until a late call-up to Toro Rosso. He has impressed there and as Pierre Gasly fell apart at Red Bull they unexpectedly promoted the 23-year-old Albon into a race-winning car, alongside the intimidating No 1 driver, Max Verstappen. With few alternatives on offer and Red Bull desperate to have a driver to back up Verstappen at the front, a strong performance could secure Albon’s place for next season and beyond. He was impressive in coming up to speed at Toro Rosso with little preparation and the Red Bull should suit his smooth driving style. Albon has an opportunity most drivers can only dream of; how he faces the challenge will be fascinating. After a process that began soon after Liberty took over the sport in 2017, the end-of-October deadline for signing-off new regulations for 2021 looms large. Delayed once this year already, the plan devised by the director of motor sports, Ross Brawn, intended to improve the racing could not be of greater import. What is agreed will shape the sport and what has already been a tortuous process is likely to become increasingly tense as the days count down. Several midfield teams have warned the proposals are in danger of being watered down by the leading marques, who want to maintain their advantage. Equally, a new concorde agreement between competitors and Liberty has yet to be signed for 2021. Confidence in how competitive they can be under the new regulations will play a part for the smaller teams in those negotiations, with Gene Haas already warning F1 has to make sporting and financial sense if teams such as his are to remain. This is the first vital test for F1 in the Liberty era. Mercedes have swept into the distance in the constructors’ championship, 150 points clear of Ferrari, but behind them every race is vital. Ferrari are still struggling with their car and winless, while Red Bull are snapping at their heels thanks to Verstappen’s two victories. They trail the Scuderia by 44 points and the Dutchman is third, ahead of Sebastian Vettel, in the drivers’ championship. Verstappen and Red Bull clearly sense Ferrari blood in the water. The team have gone from strength to strength and if Albon can perform where Gasly failed, they could take the fight for second to the wire. Behind them McLaren are a team reborn with Lando Norris and Carlos Sainz revelling in their competitive car. They are fourth in the championship, 39 points in front of Toro Rosso and 43 in front of Renault. After the turmoil of recent years they look to be firing collectively, reminiscent of the team that once towered over the sport. Holding fourth would be their best finish since 2012 but it is far from a given; a tooth-and-nail scrap may well define the midfield run-in. Jockeying in the drivers’ market will begin in earnest when racing resumes at Spa. The decision that will likely set the dominoes in motion is whether Mercedes will drop Bottas for their protege Esteban Ocon as Hamilton’s partner. Toto Wolff, the team principal, said they would consider it over the summer and it seems likely they will announce their choice, now expected to be to stick with Bottas, at Spa. There is considerable trading still to be done, however. The Red Bull drive might yet be open should Albon not make the grade and, although highly unlikely, a return to his former team has been rumoured for Vettel, despite the German being contracted with Ferrari until the end of the 2020 season. Romain Grosjean at Haas, Antonio Giovinazzi at Alfa Romeo and Renault’s Nico Hülkenberg are all out of contract and the last of these is expected to be replaced by Ocon should Mercedes retain Bottas. Racing Point are likely to stick with Lance Stroll and Sergio Pérez, as will Williams with George Russell, but the latter will likely replace Robert Kubica with their reserve driver Nicholas Latifi. McLaren have already confirmed Norris and Sainz for next season.