Lewis Hamilton feels at the peak of his powers and has no intention of retiring soon. Having completed the most successful first half of a Formula One season in his career with a thrilling victory at the Hungarian Grand Prix, the five-times world champion is firmly on track to take another title this year. Hamilton beat Red Bull’s Max Verstappen into second place at the Hungaroring after completing a brilliantly executed race. With Mercedes taking a gamble on stopping twice, Hamilton closed down a 20-second gap to Verstappen and passed him with three laps to go. The charge was a display of ruthless, precision driving by Hamilton and secured his eighth win from 12 grands prix. “I want the second half to be even stronger than this first half,” Hamilton said. “I am 34 years old but I feel like I am driving better than ever. Hopefully on Sunday you could see I have not lost any speed.” Hamilton is in his 13th season in Formula One and has one more year on his contract with Mercedes, whom he joined in 2013 and with whom he has won four of his titles. He is two behind Michael Schumacher’s record of seven and only 10 behind his tally of race wins. He has already surpassed the German to claim the most pole positions. He has regularly faced questions about his future but in Hungary he was unequivocal that he was in the form of his life and believed there was more to come. “One day I will have to stop but right now I feel fantastic, physically and mentally,” he said. “I don’t have any plans on stopping anytime soon – there is more to do, more to win, more to achieve together inside and outside the car. “It’s been a phenomenal journey. We had our first win in Hungary together in 2013 and we have gone from strength to strength. The majority of the people are still here from when I joined the team. This journey had been remarkable, now I am excited to see what more we could do together.” Mercedes’ strategy at the Hungaroring proved inspired and capped a strong comeback after they had performed poorly at the previous race in Germany. They have been dominant this season, winning 10 of the 12 grands prix before the summer break. Only Red Bull have denied them, with Verstappen taking victory in Austria and Germany. Hamilton leads the drivers’ championship by 62 points from his teammate Valtteri Bottas, with Verstappen seven points further back. When asked to rate his performances this season out of 10, he delivered a considered assessment of “8.9/8.8”. He said Mercedes are constantly striving for more and, ominously for their rivals, expected improvement when racing resumes at Spa on 1 September. “I don’t believe we are ever complacent, we always arrive with the same mentality,” he said. “We have had all this success but everyone continues to work just as hard. No one is better than the other, we all lift each other up. “These eight wins in the first half of the season is obviously exceptional. I look at those races and I think: ‘Eight out of 12, there are still some missing, how did we miss those ones? How were we not perfect those weekends?’ “We have to continue to arrive and deliver as we have but we are not perfect by far. We still have areas where we can continue to improve.”