To try and win the lottery, Rebecca Biscuit and Louise Mothersole paid a witch to sell their soul to Satan. “It went really well,” Mothersole says drily as she lolls across the sofa in a room at Summerhall, their Edinburgh fringe venue, with a half-empty bottle of spiced Caribbean rum at her side. “We didn’t win, but she was great.” They offered Satan 25% of their audience applause. “She said that’s good,” Biscuit says, splayed on the other sofa with her dog, Nala, curled across her stomach, “she said he’ll like that.” Better known as intrepid live art company Sh!t Theatre, Biscuit and Mothersole join me after their new show, Sh!t Theatre Drink Rum With Expats, to drink some more rum. The performance they originally planned was about the lottery. They had an hour’s worth of content, a human-sized hamster wheel and the deal with the devil all set. Then they went to Malta and got norovirus – and very distracted. The last time I saw the pair perform was at 3am in an adult baby creche – a spiralling joke from one of their earlier shows – as part of a 12-hour live art show, where they wore nothing but adult diapers and baby bonnets. In recent shows they have tackled the housing crisis, medical testing and Dolly Parton. Their style is scrappy, their tone joyously deadpan. But the new show is darker than anything they’ve done before. In 2018, they were invited by their friend Charlie to perform as part of Valletta’s year as European City of Culture, for which they planned to make a show about expats. “We thought it would be our secret Brexit play,” Biscuit says. “Nice and easy. They’ll eat it up.” They’d go to Malta, do the show, take the money and go home. Instead, they became fascinated by the overlapping stories of Maltese corruption, the migrant crisis and the murder of journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia in 2018. They throw some bottles of Cisk, a Maltese beer, down by the rum. Charlie had suggested her local drinking ground, The Pub, where all the expats hang out, as their research centre and stage in Malta, and now it forms their set. Everyone in the audience gets handed a glass of Cisk when they walk in. Biscuit and Mothersole are 12 shots down when we meet, but not of rum. In the show, they drink a dark liquid while singing a rousing sea shanty. “I’ll be honest,” Biscuit admits, “it’s apple cider vinegar.” They usually intersperse it with rum, Mothersole says, “just so we don’t die,” but today they ran out, so it was just vinegar. They needed something less potent than alcohol to make them recoil as you do with a shot, because they don’t trust their acting skills. “We don’t believe in acting,” Mothersole shrugs. “It’s not what we do.” Sh!t Theatre’s work is usually told through the lens of their own lives and relationship – they once dated – and how they get caught up in bigger political stories. Rum With Expats is their biggest departure from that personal aspect. “We’re the way in,” Mothersole says. “Beyond that, it is so much bigger than us.” Caruana Galizia was a controversial figure who had been investigating alleged Maltese government corruption. “Everyone in Malta is either labour or nationalist and she was neither, really,” Biscuit explains. “She pissed off both sides.” Still, no one knows who committed the murder, or who is clearing the memorials laid out for her daily. At the same time, reports kept coming in of migrants in boats from Libya being turned away from the shore and drowning at sea. The show features flashes of graphic imagery, but everything they use is from a TV news broadcast. Early versions included much longer videos. “Jen, our technician, said: ‘If you keep this in I can’t tech your show,’” Mothersole explains. “We’re facing away. Jen is the one who has to watch this every day.” Now, they describe most of the footage instead, and show only a glimmer of molten plastic falling on to a Libyan man’s back. “It’s against our nature on stage to say we are upset,” Biscuit says as she strokes Nala’s stomach. “We’ve never been able to say this is how we feel about it.” Mothersole nods. “This is the most earnest we’ve felt we had to be.” She sits up and clears her throat. “All these conversations, they were always over a drink.” She pours the last of the rum, “and it was soothed by alcohol.” We clink glasses and order pizza. Their new mantra is “find the fun”. She holds out a bit of biscuit to Nala, the dog Biscuit adopted in Spain. She now owns a passport, a Summerhall pass and a claim to fame with a cameo in the show. “Five stars, Nala.” Nala high-fives her and gobbles the biscuit down. At one point, they show me their victory lap, which they do before every show if there are double figures in the audience. “We run round twice and do a few circles with our arms in the air,” Mothersole explains and leaps up. Then they’re racing and we’re all cackling and I swear Nala rolls her eyes. The tradition is a hangover from their days at the free fringe, where they’d frequently get single-digit audiences and performed with a handheld projector they still haven’t returned to their university. “One time, a single woman turned up and we said please leave if you want to. She said no, so we said if one other person shows up we’ll do it. Then, about a minute before the show, my mum walks in.” Now they pack out the main hall at Summerhall. “In this line of work,” Biscuit grins, “you’re never going to be rich, but at least you can be a cult hero, right?” Next year is Sh!t Theatre’s 10th anniversary at the fringe. “We’re thinking of doing a decade of Sh!t,” Becca says. A “best of” as well as a run down of the decade of British politics. “Go back to a time we had no worries.” Mothersole scoffs. “When we were scared of Sarah Palin.” The world is darker now. They couldn’t get a hold of Satan for their lottery show. Maybe he was too busy at work in the real world. Sh!t Theatre Drink Rum With Expats is at Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Then at Soho theatre, London, 8-19 October.