In less than a week since it was broadcast on the BBC, Jeremy Deller’s Everybody in the Place: An Incomplete History of Britain 1984-1992 has enveloped viewers in a loved-up embrace. Across social media, even hard bitten, seen-it-all old ravers have been celebrating the film – now on iPlayer – and Deller says feedback he has had on Twitter has been almost universally good, “apart from one guy with a Brexit party icon who said ‘I was expecting to relive the best days of my life but you’ve ruined it with this leftwing propaganda’”. The premise of the documentary is pretty straightforward: contextualising the acid house/rave moment in the social movements of the 1980s: the miners’ strike, the Traveller convoys, British-Caribbean soundsystem culture and, of course, the LGBT culture of Chicago that birthed house itself. But rather than, as Deller puts it, “the standard BBC Four documentary where it’s middle-aged men talking with their record collections behind them, then some unattributed archive and a voiceover”, it’s structured more interestingly – as you would hope from a Turner prize-winning artist such as Deller. Not only is the archive footage carefully sourced to avoid the familiar and presented in longer chunks than usual – “a minute or two at a time, so you can delve into it, absorb it, take it seriously, get lost in it, almost” – it is framed as a lecture by Deller, delivered to a class of A-level politics students, whose often bemused reactions are as important as the material presented. Looking partially through the eyes of people born in 2002 and 2003 really makes 1989 look like another world. There is clearly something in the air right now. The film comes as the Sweet Harmony exhibition (named, like Everybody in the Place, after an XL Records rave hit) is running at the Saatchi gallery in London, while the buzz is still high on Brian Welsh’s independent movie Beats, a delightfully touching “universal story of friendship, rebellion and the irresistible power of gathered youth” set around the Scottish rave scene in 1994. At a recent Q&A with Welsh following a screening of his film, it was striking how much the audience was dominated by people who were not born when the film is set – and their fascination with the details of the rave movement was palpable. Meanwhile, Radio 1 playlists are full of records by contemporary artists such as Chase & Status and High Contrast, who hark back to early 90s moments of rave intensity. Why this sudden interest? “Now and the 80s,” says Deller, “are both eras that are quite rightwing, reactionary moments in British history, and music and popular culture are good ways to explore people’s reactions to that.” Even around the 2008 economic crash, he thinks, when 20 years of acid house could have been a significant milestone, “I don’t think we knew what we were in for”. It is only now, after nearly 10 years of coalition/Tory rule, that the conditions a decade of Thatcherism fomented seem grimly familiar. “Also,” Deller says, “I think it’s the media. For a very long time during and after, people didn’t take the movement seriously. The media was still obsessed with punk and rock music, with that Bob Dylan sense that everything had to have ‘meaningful’ lyrics. And then with Britpop, which was for the most part reactionary, comforting and familiar. Electronic music hasn’t been given the credit it deserved in terms of forcing social change and being a driver of change and youth culture.” Not that rave was a utopia – and the film doesn’t paint it as such. On one hand, Deller is indeed fascinated with the grassroots, “self-organising” movement as a site of a weird, psychedelic kind of social cohesion. “I wanted to show how a rave in Blackburn that was a couple of quid on the door was different from a rave by the M25 that cost loads and had these huge lasers and so on,” he says. “These clubs were meccas in towns, they were places people made pilgrimages to. The Eclipse in Coventry, Hangar 13 in Ayr, Shelley’s in Stoke, these were legendary places, but every town had a hub like this, even if it was a really small dive kind of place, where you could access this music and culture.” But on the other, he recognises the capitalist hustle of it, hence his focus on Paul Staines – then the publicist for uber-yuppie acid house “Mr Big” Tony Colston-Hayter, now the mastermind behind scurrilous hard-right gossip site Guido Fawkes. The presence of Staines, Colston-Hayter (now in jail for digital financial fraud) and plenty of conservative and/or capitalist-minded people who grew up to be like his Brexit party-badged critic, was, reckons Deller, inevitable. “If something is really exciting, is the new thing, everyone’s going to get involved.” But he is clear that many of these people helped drive rave’s futurism. “It’s not surprising,” he says, “that Staines and Colston-Hayter met at a video game competition in the 80s. I think they were writing software, as well. They were interested in technology before rave, then they got into rave where you had this whole futuristic vision with robots, VR, video games, electronic music and mobile phones getting some of their first use to organise parties – then Staines applied the same mentality to politics: his website is anti-establishment, disruptive, cheeky, but very seriously political. He’s not on our side, but this is what he’s doing.” Staines was, it turns out, delighted by Deller’s description of him as “an agent of chaos”. For all that Deller quotes Marx in the film, and depicts social movements with some of the romantic fervour of a convert, he didn’t go to the biggest raves of the acid era and was only seriously drawn into the culture towards the end of the period covered in the film. It is really a story about complexity and ambiguity in British cultural history. A key scene shows footage of old, conservative-looking folk in Salisbury in 1986, defending Travellers against police brutality – and the 2019 teenagers viewing the archive being obviously surprised by this. “The old guy in that,” says Deller, “would have been a young man in the 1930s, he would have known about people being persecuted, really known what a police state was, what it led to, what genocide was. People of that generation could be brilliantly pro-Europe, anti-authoritarianism, and that – obviously – shocked a lot of the students watching. If there was something that came out of it for these kids watching, it was recent history in Britain being a little less predictable and a little more chaotic than they thought.” Likewise, the story of rave itself is an attempt to get away from “Fatboy Slim reminiscing surrounded by smiley faces, or the same old stories about London, 88, a bunch of lads go to Ibiza and so on ...” – instead bringing out the tangled individual life stories and macro social flows of a real mass movement. The misty-eyed idealism is there, though, and a certain innocence. Drugs are deliberately underplayed, partly to emphasise other, untold elements to the story, but mainly because Deller wouldn’t have been allowed into the school if he had been seen to be promoting drug use. But it is obvious he believes that there’s something for a young generation to connect to, even if the class of rather serious-looking youngsters care more for grime and rap. Deller rhapsodises about watching Glastonbury 2019 on TV, seeing a sea of people reciting Stormzy and Dave lyrics en masse. “That music has gone throughout the country,” he says, “and is felt intensely by this generation, it was like 2-Tone. That is such a great contrast to what’s going on politically, it gives you hope. Like rave, it’s not nostalgic – it is about the future.” Most of all, he thinks, people yearn for physical connection – and that is what has allowed acid house to become, rather than a nostalgia industry like Britpop, a living folk culture, which still has the power to bewitch and lead astray, to be an agent of chaos, for better or worse. “Twenty-thousand people in a field, who’ve come there through word of mouth, things like that give a warmth to memories of this music and culture. You can’t go back from that if you’ve had nights like that. If you’ve shared moments like that with people, you’re changed and you’re connected to them for good.” Everybody in the Place: an Incomplete History of Britain 1984-1992 is on BBC iPlayer until 1 September. Sweet Harmony: Rave Today is at Saatchi gallery, London, until 14 September. Joe Muggs’s book on UK soundsystem culture, Bass Mids Tops, is out soon on Strange Attractor/MIT Press