Anyone seeking information on Graham Potter’s route to the top flight has a veritable library to refer to. A pound for every time he has been asked about the team-building exercises he fostered at Östersunds would make him richer than, say, a Premier League manager but more afternoons like this will guarantee his football is the only thing remotely worth discussing. This was some debut for Potter, whose Brighton side produced exactly the kind of proactive, inventive performance the club had sought on recruiting him from Swansea. They cruised home through an own goal from Abdoulaye Doucouré and clinical finishes from the substitutes Florin Andone and Neal Maupay. The pair justified his decision to keep hounding a muddled Watford, who won the same fixture 2-0 on last year’s opening day but were outclassed this time. It all bodes well given that Potter, who spent £60m over the summer, fielded a starting lineup that entirely comprised players who were at the club last season. The same men who looked taut and inhibited towards the end of Chris Hughton’s reign radiated purpose here, Dale Stephens among those appreciative of greater freedom to pick his attacking moments. They were composed and methodical, exuding comfort in a 3-4-2-1 system and responding to Potter’s calls for greater aggression. “I thought the players were fantastic,” he said. “They tried their best to do what we asked them to do. We weren’t perfect. I wouldn’t expect that. But it was probably a reward for all the work the guys have done for the past few weeks.” If Brighton were not flawless, then Watford barely got anything right. They could not blame the swirling winds, which if anything should have played greater havoc with Brighton’s possession-based approach. After a brisk start they became maddeningly imprecise and it was no shock when they fell behind. The goal summed up both sides’ levels of execution, Craig Dawson conceding the ball to Stephens and allowing Brighton to spring forward. Eventually Stephens produced a delivery that looped to Pascal Gross beyond the far post. Doucouré needed to get something on the volley across goal that followed but all he could manage was a snick that sent the ball fizzing past Foster. In the second half Andre Gray was thwarted by Mat Ryan’s legs, spurring a spell of pressure that ended with a VAR check when Roberto Pereyra’s free-kick slammed into an initially indeterminate part of the wall’s anatomy. Brighton survived, freshened up and sealed the points. Rather than settling for a rearguard action, Potter sent on two forwards and Andone clipped in smartly at the near post within a minute. Maupay, a £20m signing from Brentford, then ran through to finish from an angle and Brighton’s initiative got what it deserved. “Maybe it’s a good wake-up call for the rest of the season,” said Javi Gracia, who surely cannot wait for Watford’s major new signings, Ismaila Sarr and Danny Welbeck, to be ready for action. Potter and Brighton could hardly have looked more clear-eyed in comparison.