“Don’t be ‘Mlle Beauvoir’. Be me,” Simone de Beauvoir wrote in her diary in 1927. She was 19, and she had incurred her parents’ disapproval by starting a degree in philosophy. In love with her cousin, she still half hoped for a conventional marriage, but felt disturbed that she could only have “one life”. She wanted to fill it with as many different experiences as possible, already sure that her vocation as a philosopher compelled her to live differently, using herself as the raw material for her ideas. Two years later she recorded “curious certainty that this reserve of riches that I feel within me will make its mark … that this life of mine will be a well-spring from which others will drink”. There has been a succession of biographies of De Beauvoir since Deirdre Bair’s authorised and therefore somewhat inaccurate life appeared in 1990, from Lisa Appignanesi’s slim, trenchant account to Toril Moi’s more theoretically driven The Making of an Intellectual Woman to Carole Seymour-Jones’s moving portrait of De Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre as a couple and Claudine Monteil’s portrait (not translated into English) of De Beauvoir the activist. In writing the life again, the philosopher Kate Kirkpatrick hopes to bring new material into the public domain (De Beauvoir’s letters to her final serious lover, Claude Lanzmann, were only made available in 2018) and to offer new interpretations for our age. “Biography can reveal what a society cares about, what it values,” Kirkpatrick writes, so “by encountering the values of another person in another time we can learn more about our own.” This is certainly true, and I’d have liked to learn more about what De Beauvoir has to tell us today than we are given here. Her complex, ambivalent ideas about gender as both inherent and performed can be usefully brought to bear on the current dilemmas about transsexuality. We can’t ventriloquise De Beauvoir in the present, but it would be worth dwelling with these ideas for longer than Kirkpatrick does. She gives more space to De Beauvoir’s contrary relationship with feminism, and the discussion here is helpfully rich. De Beauvoir, like her almost contemporary Doris Lessing, was initially reluctant to lend her support to the women’s liberation movement, despite being co-opted as a heroine. In her 1963 autobiography, she congratulated herself on avoiding “falling into the trap of feminism” in The Second Sex. However, Kirkpatrick shows her outing herself as a feminist in the 1970s, calling for “the abolition of the family” and deciding that economic independence and socialism would not in fact deliver the changes needed to emancipate women. She campaigned bravely for the right to abortion in terms that could inform the debates today. I think that as well as seeing De Beauvoir as a proto-feminist, we can see her as a pioneer behind the current feminist strand of the project known as autofiction or autotheory. In using their lives as material for their art, Chris Kraus, Maggie Nelson and Rachel Cusk are writing in a tradition begun by her. In The Second Sex in particular, she pioneered the practice of writing novelistic scenes about her own experience and then analysing them. Throughout De Beauvoir’s life we see both the costs and gains of life undertaken as a philosophical experiment. She chose to exercise her philosophical commitment to freedom, while understanding from the 1940s that her freedom should not come at the expense of others’. She made mistakes – the damage done to the young women she and Sartre shared between them is well known – and paid the price of jealousy and remorse. But these helped her refine her ideas about freedom and bad faith, enabling her to develop an ethics of existentialism, which Kirkpatrick convincingly shows was her great contribution to the philosophical project she shared with Sartre. De Beauvoir and Lanzmann lived together for seven years, he was the only lover she ever addressed with the familiar 'tu' Having experimented in life, De Beauvoir also experimented with literary form, finding new ways to write her autobiography and her philosophy simultaneously. Each of her novels, memoirs and works of philosophy was a new venture in this. During her lifetime, there was a lot of debate over whether she was a philosopher or a novelist. The press tended to label Sartre the existentialist philosopher and De Beauvoir the mere “Notre Dame de Sartreuse”, a novelist engaged in giving life to his ideas. De Beauvoir saw this as false: she was a philosopher whose commitment to particularity (“situations are different, and therefore so are freedoms”) entailed the use of forms that could render experience universal without generalising. So in her life and her work she was courageously committed throughout to the process of becoming, which Kirkpatrick profitably makes her central theme. There isn’t much material here that’s unknown to scholars, but the letters to Lanzmann do constitute a major new resource. When they met in 1952, Lanzmann was 26, De Beauvoir 44. She had recently emerged from a relationship with the American novelist Nelson Algren, which she felt had remade her as a sexual woman, leading to many of the revelations about the possibilities of genuinely mutual sexual transformation she elucidated in The Second Sex. Algren, however, had left her feeling depleted and old, worried that her sexual life was over. Lanzmann convinced her that it wasn’t, and became a new collaborator, reading her work and learning from her in his (he went on to direct the landmark Holocaust film Shoah, under her influence). They lived together for seven years and he was the only lover she ever addressed with the familiar tu. Kirkpatrick could make more of her letters to him, using them to give a sense of the scenography of her days. It’s probably sensible to avoid descriptions of apricot cocktails in Left Bank cafes, but with a philosopher so committed to using daily life as raw material, it would be good to hear more about her experiences of domestic life and about her impressions of the places she spent time in. Where Kirkpatrick’s biography is strongest is in clarifying and showing the strength of De Beauvoir’s ethical commitments, and how these were transformed into political commitments after the war. Her concern for the situation in Algeria in the 1950s and 60s is movingly recorded, as is her tireless commitment to helping younger women. While Albert Camus once accused her of “making the French male look ridiculous”, the women of France thanked her for using this to effect change, both in the lives of the hundreds who wrote asking for advice or help, and in the lives of the thousands whose freedom she enabled and inspired. “Women, you owe her everything!” the crowd chanted at her funeral. Now we are coming to comprehend exactly what this means. • Free Woman: Life, Liberation and Doris Lessing by Lara Feigel is published by Bloomsbury. Becoming Beauvoir by Kate Kirkpatrick is published by Bloomsbury (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.