No 10 has not ruled out scheduling an election in the immediate days after leaving the EU on 31 October if Boris Johnson is forced into one by the loss of a confidence motion, according to party sources. Speculation about the timing of an autumn election is rife as Downing Street tries to figure out how to deal with the fallout if Tory rebels join with opposition parties to vote down the government. Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s most senior aide and “assistant to the prime minister”, has told ministers and officials that the government is prepared to call an election to be held after 31 October and leave anyway if it loses a confidence vote. However, the idea of leaving the EU – possibly without a deal – in the middle of an election while parliament is suspended for campaigning would be a highly controversial move. It would also be extremely risky for Johnson to lead the UK into an election in the middle of potential disruption to food supplies, travel and trade caused by a no-deal Brexit. No 10 did not deny that this could be a possible course of action in the event of losing a no-confidence vote, after the Spectator mooted the possible date of a post-Brexit election as 1 November and the FT reported it would happen in the “days after”. Labour could hold a confidence motion in Johnson’s government as early as the first week of September to test whether he commands the support of the House of Commons. There would be a subsequent 14 days in which MPs could try to form an alternative government but a general election would be triggered if they could not manage to do so. Opponents of a no-deal Brexit would want an election to happen before 31 October in order to prevent a crash-out, but the Fixed-term Parliaments Act gives discretion to the incumbent prime minister to name a suitable polling day. A cross-party group of MPs is working on plans to stop a no-deal Brexit either via legislative means or collapsing Johnson’s government, possibly sitting through the autumn recess in order to frustrate a no-deal exit. David Lammy, a Labour MP opposed to a hard Brexit, has said the plan to hold an election after crashing out without a deal would be a “constitutional and democratic outrage that will impoverish millions” but he said a “a flaw in Cummings’ plan to force us out during an election is we can refuse to back dissolution without a Brexit delay”.