Q My wife and I are planning to buy our first home some time towards the end of next year. At the beginning of this year (January 2019) I went freelance and while I expect to make more than my previous salary this year and next, I am concerned that this will compromise our ability to get a mortgage. By the time we are ready to apply for a mortgage I will have two years of tax returns, and about 20 months of business accounts. Is it worth delaying buying our first home until I have two full years of business accounts? Or is my freelance career jeopardising our chances of getting a mortgage and I should go back to being an employee in order to improve our chances? For context, my wife earns £55,000 a year and expects to get a bonus of about £20,000, and my freelance earnings should be about £40,000 this year. We hope to buy a house for about £350,000 to £370,000 and can put down a cash deposit of at least 10%.PD A If you want to be able to choose from the full range of mortgage lenders and mortgage deals, you’ll need to have three years’ worth of HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) tax calculations (which is the SA302 form you get once you have submitted your self assessment tax return). According to Crunch Mortgages (a whole of market broker specialising in mortgages for the self-employed), “the most common problem for a self-employed person applying for a mortgage is only having one year of accounts”. However, although many lenders require two or three years’ worth of evidence of earnings, there are a few who will look at applications from people with only one year’s worth of evidence. So, no, your freelance career isn’t necessarily jeopardising your chances of getting a mortgage but with less than three years’ of tax calculations it is limiting the number of mortgage deals you have access to although with a cash deposit of 10%, there will be more options than with the minimum 5% deposit you need to secure a mortgage. Before making the rather drastic decision to go back to being an employee, it might be an idea to get in touch with a specialist mortgage broker (Google “self-employed mortgages” to find one) who will know which lenders can accommodate your personal circumstances. It may be that you can go ahead with buying your first home before the end of next year. 