It may seem strange to single out one player after such an imperious England performance across the board but Manu Tuilagi is someone worth making an exception for. There have been countless days over the past five years when a performance such as this seemed beyond the realms of possibility. Just this week he laid bare the extent of his injury struggles and how hiding one of them cost him more than a year of his career. Suffice it to say it is good to see him back and firing like this. Granted, this was his ninth straight appearance for England but we have seen his power, his pace and his poise only in glimpses. That can no longer be considered the case. He was not alone but he typified England’s intensity, their ability to burst over the gainline and such is the obvious joy Tuilagi takes from playing international rugby that it must be infectious. For Tuilagi loves playing for England, all the more so against Ireland, and it was eight years ago that he ran amok in Dublin when winning only his second cap, rubber-stamping his place at the 2011 World Cup aged only 20. In February this year, Tuilagi made his first England start in five years and made a considerable impact after less than two minutes, taking Jamie George’s over-the-top lineout and thundering into the Ireland defence. Yesterday, Ross Byrne acquitted himself well on his first Test start but he may live to regret directing his kick-off at Tuilagi, who fielded it and rampaged into his opponents. Eddie Jones is these days non-committal when asked whether Tuilagi is better suited to playing at No 12 or No 13. He started four of five Six Nations matches at inside-centre but on this evidence it seems hard to argue that he is not better suited to playing one out with that extra yard of space. Not least when he has George Ford and Owen Farrell inside him and surely this will not be the last time Jones deploys this trio in midfield from the start. Ireland were given a warning of Tuilagi’s threat and how Ford and Farrell might combine to release him early on. He could not quite wriggle free the first time but did so the second and from there England embarked on a series of phases that led to Elliot Daly’s try. Just before it, Tuilagi left a huge dent in the Ireland defence, creating the space for Daly to finish on the right. For his own score, he burst through a gap with the kind of acceleration he was showcasing eight years ago. He ended the first half with seven defenders beaten – equalling his best ever for a whole match, which was against Romania in 2011 – and after the break hit Jordan Larmour so hard that the Twickenham groundsman will be picking bits of the Ireland wing off the turf for the next few weeks. Soon after he tracked Jacob Stockdale down the left and bundled him into touch. He was also in the thick of things for Joe Cokanasiga’s second try, running a perfect decoy line after Ford and Farrell had combined. He does not even have to touch the ball to leave his imprint. Ben Youngs knows Tuilagi better than most, having come through the Leicester academy with him. On Friday he said he had never seen Tuilagi in better physical shape but perhaps more significantly, spoke of what a good place he was in mentally and perhaps the best thing that can be said about Tuilagi is that it is no longer necessary to hold one’s breath whenever he gets the ball and sets off towards a wall of defenders, as was the case not so long ago. We often hear about how popular Tuilagi is off the pitch, how he rules the pool table and makes everyone coffee and seeing him in this kind of form is sure to rub off on his team-mates. “He’s in a good place, he’s got a smile on his face, he’s getting fitter,” said Jones. “He’s about 80 per cent fit, when he gets there he will be a handful. One of his best assets is that people like to play with him.” Throughout his tenure, Jones has never liked answering questions about players absent from his squad. The mere utterance of Danny Cipriani has often been met with a quiet fury and more recently it has been Ben Te’o off limits. Over the years he has always had time to talk about Tuilagi, however. Now we know why.