In the first of an exciting three-part documentary, clever camerawork and commentary relayed from in-helmet microphones combine to capture the thrills and drills of the cockpit. Three trainees at Britain’s elite fighter pilot school (including the establishment’s only female student) graduate from propeller planes to learning how to fly the F35 Lightning II, the RAF’s most advanced jet fighter, in a tough competition that involves dizzying rolls, whiplash 4G turns and hair-raising “treecutters”. And, yes, they really do quote Top Gun to each other. Mike Bradley This inspiring film follows the animal behaviourist Jo-Rosie Haffenden, who comes to the aid of despairing parents. Here, she deploys dog-training techniques to work with a tantrum-prone three-year-old and an 18-month-old baby who refuses to sleep in her own cot. Repetitive, but full of surprisingly good sense. MB A soothing new series that shadows some of the UK’s finest brass bands as they take part in classic competitions. First up are high-flyers Brighouse & Rastrick and their keen rivals Fairey, just two of 100 bands marching through various Saddleworth villages to be assessed by judges hidden in caravans. Graeme Virtue Faith’s unconventional stress-management techniques include eating cereal in the street and smashing wing mirrors with her stiletto heel. To be fair, she has got plenty of stress to manage. Madlen won’t cooperate in her defence and DI Breeze has evidence linking Faith to the body in the sand dunes. Ellen E Jones Where the first episode looked at beauty, this time the focus is on motherhood, as Kathy explores why women elect whether or not to have children. She meets a City analyst who has pressed “the snooze button on my biological clock” by freezing her eggs, and visits old mates (and single mums) Samantha Morton and Katherine Ryan. MB It is time for 10 strangers to plug the Love Island gap by heading off on either a Greek odyssey or tragedy, depending on who the producers decide to chuck into the mix. Romance blossoms as the group meet up in Mykonos, but how long before their exes turn up? Later this week, there will be chats and confessions in Crete. Hannah Verdier Bad Lieutenant: Port of Call New Orleans (Wener Herzon, 2009), 1am, Film4Werner Herzog’s reimagining of Abel Ferrara’s 1992 NYC thriller relocates the action to Katrina-shocked New Orleans. Nicolas Cage is edgily mesmerising as the lieutenant, racked by back pain and engaging in horrific levels of drug abuse, as he tracks down the killers of a Senegalese family. Paul Howlett Super League cricket: Lancashire v Loughborough 6pm, Sky Sports The Ashes. Women’s T20 match from Emirates Old Trafford. Championship football: Hull City v Blackburn Rovers 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Action from the KCOM Stadium. Champions League football 7.45pm, BT Sport 2. An as-yet undetermined game from the first leg of the play-offs.