An Australian tourist has been found shot dead inside a camper van outside the popular New Zealand surfing town of Raglan on the west coast of the North Island. New Zealand police were notified at 3.20am on Friday morning and found the van that was earlier reported stolen with the body of a man inside at 8am local time. Australian Associated Press and the Age newspaper have named the victim as 33-year-old Australian Sean McKinnon, from south-west Victoria. Live: Tourist killed in campervan shooting https://t.co/uT0rVwZ0Jf pic.twitter.com/iUjdkK2hsr According to police, a male offender is now the target of a huge manhunt in the Waikato region and all local police officers have been ordered to carry their guns until the man is caught. Police said the man smashed the window of an Apollo camper van in the early hours of Friday. Two occupants were inside the camper van at the time – the Australian man and his 32-year-old Canadian fiance – and the male offender fired several shots into the vehicle, injuring the man. Police refused to comment on whether the shooting was a robbery gone wrong, and described the incident as a “random” attack by a sole offender, and said the attacker was not known to either victim. The female victim managed to escape from the van and flee, and then made her way to a nearby property where she phoned the police. Meanwhile, the gunman stole the camper van with the dying McKinnon inside, AAP reports. He had been shot multiple times. “He was a lovable, knockabout Aussie guy, loved his surfing,” friend Julian Smith said. The woman, who works in New Zealand, was uninjured. She was in a “shocked and distressed” state after the ordeal. A homicide inquiry has been opened, and a large-scale manhunt was under way across the region on Friday afternoon, with armed offenders out on the streets. “This is an absolutely tragic incident,” detective inspector Graham Pitkethley of Waikato Police told the media on Friday. “It is obviously concerning that we have an armed offender outstanding and we want to assure our Waikato community that our absolute priority is locating him as soon as possible and holding him to account.” Police believe the alleged killer may have confided in members of the local community, and described the terrain of the search area as quite rough, with a lot of bush. The Waikato region is known as the dairy heartland of New Zealand. Colin Chung from Colin’s Cafe at nearby Whale Bay said the area was a rocky coastline and provided some of the best surf in New Zealand, but it is off the beaten track for tourists. Random shootings are very rare in New Zealand and thousands of tourists travel safely in camper vans every year, with many choosing to park their vans on the side of roads, in parks and in recreational areas. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was providing consular assistance to McKinnon’s family. – Australian Associated Press contributed to this report