Hamilton’s drive to victory was superb but it was the Mercedes decision to opt for a second stop that really stood out. After they gambled on fresh tyres there was no real opportunity for Red Bull to react; their only hope lay in Max Verstappen making his rubber last and, valiant as his effort was, just trying to stay ahead pushed them over the edge. The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, described Hamilton’s driving as in “another dimension” but notably paid homage to his team’s strategists. With just over 20 laps remaining they might have settled for the safe option of a guaranteed second place with, perhaps, Hamilton able to challenge Verstappen at the death on the tyres he was happy with. However, strategist James Vowles and his team decided to take the chance of new rubber and a charge. This was bold, impressive and proof the team have not lost any ambition despite their dominance this season. After fifth place at a wet Hockenheim Carlos Sainz made it two in a row with fifth in Hungary, cementing his place as the best of the midfield drivers. Having had two retirements in the opening races Sainz has since returned a points tally that McLaren might have expected from Fernando Alonso. He is seventh in the world championship, five points behind Red Bull’s Pierre Gasly. Sainz’s drive at the Hungaroring exemplified why he is standing out. Once up to fifth he was inch-perfect, smooth and metronomic in getting the very best out of the McLaren as the team reinforced their position in fourth. Gasly, the driver Red Bull chose over Sainz last year, was woeful, lapped by Verstappen in the same machinery and crucially unable to play any part in Red Bull’s race at the front. The team principal, Christian Horner, pointedly noted: “The problem is he’s not in the mix at all”. Red Bull still believe they can beat Ferrari in the constructors’ championship but as things stand Gasly is their achilles heel. What also became clear from Hamilton’s charge was just how strong the Mercedes still is. Verstappen was adamant that the rate at which the British driver caught him proved just how much more they could get out of their engine when required. “I think you can see how much margin they still have when they really need to push,” he said. Which makes it one of the most sought-after rides and Valtteri Bottas knows his days may be numbered. After a strong start to the season with two wins he has faltered. He scored 120 points in his first six races but has only 68 from last six. In Hungary Wolff said the team would chose between Bottas and their French reserve driver Esteban Ocon. Ocon, who has come through the Mercedes junior system, is highly rated by the team and they are keen he should be in F1. On form, opting for young blood would seem the likely option but Hamilton is very comfortable having Bottas alongside him and his feelings doubtless carry huge weight. The decision will be made over the summer break. Hungary heralds the beginning of F1’s summer break and what a way to go out. After some at best listless meetings the last four have been close to unmissable. Beginning with Austria, where Verstappen’s bravura recovery from ninth to the win stole the show; through the British Grand Prix where passing and incident abounded, to the drama of Germany in changing conditions. Then Hungary; once derided for serving up soulless processions the circuit has come into its own of late and rarely delivers anything but a sterling show. This year was no exception. There is no single defining factor why these four have made for such spectacles but what cannot be ignored is that the layouts themselves played a role, which is a lesson for F1 to learn. With the calendar next season set to be 22 meetings, which is as many as it seems every team are willing to tolerate, any proposed additions that may replace circuits recognised for good racing ought to be fit for purpose as well as financially inviting. George Russell was rightly elated with his performance at the Hungaroring, after coming within half a tenth of putting his car into Q2 before finishing the race in 16th. This is far from where Williams want to be but the meeting gave a definitive indication they are moving forward. The team have cleared their manufacturing backlog and brought their first aero upgrade to Germany. In dry running in Hungary it was given a real assessment and passed. What they saw on track correlates with what had been expected in the wind tunnel and their pursuit of more downforce can now begin in earnest. Russell’s qualifying lap was exceptionally good and a stark reminder of his talent, while in the race he had the pleasure of mixing it up for once, passing Kevin Magnussen and Daniil Kvyat at turn four and five on lap one. Now Williams are in a position to be able bring on their car, there may yet be more small victories to come.