Until Skins, every teen party on TV seemed to end in an overdose, every sexual encounter some kind of STI – but here we got to see young, unknown actors (many of whom went on to be Hollywood stars) revelling in the delights of adolescence, showing that teenage identity exploration and drug use are often just quite a lot of fun. Consequences began to rear their head as adulthood came into focus, and Skins also had fantastic portrayals of mental illness and parental abandonment – it was the show’s hedonistic streak, however, that led to tabloid panic about copycat “Skins parties” popping up across the UK. If Skins showed what party-loving sixth-formers got up to, then The Inbetweeners panned across to the neeks in the corner of the common room. It refused to disguise the filterless vocabulary of teen boys, with turns of phrase such as “She’ll be frothing at the gash” and “Jump in the minge mobile” heard on telly for the first time. Critics saw it as a nadir of television standards; one even describing it as “four complete nobodies going through nondescript adolescence in a nonentity of a suburb”. The Inbetweeners Movie went on to be the highest-grossing British comedy ever, proving they’d tapped into a truth about the bathetic coming of age of the British man. Channel 4 has become synonymous with horny shows such as Sex Box, Naked Attraction and Sex Tape, which dress up titillation as factual entertainment with the help of a few “sex experts”. It may have pushed things too far with this effort, which ran for two series in 2011, and specifically focused on adolescent rutting. There were pieces on BDSM, Andalusian shagging holidays and vajazzling – but a letter signed by 23 health and education professionals condemned Channel 4 for giving poor advice. Now if you try to Google the show, you are faced with a warning reminding you that child pornography is illegal. Netflix’s huge teen hit is the story of Hannah, a 17-year-old girl who kills herself and leaves behind cassettes for her classmates describing why she blames them for her death. The first season showed Hannah’s rape and subsequent suicide in graphic detail, leading to an outcry from mental health professionals who said the show would lead to more teen suicides. In 2017, reports of a 23-year-old in Peru whose suicide appeared to mimic the one depicted in the show raised further concerns. Two years after the series aired, Netflix edited out the suicide scene, claiming it would do “the most good for the most people while mitigating any risk” for vulnerable viewers. A sign of how the debate around TV in the Netflix era is changing, Big Mouth is an 18-rated animated show about puberty aimed at teens. It’s a wonderfully surreal and utterly filthy show where the ghost of Duke Ellington gives dry-humping advice, while pubes and genitals become anthropomorphised roles (one character’s vagina is played by Kristen Wiig). In the streaming era, though, it’s garnered little controversy and mostly rave reviews, with New York Magazine saying it deserves a Peabody award for capturing the truth of puberty “better than any work of pop culture in recent memory”. It suggests controversy is now focused only on shows that put teens in danger, not those that simply celebrate the rude bits of growing up.