It is the battle nobody expected to get going at all, let alone run into the final weeks of the season. London’s surprise promotion from the Championship last year produced celebrations not only in the capital but also, privately, at several Super League clubs who expected the Broncos to be relegated back to the second tier without a whimper. But here we are, with three games remaining, in the midst of an extraordinary five-way battle to avoid the drop. London are still in the fight and still swinging. The nine games they have won would have been enough in every other season to avoid finishing bottom, underlining the remarkable nature of the relegation run-in. “I’m already bored of people telling me it’ll be the highest ever total to go down,” says the London coach, Danny Ward, with a laugh. Going into this weekend’s games the Broncos were bottom, but only on points difference, with Huddersfield – who eased their survival fears with a 22-12 win at Hull FC on Friday – and Hull KR – who beat Catalans 24-6 on Saturday – also on 18. Just above them are Leeds and Wakefield on 20 points, but with a superior points difference to the other three, making them, in effect, three points clear of the rest. But it would be foolhardy to rule them completely out of the picture ahead of perhaps the most decisive Sunday of Super League action. Three of the bottom five play on Sunday, including a tantalising match in the capital between London and Leeds. “I have to say, they’ve been absolutely outstanding this year,” says Leeds’ interim coach, Richard Agar. In May, when Leeds made the huge call to sack their coach David Furner after he was at the club less than six months, Agar inherited a side in danger of relegation and while he has steadied the ship somewhat their upturn in form has merely kept their heads above water since the rest of the relegation pack keep winning games, too. However, their recent results suggest that of the five, Leeds are the least likely to go down. “They will be fine,” Ward says of the Rhinos. Agar says: “I’m not studying other fixtures, but given our points difference and the nature of everyone playing each other, we’d need to have a severe meltdown if we win Sunday.” He is probably right. London’s run-in epitomises that everyone will be taking points off each other: they face three of their four rivals in the remaining games. But their coach says: “I don’t think there’s any pressure on us. We’ve got to this stage, which is more than what some people thought, and we get to play the teams around us.” For weeks, a final-day relegation showdown with Wakefield seemed inevitable, but Trinity – who also play on Sunday – have eased their own fears lately. A run of one win in 11 games dragged them into the mire, but victory against Hull KR a fortnight ago was decisive. “It’s been very challenging,” says the Wakefield coach, Chris Chester, whose side face Wigan. “We’ve been through the mill over the last few months and hopefully we’re getting through the other side of it now.” As things stand, London would have to travel to Wakefield on the final day and beat them by more than 70 points to relegate Trinity. It is far more likely that if the Broncos do survive against all the odds, it will be at the expense of one of Huddersfield or Hull KR. “If you’d offered this position at the start of the year, would we have taken it? Absolutely,” says Ward, who has done a remarkable job in London. As he points out, that they are still bottom despite achieving so much this season probably makes them favourites to go right now. But this season has shown you can take nothing for granted when it comes to the bottom of the table.