Edinburgh’s collective pulse has been raised over the course of the fringe by a host of explicit plays burrowing under the sheets. At Summerhall, three performance artists take different positions to grapple with the topic, with one examining sex education, another consent and the third erotica. Strap on. Sorry, in. Most of us have lacklustre sex education in school and are left to figure it out through trial, error and, potentially, trauma. Harry Clayton-Wright’s barnstormingly sex-positive Sex Education (★★★★☆) attempts to rid the stage of shame – unless that’s what you’re into – as he intersperses delicate, difficult conversations he has recorded with his mum, with clips of gay porn his dad gave him when he was 14. Clayton-Wright has complete control of the room’s mood, from flippant and celebratory to honest and distressing. In a diamond-studded wedding dress, he is a mischievous storyteller. But his mum is the real star, funny and surprisingly open. She’s not allowed to see this show; he’s not ashamed, but he’d rather protect her from what she doesn’t need to know. But us? We get it all. Through this achingly funny, filthy and tender confessional, Clayton-Wright makes a case for richer dialogue about sex, and reilluminates the vital need for comprehensive, LGBT+-inclusive sex education from a young age. Across the courtyard and dressed to match her Barbie, Louise Orwin toys with consent in Oh Yes Oh No (★★★★☆). We follow a script together, with her dominating through a distorted whine of a mic, and us silent and passive. “We will say this is consensual,” she says. The script tells us that we agree. In a vignette structure, the show plays with the ideas of our gaze, sex as performance and choice. Orwin invites an audience member on stage to simulate a sex scene between Barbie and Ken. She takes her hands away and lets the stranger repeatedly thump the inanimate body. Tracing the line between sexy and sickening, Orwin’s show serves as a reminder of how sex puts us at our most vulnerable. It is in one moment empowering and exhilarating, and in the next, full of rage and despair. At the show’s dark heart, it asks the thorny question of why and how some rape survivors have rape fantasies? However smartly manipulative Orwin is in the construction of her show, she is delicate with women’s recorded words: probing and questioning, but never judging. This is not an easy show to watch, but one that dives deep into grey areas many others are afraid to explore. No less intimate, but in far lighter spirits, Rachel Mars’s triumphant show is an education in how to talk dirty. Or rather, write dirty. In Your Sexts Are Shit: Older Better Letters (★★★★☆), Mars reads erotic letters from James Joyce, Georgia O’Keefe and Proust. We learn what they liked and what they wanted. The words drip with uninhibited desire. Mars is the ideal narrator, showing childish glee at the queef jokes, but not a hint of judgment for these proudly grimy cultural icons. Contrasting these dusty pages with messages from dating apps and WhatsApp – some sexy, some bland, some so desperate they don’t deserve her witty replies – Mars tries to capture the way we trade words. She celebrates how all of these intimate messages of care and carelessness – from a woman telling her how she wants to be licked, to a reminder to pick up milk – make up our relationships. She salutes how each grouping finds their own code, through long romantic letters or quick blue-ticked thrills. But really, she seems to suggest, when someone can write in a way that turns you on, wouldn’t you want more – faster? Had the option of a smartphone been around then, Joyce wouldn’t have been able to handle it. Sex Education, Oh Yes Oh No and Your Sexts Are Shit: Older Better Letters at Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews