That it seems almost offensive to compare Celtic’s class of 2019 to the side who delivered a European Cup amid domestic dominance, a run of nine consecutive Scottish league titles will not divert this season’s narrative. A more controversial standpoint is that this Celtic team are not as formidable as the Rangers sides who won nine titles in a row from 1989. In the Old Firm bubble, nine is the magic number; a successful Celtic defence of the Scottish Premiership would take them to that number and, more significantly, within one of making history. That Scottish football is so consumed by a monopoly – or, at best, duopoly – is depressing. It is one fuelled by broadcasters and those charged with leading the game. Still, arguably the rest do not help themselves; a non-Old Firm team last reached the group stage of the Europa League 11 years ago. In that period, two League of Ireland clubs have. Making inroads in Europe was a Neil Lennon strength during his previous Celtic tenure. He will naturally look to joust with the continent’s best again but the sense prevails, including among the Celtic hierarchy, that so much is centred on nine in a row. Lennon has the resources – financial and physical – to achieve that, again with a little to spare. It is a sign of Celtic’s grip on Scotland that any sale of Kieran Tierney to Arsenal for £25m is not in any way necessary and should not meaningfully impact on their ability to retain the title. Not that Lennon’s task is straightforward. Rebuilding and reshaping the team after the successful but expensive reign of Brendan Rodgers is a tough ask. Celtic’s support has become so accustomed to sweeping all before them the slightest bump on the road is met with disdain. That brings pressures in an environment already far from tame. This is a key season for Steven Gerrard. Leading Rangers to second place in his first campaign as a manager was a fair achievement but falling short in both cup competitions means the club’s wait for a major trophy has stretched to eight years. This time there are widespread suggestions Rangers can push Celtic to a greater extent, a notion not entirely backed up by evidence. Just as Celtic have millions lying around to boost their squad – where a striker is needed – Rangers look as good as will be the case for months. To Rangers’ benefit, on paper at least, is the first Old Firm derby of the season taking place at Ibrox on 1 September. Although many remain starstruck by Gerrard’s very presence in Scotland, his recruitment record is patchy. The return of Ryan Kent to Liverpool, the sale of Daniel Candeias and the possible exit of Alfredo Morelos blunts Rangers’ attack. Sheyi Ojo, another Liverpool loanee, has a difficult task living up to Kent’s performances, while the jury is firmly out on whether Jordan Jones, Jake Hastie and Greg Stewart can be positive performers, regularly, for a club of this size. Gerrard has solidified his defence with the addition of Filip Helander. Whether he can harness the talent of the inconsistent but exciting Joe Aribo will prove intriguing. Kilmarnock, transformed by the now Scotland manager Steve Clarke, suffered such humiliation by Connah’s Quay Nomads in a Europa League qualifier that it is already easy to fear for his successor Angelo Alessio. Aberdeen were wounded by the loss of their influential captain Graeme Shinnie to Derby County but the signings of Craig Bryson and Ryan Hedges in particular imply Derek McInnes may be one of few top-flight managers to leave this transfer window stronger than he entered it. The same applies to Craig Levein and Hearts, whose league form imploded after a superb start a year ago. Hibernian’s prospects are linked in large part to whether Scott Allan, after a spell in the wilderness at Celtic, can recapture form of an earlier stint at Easter Road. That Hibs lost Marc McNulty and Stéphane Oméonga after impressive loans is significant. Motherwell have undertaken a hefty recruitment drive but more notable was the long-term injury incurred by the terrific David Turnbull. It would be a surprise if St Mirren, Hamilton and Livingston are not involved in a relegation scrap. This is a league where very little separates batches of teams; in previous generations, that was a sign of concerted strength. Not now, alas.