Ramallah, in the heart of the West Bank, is only a few miles north of Jerusalem, its nose pressed up against the dashes of Palestine’s borders on the maps, official markers of the city’s – and the country’s – provisional nature. It is a place of scarcely 30,000 inhabitants, historically a Christian city (although now the majority are Muslim) and also one of cold winters and carefully tended gardens, chosen by the PLO as its de facto headquarters following the Oslo accords of 1993 and 1995. It is, above all, a city of authors, home to Palestine’s greatest poet, the late Mahmoud Darwish, and the man we can now recognise as its greatest prose writer, Raja Shehadeh. Shehadeh won the Orwell prize for his 2007 book Palestinian Walks and published a powerful memoir of a cross-border friendship, Where the Line Is Drawn, in 2017. These books built on earlier memoirs, Strangers in the House and When the Bulbul Stopped Singing, written at the beginning of the century, during the second intifada, when any optimism that the Oslo agreements might bring peace had died, and a new kind of hope gripped Palestine – that desperate and violent resistance might succeed where political negotiation had failed. Palestinian Walks was the story of 27 years’ worth of walking in the hills of the West Bank, while Going Home takes place on a single day, 5 June 2017, the 50th anniversary of the Israeli invasion of Palestine. Shehadeh sets out to walk to a meeting at his office – he’s a practicing lawyer as well as the founder of Al-Haq, the human rights campaign group – and strolls through the city in which he has spent most of his life. Normally, the walk to his office takes only 45 minutes, but he stretches it out to four hours, chewing over the history of his city. After the meeting, he walks home, reflecting on “how the city I grew up in has remained with me”. Going Home is a travelogue, a lament, a record of a vanishing city and its near-vanished inhabitants, most of whom (despite World Bank incentives) have fled to the US or Europe. For those who’ve read his earlier books, there is much in Going Home that is familiar. We read of Old Ramallah, of the city’s unique atmosphere, its characters and its gardens, the way Shehadeh’s (Christian) family came to Ramallah while he was still a small child, exiled from glamorous Jaffa during the Naqba – the 1948 expulsion of Palestinians from what was to become Israel. We read of the murder of Shehadeh’s father by a thug who, as a collaborator, was not pursued by the Israeli police. We read of the 2002 siege of Ramallah and Shehadeh’s work with Al-Haq to secure justice for Palestinian prisoners. There is partly the sense that this is the traumatic recapitulation of past events, the going over of old ground in the hope of changing, or at least understanding, history. There’s something more subtle at work, though. A decade and a half have passed since those earlier books: the second intifada is a distant memory – Shehadeh remembers it bringing about “a great sense of solidarity that I have never forgotten”. Books are shaped by the context in which they’re written, and both distance and disappointment cast well-known stories in new light. While the early memoirs were written at a time when there was still hope, this latest memoir, which gives the lie to Diogenes’s claim (via Bruce Chatwin) “solvitur ambulando” (“it is solved by walking”), recognises that the history of Palestine is “a chronicle of repeated failures. Both we and the Israelis who were against the settlement project have failed to find a way of living together and that’s the biggest tragedy.” Legalese is a notoriously ungainly offshoot of the English language, and it is to his great credit that Shehadeh writes prose that is clear, readable and full of powerful imagery. There is no right when it comes to the story of Ramallah and Palestine, but there are many wrongs. It is fitting that it should be a lawyer who writes this book, given that the overwhelming impression for the reader is one of powerlessness and injustice. Shehadeh speaks of the idealism of both Palestinian and Israeli negotiators in the early days post-Oslo, and how this has curdled into bitterness and frustration. “By forcing them [the Israelis] to justify the unjustifiable, that which is patently illegal, we have helped them destroy their legal system… We have certainly not won, but neither have they.” • Going Home: A Walk Through Fifty Years of Occupation is published by Profile (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99