When Ella tells people that she works as a freelance home carer for the elderly, they tend to react with a gushing mixture of approval and self-deprecation: “How wonderful. I could never do what you do.” One young woman is entirely unabashed about the human instinct to put one’s own emotions at the centre of every story, replying: “Oh, now I feel bad.” US author Lila Savage worked as a caregiver for nearly a decade, and her wise and understated first novel explores a carer’s thoughts and feelings as she steps into the crucible of other people’s suffering. At first, Ella was “wide open” to the all-consuming dramas of the people she worked for, but she has learned over the years to “step in and out of grief, to sample it on demand”; to offer up a version of herself and ration her own responses. The work is “pink collar, no doubt about it; it was utterly, overwhelmingly, women’s work”, and the labour is emotional as well as physical, involving enforced intimacy with failing bodies, long stretches of tedium interspersed with panic, isolation combined with overfamiliarity. At nearly 30, this isn’t the life Ella imagined for herself; she had hoped to escape her evangelical lower middle-class upbringing to join “the creative classes”, and she still makes desultory efforts to paint and draw. But she alternates constantly between two opposing certainties: both that she is wasting her talents and her precious youth, and that “each action she took mattered, whether it was changing a soiled disposable brief with kindness and tact or listening to a tedious reminiscence for the thousandth time”. The novel focuses on her time caring for Jill, who is only 60. Jill’s mind has been destroyed by a brain injury rather than age, and now she drifts through the house she shares with her long-suffering husband, Bryn, cradling a naked plastic doll and babbling her inexpressible distress, using a verbal tic that gives the novel its title (“No. I don’t know. I don’t know! Say say say”). As everything that makes Jill who she is crumbles away, Ella must negotiate her relationship with both of them, and with herself: what she can give them, what affirmation or purpose she might need from them, whether Bryn could be a friend, or a father figure, or a lover. The book explores an unfashionable subject, the drive to be a good person, while wittily weighing up human fallibility This is an intensely serious and careful book, which grapples with an unfashionable subject, the drive to be a good person, while wittily weighing up human fallibility. The narrative voice knows much more about Ella than she knows about herself – her vanity, her self-satisfaction, her laziness and blinkered thinking – but it also tracks, with sincerity and compassion, her attempts at authenticity and self-knowledge, her desire to create art and approach the sublime. It beautifully conjures the bounds of the self and the mind’s efforts to overcome them, the way our ambitions and limitations are in constant dialogue. Throughout Jill’s deterioration – predictable, inevitable, unbearable – it cherishes the rhythms of everyday life and the slow comforts of shared endurance, even in the midst of chaos and extremity: “the same chip in the plate as yesterday, but also the memory of yesterday’s meal”. The novel is particularly interesting about sexual politics and the romantic self. As a woke young bisexual woman, Ella knows the effects of living in a patriarchy, but she doesn’t know how to circumvent the damage – “what bits of her psyche were herself and what bits were scar tissue”. Her relationship with girlfriend Alix is an unfolding lesson in how the messy imperfections of love can surprise us, trumping the sterile expectations of what we think we want. Before she met Alix, Ella had thought she was attracted to “masculine of centre” girlfriends because, as Savage coolly reminds us, women are taught to eroticise power. The problem of men and women remains a live one, however, especially when it comes to Bryn. She is moved and surprised by Bryn’s “Sisyphean” care for Jill. “Why was this so startling? Did she think so little of men that it surprised her when they displayed the decency she would expect from a woman? Or did she think so little of women that they didn’t warrant tender, self‑sacrificing care from a man?” Like Ella, Say Say Say asks difficult questions, of society and of the self. There are no easy answers, but in the novel’s quietly radical choice of subject matter and its open-eyed, open-hearted curiosity, it illuminates both the intimate dramas usually hidden behind closed doors and the shifting mysteries of personality and relationship. • Say Say Say is published by Serpent’s Tail (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.