Name: Repowering. Age: 50-plus. Appearance: Fern Britton, smashed off her face on plonk, yelling at the sunrise. Pardon? I am exaggerating. But Britton coined the phrase, so it’s only fair that I use her as an example. Why? Because she has repowered. Oh God, is Britton a cyborg? Is this how it ends? Wiped out by an army of invincible Ready Steady Cook hosts? Calm down. As far as anyone knows, Britton is not an unkillable instrument of destruction. I just meant that her kids have left home. I don’t follow. Britton appears in Good Housekeeping this month, declaring that she is a new woman. “I talk to a lot of my friends who are in their 50s and early 60s, and we’re all feeling the same,” she said. “The children are getting sorted and we can stop being quite so responsible as adults. We can go back to who we were at the beginning, before we did all the responsible things we needed to do. It’s repowering. We’re repowering”. So she has been released from the drudgery of kids. Basically, yes. The long, hard slog of parenthood is over, and this has allowed her to revert back to the days when she was young and free and able to tap-dance in a leotard and present the local news with Fred Dinenage. Sounds amazing. It’s nice to know that this is coming to us all, isn’t it? Soon the anxiety of adulthood will fade away and we will become teenagers all over again. Bliss. I suppose Britton isn’t becoming an actual teenager, though. You know, an actual 2019 teenager, because then her mind would be full of terror about the ruined planet that she has inherited. Right … And she wouldn’t have any disposable income to speak of, because she would be busy killing herself in three zero-hour contract jobs to cover her rent, which is so cripplingly enormous that she will never be able to achieve the dream of home ownership that came so easily to her parents. Um … And somehow she would be blamed for all this by the generation that actually caused it, all because she has been on two nice holidays ever and sometimes buys her lunch from Pret. Christ, being a teenager sucks. I know! This is the last thing that Britton should want! At least when you have young kids you can shield yourself from the state of the world with all the constant chores. Now that’s all gone. It’s gone! So what should Britton be excited about instead? I don’t know. I saw some discounted avocados in Aldi the other week. If she really is young again, she’ll go nuts for those. Do say: “I’m repowering.” Don’t say: “With fossil fuels, probably, because I’m a selfish baby boomer.”