They called him the Paddington Express. Terry Downes was a ferociously charismatic British boxer who steamed his way to the world middleweight title in 1961 and delighted fight fans with one-liners as sharp as his blows. Downes’s tale, from scrapping on the streets of London as a child to sporting success and an unlikely movie career, is the subject of a new show at the Edinburgh fringe performed by his grandson, James McNicholas. The Boxer, staged in one of the Pleasance’s sweaty Bunker venues and directed by Tom Parry, mixes punches with punchlines in a style that does Downes proud. With his first solo show, McNicholas – who has previously visited Edinburgh with the sketch comedy trio Beasts – contrasts his grandfather’s life story with his own. He takes to the stage in a Lonsdale tracksuit, and at one point dons boxing gloves, to play a heightened version of Downes. These character-comedy scenes about “Pop”, as McNicholas always knew him, are intercut with more traditional standup routines in which he compares his achievements with those of his grandad. Downes was a world champion at 25 while McNicholas was once told by a PE teacher that he was so unfit he’d be dead by that age. McNicholas grew up hearing his grandfather’s larger-than-life story and had long planned to make a show about him. Downes died in 2017 and, last Christmas, McNicholas was feeling “a bit helpless” when he found himself watching a boxing match on TV. “One guy got knocked down and everyone assumed it was over. The other guy was celebrating. But then he got back up.” McNicholas was moved by the scene. “That action of standing up, getting back on his feet, resonated with me.” Within days, the shape of the comedy show was clear in his mind. After binging on boxing movies, from The Champ to Rocky and Raging Bull, McNicholas noticed a recurring arc, which gave his show its structure. He presents it in the defining sections of Downes’s career: the promise, the rise, the fall, the rally and the resolution. The 60-minute tale blurs comedy and theatre. “I’m pleased that it slightly defies genre in that way,” says McNicholas, who started out as an actor. “There’s a bit of cynicism within comedy about theatre but a bit of aspiration, too – theatre has a credibility that comedy in some ways aspires towards. But there’s a suspicion of deep pretentiousness.” For research McNicholas reread Downes’s colourful autobiography, My Bleeding Business, and spoke at length to his grandmother, Terry’s wife Barbara, whose voice can be heard in the show. “When I told my family I was going to do this, there was a bit of dissent,” he admits. But while there are plenty of laughs in the show, it is clearly made with heart and honours Downes, delighting in his success and never making fun of him. Its resolution is particularly emotional. As a child, McNicholas would visit Downes most weekends. “He was very brusque and would tell me in no uncertain terms that I’d be helping him paint a fence or mow the lawn. I knew a very different person to the man I portray in the show – I knew an old man with a pipe and a stick. Who was that man in his 20s and 30s? We know our grandparents, but we know a version of them. To rejuvenate him was a nice thing to be able to do.” Downes boxed for the US Marines and, had he resided in America a little longer, would have qualified to represent the country in the 1956 Olympics. He turned professional back in Britain and was world middleweight champion for nine months. Retiring in 1964, he went on to star in films including A Study in Terror, opposite Barbara Windsor, and Dance of the Vampires, directed by Roman Polanski. “He was always coming out with these little quips and one-liners. That was part of the inspiration for me,” says McNicholas, who also writes about football. He is an Arsenal fan and is directing a show at the fringe by the young comedian Raphael Wakefield called Wengerball, charting the rise and fall of Arsène Wenger. McNicholas’s whole family is sporty: his brother is a football agent and their cousin, Wally Downes, is a footballer turned manager. But the standup was hopeless at sport when he was younger. “That’s another project I want to pursue, asking people what they were like at sport in school. I think it’s really funny and formative.” McNicholas is still close to his fellow Beasts: he directed Owen Roberts’ first solo comedy show in 2018 and before this year’s fringe, he and the third Beast, Ciarán Dowd, sent each other recordings of their new shows. “You see one man on stage but a lot of comedy benefits from a slightly more collaborative process,” McNicholas says, “even if it’s just someone throwing you an idea for a line. Emotionally it’s massive to have that support.” No boxing movie would be complete without a montage showing the plucky hero’s training sessions – and the fringe is a gruelling challenge for standups. What is McNicholas’s regime? “There have been a lot of broken promises,” he laughs. “I was going to join the gym, run every day. It’s incredible how quickly the plan disintegrated.” He’s given up on getting in his five portions of fruit and veg and is mainly concerned with looking after his voice. “I’m trying to drink only clear spirits because someone told me that was better for your voice than beer. That’s as healthy as it gets: drinking exclusively clear spirits!” James McNicholas: The Boxer is at the Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 25 August