It is refreshing to see an article about the effects of social activity in preventing dementia on the front page of the Guardian (Social life may lower the risk of dementia, 3 August). The sad fact is that this has been known for many years, including examples such as the Nun Study, which examined the effects of ageing on a group of Roman Catholic nuns in the United States. So much research on either the cause or the prevention of dementia is too narrowly focused; too much attention is paid to the brain and not enough to the whole person. Research in the arts has already shown how meaningful cultural and social activity keeps people healthier for longer. What we need now is not more research on brains, but increasing investment to maintain and develop our cultural resources and encourage wider participation in the arts. This would help to build social connections between people of all ages, and prevent a host of diseases, including dementia.Rhonda RiachiOxford • Such a dementia fund (Barbara Windsor calls on PM to tackle UK’s dementia funding crisis, theguardian.com, 6 August) would be unfair. There are 120,000 older people living in care homes and many more receiving care in their own homes who need social care but don’t have dementia. Many of them are paying considerable sums for care needs caused by strokes, falls, frailty, heart failure, vision impairment, osteoarthritis, chronic lung disease or Parkinson’s disease. Privileging sufferers from dementia over these others would merely shift the boundary between the system’s winners and its cheated losers. It will take more to resolve the social care crisis than special treatment for sufferers of one condition.Marion ShoardAuthor of How to Handle Later Life • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition