Shares in the loans group Amigo plunged more than 50% after it warned growth would would come to a halt due to a looming crackdown by regulators and the rising risk of an economic downturn sparked by a no-deal Brexit. Amigo specialises in guarantor loans, which use friends and family to guarantee repayments on loans to people who might otherwise struggle to borrow. The lender said it now expected no growth in its loan book as it adopted a “more conservative view” on lending. It also said it would be setting aside more cash as provisions to cover a rising number of customers falling behind on repayments. The FTSE 250 firm added that its new forecasts “reflect the increased probability of a no-deal Brexit and the corresponding effect this is expected to have on the economy and on consumer sentiment”. It said: “While past recessions have demonstrated the resilience of our business, we believe it is prudent to factor a deteriorating economic outlook into our impairments model. We will continue to monitor the potential impact and will review our position again at the half year.” Amigo shares tumbled 51% to 72p in Thursday afternoon trading. The falling price is bad news for investors, including the beleaguered fund manager Neil Woodford and his former employer Invesco. Woodford Investment Management recently sold nearly half its stake, leaving it with a 0.8% holding. Amigo said it would focus on finding new customers rather than handing multiple loans to existing borrowers. The move is in anticipation of a crackdown by City regulators, who said this year that they were monitoring guarantor loan companies because of the increasing number of guarantees being called in. The Financial Conduct Authority has raised concerns over the practice of re-lending to existing borrowers, and the risk of customers getting caught in a cycle of persistent debt with sky-high interest rates. Amigo, which offers guarantor loans at a rate of about 49.9% APR, said 12% of its customers had topped up their loan more than twice. It tends to offer of between £500 to £10,000 paid back over one to five years. The firm has 210,300 customers that it says have an average outstanding balance of about £4,000. The company, has experienced a sharp rise in customer complaints and an increase in those being upheld by the financial ombudsman, said it was tightening its eligibility criteria to “stay ahead of regulation”. Amigo said: “The change in economic outlook, and the potential for regulatory change, means we are taking a more cautious approach to lending and have increased provisioning.” The company floated on the London stock market last summer. Its shares were priced at 275p, valuing the business at £1.3bn. They have now lost 74% of their value, making them one of the worst-performing recent flotations, along with the peer-to-peer lender Funding Circle and the luxury carmaker Aston Martin. Amigo’s founder, James Benamor, cashed in shares worth £200m but his Richmond Group still owns about 60%.  Russ Mould, an investment director at AJ Bell, said: “The outlook contains quite a few shocks, including a warning that impairments are likely to remain at a higher level, the ratio of cost to income is going to rise, and there could be a hit to repeat lending. “Amigo argues that it provides a valuable product that helps improve people’s lives yet the business is so far failing to reward shareholders. The latest update would suggest something is going very wrong given it is having problems within its collections business. “The market was already worried about regulation becoming tighter for the guarantor loans market and today’s update from Amigo makes matters even worse, suggesting it has some very dark days ahead.”