Many of the names will still resonate for older readers. All too few of them can have any associations for younger ones. They were the shipbuilding firms of Britain, the companies that, until the first world war and beyond, made the majority of the world’s ships. They were still big manufacturing concerns in the post-1945 era. They were firms like John Brown’s, Fairfield’s and Scott Lithgow on the Clyde, Swan Hunter on the Tyne, Short Brothers on Wearside and Smiths Dock on the Tees. One or two of these once fabled companies still survive, like Vickers in Barrow and Cammell Laird on the Mersey. Today, though, Britain is not a shipbuilding leviathan but a minnow. According to UN statistics, the UK now builds so few ships that our share of world shipbuilding is measured at 0.0%. In the 21st century it is China, South Korea and Japan who build the merchant ships that still carry some 90% of the world’s trade. Another of the UK’s shipbuilding legends called in the receivers this week. Harland and Wolff in Belfast once built ships like the Titanic, the Pendennis Castle, the Canberra and, for the navy, HMS Belfast. Its big yellow Samson and Goliath gantries still dominate the River Lagan’s eastern bank, towering over the tourists who flock to the Titanic Belfast visitor centre nearby. During the second world war, H&W employed around 35,000 people. Today, H&W is Norwegian-owned and the number of employees has dwindled to a few hundred, mainly refurbishing oil rigs and making offshore wind turbines. Now even they have been given their cards after administrators were called in. The unions are picketing the yard, and are pressing for the company to be nationalised. Harland and Wolff is resonant not just because it is such a storied shipyard. It is also an icon of Northern Ireland loyalism. Its historic reputation was rooted in the mass expulsion of Catholic workers from the yard during the fight that led to partition a century ago. In the 1970s, a combination of militancy and intimidation shut the yard and helped bring the Heath government’s efforts at power-sharing to an end. Today, even though much has changed, the closure may trigger some schadenfreude in republican Belfast. But in such a DUP stronghold as east Belfast it may also provoke anger that the party has not delivered enough UK support to protect H&W and its future. The unions’ threat to run H&W candidates against the DUP is certainly one to watch. This latest shipyard closure underscores a wider British failure from the 1980s on. End of empire need not have meant an end of British shipbuilding. But it was allowed to happen. Tough, government-led decisions to target new commercial shipping markets for fishing vessels, ferries and cruise ships were never taken. Governments focused instead on naval needs alone; R&D defaulted to the defence agenda. The result is that a post-Brexit Britain would have no shipbuilding sector adapted to 21st-century markets. Instead, it would be closed for business.