All 209 UK outlets of Karen Millen and Coast are to close, putting up to 1,100 jobs at risk, as the brands’ digital business has been bought out of administration by online retailer Boohoo for £18.2m. Administrators at Deloitte said 62 employees at the retailers’ head offices had been made redundant with immediate effect and stores would only remain open for “a short time” while stock is sold off. The two chains currently trade from 32 standalone stores and 177 concessions in department stores including Debenhams and House of Fraser. Like many other retailers, the fashion chains have suffered from higher costs and falling shopper numbers on the high street amid weak consumer confidence. Administrators said Karen Millen also suffered from “a complex global operation in an increasingly competitive market”. Rob Harding, joint administrator at Deloitte, said: “As we continue to see, the retail trading environment in the UK remains extremely challenging. Karen Millen has been seeking to address the financial challenges that it faced by pursuing a sale of the business and, whilst a sale of the whole business has not been deliverable, the Boohoo transaction facilitates the survival of these iconic British brands through an online platform.” Boohoo said the two brands had direct online sales from their own websites of £28.4m and were “highly complementary additions” to its roster of brands which already include PrettyLittleThing, Nasty Gal and MissPap. John Lyttle, the group chief executive of Boohoo, said: “The acquisition of the online business of two great and renowned British brands in Karen Millen and Coast represents another milestone in the group’s growth story as it continues to invest in its scalable multi-brand platform and gain further share in the global fashion e-commerce market.” Karen Millen and Coast together employ about 1,100 people across the UK. Coast also has a significant overseas presence, with concessions in the Middle East and outposts as far-flung as Singapore and Malaysia. Physical retailers have been hit by a combination of changing habits, unseasonably warm weather, rising costs and broader economic problems. 2018 saw the disappearance of Toys R Us, Maplin and Poundworld as a result. In terms of habits, shoppers are switching to buying online. The likes of Amazon have an unfair advantage because they have a lower business rate bill, which holds down costs and enables online retailers to woo shoppers with low prices. Business rates are taxes, based on the value of commercial property, that are imposed on traditional retailers with physical stores. At the same time, there is a move away from buying ‘stuff’ as more people live in smaller homes and rent rather than buy. Those pressures have come just as rising labour and product costs, partly fuelled by Brexit, have coincided with economic and political uncertainty that has dampened consumer confidence. Retailers with a high street presence want the government to change business rates. They also want more political certainty as the potential for a no deal Brexit means some are not only incurring additional costs for stockpiling goods but are unsure about the impact of tariffs after October 2019. Retailers also want more investment in town centres to help them adapt to changing trends, as well as a cut to high parking charges which they say put off shoppers. In the October 2018 budget the government announced some relief on business rates for independent shopkeepers. It has also set up a £675m 'future high streets' fund under which local councils can bid for up to £25m towards regeneration projects such as refurbishing local historic buildings and improving transport links. The fund will also pay for the creation of a high street taskforce to provide expertise and hands-on support to local areas. Some retailers could go under. Weakened by a difficult Christmas – which accounts for the entire annual profits of many retailers, and with further Brexit wobbles to come – retailers are facing a tough 2019. Another rise in the national minimum wage in April and the falling value of the pound against the dollar, which is used to buy goods in the Far East, have also added to costs and hit profits.  The Karen Millen holding company lost £5.7m in the year ending February 2018, after losing £11.9m in the previous financial year. Deloitte was hired as advisers about six weeks ago to assess options, and quickly decided a sale was the best option. A large proportion of Coast’s concessions are located in Debenhams and House of Fraser department stores, which have been forced to close branches to weather the high street trading crisis. Boohoo has been one of the few retailers to buck the trend of painful decline in the sector. In June, the company reported a 39% sales rise in the three months to 31 May. Boohoo was founded by the fashion entrepreneur Mahmud Kamani and Carol Kane in Manchester in 2006. It has expanded quickly, floating on the stock market in 2014. Its market value was £2.7bn on Monday, and shares rose by 1.2% in early trading on Tuesday. The retail analyst Nick Bubb applauded the company’s move to diversify its business towards the older shoppers who frequent Karen Millen and Coast.