Customer complaints about British betting companies have increased by almost 5,000% over the past five years, with problem gamblers alleging that bookies continue to entice them to bet even after they have pleaded to be left off mailing lists. The figures, obtained by BBC Panorama from the Gambling Commission regulator, show there were a record 8,266 complaints in 2018, compared with just 169 in 2013. Neil McArthur, the chief executive of the Gambling Commission, said: “We are pushing the industry to know its customers, and part of this is actually, possibly, a good sign because it’s suggesting that consumers are demanding more of the gambling operators. And I would encourage them to continue to do that.” A problem gambler who lost £125,000 with the online casinos LeoVegas and Casumo accused them of ignoring obvious signs of her addiction, instead offering her bonuses to keep betting. The formerly successful accountant, who is now receiving addiction treatment, once lost £54,000 in an overnight spree. “They have algorithms where if you’re spending a lot they make you a VIP, or send you a bonus email and they use that to their advantage,” she said. “They could also use it to prevent problem gambling, which is what the commission say they should be doing.” In another case, the commission is investigating claims that LeoVegas accepted £20,000 from a problem gambler who had stolen the money from his mother and then bombarded him with emails encouraging him to keep betting. Last month, the regulator imposed a £5.9m penalty on Ladbrokes Coral, one of the largest ever, over “systemic failings” at the company to protect problem gamblers who lost large amounts of money. The UK’s top five gambling firms have offered to increase funding for addiction treatment sixfold to raise £60m a year to help problem gamblers. However, critics say it is not enough to tackle problem gambling effectively and have labelled it a “bribe” to ward off tougher regulation of the sector. There have been calls from some politicians, charities and campaign groups for a mandatory tax. The former sport minister Mims Davies came under fire in April for saying that a mandatory levy was not required. The industry has grown rapidly since the government relaxed restrictions on betting and advertising in 2007. Gamblers are now losing almost twice as much to betting companies as they were a decade ago. Last year, punters lost a record £14.5bn. The Panorama programme Addicted to Gambling will air on Monday at 8.30pm on BBC One.