The teenage sensation Ansu Fati scored his first Barcelona goal as the Spanish champions were denied victory by a late penalty in an eventful 2-2 draw at Osasuna. The 16-year-old Fati was sent on at half-time with Barcelona trailing to Roberto Torres’s early strike and finding little fluency to their game. Fati was on target within six minutes of his introduction – to become Barcelona’s youngest ever La Liga goalscorer –and Arthur put them ahead before Torres equalised from the penalty spot. On a sultry evening in Pamplona which saw drinks breaks taken, Barcelona were without injured trio of Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez and Ousmane Dembélé. Osasuna, the Segunda División champions, came into the contest high on confidence, with four points from their opening two games and their defence yet to be breached. There were emotional moments before kick-off as a minute’s silence was in held in memory of the daughter of Luis Enrique. The former Barcelona player and manager announced on Thursday that his nine-year-old daughter Xana had died five months after being diagnosed with bone cancer. Osasuna took a shock seventh-minute lead when Torres superbly volleyed home Brandon’s cross at the far post. Barcelona sent on Fati at half-time and the teenager made a dramatic impact by beating his marker in the air to head home Carles Pérez’s cross. At the age of 16 years and 304 days, Fati became the third youngest player to score in La Liga history after Fabrice Olinga and Iker Muniain. Barcelona went ahead after 64 minutes when the increasingly influential Pérez poked the ball through to Arthur. The Brazilian midfielder gave Osasuna goalkeeper Rubén Martínez no chance by brilliantly curling home his first Barcelona goal from 16 yards. Osasuna levelled nine minutes from time after Oier’s cross struck the arm of Gerard Piqué and they were awarded a penalty. Torres kept his cool in the intense atmosphere to send Barcelona goalkeeper Marc-Andre ter Stegen the wrong way from the spot. In Germany, Union Berlin stunned Borussia Dortmund, achieving their first ever Bundesliga victory with a 3-1 win that left their opponents three points off the top. Dortmund fell behind for the third straight league game but their in-form frontline that had scored eight goals in the previous two matches were largely toothless this time. Marius Bülter gave the hosts a shock lead in the 22nd minute, but their joy was short-lived with the Dortmund forward Paco Alcácer stabbing in an equaliser three minutes later to continue his run of scoring in every Dortmund game so far. Yet instead of turning the game around as they had done in previous weeks, Dortmund showed little attacking appetite against a disciplined Union side and soon conceded again. Bülter slotted in on the rebound after Roman Bürki had done well to stop a shot and the goal exposed Dortmund’s defensive weakness so far this season. Sebastian Andersson then completed a fine passing move in the 75th to score their third as the Alte Foersterei stadium erupted in song and fans lit flares. “Obviously we are very disappointed,” said Dortmund’s Julian Brandt. “We have to learn from this. We are responsible for the way we play. We should have avoided falling behind in the first place.” The Ruhr valley club’s first loss of the season leaves them on six points in fifth place, three behind the new leaders, RB Leipzig, who are on nine after their 3-1 win over Borussia Mönchengladbach on Friday. Union are on four points. Bayern Munich demolished Mainz 6-1 to climb into second place on seven points.