If you’ve mentioned opening batsmen in England across a growing number of recent years, you will have witnessed a glum ritual in response. Those who have occupied the position since the retirement of Andrew Strauss will be solemnly listed one by one, like a clutch of cast-iron names read from the side of a municipal Boer War memorial. Compton, Carberry, Lyth, Robson. In the name of the Father. Stoneman, Hameed, Jennings, Hales. And of the Son. Moeen, Pietersen, Buttler, Trott. May your peace lie upon them. To this day the same angst wracks England: where does an opener come from, and who should it be? Can Jason Roy remain at the top, should Joe Denly ascend from the middle, should Joe Root do it given he effectively does anyway? All while the No 11 Jack Leach japes in the background having turned a nightwatchman stint into a more successful go at opening than any of them. But cast your gaze to the other Ashes dressing room, and that intractable English problem takes on a global aspect. David Warner may not resemble Alastair Cook in comportment or extracurricular activity, but has similarly been the one consistent opener spending years looking for a partner. Ed Cowan, Shane Watson, Phillip Hughes, Shaun Marsh came and went. Chris Rogers formed the most stable pairing but his late‑bloom career always had a limited lifespan. Joe Burns gave way to Matthew Renshaw, then Warner’s union with Cameron Bancroft took eight matches to end in sandpaper‑tinged turmoil in March 2018. Suddenly, as after Cook’s rather more cheerful retirement, a team needed to find not one opener but two. Burns and Renshaw were the emergencies covering the banned pair in South Africa. Neither was retained six months later in Dubai, where Usman Khawaja did a temporary job to resounding effect alongside the white-ball captain, Aaron Finch. Back in the home summer season, Khawaja dropped to three to accommodate Marcus Harris, then opened again three Tests later after Finch got punted, then moved back down a game later to reincorporate Burns. With Australia’s next Test assignment being the Ashes, it was equally manic and nonsensical to drop both Harris (the top scorer in Australia’s Test summer and domestic season) and Burns (who had made 180 from a tricky position in the final home Test) to recall Bancroft (second division county runs and a warmup match against his own team’s bowlers). The final piece to complete the picture this week involved panicking after two poor matches and dropping Bancroft for Harris. Perhaps those lamenting England’s position can feel like they have a bit of company. Bancroft looks a limited player against the moving ball, but has no end of stubbornness. Without making big scores, he battled out an hour and a half in Australia’s first innings at Lord’s, then over an hour in the second. Marnus Labuschagne’s match-saving innings would have been much less likely had Bancroft gone early. When it came to picking the first Test side, Burns and Harris had the strongest claims. Harris was demoted to the bench and Burns was given a ticket home. But if the justifications for choosing Bancroft a couple of weeks ago were valid then, they would still apply in the current third Test at Headingley. Instead, a couple of low scores have led to the batsman being cut. This sort of overreaction is endemic in cricket, a game where the very best fail at least two times out of three. In the same vein English pundits have continued to fret over their current opener Jason Roy, even though he was picked as an aggressive gamble that could only ever come off once in a while. Warner was able to show the value of latitude, shaking off his own poor start to the series with a vital 61 in his fifth innings after being asked to bat on the first day. Having been monstered a couple of times by Stuart Broad in swinging conditions, Warner found a way to protect his stumps, let his edge be beaten, and make the most of his chance when the luck of the swing went with him. Unable to make the same adjustment was Harris, fed to the lions by being asked to play his first match on a rainy morning with the ball seaming and swinging. A player who had felt his way into the series might have survived it, but not one from a standing start. Jofra Archer swarmed him before drawing his edge for eight. Both Bancroft and Harris could have benefited from more time. Five Tests, a full series, the best chance to find a way. By definition only one of them could have had it. Now neither will. England and Australia could equally stand to learn: in the game of openers, patience matters most of all.