The housing crisis (Can PM rekindle dream of home ownership, the policy that made the Tories?, 2 August) has two more fundamental facets that were not explored in your piece. The first is that the planning system provides perverse incentives for major developers to throttle housing delivery after they have been granted planning permissions. Controlling the speed of housing completion not only guarantees that house prices remain high but can also activate the “five year land supply” requirement that terrifies local authorities and allows developers to then force through further permissions on unsustainable sites. By slowing down building they can maximise profits and bring extra land they own into play where it should never really be developed. The second point is that housebuilding seriously increases carbon emissions. By some estimates, building a new house releases 10 times the average annual per capita emissions of the person who will live in it. This is before any energy use of actually living in the property. If the UK is serious about achieving carbon neutrality, a lot more effort must be put into renovating and insulating existing properties rather than throwing up the identikit estates on greenfield sites that developers seem to prefer.Richard GilyeadSaffron Walden, Essex • The Rev Paul Nicolson makes an argument about the tax arrangements of homeowners and landlords (Letters, 2 August). Clergy who have provided homes and own a second home are able to claim council tax relief, thus depriving councils of revenue. That’s before one considers the vast wealth, property and untaxed income of the established church. Render unto Caesar indeed.Dr Neil J YoungPennsylvania, United States • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition