It took me a while to like Eton mess – that classic combination of cream, berries and meringue. But as soon as the penny dropped, I started to think of other ways you might possibly put it together. So check this out. Trust me, it’s not that messy – it’s full of all those great summer ingredients, but all levelled up. Leave the traybake to cool completely before spreading on the Eton cream, then grate on the white chocolate as if it were cheese. Prep 30 minCook 50 minServes 12 200g unsalted butter115g golden caster sugar 110g light brown sugar 225g self-raising flour 1 tsp baking powder3 large eggs3 tbsp whole milk150g vanilla yoghurt1 tsp almond extract300g raspberries For the Eton cream400ml double cream 4 tbsp icing sugar1 tbsp vanilla extract100g raspberries, halved200g strawberries, hulled and quartered6 meringue nests, roughly crushed50g white chocolate, chilled Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and grease and line a 20cm x 30cm baking tray with baking paper. Combine the butter and both sugars and beat until light and fluffy. In a separate bowl, sift the flour and baking powder, and in another bowl, mix the eggs and milk. Add this to the butter mixture and combine well, then slowly add the flour and mix again. Spoon into the tin, level the top and bake for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, combine the yoghurt and almond extract, then, when ready, take the cake out of the oven, and quickly spoon the yoghurt over the cake. Scatter over the raspberries and pop the cake back in the oven for another 20 minutes, until a metal skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. Leave to cool in the tray for 15 minutes, then remove from the tin and transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. To make the Eton cream, whip together the cream, icing sugar and vanilla until soft peaks form, then fold in half the raspberries and strawberries. Roughly spread the cream over the surface of the cooled cake, then top with the remaining fruit and the crushed meringue. Grate over the white chocolate, as if it were cheese, and cut the traybake into squares to serve.