For reasons of equine welfare, I imagine that many of you will share my reservations about the Palio di Siena, the medieval race which is still held twice a year around that city’s main square. But I bring Friday’s race to your attention because of one extraordinary aspect, that it was won by a loose horse. Remorex is the horse in question, ridden for the first half of the race by Giovanni Atzeni, a cousin to Andrea, who we know well. Alas, they parted when ambitiously trying to take the edge off one of the corners. In fairness to Atzeni, no saddles are used in the Palio. Frankly, it’s a miracle that some of the jockeys stay aboard throughout. Anyway, bonny Remorex, with his white stripe down his face, galloped on undeterred, fighting his way among three horses that still had their jockeys and hitting the front on the line. It was enough to confuse at least one TV commentator, who initially called the (mounted) runner-up as the winner. The amazing thing about Remorex is that he has now won the Palio twice from three attempts, finishing riderless both times. I gather that he is not a thoroughbred but he was sired by a not-very-exalted horse who ran in Britain years ago, Dankeston. Trained by Michael Bell, Dankeston’s big win came in a conditions race at Redcar, though he was also fourth in the Prince of Wales’s Stakes of 1996. Dankeston was a son of Elmaamul, one of my favourite horses from my early days of following racing, and Remorex even looks a bit like him. I feel oddly proud on behalf of the old horse that one of his grandkids has shown such bravery. The Palio might be the only race in the world where a riderless horse is still allowed to keep the win if he passes the post first. I’m pretty sure I’d have been richer if we had such a rule in British jump racing. On the other hand, Red Rum would only have been third in the 1977 Grand National and few of us would want to rewrite that particular piece of form. To Brighton, where hopefully Georgia Dobie will remain firmly atop Tin Hat (2.40) in the sprint handicap for which they are being underestimated at 6-1. Trained by Eve Johnson Houghton, Tin Hat has responded well to the fitting of cheekpieces and made it two out of two at this track 11 days ago. The winning margin was only a neck but they were nicely clear of a veteran course specialist in third and Tin Hat is still 12lb below the mark he had at this time last year. I think the chestnut will go well again. There’s also 6-1 about Harlequin Rose (4.40) in the apprentice race at the end of the card. She got her second win at this idiosyncratic track last month, when today’s rider, the promising William Carver, was aboard. Dropped a furlong, she met a lot of trouble in running here a fortnight ago and I’m putting a line through that. Lady Mascara (4.10) should make up into a decent animal and her Sandown third is the best form on offer in a maiden handicap. If you can bear to bet on such a race, the 2-1 looks fair. There’s been an early move for Doctor Look Here (7.05), now 9-4 from 4-1 for a handicap hurdle at Newton Abbot. A Sue and Lucy Gardner production, he dropped 12lb for three runs over too short a trip before winning tidily here last month and can probably do it again. I napped Magical Rhythms at Kempton on the basis of the promise she showed last time but she seems worryingly weak in the market for this novice contest. Brighton 1.40 Big Time Maybe 2.10 Laikaparty 2.40 Tin Hat 3.10 So Macho 3.40 Paddy The Chef 4.10 Lady Mascara 4.40 Harlequin Rose Kempton 2.00 Pearl Stream 2.30 Overpriced Mixer 3.00 Loving Glance 3.30 Magical Rhythms (nap) 4.00 Toro Dorado 4.30 Chica De La Noche 5.05 Typhoon Ten 5.40 WanaasahYarmouth 4.55 Simba Samba 5.25 Pocket Square 5.55 Knowing 6.25 Contrast 6.55 Capla Berry 7.25 Queen Of Burgundy 7.55 Agent Of FortuneNewton Abbot 5.35 Emerald Rocket 6.05 Triple Chief 6.35 Empreinte Reconce 7.05 Doctor Look Here (nb) 7.35 Bermeo 8.05 False Getaway