For a couple of years Nontando Mpofu, known to her friends as Lucy, struggled to find permanent work and often found herself reliant on the generosity of her church and food bank. “Life was a real struggle, and it was very hard for me to juggle everything – paying the rent and looking after my daughter as a single parent,” Mpofu, 40, says in the airy kitchen of her flat in Leytonstone, east London. “I got into quite a bit of debt and rent arrears.” Mpofu’s life changed last November when an unlikely alliance between France’s biggest bank and her social housing landlord helped get her back into permanent work with a job at Marks & Spencer, and get her bank account into the black. “I was just scrolling through Facebook one day, and I saw a post from someone in the community saying: ‘If you’ve been unemployed for six months – get in touch, we can help’.” The message had been posted by a support officer employed by her landlord London & Quadrant (L&Q) , one of the UK’s largest housing associations which rents out close to 100,000 homes in London and the south-east. L&Q employs more than a dozen people dedicated to getting its long-term unemployed residents such as Mpofu into permanent jobs. The team of support workers helped Mpofu perfect her CV, coached her through mock interviews, and helped her identify jobs suitable to her skills and circumstances. The L&Q team also helps unemployed residents with buying clothes to wear to interviews and paying for travel. Matthew Corbett, the director of the L&Q foundation, said the housing association was committed to helping its tenants into work because “it makes our communities happy and healthier” but also because L&Q is contractually obliged to by its bank, BNP Paribas. France’s biggest bank loaned L&Q £100m at a discount rate on the condition that the housing association helped at least 600 of its residents into work. BNP Paribas and L&Q were unable to state how big the discount is, but Corbett said it was significant and would free up more money for the housing association to invest in its foundation. L&Q, which was founded by a Church of England priest in 1963, smashed the target of getting 600 residents into work, and the loan will be extended for four years with L&Q required to increase its job search effort by an additional 25 people each year. Accountants at PwC will audit L&Q to verify that the housing association really achieved the target, which built upon its existing efforts to get residents into work. Social housing residents are twice as likely to be unemployed compared with the UK population on average, according to research by the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR). Those who are in work are likely to be low-paid and in part-time jobs. The average weekly pay for housing association tenants is £250, compared to £232 for local authority tenants, £348 for private renters and £454 for owner-occupiers. Waqar Ahmed, L&Q’s finance director, said: “Everything that L&Q does begins with social purpose, and we believe that no one should be denied the opportunity to achieve their potential because of where they live. “BNP Paribas is exactly the sort of partner we are looking for, and we are delighted to have completed this ground-breaking deal with them. The team at BNP Paribas share our sense of social purpose, and our combined vision is going to help hundreds more people into employment every year.” BNP Paribas said the idea to offer the discount “sustainability-linked” loan came about after the bank’s change to its corporate social responsibility policy to do more to “create a positive impact in society”. Simon Gates, a senior banker at BNP Paribas UK, said the deal was the first to tie the terms of a loan to efforts to reduce unemployment. “It is the result of close collaboration to conceptualise and structure what represents a landmark deal for sustainable finance in the UK: to our knowledge, this is the first ever UK housing association loan that incorporates a concrete, positive impact metric. “L&Q will be assessed on the actual impact realised in the community in terms of helping residents back to work. We think this is a watershed moment and we are honoured to support L&Q as it continues its essential work of building affordable, high-quality homes.” After the success of the deal with L&Q, BNP Paribas signed a similar deal this week with Optivo, another housing association which owns 47,000 homes occupied by close to 100,000 people. Gates said the Optivo loan was “about getting people back into work, which is good for individuals, families, the economy and society”. David Reynolds, the BNP Paribas banker who agreed the deal, said the French bank saw it as part of its “responsibility to align financing to reward worthy causes”. “From the top down, we are really focused on the positive impact banking can have,” he said. “It’s important for us to show that we support these sort of causes that are doing good for society.” Reynolds said the bank was putting aside a pool of money to support other social housing projects as well as other schemes aimed at improving the environment and cutting down on waste water. Greg Beales, the campaigns director of the housing charity Shelter, said it was important that banks such as BNP Paribas were making it easier for housing associations to build more homes particularly at a time of severe government cuts. “This shows the private sector stepping in to provide finance when the public finances have been incredible stretched,” he said. “Homes can help do so much more social good than just simply providing housing: they act as a platform from which people can improve their whole lives.” The terms of the Optivo loan have not been disclosed due to commercial sensitivity, but it is understood that the target will call on the housing association to significantly build on the approximately 1,000 residents a year it currently helps into work. On the frontlines helping Optivo residents find work are 17 Give Us a Chance employment specialists including Whitney Henry. Henry, who got her job through the same programme, said the most important aspect of her work was to give other residents “the confidence to believe in themselves”. “Some people have been out of work for a long time, and they have lost some of that confidence and belief in themselves,” said Henry, who works with residents on the Isle of Sheppey, Kent, one of the most deprived parts of the UK. Her personal target is to get 50 people a year into work. Last year she found jobs for 126, including every member of a family of four. The father secured a job as a school caretaker, the mother got part-time cleaning work in the school, the daughter took an IT course before getting a job at PC World, and her brother is studying the same course while working at Greggs. “It is so rewarding when they get into jobs,” Henry said. “It’s probably the best feeling in the world that you have helped them achieve, and you feel like you have achieved with them. I am so proud of all them.”