Booking a cheap flight can seem a good idea. But reality brings surprises. Such as one easyJet customer’s tweet claiming to show a woman on a flight from London to Geneva sitting on a row of seats without backs. EasyJet pointed out that no one had actually sat in the damaged seat during the flight. However, plenty of passengers have their own nightmareish tales of low-cost flights … I was trying to catch a flight to my sister’s hen weekend with her three closest friends. However, airline staff told us we could not board as the plane was too heavy. They offered us a flight the day after, but my sister was already at our destination alone. So we asked if there was anything they could do. We were given the option for two of us to fly out, with the other two remaining in a hotel. They weren’t given any food and to this day haven’t been reimbursed for the flights. I would be very curious to know how the airline decided we were the ones pushing the plane over its maximum weight, given none of us weighed more than 55kg and were all carrying hand luggage. Charlotte, London I boarded a very early flight one morning for a business trip to Budapest, only to find that a man was lying, asleep, across the front three seats. The cabin crew tried to wake him and sit him up but he kept falling over – it looked as if he might have been under the influence. They then decided to remove him from the plane. They shuffled him to the aircraft’s front door, at which point he tripped and fell down the steps on to the tarmac. I and some other passengers watched from the window as he was escorted away. Surprisingly, we left almost on time. Alex, Guildford A budget airline once lost my bags on a flight to Madrid. I went to the airline’s website and it stated that I was entitled to £100 for each day I was without baggage. In need of a change of clothes and toiletries, I went shopping, making sure to keep receipts. The next day I went back into the airport and was reunited with my bag. Later, I submitted a lost baggage claim to the airline only to be emailed back with a message saying my claim was rejected because I received my bag in 23 hours and 30 minutes rather than 24. Megan, 24, Colchester I arrived at Stansted for a flight to Frankfurt, and the parallel queue – for a flight to Belfast – consisted of hundreds of passengers. Both queues were moving slowly, but no one was present to check in the Belfast flyers until an hour before their departure time. As I reached the front of my queue, the check-in staff closed the Belfast flight with only a third of its passengers checked in, claiming that the check-in desk had to be closed 40 minutes prior to departure. There was no mention that the reason people hadn’t been able to check in was the lack of staff. Eventually, I heard that people were offered a flight to Dublin the day afterwards, but travelling onwards to Belfast would be at their own expense.Ric, Stevenage