The leader of Italy’s centre-left Democratic party (PD) is under pressure to relent to demands for Giuseppe Conte to lead a PD-Five Star Movement (M5S) coalition, as the deadline looms for the two parties to strike an agreement and avoid new elections. The nomination of Conte, the outgoing prime minister who last week ended an ill-fated coalition government between M5S and the far-right League, is the main obstacle in the talks. The PD leader, Nicola Zingaretti, showed signs of opening up to the prospect of Conte during a PD meeting in Rome on Sunday afternoon, a source close to the discussions said. But then later on Sunday, and again on Monday morning, he told reporters that any “turning point” government required a break from the past, including a change of team. “I am working for a serious solution … we need to build a shared programme, because parallel programmes were a mistake that Italy is paying for … we can and we must move forward,” Zingaretti said. Luigi Di Maio, the M5S leader, has refused to back down on Conte, saying last week that the law professor, who was plucked out of nowhere to lead its alliance with the League, was “a rare pearl that Italy can’t lose”. Zingaretti’s reluctance over Conte stems partly from his preference to have elections rather than team up with a longstanding rival who has already been part of a failed government. The other issue is Matteo Renzi, the PD senator and ex-prime minister who spearheaded the idea, and who still wields considerable influence within the party. “Renzi said ‘yes’ straight away to Conte … many are trying to convince Zingaretti, but he wants to demonstrate that he is the one in command,” the source added. “Either way, we need to decide today.” President Sergio Mattarella is expecting to see serious signs of progress towards the creation of a new parliamentary majority before holding fresh consultations with Italy’s main parties on Tuesday and Wednesday. If a viable deal is struck between the PD and M5S by Tuesday, Mattarella could give them more time to formalise a plan. But if the talks implode, he will probably install a caretaker government until new elections. PD supporters are also pressing Zingaretti to accept Conte. “I think it’s absurd to fight over Conte, he is a decent person who has shown great courage … we have a great opportunity,” wrote one on Zingaretti’s Facebook page. “Why veto Conte?” asked another. “This agreement should have been done over a year ago.” A Twitter campaign to reinstate Conte was also launched after his blistering attack in the senate last week against Matteo Salvini, who dramatically withdrew his League party from the alliance with M5S earlier this month as he sought to exploit his high popularity to force snap elections and become the next prime minister. Salvini’s moves have cost the party support: the League has slipped to 33.7% from 38.9% in late July, according to a poll published on Sunday. He also had not banked on the possible M5S-PD tie-up, or that Conte could emerge as his main rival. Conte eclipses both Salvini and Luigi Di Maio in the popularity stakes, commanding 61%, according to a survey on Saturday. Salvini has made peace overtures to M5S to restore the government. Italian media reported that Salvini and Di Maio were due to meet on Monday, although spokespeople did not respond to a request for confirmation. The chances of them reviving the partnership are remote but cannot be completely ruled out.