Netflix’s 13 Reasons Why has courted controversy ever since its initial release. Based on the YA novel by Jay Asher, the show’s first season probed the lives of many students at Liberty High, each of whom was impacted by the death of one of their classmates, Hannah Baker. Told in voiceover from Hannah’s perspective, 13 Reasons Why was celebrated for daring to look at teenage mental health yet sharply criticized for how it handled teen suicide. Many psychologists raised concerns that one specific scene depicting how Hannah did it (which was removed several years later) could spark a contagion effect. In response, the series has now spent two seasons trying to have its cake and eat it, doubling down on its insistence that it’s an essential show that takes teenage pain seriously, while also turning those same issues into a melodramatic soap opera. While it was always overwrought, the first season of 13 Reasons Why was punctuated with moments of sincerity that rang true, especially in scenes that illustrated the friendship and connection between Hannah and her exceptionally earnest friend Clay. In contrast, the subsequent two seasons have routinely missed the mark, depicting adolescence as a time of cloying sweetness and unbearable cruelty. In the recently released third season, it continues to traffic in cliche, presenting a teen drama that is one-part soap opera and one part after-school special. The result is a show that comes across as slapdash and careless about the very problems it proclaims to take seriously. At least the second season, which was often frustrating and included a scene of sexual violence that came across as lurid and exploitative, remained invested in looking more deeply at Hannah’s character and how her suicide affected those closest to her. In contrast, the third season just isn’t sure what to do with itself and its characters. The series reboots itself as a supposedly less inflammatory teen murder-mystery that manages somehow to be boring, manipulative and toxic all at once. The season is barely held together by the narration of a completely new narrator, Ani, an annoyingly self-absorbed and self-aggrandizing recent transfer to Liberty High, who waxes on philosophically about truth and secrets as fellow students are placed through a laundry list of “teen issues” such as bullying, teen pregnancy, drug use, assault and sexual violence. In moving away from Hannah’s story, it’s clear that 13 Reasons Why hoped to put to bed many of the complaints about the ways that the series could affect vulnerable teens. But instead, the new season confirms how the series has no moral compass at all. Certainly, there are other ensemble dramas that struggle with too many storylines, but 13 Reasons Why is so obsessed with showcasing teen trauma that the series doesn’t even seem invested in specific character development, which is why tacking on Ani as a strange new narrator who has no connection at all to Liberty High struck even diehard fans as strange and off-putting. Worse still, the most recent season is also shockingly lacking in nuance, especially as it aims to humanize Bryce, a serial rapist and bully, who has been terrorizing Liberty High since the first episode. His character is given center stage throughout the season, with the show’s aim clearly being to demonstrate how a kinder, gentler Bryce is capable of being more than vicious. Certainly, there are any number of sophisticated dramas that force viewers to contend with fascinatingly complex villains, but Bryce’s shift from sadistic rapist to troubled teen is so underwritten it could barely be described as character development at all. Instead, like Ani, Bryce’s character becomes a plot device to keep the series going. There are some aspects of character development that do feel earned this season, especially the case of Tyler, a loner who was viciously bullied and assaulted in season two. A scene where Tyler opens up to Clay about his sexual assault is incredibly moving and layered. Still, the series can’t quite seem to come to grips with the magnitude of what it means that Tyler armed himself at the end of the last season in an attempt to shoot his classmates. Rather than give an honest look at teenage mental health, 13 Reasons Why consistently reverts to after-school special talking points and even seems to assert that something as horrible as a school shooting can be averted through a simple commitment to kindness and friendship. This strange insistence on moralizing teen pain, while also presenting completely amoral storylines, makes season three such a frustrating watch. One of the most refreshing aspects of a show about teenagers like HBO’s Euphoria is that it takes its young characters seriously as people with real hopes, dreams, and desires. In contrast, 13 Reasons Why is constantly trying to convince its viewers that it is the voice of a generation, while also refusing to actually deal with character complexity in any meaningful way. Teen viewers deserve a show that doesn’t treat their problems with coy concern or with morbid fascination, but with actual compassion. If 13 Reasons Why wants to actually do this, it needs to stop endlessly ticking off a checklist of teen issues and instead, focus on giving viewers the opportunity to see characters they care about given the space to actually grow and change.