In the prologue of Regina Porter’s sprawling, sparkling debut novel, four-year-old James Vincent Jr asks his firefighter father why people need to sleep. His father tells him it is “so God could unfuck all the things people fuck up”. Decades later, when his own grandson asks him the same question, James hesitates before answering. “No one knows,” he says at last. “Sleep is a mystery.” Porter, an award-winning American playwright, is as interested in life’s mysteries as she is in the myriad ways we mess things up. Following the stories of two intersecting family clans, one black and one white, The Travelers spans six turbulent decades in the US and beyond, from the civil rights struggle of the 1950s to Obama’s first year in office. The novel begins conventionally enough: Agnes Miller is a cherished only child coming of age in Jim Crow Georgia. But when Agnes and her date, both black, are pulled over late at night by a white policeman on the aptly named Damascus Road and Agnes is taken aside for “questioning”, her ordeal, never discussed or acknowledged, detonates a silent bomb beneath her story, fracturing not only her life and the lives of those around her but narrative form itself. Porter is a wickedly astute chronicler of human foible and her sharp writing is often mordantly funny From that point on Porter’s tale abandons chronology to freewheel through time and place, in a series of seemingly random vignettes that loop through and around one another like knitting, veering off into new patterns, picking up dropped stitches of plot. Children reappear as lovers, lovers as negligent grandparents. Peripheral characters are brought abruptly into the foreground, new ones arrive without introduction to take centre stage. Events are revealed in screenplay form or through exchanged letters. It’s not always easy to keep track of who’s who – I found myself frequently flipping back to consult the two page cast of characters at the front of the novel – and there are moments when technical virtuosity tips over into tricksiness. On the whole, however, this is an exhilarating ride. Porter is a wickedly astute chronicler of human foibles and her sharp writing is often mordantly funny. It also brims with compassion. In her hands, this series of glimpses feels something like life itself: a tangled, involving, frustratingweave in which we know things briefly, intensely and at the same time not at all, and we are all both the heroes of our own stories and the extras in other people’s. • The Travelers by Regina Porter is published by Jonathan Cape (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.