Kick It Out has issued a “call to action” to social media companies after the Chelsea forward Tammy Abraham was the victim of online racial abuse. Abraham was the subject of several abusive posts on Twitter after his penalty was saved by the Liverpool goalkeeper Adrián, sealing Uefa Super Cup victory in a shootout for Jürgen Klopp’s side on Wednesday. “Last night we received reports of racist abuse at Tammy Abraham on social media after Chelsea’s Uefa Super Cup match,” a Kick It Out statement read. “Such abuse is now increasingly predictable, but no less disgusting. “We send our support to Tammy and reiterate our call for Twitter and other social media companies to clamp down on this level of abuse. This is a call to action – we want to know what they are going to do to tackle this insidious problem.” Kick It Out has already called on the FA and individual clubs to take action after “disgraceful” incidents of reported abuse on the first weekend of the season. The anti-discrimination body highlighted Cyrus Christie’s allegation that his sister was hit and racially abused by a Fulham fan during their game at Barnsley, and said Southend’s Theo Robinson, Stoke’s James McClean and Barnsley’s Bambo Diaby were also subjected to “unacceptable discriminatory abuse”. “Clubs and the football authorities must be relentless in calling out this disgraceful behaviour, and be prepared to issue strong sanctions and education sessions to any supporter involved,” the statement said. “Discrimination casts a shadow over football in this country, and we will not stop highlighting the problem while it remains rife in the game.” After the game in Istanbul, Christian Pulisic said he and his Chelsea team-mates would get behind Abraham after his shootout miss. “It’s penalties, man – somebody has to miss,” Pulisic said. “He’s going to get his head up. Obviously it’s tough but penalties are like that. He can deal with it and he’ll be fine. He’ll move on, score a goal in the next game and everything will be forgotten. We’re there for him.” Following the 4-0 defeat by Manchester United on Sunday, Pulisic felt this was the second game in a row where Chelsea’s performance was not reflected in the result. “It was harsh on us,” the USA international said. “A few things just didn’t go our way, a few decisions and in the end, to lose on penalties, that’s just how it goes.” “We can be really proud of how we played. I don’t feel that we had a fair result at Old Trafford either. We’ve been creating enough chances to win these games and we just have to keep going and keep fighting.” Pulisic had a goal ruled out for offside soon after setting up Olivier Giroud’s opener, only for Sadio Mané to level shortly after half-time. Mané added a second in extra time, before Jorginho levelled from the spot after Adrián was adjudged to have brought down Abraham in the box.