Andrew Luck, the four-time Pro Bowl quarterback and Indianapolis Colts’ franchise player whose career has been dogged by injuries in recent years, has announced he is retiring from professional football aged 29. ESPN was first to report Luck’s decision on Saturday night as the Colts hosted the Chicago Bears in a preseason contest at Lucas Oil Stadium, saying the signal-caller was “mentally worn down” and had already spoken with Colts owner Jim Irsay. After the game, Luck made it official in an emotional press conference. “I’ve been stuck in this process,” said Luck, who missed 26 games over the last four season with a litany of shoulder, kidney, rib and ankle ailments. “I haven’t been able to life the live I want to live. It’s taken the joy out of this game.” He added: “The only way forward for me is to remove myself from football.” One of the best amateur prospects of his generation, Luck was chosen with the No 1 overall pick in the 2012 NFL draft as the Colts’ successor to Peyton Manning following a decorated career at Stanford University. He immediately delivered on his promise, leading Indianapolis to the playoffs in each of his first three seasons, including a 2014 campaign where he threw a league-best 40 touchdown passes while leading the Colts to the AFC championship game. But a shoulder injury suffered during the first month of the 2015 season was the first of many ailments that would increasingly compromise Luck’s fitness, including a lacerated kidney and a partially torn abdominal muscle later that year which ended his season. That didn’t stop the Colts from signing Luck that summer to a six-year extension worth $140m, including $87m guaranteed, to make him the highest paid player in the NFL. After undergoing offseason surgery on the shoulder ahead of the 2017 season, Luck was held out the entire year as the Colts slumped to 4-12 with back-up quarterback Jacoby Brissett under center. But he returned to finish second in the league in touchdown passes last year, winning the league’s Comeback Player of the Year award. Luck, who turns 30 next month, will retire with career totals of 23,671 passing yards and 171 touchdowns in six active seasons with the AFC South club. His abrupt retirement means Brissett will be expected to start for the Colts when they open their regular season on 8 September at the Los Angeles Chargers.