When Eoin Morgan said at the end of the World Cup group stage, during a carnival of cricket that would eventually carry his team to glory, that the experience was proving so intense that “I can’t wait to get away from a cricket field”, there will have been many sportsmen who understood precisely what he was feeling. While fans enjoy the remorseless drama of these great competitions, those actually playing them find they exact a psychological and emotional toll. In October 2018, with many of the players who starred in the World Cup in Russia that summer disappointing in the Premier League, Liverpool’s Croatian defender Dejan Lovren asked for patience. “A lot of the Croatian players are exhausted emotionally,” he said. “It is the same for England, trying to get over not going into the final. Then you have such a short period of rest. It is not easy to adapt straight away. It takes so much out of you, emotionally and physically. All the players who went to the World Cup are having this period of adaptation. Eventually they will get their best form back, but it will take time.” This is not a new phenomenon, nor is it one confined to football, but before the Premier League started attracting so many international stars it was one witnessed in this country only when England themselves progressed to the later stages of World Cups in major team sports, which was a sadly infrequent occurrence. In the months after the glorious summer of 1966 several squad members endured severe downturns in form, leading the Times to complain that October that “players like the Charlton brothers, Roger Hunt and one or two others have become mentally and physically jaded by their summer’s exertions and nervous strain”. The following month they played at home for the first time since the World Cup, a goalless draw against Czechoslovakia that led the Observer’s Hugh McIlvanney to memorably damn Roger Hunt for “looking at times as incongruous in the England jersey as a shire horse fitted with a racing saddle”. The following week Leeds travelled to West Ham and lost 7-0; while Geoff Hurst scored a hat-trick, in the Guardian David Lacey wrote that “Jack Charlton, that lofty hero of the World Cup team, was reduced to gnome-like proportions”. By the time Clive Woodward picked England’s first touring party after their 2003 Rugby World Cup win six squad members had retired and a further seven were left out because of injury or poor form. “We knew that some of the heroes of the final would experience a temporary loss of edge on coming home,” wrote Stephen Jones in the Sunday Times, five months after the victory. “What we did not legislate for is that so many key men, who should still be in their prime, would be found wanting.” The wing Jason Robinson described that year as not the greatest but “the hardest of my career so far”. He said: “I have spent more time with the England team than with my family. Then there was the success of the World Cup and everything that came with that. It has been hard for everyone to take in and deal with. Until you win it you don’t know what the reaction will be and it was a crazy time. Nothing prepares you for that. All the attention and all the requests have been difficult to cope with – it’s hard to keep everyone happy and still concentrate on your game. Whatever you achieve, there is a sacrifice to be made. Winning the World Cup was the greatest moment of my career but there was a price to pay for it.” It is too early to judge what effect this summer’s exertions are having, and on which players. But it is notable that in the first Ashes Test the World Cup squad members Jos Buttler, Jonny Bairstow and Moeen Ali scored 24 runs between them in two innings. Jason Roy scored 38 but in his second knock, with England batting for time, was dismissed after playing a shot widely condemned for its gasp-inducing immaturity. There are other issues at play here: Roy is a one-day specialist who was playing in only his second Test, having played a mere three innings in the County Championship across the past two years, and he will never have faced a world-class spinner on a fifth-day pitch. Bairstow meanwhile has always had difficulty reacclimatising to Test cricket after extended spells playing the short-form game. In the first match of the first Test series of either a summer or winter he has played 22 innings, with 15 scores of 16 runs or fewer and a median score of only 9.5. In this context, the scores of eight and six he managed at Edgbaston were roughly par, and the problem could be more pronounced after a year in which, for the first time, he has spent more time at the crease in one‑day cricket (facing 886 deliveries, to 690 in Tests). None of the rugby or football players who struggled to adapt after their World Cup efforts have also had to cope with this kind of technical transition. “The World Cup is not a hindrance,” Buttler insisted on Saturday. “We don’t need to use it as a negative. Of course, it’s gone now and we’re focused on Test cricket, but there’s no hangover from that. We’re excited for the Test matches and we need to turn up, prepare well and play well.” It is quite the test. After England’s emphatic defeat at Edgbaston the summer heralded a year ago by the England and Wales Cricket Board’s chief executive, Tom Harrison, as “truly a season to savour for all cricket fans” is starting to look less auspiciously scheduled. Whatever the Ashes outcome, the fact that England’s most important World Cup campaign for two decades has been so swiftly followed by the most important Test series in the calendar is surely problematic for those involved in both. This year has offered enormous opportunities to those tasked with marketing and monetising the sport, but at the expense of placing an uncommon burden on those actually playing it. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.