Wednesday’s announcement of the All Blacks squad for the Rugby World Cup is unlikely to contain any surprises, but Steve Hansen still loves a punt. In moving Beauden Barrett from first five-eighth to fullback just two months – and four Test matches – out from the tournament in Japan, the noted racehorse owner has already taken arguably the biggest wager of his All Blacks coaching career. It is not so much the move itself that represents a risk, more the timing of it. In obstinately insisting previously that Richie Mo’unga had the benefit of a luxury ride behind the All Black-laden Crusaders forward pack – and so refusing to relocate Barrett to accommodate the younger man earlier – Hansen hasn’t given himself, or his team, a lot of adjustment time. History is also against him. Although dramatic late changes of personnel and their positioning are a surprisingly common feature of the All Blacks’ World Cup story, they have seldom worked. In 1991 an ageing side, unbeaten for 50 games through the previous three years, underwent dramatic change following a mid-year scare which saw the Wallabies get within a missed penalty goal of stealing the Bledisloe Cup. The blazers panicked and coach Alex Wyllie had John Hart parachuted in as co-coach. The two men had coaching philosophies and personalities as different as their Canterbury and Auckland homes, and did not see eye-to-eye. There was dramatic change on the playing front too; most notably veteran fullback Kieran Crowley being rushed from his Taranaki farm, and pitched straight into a semi-final in Dublin, after the coaching staff dithered on the options available within the touring squad. It ended in tears. The semi-final was all over by half-time, with the Wallabies running rings around the All Blacks and 13-0 ahead. At an end too was New Zealand’s hold on the World Cup. A decade earlier, New Zealand rock band Split Enz had had a smash hit with History Never Repeats. Unfortunately for the All Blacks, it has, and more than once. Hart was involved again eight years later, moving the world’s best fullback, Christian Cullen, to centre during the 1999 campaign. The idea had merit: he was also trying to fit Jeff Wilson, Jonah Lomu and Tana Umaga into his team; but it failed. Cullen was not the reason the All Blacks collapsed in the famous semi-final loss to France, but his discomfort in the role didn’t help. Two more World Cups, two more last-minute changes, and always at centre, unlucky 13. Injury to Umaga saw regular fullback Leon MacDonald thrust into the role in 2003. The current Blues coach didn’t throw the pass that Stirling Mortlock intercepted to win the Wallabies the semi-final, but his was a selection that was never forgotten, or forgiven. In 2007, it was Malili Muliaina’s turn. Muliaina played 83 of his 100 Tests as a fullback, but three at centre at the World Cup, where he was one of three used in the jersey across just five games. This indecision even more surprising given the All Blacks had been the No 1 side in the world by a mile between the 2003 and 2007 tournaments. Settled combinations win World Cups. The All Blacks proved that in 2011 and 2015, just as Australia and South Africa (both twice), and England, had before them. So, to 2019, and the Barrett gamble. There is no doubt the fullback position affords Barrett more time and space, which is important given the way rush defences have stressed him in recent times. Equally Mo’unga had shown for the Crusaders, as he did in the second Bledisloe Test, that he can control a game and ensure the team plays in the right areas of the field to ramp up the pressure and squeeze out of the opposition the mistakes the All Blacks feed off. Yet the two playmakers have already shown signs of getting in each other’s way under pressure. It looks like the change is also going to deny the All Blacks the calming influence of Ben Smith, whose voice and organisational skills from the back have been part of the glue that has held together the backline since their 2015 victory, a period where a number of young backs were introduced and prospered. At the last tournament, the All Blacks skilfully used Barrett as a change agent, bringing him off the bench when games were opening up, where his ability to spy an opening and run tiring defences ragged came off with spectacular effect. While most remember the five-pointer that sealed the final against the Wallabies, even more critical was his try three minutes after taking the field in the semi-final, which gave the All Blacks the lead for the first time as they edged South Africa 20-18. It is a formula that worked then. Perhaps it should be tried again. The All Blacks are chasing history in Japan, as the first team to win three straight titles. Where the current strategy with Barrett is concerned, the worry would be their repeating history of a less satisfactory kind.