Wallabies coach Michael Cheika gave his side every chance to regain the Bledisloe Cup at Eden Park in Auckland on Saturday night. He stuck with the team that upset the All Blacks 47-26 in Perth the previous week, giving the players the opportunity to bring back the Bledisloe and end a 16-year drought. Cheika gave them everything - except a game plan for wet weather rugby. Unlike the clear, starry night in Perth, Auckland was wet and cold and miserable, just how the Kiwis like it. The sky was blue during the day, but when the long black rain clouds gathered in the afternoon it was time for the Wallabies to make a last-minute tweak to their tactics. Unfortunately, they didn’t. Instead of adapting to the conditions the wet weather Wobblies tried to pretend it wasn’t raining at all and played with the ball in hand like they did in Perth. They failed to trouble the scorers, while conceding 36 points and five tries to the All Blacks. Possession and territory are not always relevant in rugby the way they are in rugby league, but two key statistics in the Bledisloe decider were very telling. The All Blacks and the Wallabies each had 50 per cent of the ball, but New Zealand had 57 per cent of the territory to Australia’s 43 per cent. The reason for this was that the hosts made 909 kick metres to the visitors’ 476. The kicking game of New Zealand halfback Aaron Smith was superb. None of the Wallabies’ kickers came anywhere near him for tactical acuity. When the Wallabies did kick they often sent the ball down the throat of fullback Beauden Barrett, who initiated a try for Smith in the 31st minute with a classic piece of counter-attack. Why on earth would you ever kick the ball to Barrett? The All Blacks were hurting from Perth. The Wallabies braced themselves for the inevitable “blacklash” but all the things that worked for them at home unraveled in Auckland with the notable exception of the lineout. Even in the absence of injured lock Rory Arnold, the Wallabies still dominated that set-piece, but they did not play to it. The lineout advantage should have been central to their game plan, particularly in the rain, but it was not. But it was more than just the weather that dampened the Wallabies’ spirits. They looked spooked. Did the ghostly ghouls of 33 years of losing at the Eden Park graveyard come back to haunt them yet again? Perhaps it was the ferocity of the All Blacks’ haka that unnerved them. Whatever unsettled the Wallabies, the game was all but over in the first few seconds as five-eighth Christian Lealiifano’s kick-off sailed into touch on the full, betraying Australia’s mental fragility. Lealiifano’s failure to then raise the flags with a couple of penalty goal attempts added to the sense of impending doom. After Perth Cheika would have thought he had found his World cup five-eighth, but now I doubt he is so sure. He may be re-evaluating a few other positions as well. Sure, the Wallabies had some momentum early in the first-half, but they could not get across the try-line. The All Blacks did their homework in defence, shutting down the Australian ball-carriers. After missing 43 tackles last week they missed just seven in the first-half here and led 17-0 at half-time, the score almost out of reach. There was a lot of talk after the game about how well the Wallabies were competing until Richie Mo’ungas try against the run of play in the 28th minute. Unlike the All Blacks, who kept their attack tight in the slippery conditions, the Wallabies probed the wide channels where a pass from fullback Kurtley Beale went behind winger Reece Hodge and the ball was scooped up by Mo’unga, who raced 40 metres to score. Australians have been complaining about Kiwis scoring tries from turnover ball for 17 years. It’s time they did something about it. But the biggest jolt the Wallabies received was the scrum. After dominating the set-piece in Perth, the forward pack went backwards, even collapsing twice while the All Blacks had a seven-man scrum with hooker Dane Coles in the sin-bin. How does that happen? The All Blacks are now in possession of the Bledisloe Cup for an unprecedented 17th year in a row. The Trans-Tasman rivalry is no longer just lopsided, the Kiwi dominance is the status quo. But Bledisloe Cup form does not always translate into World Cup form. The Wallabies showed what they are capable of in Perth, but they cannot always rely on their opponents having an off day or the weather being fine. By the way, has anyone checked the long-term weather forecast for Japan between 20 September and 2 November?