As you might surmise from the peachy, fleshy fungi laid out on its cover, The Collection is an ethnography of the penis. It’s a nouveau roman-esque narrative about Jeanne, a woman who has methodical, anonymous sexual encounters in a series of hotel rooms across Paris with men she picks up on the street. She seems in particular to enjoy fellatio, memorising each member she encounters, storing it away in her “memory palace”. She doesn’t remember anything else about the men, and she doesn’t compare them with one another, simply files away the image to recall when she pleases: “Jeanne only has to cross the threshold and she rediscovers the shape, the form, the particular warmth, the density, the smell of the penis; the elasticity of the tissue and its colour when drawn tight and when slackened; the smooth or glistening appearance of the head; the network of bluish blood vessels; the shaded areas; the wrinkled fingerprint skin of the testicles; the growth pattern of the hairs.” There’s no way around it: the penis is a comic character, the Falstaff of the anatomy. In the original French, the term is sexe, which has an ambiguity of meaning (it can refer to either male or female anatomy) and tonality (the inoffensive “eh”, the pretty sexy x). The word in English is embarrassing, with its cringingly long, whiny first vowel and its truncated last syllable. In translation, the term introduces a jarringly different register from the often lyrical writing around it, here gamely rendered in Laura Francis’s resourceful translation. On the very first page, Leger compares one penis to those “paper flowers that unfold when placed on water”. While I admired the delicacy of the image, I have to admit I guffawed when I first read it. Was the dissonance deliberate, I wondered; was this tongue (or some other organ) in cheek? How was I supposed to read this penis? There is levity here, but the novel is much more preoccupied with exploring the dimensions of Jeanne’s quest for pleasure. For once we are getting a woman’s point of view on the male anatomy, instead of the other way around. “Nothing in the outward appearance of a man ever foretells his penis,” Leger writes, capturing the endless fascination women can have for this intricate part of the anatomy that we do not share. Leger’s rendering of Jeanne’s penile preoccupation is virtuosic and precise while also surprising, even surrealist. The first penis she memorises “grows lighter towards the mound of the head where it becomes translucent, like an electric nightlight in a child’s bedroom”. The Collection is short and focused. Jeanne has no backstory. We will not learn what she does for a living, or what she looks like; Leger refuses to explain her obsession, and this is a relief. From the 1967 film Belle de Jour to Leïla Slimani’s Adèle, the French seem to be addicted to sex addiction narratives, usually starring an inscrutable young woman having meaningless sex with strangers. Of course it’s never meaningless; it’s always a symptom of something not quite right with the heroine. Jeanne looks for herself in novels of nymphomania but finds they always tell the same story: “The taste for sex itself was not a strength, but the consequence of extreme weakness”; “the heroines lived only to be the objects of male desire” and they always ended up between the sheets with a man “whose penis was never described, because it was a symbol, an authority to which the weak woman who had believed herself to be strong surrendered herself, a phallus, not a cock”. The novel’s audacity did not go unremarked when it was published in France in 2017, under the title Mise en Pièces, and went on to win the Prix Anaïs Nin. Leger was invited to take part in a television talk show called On N’est Pas Couché, where the famously irascible writer Yann Moix claimed to detest the book, saying that it was “old-fashioned”, that it wasn’t as shocking as Georges Bataille’s pornographic writings, and that in his view it presented sex as an obscenity. Whether this was a wilful misreading of the novel, or a genuine inability to understand what Leger was up to, it provided a case study in why her book is urgently necessary: because there are still men out there who don’t understand how rare and revolutionary it is for a woman to write about what their penises look like to her. For a woman to adopt the surrealist approach, and show, for once, a man in pieces. • Lauren Elkin’s Flâneuse is published by Vintage. The Collection by Nina Leger, translated by Laura Francis, is published by Granta (RRP £9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.