Raúl Jiménez powered Wolves into the third qualifying round of the Europa League as they overcame a brief scare to ease past Northern Irish club Crusaders 6-1 on aggregate. The Mexico international’s brace, a strike from Ryan Bennett and an own goal from Jordan Forsythe earned a 4-1 success in Belfast. Nuno Espírito Santo’s Premier League team, leading 2-0 from the first leg, were forced to come from behind on the night after Bennett’s early own goal. The convincing victory sets up a 6,370-mile round trip to face the Armenian club FC Pyunik in the next round. In Luxembourg, Rangers ground out a goalless draw with Progres Niederkorn to advance 2-0 on aggregate and right the wrongs of two years ago. The Scottish Premiership club suffered a shock defeat at the hands of the part-time minnows in 2017 under Portuguese coach Pedro Caixinha. But they had no such problems under Steven Gerrard as first-leg goals from Joe Aribo and Sheyi Ojo proved sufficient to set up a meeting with Danish club FC Midtjylland. Aberdeen joined Rangers in the third qualifying round after Sam Cosgrove hit a hat-trick in the 5-0 demolition of Georgian side Chikhura Sachkhere. Greg Leigh and substitute Scott Wright were also on target at Pittodrie as the Dons secured a 6-1 aggregate success and a two-legged tie with Croatian club HNK Rijeka. At Windsor Park in Belfast, Andrew Waterworth’s first-half penalty was enough for Linfield to overcome HB Torshavn of the Faroe Islands. The Northern Irish club won 1-0 on the night and 3-2 on aggregate and will next play the Montenegrin champions FK Sutjeska Niksic. In Nicosia, Shamrock Rovers were knocked out 4-3 on aggregate following a 3-1 extra-time defeat to Apollon Limassol in a game which both sides finished with 10 men. Substitute Adrián Sardinero sent the Cypriot club through after Aaron Greene’s long-range strike forced an additional 30 minutes following goals from Apollon pair Emilio Zelaya and Attila Szalai. Fotios Papoulis was sent off for the home side with the score 2-0, while Shamrock defender Lee Grace was dismissed early in extra time for a second booking. Connah’s Quay were also eliminated after a 4-0 aggregate loss to Serbian side Partizan Belgrade. Trailing 1-0 from the first leg, the Welsh club were beaten 3-0 on the night after conceding second-half goals to Zoran Tošić, Ognjen Ožegović and Filip Stevanović.