Easily the most positive sign of our economic health is the level of participation. In July, a record percentage of all adults were in the labour force (either employed or unemployed) – more than during the mining boom. The big growth has occurred since the end of 2016, a growth so strong that it took the Reserve Bank by surprise and is a driver of the current low wages growth. The figures also show just how greatly the working life for women has changed over the past 40 years. Since December 2016 the participation rate has risen by 1.5 percentage points to the current record level of 66.1%. That growth is among the fastest two-and-a-half-year rise we have ever experienced – and certainly comparable with that which occurred during the mining boom. And it means the unemployment rate is higher than it probably would have been, had the participation rate stayed lower. Last month the head of the Reserve Bank, Philip Lowe, suggested that such was the impact of the increased participation that if the participation rate had risen by just 0.75% rather than 1.5%, “this would have meant the unemployment rate today would have been well below 5%”. Just how low it would be is up for conjecture but if we assume that the increase in people entering the labour force were all unemployed then without those people we would be looking at an unemployment rate of around 4.2% instead of the current 5.2%: Now that is all hypothetical – people enter the labour force for a number of reasons, not the least of all because there are more jobs. But it does highlight that the employment growth we have had over the past two-and-a-half years would normally have seen unemployment fall by much more than it has. And that has been a big reason for the employment growth not translating to stronger wages growth. But the real interesting thing is what has caused the jump in participation – it is mostly women in their 30s and people above 60: Women aged 25-39 in December 2016 made up 16% of the entire labour force, and yet they accounted for a quarter of the increase since then. Similarly people aged over 60 made up just 10% of the labour force but they accounted for around another quarter of the increase in the labour force. In effect half of the participation increase has come from a quarter of the labour force. What the figures also show is just how changed the working life has become for women. Women born in the early 1960s largely left the labour from their mid-20s until their early-40s – the so-called “nappy valley” of participation: By contrast a woman born in 1982 was almost as likely to be in the labour force in her late 20s and 30s as she was in her early 20s. We are now also somewhat astoundingly entering a period where there is no participation valley at all. Millennial women born in the early 1990s are the first generation where the likelihood of them being in the labour market actually increases as they shift from their early to their late-20s: We are also seeing a closing of the participation gap between men and women. It remains wide, but certainly much less than it was for the late baby boomers. By the time they entered their 30s, men born in 1962 had a 30% higher participation rate than women born in that year. By contrast men currently in the early 30s have a participation rate just 16% higher: The closing of the gap is almost all due to the increase in women in the workforce rather than a decline in the number of men working: But while this might suggest that women and men are becoming much more likely to share the responsibilities of raising their children in the pre-school years, when we look at the level of full-time work being performed by women, the nappy valley returns: While the drop in the percentage of women working full-time was not as severe for those born in the 1980s compared to their mothers born 20 years earlier, the reality is when women have children they will not surprisingly be more likely to shift from full-time to part-time. The good news of these figures is that it would appear policy over the past 20 to 30 years to make work more flexible for women with children and to increase the availability and affordability of childcare does look to have had the impact of keeping women working. But the data also highlights that women still face the same struggles that come with being the one who goes part-time – the drop in superannuation, and the likely losing out on the promotional path and the higher pay that goes with it. The data also highlights that, given there was a big surge in labour for women in their late 30s and for those over 60, the growth areas in the labour force have been in jobs that mostly attract such workers – the healthcare and the social assistance industry. That industry has been notoriously low-paying, which also means that the employment growth we have experienced was not likely to lead to strong wage growth – even had the unemployment rate fallen by more than it has. The rise in participation certainly is to be celebrated but somewhat conversely the rise highlights the ongoing issues we have with the labour market – low wages growth overall and job growth in the lower paying occupations. • Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian Australia