Financial markets around the world have fallen sharply amid growing fears that the US-China trade dispute could escalate into a full-scale currency war, with damaging consequences for the world economy. London-listed shares on the FTSE 100 fell by about 160 points, just over 2%, on Monday as stock markets across Europe came under sustained selling pressure, following losses on Asian markets overnight. The sell-off comes after China allowed its currency to devalue against the dollar to levels that experts said could effectively mean the “weaponisation” of the Chinese yuan in the long-running dispute between the world’s two largest economies. In the latest escalation of the trade war, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) let the yuan weaken below the sensitive seven-to-one dollar level for the first time since 2008. A weaker currency could help Beijing offset the US tariffs, as Chinese goods would become more competitive for overseas buyers. Donald Trump threatened to impose punitive import tariffs on $300bn (£246.9bn) of Chinese imports last week, in a move that would effectively slap tariffs on all exports to the US from the Asian country. China had threatened to retaliate on Friday without saying exactly how it would respond. Economists said China allowing the yuan to devalue was a clear result of the threat made by Trump, although it also comes as Beijing increasingly allows the currency to move in line with market pressures. Julian Evans-Pritchard of the consultancy Capital Economics said: “The fact that they have now stopped defending 7.00 against the dollar suggests that they have all but abandoned hopes for a trade deal with the US.” By linking the devaluation with Trump’s renewed tariff threat, “the PBOC has effectively weaponised the exchange rate,” he added. The roots of the dispute come from US president Donald Trump’s “America first” project to protect the US’ position as the world’s leading economy, while encouraging businesses to hire more workers in the US and to manufacture their products there. Trump complains of a large trade deficit with China, which he views as a symbol of the US’s decline as a manufacturing powerhouse. Chinese imports to the US totalled $539.5bn last year, while $120.3bn was sold the other way – leaving a trade deficit of $419.2bn. The president has accused Beijing of “unfair” trade policies, including allowing the theft of US companies’ intellectual property. The threat of import tariffs on Chinese goods is being used as leverage in talks where Trump is seeking changes to Beijing’s trade policy. Tariffs have been imposed by Washington on some Chinese goods sold in the US for about a year. They came on top of broader tariffs used by Trump that have hit China and other trading partners such as the EU, Canada and Mexico, on goods including steel and aluminium. In May 2019 the US president further ratcheted up existing import tariffs of 10% on $200bn (£153bn) of Chinese goods sold in the US to 25%, hitting everything on a long list of products. Trump has previously warned that 25% tariffs could be slapped on a further $325bn of goods in future – which would mean all Chinese imports being covered by tariffs. Richard Partington and Jasper Jolly The FTSE 100 slumped by more than 2% to trade about 7,241 on Monday lunchtime, while Germany’s Dax index fell by about 1.7% and France’s Cac40 fell by about 2%. Wall Street futures contracts indicate the Dow Jones Industrial Average could fall by more than 350 points, or 1.3%, when share trading opens in New York later on Monday. According to Reuters China’s central bank linked the yuan’s weakness to the fallout from the country’s trade war with the US. The PBOC said: “Under the influence of factors including unilateralism, protectionist trade measures, and expectations of tariffs against China, the yuan has depreciated against the dollar today, breaking through 7 yuan per dollar.”