1) No one’s said too much about it, but the Ashes are back with us. Here’s a golden moment from the 2015 contest, when a punter plays at her seat … and misses. Naturally, the commentators and players gallantly pretend not to notice. Now back to 2005, and Andrew Strauss decides he can pick Shane Warne, then Ian Bell does likewise ... with hilarious results. Talking of Bell, here he is again, breaking the world “like I said” record into tiny pieces, and here’s Strauss taking a screamer to get rid of Adam Gilchrist. From the archive, here’s DK Lillee on Lord’s 1975, David Steele accepting BBC’s sports personality of the year award for his work in that same series, and an amazing finish in 1968, complete with the most ridiculous field of all time. Just spare us slapstick run-outs, that’s all we ask. That said, in village cricket corner, this entire passage of play is a beauty. Meanwhile, your new favourite cricketer: Cluj’s Pavel Florin. His bowling immediately catches the eye, but bear in mind he turned up for the match 500km from home, still recovering from a broken leg. For the love of the game indeed. 2) Football is back. Sunday sees the “traditional curtain-raiser to the season”, so here’s a classic moment from the 1997 edition: Peter Schmeichel saves Frank Sinclair’s penalty, then saves his furious follow-up, then offers him a third go. And as a bonus, here’s John McGinn scoring a pre-season jazzer for Aston Villa v Charlton. Meanwhile, goal-kick rules have changed. You can now do this. We can’t see how that will go wrong at all this coming season: Not entirely sure what the advantage is here, but presume this won't be allowed in official games anyway, will it? pic.twitter.com/DhTKKLpqsq 3) Meet the kids hoping to make it big in skateboarding at Tokyo 2020. And they really are kids. Here’s 10-year-old GB hopeful Sky Brown displaying her tricks, Brazil’s 11-year-old Rayssa Leal showing no fear as she rips it up at the famous Berrics skatepark in LA (she recently won the women’s final at the Street League World Tour in the same city). Japan’s comparative old-timer Misugu Okamoto, 13, will be carrying the hopes of a nation next year. No pressure, then. 4) UFC fun: Niko Price kayos Randy Brown in unusual fashion, and Max Holloway gives Brian Ortega some advice … mid-fight. 5) Some throw: Sorry, WHAT!? pic.twitter.com/UyRssagD6I 6) Treacherous conditions underfoot as Tonga and Samoa met in a mudbath for the Pacific Nations Cup. Incredibly, the Apia Park pitch had passed a pre-game inspection. 1) Uncle Rico impresses Napoleon Dynamite with his football skills. 2) The highest and lowest-scoring games this century for each AFL team. Spotters badges: JazzHorse, GrahamClayton Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy. 