Absolutely gutted. Although it’s seemed inevitable for quite some time I never thought it would actually happen. It’s not an overstatement to say the club was integral to the community. The local pubs, takeaways and hotels are absolutely dependent on the fans being drawn to Bury. I fear the worst for the area now the club is gone. The decision makers at the top of football really need a good look at themselves. I really don’t understand how clubs like Manchester City can receive so much scrutiny when there is no chance of them ever going bust while clubs like Bury and Bolton are left to crumble. Curtis, 30, Bury I am devastated that the EFL have chosen to expel Bury from the league. I grew up right next to Gigg Lane. Very sadly my mum died a few months ago and now that my club has gone too. I feel rootless. I would go back to Bury to go to games with my brother and friends and call and see my mum. Being a Bury fan feels like an essential part of who I am. I started to go to games with friends at 14 so it’s been a constant – a main pillar of my identity. I just can’t bring myself to watch any football or read about it this season. Lots of people have suggested mergers or adopting another team but it would never be Bury. Cara Taylor, 39, Mossley I got into football aged 10 and started going to Bury in 2011. I have devoted so much to this club and now it’s gone. My family have been going for over a century. In the eight years I’ve been going, I’ve seen us promoted twice and relegated twice. I was at Tranmere both times, seeing Tom Soares get a toe to the ball and Danny Mayor somehow weave through their defence. My greatest memory is when Joe Riley fires in a 30-yarder against Shrewsbury in what was my first promotion-seeing campaign. That feeling of jubilation, being connected to thousands of people who I only know because of this wonderful club, was only matched when Shrewsbury got a goal disallowed in the last minute. I am forever grateful for this club for giving me such fantastic memories and stories to tell. Matthew Holmes, 18, Haslingden I moved away from Bury 10 years ago. For me the club was an anchor, a reason to visit home and part of my identity that I am proud of. Despite the current anguish, the expulsion provides relief. The historical financial transactions were going to hang over us for years to come and this gives us a clean slate to rebuild from. This is the Carillion of football, a wake up for the industry and changes must be made. The EFL need to decide on its role and give itself additional powers and capability to stop this from happening in the future. We cannot let financiers and businessmen win while local communities and culture lose. H, 33, London I keep switching between anger and sadness. Other than my parents, my brother and a couple of friends it’s the longest relationship I’ve ever had. It’s been a constant through my teenage years to middle age. People I met because they sat near me at Gigg Lane came to my wedding. It’s given me some of my favourite memories. The thing that has really upset me is that my first child is due to be born any day now. Taking your child to their first game is something a football fan should look forward to, but that has been taken away. I have been to hundreds of games with my dad. Sadly, my child may never say that. Adrian Foster, 38, Heywood As many have said over the past few day, it’s been devastating – even for someone who wouldn’t necessarily class themselves as a supporter. I’m an interested local, who likes football and has a soft spot for their hometown team. My neighbour, a season ticket holder in his 60s, attends every home game with 12 of his close friends. It is their tradition, all they have known every other Saturday for 20 years, gone due to a string of terrible decisions completely out of their control. The only positive out of all of this is a re-invigoration of the love for Bury FC among many locals – a real desire to save a local club. The outpouring of support, the willingness to lend a hand in getting Gigg Lane ready for a match now doomed to not take place, the resonation across the country of football fans unconnected to this place and people – all dismayed at what has happened. Sam Allen, 31, Bury I’ve been a supporter for 27 years, since my first game aged eight. I feel sad, angry, empty. Mostly, that it was so unnecessary. At clubs such as Bury there is no demand from fans for the owner to bet the house on winning promotion. I never expected Bury to be good; most of the time the team were useless, but that was OK. When they were good, it was a bonus. The main thing was that they were there. For me, it feels like a strange absence. Bury have been a fixture in my life for as long as I remember. I don’t have a team any more. I don’t have a result to listen out for on the radio on a Saturday afternoon. Colleagues – mainly fans of Premier League teams – keep asking me if I have chosen a new club. More likely, I will just stop paying attention to the game altogether. I don’t live in the town. I feel deeply sorry for the people it will impact harder than it will on me - the people whose lives really do revolve around the club. R, 35, Guernsey Having lived in the Bury area for 35 years, I fear for the community. The club was a life line for many pensioners whose only human contact was with their Gigg Lane family and the shop cashier. It’s also going to be a blow for all the fans, the Grandads who introduced their kids and now those kids bringing their kids. Gigg Lane was not just about football, it’s one big family, where you come to recognise the same familiar cheery faces. Gareth Ellis, 45, the Netherlands Bury was my first access to live football as a teenager. Close enough that my friends and I were allowed to get the bus down to Gigg – our first real independence. Later we were allowed to away games and obviously used that as an opportunity for underage drinking. Last year I was living in Germany and, when people would ask where I was from, I’d say Manchester, because people have heard of that. Often the first response was “City or United?” It’s great to be able to say neither and bend someone’s ear about my little town nine miles north. Throw in a bit of “yreet” to explain the accent. I also loved that we were closer to the players than with big clubs. I recall going to Mansfield away in the early 2000s, Phil Stant scored a hat-trick and got a standing ovation all round as he was previously with Mansfield. Before that game my friend and I were wandering down an alleyway, bumped into three Bury players about 40 minutes before kick off. No idea what they were doing there, probably been for a pint. R, 37, Barry