I’m off on holiday and, in between packing, making sure I hit all my deadlines and tidying up (anyone else have an affliction that means they need to come back to a spotless house?), I try to make some food to take with us on our travels, hoping this will keep spirits high and tastebuds happy, and soften the inevitable fatigue a little. This year, we are going to Portugal, so not too far, but when I do travel long-haul, I find it even more important to make sure there is good stuff to eat. Making food that travels well is an art: think crunch (pomegranate seeds, toasted nuts and freshness), citrus and veg. This travel salad is exactly that. It’s made with veg that stays fresh and crunchy for hours, so that means nothing that will wilt – fennel, fresh peas, a pop of pomegranate – and a dressing that brings it all together. I always take fruit too – whatever is good at the time and not too squishy – and hit it with lots of lime; it’s fresh, sweet and hydrating. This is everything I want when I travel: all the veg, some protein and a big hit of hardy, fresh herbs. Depending on how I feel, I sometimes leave out the onions for a more mellow version. Prep 15 minCook 5 minServes 2 Juice of ½ lemon1 red onion, peeled and very finely sliced250g frozen peas or broad beans50g pumpkin seeds250g cooked puy lentils, drained and rinsed (or 1 x 400g tin, drained) 1 small bunch parsley, roughly chopped 1 small bunch mint, roughly chopped100g radishes, finely sliced1 fennel bulb, tough outer layer removed, finely sliced100g pomegranate seeds For the dressing ½ tsp runny honey or maple syrupJuice and zest of half a lemon 1 big splash extra-virgin olive oil¼ tsp toasted cumin seeds Salt and black pepper In a small bowl, combine the lemon juice with the onions, scrunch it all together with your hands until the onions turn pink and begin to pickle, then set aside. Boil the peas or beans in salted water for a minute or two, until they float to the surface, then drain and rinse under cold water. In a dry frying pan, toast the pumpkin seeds over a medium heat until they start to pop, then set aside to cool. Mix the dressing ingredients together and season with salt and pepper. If you are eating right away, drain the onions, add to a bowl with all the other ingredients, then toss in the dressing and serve. If you are making this to travel, mix all the ingredients apart from the onions and dressing in a bowl. Store the salad, drained onions and dressing in the fridge until just before you travel. At the last minute, tip the dressing into the bottom of your travel container, top with the onions, pile the salad on top and toss together when you’re ready to eat. A super-simple suggestion for something fresh to eat on your journey; I crave freshness when I travel and this hit of lime does the trick. Prep 10 minServes 2 100g cherries, stoned ½ small watermelon or ½ cantaloupe melon, peeled1 peach or nectarine 2 limes Chop the fruit into bite-sized pieces and transfer to a travel container. Zest both limes over the fruit and give it a good mix so it’s evenly coated. Slice both limes in half and add to your container; keep in the fridge until you’re ready to set off. Add a couple of ice cubes before you travel, to keep things cool. Squeeze over the lime juice before eating.