Ruth Davidson is expected to quit as leader of the Scottish Conservative party because of her irreconcilable differences with Boris Johnson over Brexit and the pressures of motherhood. Scottish Tory sources said an announcement was imminent. Davidson was “considering her position”, one source added, although he stressed it was not connected to Johnson’s decision to prorogue parliament. “Ruth will make her decision clear in due course, and there will be no further comment this evening,” her spokesman said on Wednesday. She made abundantly clear during the Tory leadership campaign that she did not believe Johnson was the right UK party leader. One of Johnson’s first acts as prime minister was to sack her close friend and ally David Mundell, who served as Scottish secretary for five years. Davidson was reported to be “livid” at Mundell’s sacking and went on to issue a defiant challenge to Johnson on the eve of his first visit to Scotland as prime minister, pledging she would refuse to back a no-deal Brexit. In her regular column for the Scottish Mail on Sunday she also promised that she “will not be backward in challenging Mr Johnson’s government where I think they are getting it wrong”. Davidson, the first openly lesbian party leader anywhere in the UK, gave birth to her first child, conceived with her partner, Jen, following IVF treatment, last October. As a state-educated woman in a party overwhelmingly controlled by privately schooled men, she has delivered previously unthinkable electoral success for the Scottish Tories at both Holyrood and Westminster. Last September Davidson published her first book, Yes She Can, a collection of interviews with “mould-breaking women”, in which she revealed that she was diagnosed with clinical depression as a teenager and discussed the continuing management of her mental health. Davidson attracted criticism from opposition politicians, including the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, for not giving media interviews on Wednesday following the prorogation announcement. Davidson’s allies would not be drawn to speak publicly before her own statement on Thursday, and privately only expressed admiration for her leadership and sadness at her decision.