While Manchester United are ready to cease in their attempt to lure Paulo Dybala from Juventus, due in no small part to their frustration at the Argentinian’s financial demands, Juventus have suggested Mario Mandzukic as a makeweight in a deal that could see Romelu Lukaku and a big bag of money move the other way. However, with Inter still hopeful of signing Lukaku, Mandzukic could simply end up at Old Trafford for a fee of around £15m and earn himself over £6m per year. Napoli have also emerged as late, surprise contenders to make a Serie A star of Lukaku, with their president Aurelio De Laurentiis telling Sky Sports Italia that he is open to signing the Belgian striker. With the transfer window closing on Thursday, uncertainty continues to surround the future of Paul Pogba at United, but reports in Spain suggest Real Madrid are ready to end their well documented interest in taking him to the Bernabéu and set their sights on Ajax midfielder Donny van de Beek instead. In the latest episode of this soap opera, United rejected an offer from Real that included their unwanted winger James Rodríguez as part of a swap deal. A year to the day after his most recent appearance for Chelsea in last season’s Community Shield, Danny Drinkwater looks to be on his way out of Stamford Bridge and could be bound for Brighton. Graham Potter wants the midfielder on a season long loan, but Chelsea would rather sell him and get him off their books. Frank Lampard is also ready to usher Tiémoué Bakayoko to the exit door and could find a new home for the midfielder at Paris Saint-Germain. Leonardo, who engineered the Frenchman’s loan move to Milan last season, is now sporting director at the Ligue 1 club Bakayoko has supported since he was a boy, although his recruitment of Idrissa Gueye from Everton means an additional midfield anchor might be surplus to requirements at the home of the French champions. Earlier this summer Bakayoko was also linked with moves to Arsenal and Manchester United, while a return to Milan, where he spent last season on loan, remains on the cards. Boavista’s 18-year-old defender Gonçalo Cardoso is expected to sign for West Ham today for a fee of £2.7m, while Club Brugge have announced that Simon Mignolet has moved to them from Liverpool for £6.4m. Currently without a club, former West Ham goalkeeper Adrián is being mooted as a possible replacement to act as understudy to Liverpool’s undisputed first choice stopper Alisson, while the name of Southampton’s Alex McCarthy has also been mentioned in dispatches. Burnley, Sheffield United and Bournemouth are forming an orderly queue to bid for Everton defender Mason Holgate, whose current employers value him at £10m. Currently a free agent, following his release from Chelsea, defender Gary Cahill is considering a move to Crystal Palace, where he has an admirer in manager Roy Hodgson. And finally, a similarly high profile footballer without a club, Andy Carroll, won’t be making an emotional homecoming to Newcastle after Steve Bruce ruled out making a move for the striker and said he wanted to focus on signing a right-back instead.