If you think too hard about food norms of the past, you will end up disbelieving all science and refusing to vaccinate your pets (cat anti-vaxxers are a thing now). For the whole back end of the last century, butter – for its animal fats – was the enemy of the health-conscious. We all ate spreads (Flora for everyday, Olivio if you were fancy), as part of an ongoing commitment to being better than other people. You don’t ask too many questions about how things taste when that is your motive. How else do you explain the mung bean? Then fat dropped out of the banned-substance list, replaced by processed food in general, and refined carbohydrates in particular. Butter and marge had a complete reversal of reputation: the first, having little process attached, was rehabilitated, while the second, forged with methods so complicated they had to introduce ridiculous non-words for it (interesterfied, anyone?), fell out of fashion. Butter’s golden age lasted mere seconds: veganism, dairy-related animal cruelty concerns and environmentalism have driven a fresh appetite to find alternatives. We are typically not swapping it out for heavily processed vegetable fat spreads, whose sales continue to decline. There is a difference between margarines and their affiliates, but not enough to trouble anyone with aspirations to gourmetdom. I have become convinced that they are so engineered that any variation in taste is based on focus groups – how much do you want it to taste of butter? Will you accept any real butter mixed into it? – rather than some manufacturers being better than others. Flora is anodyne – almost entirely mouthfeel rather than taste, and a very inoffensive, almost absent mouthfeel at that. Bertolli is perfectly serviceable, though it is not entirely olive oil – the greater part is sunflower and palm oil – and is not free from animal products, so useless if your future is vegan. The real creativity boom is in replacements for butter that are natural and unprocessed (I am not counting “grinding things up” as processing, even though it is plainly a process). You have to decide what you wanted the butter for in the first place. On bread, for instance, I want that oleaginous solid layer, against which your classic carb poses some elementally perfect textural counterpoint. Victoria sponge against cream; bagel against cream cheese; bloomer against butter – these things cannot exist without one another. Nut butter is the obvious substitute and the focus of much experimentation. It no longer has to be peanut: cashews are the best all-rounder, also featuring heavily in vegan cheese. Almonds have a surprisingly delicate delivery. Pine nuts work for the very determined. The problem, to my mind, is not that all these taste of nuts, but that their integrity is compromised: the oil separates from the solids and very subtly leaks from the edges, which leaves the rest a bit too substantial and claggy. The beauty of butter is that it has so much oomph but so little density. Nut butters are the opposite. Paradoxically, I could enjoy a peanut butter sandwich so long as it had butter in it as well, but on its own it is mouth-drying and tastes like punishment. The fatty fruit or vegetable is a better, more lateral alternative – avocado, mashed banana, or carrots and butternut squash, roasted then mashed, make much more satisfying spreads. Without disappearing too far down the baking wormhole, it is far safer to swap out butter when cooking with it. Most bundt cakes can take oil instead. All my snootiness about margarine vanishes on the matter of the fairy cake, in which you can’t really taste the fat anyway under all that icing. Low-fat baking has been known to replace butter entirely with prunes, which knackers your low-sugar dreams and makes it a pruny colour, but tastes so close to fat as to be mysterious. (On colour: part of the folkloric power of butter is that, in every variation, from the palest unsalted butters of Ireland to the deepest yellow salted butter of the tiny isle of Noirmoutier, the colour is bewitching. You would paint your kitchen any shade of butter. Margarine, meanwhile, is grey until they bleach it and add food colouring.) Butter’s other stranglehold – I am taking out steamed vegetables, which you can douse in anything, or nothing – is toast. It melts anyway, so you are not trying to replicate its texture. But the entire muscle memory of your mouth, from your pre-verbal understanding of the world, does not even recognise the experience of toast without butter. I swap it for olive oil, but rub the toast first with a half clove of garlic, which is so disruptive that I forget what it was like before. This only works on wholemeal and rye. No idea why. There is a view that some foods – cheese, bacon – are so fatty on their own that they don’t need butter underneath them. This is ridiculous. There are cheeses I can’t even taste without butter underneath (comté), and those that are plainly too dry (Monte Enebro). Part of the point of bacon is what it tastes like against melted butter. But then I even put butter with Nutella, which, I am given to understand, makes me an unreliable witness.