Our language is heavy with pennies, as our purses and pockets used to be. A penny for your thoughts. The penny drops. Penny dreadful. Pennies from heaven. The proverbial and idiomatic value of the penny has long since outstripped its real one. No 1p coins were produced last year by the Royal Mint for the first time since 1972, and no 2p coins for the first time since 1984. The Treasury reports that 60% of copper coins are used for just one transaction before being stashed away. Given that as of March 2016 there were an estimated 11.43bn 1p coins in circulation, worth around £114m, that is some stash. The Treasury says there were enough 1p and 2p coins in circulation last year to meet demand from banks and the Post Office without minting new ones, thanks to a sharp fall in the use of cash (a blow to the 2.2 million Britons who rely upon it daily). Coins have long had a sentimental role in English identity. “When you come back to England from any foreign country, you have immediately the sensation of breathing a different air,” George Orwell wrote in 1941. “The beer is bitterer, the coins are heavier, the grass is greener.” That burden lightened in 1971 when decimalisation yielded a new penny weighing less than the old one (3.56g instead of 9.45g). Those were paradoxical times for the penny: the new one was smaller than the old (the diameter shrinking from 31mm to 20.3mm) but worth more (there were 240 old pennies in a pound, but only 100 new pennies). British attachment to our coins should not be underestimated. No wonder we never joined the eurozone. In 1971, such was popular outrage over the scrapping of the sixpence (a favourite Christmas pudding ingredient) that it remained legal tender for another nine years after decimalisation, even though it was worth only 2½ pence in the new money. You can’t imagine, say, the French allowing such nonsense to sully their more logical realm. But the penny is not what it was. Who in 2019 can remember when 1p would have been enough to enable you to spend the proverbial penny? Nor do many give a tuppence for the twopence piece: even if they recall Anita Harris’s 1968 hit Tuppenny Bus Ride, where could such a fare take you now? What we lose as we march to our cashless society is not so much weight as beauty. Think of the little wren on the reverse of the farthing (last produced in 1956 and demonetised in 1960) or the 12-sided threepenny bit. When the government floated the possibility of withdrawing 1p and 2p coins last year, the backlash was swift and the government committed to keeping them. Yet there would be no riots in the streets should the chancellor, Sajid Javid, U-turn on that decision. And only a posturing political fogey in the style of Jacob Rees-Mogg would insist that coppers should be as important to our finances as to our idioms again. Pound to a penny, it won’t happen.