Celtic have successfully deflected interest from clubs from England to secure the highly regarded Republic of Ireland junior international Jonathan Afolabi, with the striker putting pen to paper on a three-year contract. Afolabi left Southampton at the end of last season having featured for their under-23 team, and the likes of Wolves, Crystal Palace and Stoke City all expressed an interest in signing the teenager. Lokomotiv Moscow had also offered him a potential route to Champions League football having been impressed with his displays at the European U-19 Championship, where the forward helped Ireland into the semi-finals and was named in Uefa’s team of the tournament. The Dublin-born striker has opted to pursue his career at Celtic, and attended the extra-time League Cup win over Dunfermline on Saturday. “We have signed him on a free transfer and he is one that’s a development,” said the Celtic manager Neil Lennon. “He is sort of on the cusp [of the first team]. He will come in and train with us and we will get a good look at him over the next few weeks, and see what we want to do with him in terms of his progression. He is raw but he has good potential.” Afolabi was watching on as underdogs Dunfermline threatened to end Celtic’s stranglehold on domestic silverware, before James Forrest scored the winner with six minutes remaining in extra time. With a penalty shoot-out looming, the substitute worked space to steer a deflected effort into the far corner from 14 yards and send Celtic into the Scottish League Cup quarter-finals. The home side were looking for a lift following their Champions League exit but again started slowly, and needed a wonder strike from Mikey Johnston to open the scoring 10 minutes into the second half. Celtic suffered a double blow when Kristoffer Ajer went off injured before Tom Beadling levelled in the 77th minute. Dunfermline clung on during a one-sided extra-time but Forrest netted his fourth goal in four games to make it 28 consecutive domestic cup wins for his team and keep alive the prospect of a fourth treble in a row.