Magnus Carlsen’s form collapsed in spectacular fashion this week just as Norway’s world champion, 28, seemed invincible after a run of eight consecutive tournament victories. The prestigious $325,000 Sinquefield Cup at Saint Louis, named after the billionaire who has transformed US chess and made his home city a global centre for major events, starts on Saturday, with Carlsen the clear favourite. Although last week’s tournament in the same city, part of the Grand Tour whose final is at London Olympia in December, was 25-minute rapid and five-minute blitz, Carlsen is also ranked near the top at fast time limits so was expected to continue his winning streak. Instead his failure was so damaging to his confidence that it poses the question whether he can recover his equilibrium in the two days between the end of the rapid/blitz and the start of the classical Cup. The world champion lost 10 of his 27 games, the worst result of his career, and finished a distant sixth behind Levon Aronian. The Armenian won by half a point over 27 rounds from France’s Maxime Vachier-Lagrave and the Chinese pair of Ding Liren and Yu Yangyi. The pair were the real success story of the event, for which Yu was invited only as a wildcard. They were responsible for four of Carlsen’s 10 defeats, including a crushing win by Yu where the champion ventured the dubious gambit 1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nf6 3 Nxe5 d6 4 Nxf7?! Carlsen’s brief interview with the commentator Maurice Ashley to try to explain his defeats was full of angst and self-doubt, in strange contrast to his normal confident self. “When things start to go wrong, it is easy to doubt oneself. I tried to play more aggressively rather than trying to play safer, but it doesn’t really seem to work out any more,” he said. “I am constantly doubting myself. I don’t really care any more. I’m just waiting for the classical [that is Sinquefield Cup] to start.” Barely a week ago all the speculation was whether Carlsen, currently still unbeaten in 79 classical games, could achieve a record round number of 2900 rating points at the Sinquefield Cup. For that he would need to score 9/11, which seems unrealistic after what happened in the past few days. The Norwegian’s opening round game against Anish Giri of the Netherlands will be live and free to watch online on Saturday from 7pm. Guardian entrants topped the poll in the first round of the Winton British Solving Championship, announced in June. Our 217 competitors easily outnumbered the combined total of the Times, Telegraph and FT. The only downside was that over 100 Guardian readers missed the correct solution 1 e6-e7! A trap which provoked most wrong answers was 1 exd7? planning 2 dxe8=N mate but defeated by 1…Nf5! giving the black king an escape at g5. The puzzle was created by leading English composer John Rice. Successful entrants qualify for a postal round of harder puzzles, followed by the national final in February 2020. 3632 1…Rxf4! 3 Ng6+ Kxh7 3 Nxe7+ Re4+! when if 4 Kf1 Re8 traps the knight and Black’s rook, bishop and knight will defeat White’s queen. The game went 4 Qxe4+ dxe4 5 Nxc8 Bxc8 when Aronian’s rook and knight easily beat Carlsen’s rook.