The Wallabies have the All Blacks where they want them. They’ll do well to keep them there. In 2015 Australia won the opening Test of the Bledisloe Cup series with a 27-19 win against New Zealand in Sydney, their first victory over the Kiwis in four years. It was a rare chance to regain the Bledisloe Cup for the first time in 13 years, but with an eye on the World Cup later that year coach Michael Cheika changed half the team and suffered a 41-13 thrashing at Eden Park in Auckland in the second Test the following week. This time Cheika must stick with the team that humbled the All Blacks 47-26 in Perth last Saturday night for the return Test at Eden Park this Saturday. Cheika has to forget about experimenting, or trialing players for the World Cup. There is only one objective this week and that is to bring the Bledisloe Cup back after a record 16-year drought. While the World Cup is undisputedly the main event, the Bledisloe Cup is a highly treasured piece of silverware with a rich and proud 88-year history. In fact, winning the Bledisloe Cup is harder than winning the World Cup because you have to beat the best team in the world twice to do it. Some World Cup champions such as the 1999 Wallabies avoided the All Blacks altogether in the tournament. Just as importantly, beating the All Blacks at their Eden Park fortress and regaining the Bledisloe Cup will instil enormous confidence and self-belief into the Wallabies heading into the World Cup in Japan next month. Cheika has received a lot of criticism over the last three years, and justifiably so, as the Wallabies descended to sixth in the world rankings, but he also deserves a lot of credit after such a dominant performance in Perth, which featured Australia’s highest ever score against the All Blacks and a record-equaling biggest margin. After releasing attack coach Stephen Larkham at the end of last season (the Wallabies’ worst year since 1958) Cheika devised a new strategy based on power-ball, which reflects his own abrasive and combative nature. Cheika has assembled a formidable forward pack reminiscent of the one that Alan Jones and Alec Evans put together for the 1984 Grand Slam triumph of Britain and Ireland. It was the tight five who laid the platform for victory on Saturday and provided halfback Nic White with the opportunity to snipe away from the base of the ruck, setting the tone for the team’s attack, which stressed the All Blacks’ defence so much they missed an unbelievable number of first-up tackles. The All Blacks’ strategy of targeting the Wallabies at the breakdown backfired spectacularly as the men in gold competed hard at the tackle contest, conceding nothing without a fight. The Wallabies denied the All Blacks possession and territory, the Kiwis only managing to stay in the game by virtue of their trademark counter-attack, but it was not enough, particularly playing with only 14 men in the second-half. Whether the All Blacks would have won the game if second-rower Scott Barrett had not been red-carded for shoulder charging Wallabies captain Michael Hooper in the 39th minute we will never know, but Australia were already imposing Cheika’s brute force game-plan, which was why their opponents became so frustrated and lost their discipline. Cheika’s decision to start former wild child James O’Connor at outside-centre proved a masterstroke. A strike player with play-making skills, O’Connor gave the Wallabies a ball-distributor out wide, similar to what the All Blacks used to have with Conrad Smith. O’Connor complemented power-running inside-centre Samu Kerevi and kept Australia’s attack connected. Cheika has finally found his combination of brutality and brilliance and now must go for the jugular at Eden Park. Before the Wallabies get too carried away, it is worth remembering that Australia have won the home Test against the All Blacks in the Bledisloe Cup series in the last two World Cup years before losing the away match. No doubt there will be a “blacklash” at Eden Park where the Wallabies have not won since 1986, but the All Blacks seem uncharacteristically vulnerable. Without injured second-rower Brodie Retallick there is a question mark over the tight-five and their ability to repel the Wallabies up front. Until last weekend the All Blacks had been the number one team in the world for 486 weeks, yet their coach Steve Hansen said after the defeat that his side had to play with more confidence in Auckland. It is hard to imagine the All Blacks lacking confidence. What’s happened over there? The All Blacks are on the ropes, but they are fighters. It is important for Cheika to keep this Wallabies team together to deliver the knockout blow.