“It’s time to be realistic about it all.” Those are the words no Bradford Bulls fan ever wanted to hear uttered in regard to Odsal Stadium, their home for 85 years. Once known as the Wembley of the north and highly unusual in its design – a bowl carved out below ground level – it feels like a site rugby league can ill-afford to lose. But it seems the point of no return has finally arrived. Redevelopment of a stadium handily placed next to the motorway entry into Bradford has been mooted for decades and now the club insist they are sick of waiting. The costs of playing at Odsal, they allege, are crippling. Not so much the £72,000 rent they pay the Rugby Football League – owners of the stadium’s lease – more the overheads and maintenance costs, which are lofty for a second division side. “We’re talking in the region of £400,000 we will save from moving out of here,” the Bulls’ general manager, Russ MacFarlane, says. Leaving the council-owned Odsal is one thing. What Bradford plan to do in 2020 is another. With approval from the RFL they hope to vacate the city altogether and play in neighbouring Dewsbury at the Tetley’s Stadium, with a modest 5,100 capacity. “We understand the concern from some supporters but we will be back,” says MacFarlane. Bradford’s plan is to leave for two to four years before returning to a purpose-built site elsewhere in the city. Ambitious? Definitely. Talks with football teams Bradford City and Bradford Park Avenue over a groundshare failed, leaving relocating the only option. “It’s economically viable to leave Odsal, and that’s the whole point,” MacFarlane adds. “We don’t have to wake up in the morning and look at what needs fixing here. We can spend our money on the first team, on playing staff and on the club itself.” But the Bulls’ departure from Odsal will not just affect the club. Stadium staff will lose their jobs, local businesses who thrive on matchday revenue will struggle. Bradford, not just the Bulls, will feel this decision. But parts of Odsal’s terracing have recently been condemned and deemed unusable – this crumbling relic has been showing signs of irreversible decline for decades. “It’s highly unlikely Odsal will ever be redeveloped, I’m afraid,” MacFarlane says. “It’s more likely you’ll get another stadium nearby. But we’re already plotting the route back to Bradford.” The RFL will not accept the Bulls’ request to leave the city on an initial two-year term unless they are sure they will return. (Awkwardly, it is clearly in the governing body’s interests to keep the Bulls as tenants so it does not incur the rent and costs itself.) But Bradford say they have already held discussions with developers and will secure third-party investment to finance a new build. New stadiums do not simply spring up overnight, however. “If an option comes up in the city sooner, we’d be foolish not to explore it,” MacFarlane says. “We would hope Bradford council help but that’ll become clearer down the line. Moving to Dewsbury gives us breathing space and time to find a new home.” The council has not given up hope of a U-turn, saying: “We still really want the Bulls to stay in Bradford and to this end all parties have been working towards this.” But with the agreements drawn up and the request submitted to the RFL, unless something drastic happens quickly, 1 September’s fixture against Sheffield Eagles will be Bradford’s final game at Odsal and one of rugby league’s true gems will be gone for ever.