The Edinburgh Comedy award has found itself another deserving winner in Jordan Brookes, who has bagged the biggest prize in comedy – now sponsored by the TV channel Dave – for his show I’ve Got Nothing. Long the darling of comedians and critics (despite his terrifying habit of singling the latter out in his audiences), now he’ll get the chance to see whether his brand of faintly threatening experimentalism can amuse a wider audience. Had the awards organisers sought another household name to join the pantheon of Coogans and Skinners of yesteryear, Brookes would not have been their choice. But he’s undeniably a fascinating talent, a gripping stage presence and a disturbingly funny man. Visibly surprised by his win, Brookes took the stage after the winner of the panel prize, Fringe of Colour founder Jessica Brough, had spoken at length about the need for more diversity in comedy. This year’s shortlists included the first two black British women ever nominated for the two awards (best newcomer and best show), one of whom – London Hughes – is clearly zeroing in on stardom, and who was among the favourites for the gong. But if Brookes’ win doesn’t look like a victory for diversity, neither is it one for conformity. He’s an experimentalist, doing odd things with comedy, making people laugh in unexpected ways – and his win honours the ex-Perrier award’s occasional tradition of honouring eye-catching oddballs (Will Adamsdale, Tim Key, Dr Brown, Sam Simmons) over Live at the Apollo-esque standup. I’m delighted that he’s won – and even more so that New York musical comic Catherine Cohen (a glaring omission from the main list) secured the newcomer prize. Brookes threw everything including the kitchen sink at winning the comedy award in 2018 with a striking hi-tech show which didn’t even get a nomination but it was this year’s loose and largely unprepared effort that struck gold. Both offerings would have been worthy winners – and the same could be said of plenty of shows in Edinburgh this year (Ahir Shah, Tarot, Max and Ivan, James McNicholas) that didn’t get a sniff of the awards action. What he’ll do next will be intriguing to see. The leftfielders who went before (Noble + Silver spring to mind) haven’t always succeeded in parlaying their twisty fringe comedy into long-term success. Can he find a bigger audience for what he does? How might his dark comic sensibility map on to TV? And – as per awards host Rose Matafeo’s running gag at the ceremony – will he stick with live comedy? I hope so: his show was a highlight of the fringe in 2019. Do we need an Edinburgh Comedy award? In so many ways, competition is the least interesting thing happening on the fringe. But goodness knows this is a long festival, and it’s none the worse for a bit of ticker tape and champagne at the end – which the award (touchingly presented by Stephen Fry, its first ever winner as part of the Cambridge Footlights) cheerfully provides. As the dust settles, it clearly wasn’t a vintage year for comedy – there were fewer standout shows, those ones that the whole town is talking about and that demand to be seen. But it’s still a privilege to be here, in a town that for one month of the year teems with creativity, optimism and endeavour. I wish everyone involved a restful September, and look forward to rejoining the fray in 11 months’ time.