Britain’s food and drinks industry has said companies may have to choose between working together to avert food shortages or paying large fines unless the government steps in to suspend competition law in the event of a no-deal Brexit. Collaboration between large companies is controlled to prevent cartels harming consumers. The Food and Drink Federation (FDF) told the BBC that the government had not yet confirmed that companies would be able to work together to direct food supplies if there were delays as a result of crashing out of the EU. At 11pm UK time on 31 October the UK would, by default, become a “third country” in terms of relations with the EU, with no post-Brexit plan in place, and no transition period. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. The UK would drop out of countless arrangements, pacts and treaties, covering everything from tariffs to the movement of people, foodstuffs, other goods and data, to numerous specific deals on things such as aviation, and policing and security. Without an overall withdrawal agreement each element would need to be agreed. In the immediate aftermath, without a deal the UK would trade with the EU on the default terms of the World Trade Organization (WTO), including tariffs on agricultural goods. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports – making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO ‘most favoured nation’ rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods – they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some no-deal supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to ten years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement (FTA) is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally – the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. The director general of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, has told Prospect magazine that "in simple factual terms in this scenario, you could expect to see the application of tariffs between the UK and EU where currently there are none". Until some agreements are in place, a no-deal scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses – eg the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a ‘managed’ no deal envisage that a range of smaller, sector-by-sector, bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or to rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam Many trade experts, from the government’s own analysts to the Bank of England, expect that a no-deal Brexit will cause severe disruption at ports, potentially delaying food imports. Boris Johnson has committed to leaving the EU on 31 October whatever the implications, having put Michael Gove in charge ofpreparing to exit without a deal. FDF members, including large companies such as Associated British Foods, Mondelēz and Nestlé, risked incurring large fines from the Competition and Markets Authority if they collaborated, the industry body told the Guardian. Tim Rycroft, FDF chief operating officer, said: “Competition law is important, but in the event of no-deal disruption, if the government wants the food supply chain to work together to tackle likely shortages – to decide where to prioritise shipments – they will have to provide cast-iron written reassurances that competition law will not be strictly applied to those discussions.” The CMA could be legally obliged to fine the manufacturers if they work together. The CMA does not have the power to decide to waive the fines, but the government can order a suspension of the fines under exceptional circumstances. The government has used this power four times before, including to protect petrol supplies during the 2012 fuel crisis. Rycroft said the food industry was still waiting for the government to guarantee that this would happen. “We asked for these reassurances at the end of last year and, despite support from Defra, we’re still waiting. Hopefully, now that Michael Gove is in charge of all no-deal planning, we can make progress.” The food and drink industry claims to be Britain’s biggest manufacturing industry, above the automotive and aerospace sectors, employing 4 million people across the supply chain. A spokeswoman at the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said the UK produced half of the food British people eat. She added: “The UK will be leaving the EU on 31 October and our top priority is supporting consumers and businesses in their preparations for Brexit. We are working closely with the food industry to support preparations as we leave the EU.”