When Elena Sanchez-Heras realised the menopause was upon her, she did what she always does when faced with a biological unknown. “I’m a scientist,” she said. “I’ve been trained when you encounter a problem and want to figure it out, you go and seek out original sources.” Sanchez-Heras, now 56, is a cell biologist at University College London and has access to a vast online library of peer-reviewed scientific literature. But she was surprised by the number of questions that remained unanswered – and by the relative lack of research on a process that directly affects women. “We have half of the population … who has this problem and we don’t know what to do,” she said. It is striking that while there is no shortage of tests being marketed to women – none of which are very accurate – the biological intricacies of the middle-aged ovary remain relatively uncharted territory. Scientists are yet to decipher the chemical signals that stop ovarian follicles maturing into eggs when the overall egg reserve becomes low or uncover the role that ovarian cells other than eggs play in this process. Another surprisingly vague area is why some women (about a quarter) have almost no discernible symptoms while others (another quarter) have hot flushes that are seriously problematic and, in extreme cases, can persist for a decade. “We don’t fully understand that aspect of it,” said Waljit Dhillo, a professor in endocrinology and metabolism at Imperial College London. “Why in some patients you don’t get any symptoms and in some they’re very severe.” Even within a single individual, the way a woman’s decline in oestrogen relates to her symptoms is a mystery. In basic terms, hot flushes are known to be caused by the decline in oestrogen experienced when the fertility cycle comes to an end and more sudden drops in oestrogen tend to cause more extreme symptoms, but beyond that our knowledge seems to taper off. Some scientists say they are met with puzzlement when trying to justify new research into possible treatments. Hormone replacement therapy has long been the most widely used intervention, but there is still a lack of basic understanding about how HRT interacts with a woman’s body. “One of the reviewers for our grant asked ‘Aren’t you medicalising a physiological process?’,” said Dhillo, who led a recent trial of a compound that it is hoped could become an alternative treatment to HRT. The implication was that “women should put up with it”, he said. “You would never say that to someone with heart disease.” Dhillo added: “Historically, menopause is seen as a physiological phenomenon. It’s just one of those things that women go through, like childbirth.” What is not appreciated is the amount of disturbance in someone’s life this could have. Janet Lindsay, the CEO of the charity Wellbeing of Women, which funds several major research projects into menopause, said this attitude filters down to women seeking medical advice. She said: “Women are being told that what they are going through are just ‘women’s issues’ and too often suffer in silence.” However, both Lindsay and Dhillo say attitudes about medical research into the menopause are shifting as women are increasingly speaking out about their experiences. “The more you have … people coming together and saying this is really important area that you’ve missed, that you need the science there, the more funders will recognise it,” said Dhillo.