At the time of the last elections for the Scottish parliament in 2016, the position of the SNP was that if a Conservative government was elected at the next UK general election, and if there was a referendum on EU membership, and if the UK voted to leave and Scotland did not, then that would constitute a change of circumstances sufficient to trigger a second referendum on Scottish independence. At the time none of this was thought likely, but someone in the SNP seems to have a crystal ball, and the Scottish government therefore has a clear mandate for a second independence referendum. It is reasonable for the Labour party both north and south of the border to be in favour of keeping the union and to campaign for that. If they are democrats it is not reasonable for them to deny a second vote. Incidentally, Ruth Davidson is on the record, after the Brexit vote, as saying it would be most unwise of the UK government to deny Scotland a second referendum, but that was before they did just that, and she has since built her career on a “no second vote” position. I live in Scotland and, like Simon Jenkins (Independence for Scotland is inevitable – we need a plan for it, 9 August), would vote for independence tomorrow, given the opportunity. Westminster is corrupt, undemocratic and not fit for purpose. In Scotland we have a modern parliament elected by proportional representation. If we were independent we would have a written constitution too. It is not perfect but it is streets better than Westminster. Voters in the rest of the UK should be demanding all these things. Perhaps, if Scotland leaves, they will.Sue HawthorneHaddington, East Lothian • I read with interest the advice from Nicola Sturgeon for people in England to move to Scotland amid the current political uncertainty (G2 interview, 7 August). I did just that in the mid-1960s because I found it to be an open and accepting society. However, during the campaigns for Scottish independence I have been told on several occasions: “Why do you not go home if you do not agree with this movement?” My feeling is that if it is racism for the president of the United States to say such a thing then it is also racist to voice this in Scotland. I consider myself to be British and I hope to remain in my home country.Judith DunkerleyElphinstone, East Lothian • To avoid the upheaval of a mass migration from England to Scotland in the near future, perhaps we could campaign to lower the Anglo-Scottish border? Preferably to just south of Ormskirk in Lancashire.Hilary WardOrmskirk, Lancashire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition