We’re just gutted. That’s the feeling we all have right now. It’s been dragging on a long time but even until late on Tuesday night there was a bit of hope that the club might have a future. We’d heard there were a few late offers to buy it but then the deadline passed and the EFL felt they needed to expel us. I was at home when it happened. I was watching Sky Sports and it broke on there. I saw the statement but I didn’t know it was coming. I never got a heads-up on anything. Throughout the whole process there has been a state of uncertainty for us players. The first time we hear anything, it’s at the same time as everyone else. When EFL statements go live, that’s when we hear. We haven’t been able to play any matches this season but while the situation has dragged on we’ve carried on working. We’ve been in all pre‑season, since 1 July. We went in on Wednesday. We’ve been training as normal, preparing for games, then we get to the weekend and they’re cancelled. It’s been a nightmare, it’s been tough in training and it’s been tough away from the ground too. We have had some wages, we got last month’s, but we’re still owed our pay for a few months before that and I don’t know if we’ll ever see it; we’ve had nothing from the EFL or the PFA on that. I think we would appreciate more support. The PFA did help us out, giving us 50% of our wages, but now we don’t have an income. Lads have mortgages coming out at the start of the month. This is the time when we need the help, and we’d appreciate anything. I’ve got a baby due in February. It’s a bit of good news for me and I just wish the circumstances were different. There is a real togetherness among the squad. I think that’s probably the main reason we’ve been able to get as far as we have. We’re all in same boat together, going through similar things, but with some of the lads you can tell they’re struggling. People look stressed. You can see how it’s affecting people. We stick together but the truth is that the training ground is dead low, morale is at rock bottom. When you aren’t there you just try to get away from it. We’re definitely looking at the whole situation and asking questions. It looks like the owner had a fair few other businesses that were liquidated. It’s beyond me and the other lads as to how you could allow him in to buy a football club. We thought there were supposed to be tests before that could happen and there’s a few questions that need to be asked. Despite the news we’re all still in limbo a little bit. I don’t know how long it may drag on, but for sure something as big as this is not going to go away straight away. A lot of people are affected and I think the EFL need to be transparent about what’s going on. I’ve not had any direct communication from the EFL and neither have any of my teammates as far as I’m aware. I thought they would make some attempt at least. We’re still hearing these rumours about new bidders for the club and a lot of people round here are asking why the EFL could not have extended the deadline a bit further. I know they say there are rules in place but something like this last happened, what, 27 years ago? It’s a unique case and we need to use common sense and maybe a bit of leniency. Just look at how many people it will affect. The collapse of the club has turned people’s lives upside down. People have lost their jobs. The players have signed contracts when they came to the club in good faith, thinking you’d get what you’re owed. We’ve worked hard for that money only for it to disappear halfway through. It was only three months ago that we were celebrating promotion to League One. That seems like such a long time away now. The lads did great to achieve promotion and I feel for them all and all the staff especially.