Lewis Hamilton sported an optimistic smile as Formula One returned from its summer break and he prepared to once again do battle at Spa-Francorchamps. His beaming grin as good as matched the glorious sunshine in which this grand old circuit has luxuriated in the buildup to the race. Yet as the world champion considered his run-in to a sixth title, there was a familiar air of determination behind the pleasure he feels at being back behind the wheel. Hamilton is unashamed of his admiration for this magnificent track. He admires its history, how it coaxes great performances from the best and the challenge it presents. The rush of Eau Rouge and Pouhon and the grand, theatrical, elevation changes. This weekend it hosts the first of the remaining nine races and heralds a sequence of meetings where Hamilton has long been almost untouchable. Since the turbo-hybrid era began in 2014 he has won four of the first five races after the summer break every year except one. That exception was 2016 when Nico Rosberg took the title. The Hamilton that came back after that defeat was focused like never before, his motivation, dedication and determination to extract the best from himself and his team since then has been relentless. Despite a 62-point lead in the world championship over his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas, in Belgium the 34-year-old made it clear he would deliver complete commitment until the job is done. “I know how much work I have still got to do,” he said. “I know that if I don’t turn up in the next few races or I don’t deliver, or make mistakes I know I could well lose this championship. There are enough points to turn the tables, so I have to stay focused as I have done in the past and I come into the second half, like I have done each year. If there are areas I need to improve on while not letting other areas drop I truly believe I can do that.” Realistically he would have to suffer a meltdown for this championship to escape him, especially given his form. He already has eight wins from 12 races, four more and it will be the most successful season of his 13-year career. Admittedly Ferrari’s expected challenge has failed to materialise but regardless Hamilton has made Bottas, in identical machinery, look as if he was in a different class on occasion. With the exception of Germany, he has maximised when not wining and repeatedly when given a sniff of the flag, pursued it relentlessly, as in Monaco, Canada and to grand dramatic effect, Hungary. Another title this season, will put the five-times champion one in front of Juan Manuel Fangio and one behind Michael Schumacher. A run of success that has set him apart from his contemporaries. The last two titles have been secured under pressure from Sebastian Vettel and he shows no sign of relinquishing his crown. “It is a constant challenge for me, trying to improve,” he said. “Firstly, I am super competitive, so that never shifts. I then seek better improvements, that has been my philosophy.” It is a work ethic that has returned remarkable results yet he remains grounded. “I have a great family around me who will kick me up the backside if I fall out of place,” he said. Mercedes have brought a new engine to Spa and are optimistic of yet another performance improvement, although as was the case last year, it is Ferrari who look to have the upper hand. With their power advantage in a straight line this should be a track at which they would expect to be in front. Still winless this season Ferrari need to finally convert their pace into victory. Vettel took a dominant win at Spa last year when Mercedes were simply unable to match his pace. He had been playing down their chances this weekend but certainly in practice Ferrari were on top. Vettel was quickest in the first session, two-tenths up on his teammate Charles Leclerc. Hamilton was sixth fastest having suffered from pedal and telemetry problems. In the afternoon, Leclerc was on top with a very impressive qualifying simulation six-tenths in front of Vettel with Bottas in third and Hamilton in fourth, both eight-tenths down on Leclerc.