Roger Federer concedes it took a family holiday to help him recover from losing to Novak Djokovic in the Wimbledon final, when he blew two match points and lost all three tie-breaks. Yet the Swiss insists he is mentally and physically fit to challenge for a sixth US Open title, confidence that will be tested long before the final on 8 September. Federer, who turned 38 two weeks ago, always gives the impression the clock is ready to stop for him one more time. It did not happen over five gruelling sets on Centre Court six weeks ago against Djokovic, and the odds are the world No 1 will outlast everyone again in New York. Nevertheless Federer, who won the last of his five US Open titles in 2008 against Andy Murray, says he is prepared to dream of glory for a while yet. “I’m not putting extra pressure on myself,” he said in the lead-up to his first match on Monday, against a qualifier (with possible matches against Dan Evans and Cameron Norrie after that, or more likely David Goffin in the fourth round, before even contemplating a semi-final against Djokovic.) “I’m not coming in as overwhelming favourite like I did back in 2006 [when he defeated Andy Roddick] or 2007 [beating Djokovic], but I’m very much aware of how I need to approach the tournament mentally. I’ve had a very consistent last two years [in which he won the Australian Open twice, Wimbledon in 2017 and reached the 2019 final after beating Rafa Nadal in the semis]. “Even though my back locked up on me in Montreal, and I struggled here as well, I’ve been playing well recently again. My win over Rafa at Wimbledon was big for me. I’m happy with my game.” But Federer revealed camping in the Swiss Alps with his wife and children did much to erase memories of losing to Djokovic in a championship decider that built to a draining crescendo in the game’s first 12-12 tie‑break in the final set. “I struggled a little bit the first couple of days after that,” he said, “but then I was caravanning with my kids so I didn’t have that much time to think about all the missed opportunities. I was setting up tables and organising my life for my four children, driving around the beautiful countryside in Switzerland. “Sometimes I had flashbacks: should have done that, could have done that. But next day, having a glass of wine with your wife and you’re thinking, actually the tennis was pretty good, being in the final was very good. You go a couple of days when you get those things out of your system. Then first couple of days back playing tennis, you have a few flashbacks. “But I’m very happy I was part of an entertaining match. The crowd paid big money to be part of it. I put up a great fight. Someone had to win. Novak was the better man on the day. It’s tough but I’ve been there before. Had some tough losses, some great wins as well. I’m not too down on myself.” While Djokovic needs only four majors to draw alongside Federer’s all‑time high of 20, the Swiss’s career‑long nemesis has been Nadal, who owns 18. It is a curiosity that, although they have played each other 40 times in 15 years, they have not met at the US Open. Sadly for their rivalry, and the fans, the only chance of another showdown is in the final. The Spaniard, who has by far the easier draw, is the more likely to be there. Nadal leads 24-16 overall since beating Federer in the second round of the Miami Masters in 2004, one of 20 collisions in ATP 1000 events, to go with four matches at the Australian Open, six at Roland Garros, four at Wimbledon and five in the end‑of‑year ATP Tour Finals. Federer insists there is life in the old dogs yet but recognises the growing claims of Stefanos Tsitsipas, Felix Auger-Aliassime, Alexander Zverev and Daniil Medvedev, who beat Djokovic in Cincinnati last week. “Now that Novak, Rafa and me are healthy, with Andy [Murray] also slowly coming back again, it has made it much harder for the young guys to come through. But they are definitely knocking on the door big-time now. That’s very encouraging for those who want to see somebody else win. “Novak’s domination, and Rafa’s, is not normal. In tennis, we know how close the margins are. If you win 55 to 60% of the points in a match, you’re dominating. It’s that close. But it seems like the same guys are favourites again this time around. I’d be surprised if anyone else won.”