You weren’t always the greatest dad. You left us – my sister and me – when we were small. To your credit, you stuck around in England for a while, tried to make a go of it, even though you hated it here. You were Indian to your bones and you missed the heat, the noise, the colour and the passion. You were warm and kind when we visited you in London and you would play us tunes on your violin. You made it seem effortless, singing as you played. The words would always be about us, your children. You left for your beloved India, soon afterwards. As I grew older, I came to understand why, but it didn’t stop me feeling resentful. Contact was sparse. We didn’t see each other very often. When we did, it was always the same. Things would start out awkwardly. Then your warmth, energy, sense of humour and love of humanity would wear away at my anger and cynicism. When it was time to say goodbye, I would know that I would miss you very much. When I came to see you in Kolkata in 2009, you had retired, but you were busier than ever, devoting yourself full-time to the struggle. I was plunged into an intoxicating world of marches, rallies and fiery oratory. You fought for the rights of Dalits, women, tea workers, farmers. You fought against corruption, vested interest, the destruction of the environment. I visited a school for deprived children that you had set up. You were inspirational. I returned to England a changed person. Now I have two children of my own and I devote as much time as I can to the fight for climate justice. I know that, in comparison with you and your friends, we have it easy over here – that activists in India are beaten by police, imprisoned without charge, murdered by government goondas – hired thugs. You died in April this year, unexpectedly. We hadn’t spoken for a while. I was so excited to tell you about my recent work as an organiser with Extinction Rebellion, to talk about how the school strikers have changed the landscape and how, for the first time in years, I am feeling a little hope. It is unlikely I would be doing any of it if it wasn’t for you. I am standing on your shoulders. You weren’t always the greatest dad, but you were a first-class human being. I will miss you terribly. •We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.