A large tranche out of 2,000 pages of potentially explosive documents in a lawsuit against Ghislaine Maxwell – the British socialite and daughter of former media tycoon Robert Maxwell accused of acting as a recruiter of girls and women for disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein – have been made public. Virginia Giuffre, one of Epstein’s many accusers, filed a Manhattan federal court lawsuit against Maxwell in 2015, alleging defamation. Giuffre, née Roberts, claimed Maxwell defamed her by calling her a liar over her allegations against Maxwell and Epstein. Giuffre has alleged that Maxwell recruited her to work as a masseuse for Epstein when she was 15 and had been working as a locker-room attendant at Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. Giuffre had previously alleged that Epstein, who had political connections, forced her into sexual encounters with Prince Andrew. Buckingham Palace has vehemently denied Giuffre’s allegations. In 2015 it released a statement saying: “The allegations made are false and without any foundation.” Maxwell and Giuffre settled the lawsuit in 2017 but scores of case documents – which many speculate may contain additional details of allegations against Epstein and his political connections – had remained under seal until a federal appeals court ordered their release in June. The release of these documents comes in the wake of Epstein’s arrest earlier this month on sex trafficking and sex trafficking conspiracy charges for alleged sexual abuse of underage girls between 2002 and 2005, at his homes in New York City and Palm Beach, Florida. The Manhattan US attorney’s office, which is pursuing this case, alleges some of Epstein’s victims were just 14 years old. Epstein, a financier whose net worth is now thought to be some $560m, also associated with Donald Trump and Bill Clinton. Trump, who was pictured partying with Epstein and women in the 1990s, has recently attempted to distance himself from the financier. In the wake of Epstein’s arrest this month, Trump told reporters he “knew [Epstein], like everybody in Palm Beach knew him,” but added: “I had a falling out with him. I haven’t spoken to him in 15 years. I was not a fan of his, that I can tell you.” However, in a 2002 profile of Epstein from New York magazine, Trump was quoted as saying: “I’ve known Jeff for 15 years. Terrific guy. He’s a lot of fun to be with. It is said that he likes beautiful women as much as I do, and many of them are on the younger side.” Clinton also distanced himself from Epstein in a statement issued by his press secretary earlier this month, saying he had “not spoken to Epstein in well over a decade” and “knows nothing about the terrible crimes Jeffrey Epstein pleaded guilty to in Florida some years ago, or those with which he had been recently charged in New York”. Giuffre has also claimed Epstein forced her to have sex with the prominent US lawyer and law professor Alan Dershowitz, who defended Epstein in his 2008 abuse case, in which he secured a plea deal. Dershowitz has repeatedly denied the claims and called for the court documents in the Maxwell case to be released, saying he is confident they would clear his name. After Epstein’s first appearance in court following his arrest this month, Giuffre’s lawyer, Sigrid McCawley, issued a statement from her client, saying it was time for Epstein “and those who participated in these sex crimes to be brought to justice”. Epstein has pleaded not guilty and was denied bail before trial. He was reportedly found unconscious in a Manhattan jail cell with injuries to his neck on 23 July. Maxwell is the youngest daughter of Robert Maxwell, who died in 1991 after falling off his yacht, which was named the Lady Ghislaine. More details soon …