Tommy Shelby and his gang of be-capped ne’er-do-wells swagger on to BBC One, nudging no less than Ross Poldark from his 9pm slot in the process. Season five of the overwrought but oh-so-addictive between-the-wars drama opens with Tommy (Cillian Murphy) advancing his political career and exploring business opportunities with a certain Oswald Mosley.Sunday 25, 9pm; Monday 26 August, 9.30pm, BBC One ESPN’s terrific sports storytelling podcast returns with a five-parter on disgraced basketball billionaire Donald Sterling. Newcomers to the series should head to their episode archive, for tales of pioneering female marathon runners and juiced-up baseball cheats.Podcast One of the year’s best comedies is finally here. Doe-eyed comedian Ramy Youssef stars as a millennial Egyptian-American negotiating faith, sex and prejudice in New Jersey in an honest, funny series about modern Muslim life.From Friday 23 August, StarzPlay on Amazon Prime Video Prue, Paul, Sandy and Noel return to cast a discerning eye over the bakes and mistakes in the big white tent. If their presence wasn’t intimidating enough for this year’s hopefuls, the heat in the kitchen has been turned up several notches by the introduction of a 13th contestant, meaning that two bumbling bakers will be binned off in week one.Tuesday 27 August, 8pm, Channel 4 A fresh yet familiar cast of comrades including Kevin McNally and Robert Bathurst bring the characters of Britain’s favourite sitcom back to life. But don’t panic: this update handles the Home Guard with care, using original scripts from episodes missing from the archive. First up, shady Private Walker (Mathew Horne) tries his best to skip national service. Continues Monday and Tuesday.Sunday 25 August, 8pm, Gold The next GoT, or a steampunk shambles? Your mileage may vary on this gory new series, though the prospect of Cara Delevingne as an Irish pixie is intriguing. Orlando Bloom is the hard-bitten detective vying for her love in a faux-Victorian fantasy.From Friday 30 August, Amazon Prime Video A felt-coated Canute in a sea of CGI, the Jim Henson company stay true to their puppetty roots for this 10-episode prequel to their 1982 fantasy classic. Mark Hamill, Sigourney Weaver, Simon Pegg and Eddie Izzard are among the spectacular voice cast for a tale of magic, adventure and pointy-eared elf thingies.From Friday 30 August, Netflix The formidable TV judge swaps his robes for something a little more smart-casual with his new topical chat show. Still, the politicians and other guests crossing his path shouldn’t expect an easy ride as Rinder quizzes them on the week’s pressing topics.Friday 30 August, 10pm, Channel 4 Tom Courtenay plays the Mitty-like lad who escapes the mundane reality of his drab northern home by retreating into a fantasy land. Adapted for the screen by Willis Hall and Keith Waterhouse, from the latter’s 1959 dreamlike novel, John Schlesinger’s comedy is a funny, keen-eyed portrait of the 60s, with Julie Christie’s swinging Liz inviting Billy to get a real life in London.Saturday 24 August, 12.30am, Talking Pictures TV After five series and no end of column inches about his rampant shirtlessness, Aidan Turner hangs up the tricorned hat and retires Ross Poldark. But not before a two-night finale that promises a clandestine French invasion, some typical deviousness from George Warleggan and surely – surely – a resolution to Ross and Demelza’s will-they-won’t-they relationship.Sunday 25, 8pm; Monday 26 August, 8.30pm, BBC One