It was a sticky, stormy and rain-soaked first week at the Edinburgh fringe, but nevertheless, the fizzy verbal pitches that accompany the confetti flyers rang out as loud and clear as ever. These sentences are free entertainment in their own right. “Love musicals, hate laundry?” (Add “– the Musical!” to anything you can imagine, and somebody will be putting it on in a cellar 30 minutes’ walk from wherever you currently are.) “They dress up as stereotypes of women and then wrestle.” “Comedy about your daddy issues – we’ll sort them out.” They started to sound like cryptic crossword clues to which nobody has the answer. There was much talk of an influx of comedians whose sets promised variations on the old “it’s political correctness gone mad” trope, as if their views were new, a kind of truth-telling backlash against the myth that comics are being silenced by bossy, you-can’t-say-that leftwingers. That may surprise anyone who has glanced at the internet ever. In the interests of giving it a go I went to see Titania McGrath (Pleasance Above), the brainchild of comedian and Jonathan Pie co-creator Andrew Doyle. McGrath came to Twitter fame as an account spoofing millennial activism and “wokeness”, but here she has been turned into a raving posho who hates homeless people. It got itself in a tangle, unsure, in the end, whether it was sending up wokeness or hypocrisy, and falling between both, as McGrath, played by Alice Marshall, became neither satire nor true monster. Clearly, however, she has watched a lot of Kate Tempest performances, so if slam poetry impersonations are your thing, fill your boots. I started to play standup bingo. For a full house: referring to a recent breakup, mentioning a bad review – because you can take it! – mentioning the Guardian, bringing up Brexit once without conviction but out of a sense of obligation, and apologising to the men in the audience for being mean about them. ( – the Musical!). The anti-PC comedians, who just want their views to be heard, like they are in almost every mainstream newspaper daily, didn’t seem to have much of a point. There was no atmosphere of censure or fear, and healthy provocation was alive and well everywhere. I could not remember the last time I saw standup as joyously filthy and smutty as London Hughes: To Catch a Dick (Pleasance Attic). It felt like a throwback somehow. Hughes charmed the crowd with a gutsy, gag-heavy show about, well, mostly blowjobs, but not if her grandmother asks. Across the courtyard there was Catherine Bohart: Lemon (Pleasance Above). Bohart had a deservedly breakout year with her debut in 2018, but during that run an audience member called her “disgusting” for talking about her sex life. She had talked about her girlfriend, not her sex life, so this year she has taken on the challenge with admirable gusto. Intimacy of a less primal variety was everywhere, and theatre made a desperate push for human connection. I baptised the week with 8:8 (Summerhall), a neat little wonder staged in an old women’s locker room in which people simply tell a story from their lives, playing around with what is true and half-true. If you’re going to go to an arts festival, this was as arts festival as it could get, but over 25 minutes it grew from silence into something so utterly special that I used it as my go-to recommendation whenever anyone asked what to see. The woman next to me cried, so be warned, if uncomfortable and prolonged eye contact makes you weepy. 8:8 was a slick blockbuster compared to Arthur, which Daniel Bye performs in whoever has booked him’s front room. Bye deftly weaves his mini-audience through his thoughts on nature versus nurture and the shameful rise in child poverty, via gentle science detours on crayfish and Diane von Furstenberg’s cloned dogs. I jumped into a living-room booking and spent a good portion of this warm, touching exploration of trying to parent as best you can with co-star and main attraction Arthur, Bye’s six-month-old son, on my lap. He was a pro, and it was a standout debut performance. Jonny Pelham: Off Limits (Just Out of the Box) was an unforgettable hour of comedy, and not just because rainwater began to pour into the cave in which we sat (part of the substructure of Edinburgh’s 18th-century South Bridge) a short time into the performance. Pelham was explaining that he has worryingly low levels of anxiety, which at that moment came in handy. Happily, someone brought a bucket and the show could go on. The Bradford comedian takes a traumatic part of his life and miraculously and delicately turns being abused as a child – a situation that doesn’t scream out for the comedy treatment – into a vivid, honest and funny examination of how he could stand up on stage and talk about what people find so hard to hear. Hearing was a very literal problem for poor Rich Kids: A History of Shopping Malls in Tehran (Traverse), an ambitious, sprawling show about consumption, a decaying world and technology which tore up the traditional theatre rules about turning off phones and asked the audience to turn them up instead, so they could interact with the show via their Instagram account. Sadly, the broadband got performance anxiety. When this bold, smart story worked, you could see the potential, but most of the audience were distracted by their phones’ refusal to play along in time, and the cacophony felt like having too many tabs open on your browser. It might not have been the point intended, but was a point nonetheless. For technological horrors with a more confessional flavour, Richard Gadd’s debut play Baby Reindeer (Summerhall) was a horrifying tale of being stalked by a woman he met in a bar, who pursued him both online and in person. Gadd is no stranger to reliving trauma on stage – he won best show in 2016 for Monkey See, Monkey Do, in which he talked about being sexually assaulted – but this intense and harrowing hour, physical and frightening, has no space for comedic detours. By the end, Gadd is drenched in sweat, but he leaves the audience chilled to the bone. It speaks volumes of the fringe that you can whiplash from something like Baby Reindeer to Musik (Bijou, Assembly Rooms), an unabashed wallop of giddy, brilliant camp. Pet Shop Boys and Jonathan Harvey have revived Billie Trix, narrator of their 2001 musical Closer to Heaven, for a one-woman show and cabaret. Frances Barber is a treat as the smoky rock legend, inspired by Nico and Marianne Faithfull, telling her life story with a few shakes of the tambourine and a hefty dose of slapstick. The funniest hour of the fringe, though, was Zoë Coombs Marr: Bossy Bottom (Monkey Barrel), which grabbed the audience by the scruff and woke them all up. Coombs Marr promised nothing but jokes, just gag after gag, with no clever conceits to distract from the daftness. Anyone who has seen her previous adventurous and form-bending work as her alter ego, the sexist comedian Dave, would be wise to be suspicious of that promise, but her return to performing as herself after seven years is wonderful. She pulls that abject silliness – just gag after gag, as promised – and still sneaks it all into a clever conceit that circles and spirals into mind-melting joy. I left, as a punter should, with my face aching. Bryony Kimmings: I’m a Phoenix, Bitch (Pleasance One)The word-of-mouth, you-must-see-this, beg-a-ticket show. Performance artist Kimmings turns a terrible year – postnatal depression, relationship breakdown, desperately ill child – into a magical feminist musical. Anguis (Gilded Balloon Teviot, Dining Room) There are few things more anxiety-inducing for a journalist than watching a play about an interview going badly, but this is so much more than that. Actor-turned-playwright Sheila Atim puts Cleopatra in a Desert Island Discs-ish chair, slowly shifting the steady ground beneath the three players. Eddie Izzard: Wunderbar (Gilded Balloon Teviot)A second chance to catch Izzard in addition to his work-in-progress Dickens reading, Expectations of Great Expectations. Wunderbar, his first show in five years, will preview from 12-14 August before he takes it on tour in September. Sarah Keyworth: Pacific (Pleasance, Baby Grand) Following her best newcomer nomination for Dark Horse last year, Keyworth (above) returns to the theme of gender with Pacific, while offering the other side of the relationship that Catherine Bohart mines for her show Lemon (reviewed opposite). Total Immediate Collective Imminent Terrestrial Salvation (The Studio) Playwright Tim Crouch recently made the jump to TV with the low-key brilliance of Don’t Forget the Driver. You’d be a fool not to see what he’s up to now, with a play that makes the audience part of the performance. Phoebe Robinson: Sorry, Harriet Tubman (Assembly George Square)US comedian Robinson arrives in Edinburgh on 12 August. Fans of her podcasts 2 Dope Queens and Sooo Many White Guys will be thrilled to catch her debut UK standup show.