You might not expect penguin biscuits to contain chilli, but these do. It pairs well with the creamy, cooling ganache filling, but you could leave it out if you don’t like spice. The biscuits are quick to decorate – and delicious. Makes: 12 Prep time: 15 mins for the shortbread, 10 mins for the icing, 10 mins for the ganache, plus decorating time Bake time: 12-15 mins For the shortbread:200g salted butter100g caster sugar40g cocoa powder⅓ tsp chilli powder230g plain flour For the orange and white chocolate ganache filling:220g white chocolate140g double creamZest of 1 medium orange For the royal icing:105g icing sugar20g egg whiteExtra icing sugar and egg white, to adjust the consistency Plus:Gel food dyes, orange and black Cream together the butter and caster sugar in a bowl. Sift in the cocoa powder and chilli powder. Add the plain flour, then use your hands to combine into a ball. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface. Stamp out about 24 round biscuits and arrange on two baking trays lined with greaseproof paper. Stamp out a smaller circle at the bottom of half of the biscuits. Place the baking trays in the fridge to chill for 30 minutes and preheat the oven to 160C (140C fan)/325F/gas mark 3. Bake the biscuits for 12 to 15 minutes. Be careful not to overbake them (it is harder to tell with chocolate biscuits, as they are already brown). While the biscuits bake, prepare the ganache. Chop up the chocolate into small, even-sized pieces and place in a bowl. Heat the double cream until it starts to bubble at the edges, then pour over the chocolate. Leave for two minutes, then stir until all the chocolate has melted. If the chocolate has not melted, return to a low heat and stir until it has. Set aside the ganache to cool (you can put it covered in the fridge to speed this up). When cool, add the grated orange rind, then use an electric whisk to beat until fluffy. When the biscuits are baked, leave them on the baking trays for five minutes, then transfer to a wire rack to cool further. Sandwich the biscuits together with the ganache. Make the royal icing. Use an electric whisk to combine the icing sugar and egg white until smooth. Separate into three bowls. Colour one orange, one black and leave one white. Transfer to piping bags and use to create the penguins’ eyes, wings and feet. Baking with Kim-Joy: Cute and Creative Bakes to Make You Smile is published by Quadrille on 22 August. To order a copy for £15.84 (RRP £18), go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK P&P over £15, online orders only. Phone orders minimum P&P of £1.99.