There isn’t a taxi driver in Newcastle who doesn’t have something to say about Sam Fender, local lad done good. There’s the one who confides, as if revealing an insider secret, that he’s “a nice kid, and a star for the future.” Another, who says: “We’ve got him, Ant and Dec and Cheryl Cole who feel proud to be geordie – not like Alan Shearer, he’s arrogant.” Everyone seems to have seen him play in the Low Lights Tavern, where the singer-songwriter fairytale goes that he was spotted by Ben Howard’s manager, scored a deal with Polydor Records, and then a lot more people were hearing about “boy racers tearing down the Beehive Road” (a line from his song Leave Town). They like that Fender hasn’t forgotten his roots. I’m hoofing it across town because tomorrow Fender is playing his biggest show yet, for 4,000 people at Tynemouth Castle, five minutes from where he lives with his mum in North Shields, half an hour outside the city centre on a cliff edge overlooking the sea. As Fender tells it, these majestic ruins are supposedly where Sting lost his virginity, but they will now also be known as the venue that the 25-year-old singer-songwriter sold out in just 40 minutes. Come the gig, hundreds more people who don’t have tickets snake around the bay with picnics and pints, watching from afar. He makes jokes about egging the local shop and calls out schools (Kings, the private one, gets the biggest boo). His appeal, however, is resonating far beyond his home town – a spikier version of the pallid, relatable, boy-next-door troubadours who have continually bothered this decade’s charts. You’ve heard them. They are the doughy, well-spoken everymen with guitars, singing emotionally incontinent songs. And they are everywhere, a post-Ed Sheeran contagion of careerist charisma vacuums, ready to croon a bluesy yarn about how they want you just the way you are, girl, before dashing off to play a royal family function. Fender has the guitar, but also the cheekbones of a supermodel and songs about male suicide, the spice epidemic and fear of nuclear disaster. The only songs in his repertoire that are in any way romantic are about drunken casual sex. His foamier lager anthems recall Liam Gallagher, if Liam was in any way woke. But Fender really can write songs. His singles, such as Hypersonic Missiles (also the name of his forthcoming debut album), are lethally catchy – like a more brooding Killers coupled with a boyish, brass-loving Bruce Springsteen, albeit more Newcastle than New Jersey. And his voice is nothing like the pigeon-warble of his peers, often high-vaulting to Jeff Buckley levels of vulnerability. Elton John is a fan. So is Stormzy, who recently left him a nine-minute voice message about how much he loved his song Dead Boys, a title that leaves little to the imagination. Fender says he feels uncomfortable being lumped in with the Toms, Jameses and Georges of guitar pop. “I don’t see myself as part of that, because I’m from Shields, and up here is a very different world,” he says. It exasperates him a little that most people “can’t see that – they probably assume that I’m privately educated”. Or, worse, manufactured. We meet the evening before Fender’s homecoming show, at the studio he built in a former garage with his first music paycheck. It’s late, and someone is still hand-rolling T-shirts in kebab wrappers to sell on his merch stand. A stone’s throw away is the pub where he used to pull pints and perform and where got his break with manager Owain Davies, who spotted him and offered to take him on. “I went to the toilet and burst into tears because suddenly I felt like this is the moment I can change things,” he says, although the journey from there to a record deal was by no means instant. “Granted,” he laughs, “it took seven years.” This is the cheeky chappie I’d read about in past interviews, self-effacing and not afraid of making the odd Ed Sheeran jibe. And yet, while the musician I meet is sweet and sailor-sweary, the guy you’d prop up the bar with, he is also, in his own words, “a bit of an anxious mess”. This is, to be fair, possibly the worst time Fender could be doing an interview. Tomorrow’s show is the first since his voice went on strike a month ago. The following day he is due to support Neil Young and Bob Dylan in Hyde Park. Last month, his voice problems meant he had to cancel his scheduled Glastonbury appearance; until yesterday, he didn’t know whether he’d be able to sing this week at all, let alone do a press interview. “I did too much and haemorrhaged my vocal cord on the right side,” he says. “I’ve not stopped touring for two years, and then I crashed and burned. I realised that you can’t maintain that high. And now I’ve got myself back on my feet and I’m naturally a bit scared. Because this thing, it can destroy you, it really can.” My mum was ill and being pushed to work when she wasn’t fit to. I saw what it was like to struggle The month off to recuperate gave Fender time to reflect on how fast his career is moving. Last November he released his debut EP. A month later he won the 2019 Brits critics’ choice, the award for breakthrough musicians, previously won by Adele and Sam Smith. He’s now at the stage where he’s appearing on The Graham Norton Show and can’t walk down the street without being asked for a selfie. “Nothing feels the same any more,” he says. “I’ve spent my entire life wanting to be successful, trying to get away from hardship, or from seeing my mum sad. And I’ve got that now and it’s very strange. So many amazing things have happened in this last year – it’s no wonder people turn to drugs because it’s bonkers. And there’s a lot of paranoia.” For Fender, music was a way to get out of his situation. His father and brother were local gigging musicians but when his parents separated he moved in with his mum on a council estate and abandoned his A-Levels while trying to look after her and bring in money. “Me and my mum were below the breadline. She was mentally ill and didn’t work full-time and she was constantly going to tribunals about having to go to work again. That’s why I’ve got a thing against the DWP and the Tories, ’cause they were always breathing down her neck and pushing her to work when she wasn’t fit to. I saw what it was like to struggle.” He stops himself. “[I sound like] I’m playing the whole ‘poor northerner boy’ sympathy card. I hate that. You don’t want to cling on to the whole ‘I’m a class hero’ thing, because it can seem not genuine at all, like. Technically, I started off quite comfortable. I lived in a council estate for half of my life, but not the beginning of it. Before my parents split up, we lived in one of them terraced houses, which was quite nice. And my dad was working, and my mum was a nurse. But if I’m honest about it, the past 10 years of my life were tough. It wasn’t easy.” It’s why he grew up having “a chip on my shoulder” when it came to music. “A lot of the bands that I knew around town were kids from the private schools. I used to hear about the Tom Odells of the world and be like: ‘It’s easy for you.’” And it wasn’t just a class thing: even when he started “touring with the Nick Mulveys and George Ezras” he says he couldn’t shake the “feeling like I didn’t belong… I used to feel so thick”. Still, when he was 18, he says he desperately tried to write the “bluesy crappy songs” they did, because he assumed that’s what you needed to sound like to make it. “I saw what the George Ezras and James Bays had achieved and I was like, ‘I need to try and write some love songs that connect,’” he says. “I hated my job, I hated being in the flat with my mam where we lived at the time. I was desperate to get out of that. I did everything I could to write the songs that I thought would get us there.” But then he had a health scare, quite a serious one. He isn’t ready to discuss it publicly because, he says, “I don’t want to become a charity case, or for it to look like I’m capitalising on it as a way to make people like my tunes”, adding: “I’ll probably talk about it eventually, just not now.” But it was, he says, a “crazy traumatic experience” and that his recovery refocused his songwriting efforts. “I started writing for myself, as opposed to what I thought people wanted to hear. If you don’t know if you’re going to live [it makes you] want to write songs that actually mean something to us.” Some of those song titles do come across as if they were chosen from a social issues randomiser. If the kids want someone authentic to tackle the big themes, Fender has them cued up: Millennial (social media addiction), Poundshop Kardashians (more social media addiction) and Play God (faceless politicians). But he also writes convincingly about the bleak scenes in his backyard, kitchen-sink songs like Leave Fast, Friday Fighting and a new one, The Borders. He says, seriously, that he can’t divulge details about the last one “because I don’t want to get my head kicked in” but it’s broadly about feeling guilty that his life turned out well while some of his peers got left behind. Dead Boys, meanwhile, was written after two friends from Tynemouth killed themselves (the suicide rate in the north-east is the highest in England). After his gig, Fender tells me shakily that he could see their houses and workplaces from the stage. While people have got in touch to say that songs like Dead Boys have saved their lives, he has also faced some backlash. For Greasy Spoon, a song about “a girl who was being sexually abused”, he was criticised for trying to embody the female experience. Then Poundshop Kardashians, his takedown of Geordie Shore wannabes, with biting lines such as: “Beautiful people devoid of emotion… thick as fuck and soulless”, was seen by some as too simplistic, even nasty. Tellingly, it will not appear on his debut album (due in September). “With hindsight, I think I was quite naive,” he says. “Maybe that came across a bit too heavy-handed.” But he does feel that some of it has been taken out of context. “The song is about my home town and then it starts to talk about celebrity culture, but it’s been perceived by a select few as having a pop at girls for wearing makeup, which is just ludicrous. I’m talking about people being famous for nothing.” It is perhaps for this reason that he says he’s already distrustful of journalists. “Do you reckon they drafted you in to annihilate me?” he says bashfully, before asking what I think of the album. He reckons that cynics will “probably slate it because I’m on a major label and I write pop songs”, even though he eschewed an expensive London studio to work with his usual producer, the bizarrely monikered Bramwell Bronte, in sheds and his mum’s front room, before moving into his own studio. He seems gently perplexed that, while the bands he admires like Idles and Fontaines DC are signed to independent labels and praised for being authentic, he is sometimes treated with suspicion. “Everybody sees you’re on a major label and they just assume that you’re mass produced,” he says. At least he is attempting to put songs like new album track White Privilege on Radio 1 – a song on which he “spewed out” our conflicted political discourse, and “my bipolar thoughts about it all as well”. Brexit, of course, has an honorary mention. Says Fender: “One minute I consider myself leftwing, but then I feel like there’s also a lot of really condescending people on the left that alienate working class people.” But the song also acknowledges his own entitlement. “I can’t ever escape being a white boy with a guitar, and that is privilege in itself,” he says. “And I’m not doubting that I can write a little bit of a tune here and there, but I do think that it would have been harder if I wasn’t [a white man], you know what I mean? There was a list of Radio X’s top 100 British songs the other day and, of those, there were three female artists in that entire list and I had three songs on it alone. How fucked up is that?” Fender says that while he writes politically minded songs, he doesn’t have any answers. He is, like his hero Springsteen, just saying what he sees – except when it comes to dating. “Nobody wants to hear about my horrendous love life,” he says. “I’m soppy and boring. If I write about stuff that grinds my gears or something that actually affects our country, then it becomes something worth singing. I’m not clever enough to fix these problems, or lead the charge. I just write about something that’s stirred me up enough on a Tuesday afternoon while I’m battling my way through a pack of chocolate digestives, drinking tea, watching daytime telly.” He is, perhaps, selling himself a bit short. At the Tynemouth show, a group of local lads, all 23, are cracking open tinnies and bantering. I ask what they like about Sam, and two of them, Declan and Adam, are so sincerely on-message that they could have been planted by a marketing executive (they haven’t). “The northeast has got a lot of things to say but no one wants to listen,” Adam says. Which is why, continues Declan, “the Dead Boys song means a lot. We connect with that because we’re all north-east boys. He knows the battles that we’ve been through. Up here, people top themselves on a daily basis”, which means it’s even more powerful to see thousands of fans at the gig sing along to it. Fender, they say, is helping to change perceptions. “A lot of people here are portrayed as a bit thick,” says Adam. “Severely working class, nothing going on. But there’s a lot of really eloquent, intelligent people with a lot of things to say, like Sam Fender. He’s giving our generation a voice – and not just our generation but the area on the whole.” Hypersonic Missiles is released on 13 September on Polydor