Twenty-seven minutes into the kind of match to which they have long since become accustomed, Manchester City’s fans broke out in applause to support their stricken neighbours. “Stand up for the Bury boys” was the accompanying chant and it would presumably not have taken long, upon a quick survey of the home support, to locate some of the 28,885 who watched the Shakers win 1-0 at Maine Road in their final meeting. That was on Valentine’s Day 1998, when both clubs were in the second tier; they are based 10 miles apart but here, against a competent but outclassed Brighton, they got back to their modern-day business of operating in an entirely different universe. That applies in comparison with almost everyone they face, in fairness, and especially when Kevin De Bruyne is in full flight. Friday was the fourth anniversary of his arrival from Wolfsburg and he marked it with a fitting masterclass, opening the scoring after little more than a minute and providing an assist for Sergio Agüero to convert the first of two sublime finishes. Had a flashing volley not cleared the bar shortly before his 69th-minute substitution, he might have signed off with a goal of the season contender. In the event his work was long done by the time Bernardo Silva, 17 seconds after coming on, scored the fourth and the only black mark for City was a potentially serious injury to Aymeric Laporte, who was taken off on a stretcher in the first half. “My players up front are incredibly good and they make the difference,” Pep Guardiola said. Brighton stuck to their guns, playing from the back in the face of a vigorous City press and creating opportunities to make things mildly awkward after going two down. It is easy to be magnanimous when you have won without reaching full throttle but Guardiola seemed genuinely heartened to have watched something he claimed was far removed from the timid fare visitors usually offer up. “Sometimes the opponents have the courage and personality to say ‘OK, I am going to play’,” he said. “They played to hurt us and score goals. It is a good lesson for me. I learn from my colleague.” That determination to chew on morsels for self-improvement is part of what makes him. Everyone knew the die was cast upon De Bruyne’s opener, timed at 67 seconds. The goal would not qualify for a highlights reel of the playmaker’s City days but was dispatched as efficiently as anyone would expect. David Silva had the freedom of the inside-left channel after Davy Pröpper’s missed challenge and there were no prizes for guessing what resulted: a cutback, and a sidefoot into the vacant goal from De Bruyne. It took any sting from the game. City dozed for a while and when Kyle Walker and Dale Stephens fairly engaged in a 50-50 challenge to a resounding thud it had the effect of waking everyone up. Agüero and De Bruyne duly shot wide while David Silva could not adjust his feet to convert Raheem Sterling’s centre. They were interrupted when Laporte, who had halted a gallop up field from Adam Webster, went down clutching his right knee. The medics came on and so, after a lengthy delay, did Fernandinho in Laporte’s place. “The doctor is going to call me but I think [he will be out] a while,” Guardiola said. It did little to knock City off their stride. The second goal was a peach, Riyad Mahrez backheeling De Bruyne into space and Agüero receiving the Belgian’s pass, thumping past Mat Ryan after taking two touches to work an angle. Brighton worked their two best openings either side of half-time, Ederson saving from Neal Maupay and Fernandinho heading away a goalbound effort from Leandro Trossard. “The performance of our players was one of real courage; their application was fantastic,” Graham Potter said. It is no criticism of them to say that Agüero’s was even better. A subtle first-time touch from David Silva, allowing him to size up a curler from the edge of the area, opened up the chance and the end product was scintillating. Bernardo Silva, slotting in from an angle, had the final say. Unlike that defeat to Bury this was hardly a “where were you when?” occasion, but nowadays City routinely provide moments to stick in the memory.