Copycat terrorism is on the rise again, this time from the far right. Over the past few months, we have witnessed a series of lethal terrorist attacks against minorities in places of worship and other public spaces that are said to have been carried out by white supremacists. There was the shooting at a Pittsburgh synagogue in October 2018, then two mosque attacks in New Zealand in March 2019, another synagogue assault in California a month later and an attack at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas, on Saturday. While the victims of these attacks were diverse – from young children to army veterans and mothers of newborn babies – their alleged perpetrators had much in common: radicalised white men who frequented online far-right hotbeds such as the anonymous imageboard website 8chan and the alt-right Twitter equivalent, Gab. And they believed their race to be threatened by an imminent “invasion” or gradual “population replacement”. In the summer of 2016, one Isis-inspired lone-actor attack was followed by the next: first a truck attack in Nice, then several knife attacks and a bombing in Germany, followed by a hostage-taking at a church in Normandy. After the emergence of Isis, it did not take long until early warning systems were introduced on a global scale The ideology driving today’s wave of far-right emulation attacks is, of course, different in nature, but the underlying contagion effect is similar. The spike in jihadi attacks in 2016 came after Isis spokesman Abu Muhammed al-Adnani repeated his call for lone-wolf attacks against western targets in a recording that quickly spread across online channels. The Christchurch shooting suspect is said to have encouraged his audience on 8chan to follow his example. “I only wish to inspire others,” the suspect in the Poway synagogue shooting in California announced in a similar tone in the document he left behind on the same platform. Shortly before the El Paso attack occurred, a post calling for racial separation and denouncing the “Hispanic invasion of Texas” appeared on 8chan. The deadly El Paso attack would be at least the third time in 2019 that 8chan has been accused of acting as a radicalisation engine. Like the Isis attackers, the white supremacist shooters are part of toxic extremist subcultures rather than socially isolated, disturbed individuals. But politicians and security forces have systematically underestimated the risks emerging from inherently violent far-right ideologies. After taking office in 2017, President Trump even cut the funds for anti-racist organisations and far-right extremism prevention programmes. Terrorism is a means, not an end. Its strategy is based on generating attention, inflaming tensions and escalating conflicts. Whether Isis suicide bombings or white supremacist shootings, the shared goal of such acts is usually to spark a war of races, religions or cultures. The alleged Christchurch attacker wrote that he wanted “to add momentum to the pendulum swings of history, further destabilising and polarising western society”. Similar to his jihadi counterparts, he denounced the “nihilistic, hedonistic, individualistic insanity” in contemporary western society. These parallels mean that we neeed to apply what we know about martyrdom operations from previous waves of terrorism. First and foremost, we need to tackle the underlying ideology and its online spread. With Trump and some European politicians echoing the language of the 8chan community and using words such as “invaders” to describe immigrants, it will be challenging to reverse the emboldening of the violent far right and the normalisation of their rhetoric. Our latest report at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue revealed that 8chan and similar sites served as a central hub for the wider dissemination of propaganda related to the so-called great replacement theory. Following slick online operations coordinated by far-right activists on fringe platforms, these conspiracy theories have increasingly entered mainstream discussions on social media. The number of tweets mentioning the theory nearly tripled in four years from just over 120,000 in 2014 to just over 330,000 in 2018. Despite recent changes in the removal policies of bigger platforms like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, which now cover white separatist and white nationalist content, there remain vast numbers of websites that are willing to host far-right extremist accounts. Many racist and violence-endorsing pages continue to be operative across the less known alt-tech platforms: from extremist in-house creations to ultra-libertarian social media sites and encrypted messaging apps. In such far-right safe havens, it does not take a user long to come across posts that explicitly incite crimes against Muslims, Jews, black people, Hispanics and leftwing politicians, or step-by-step instructions on how to build weapons at home. Despite a decrease in the number of Islamist extremist attacks across Europe and North America in the last two years and, at the same time, a large increase in the number of far-right-inspired terror attacks, the response provided by the international security community is inadequate. After the emergence of Isis, it did not take long until early warning systems were introduced on a global scale. Removal mechanisms were faster, ample resources were provided and international cooperation was more determined. There is a database that facilitates the removal of extremist photo and video content across tech platforms, but it focuses almost exclusively on al-Qaida and Isis-related propaganda. If we want to protect our communities from more atrocities, we need our governments to step up their efforts for an internationally coordinated response to the online spread of white supremacist propaganda. A first step would be to agree on an international definition of terrorism that is ideologically agnostic and includes not only traditional jihadi organisations but also loose far-right networks. Second, governments will need to look beyond the big tech platforms and introduce legal frameworks that tackle the ongoing migration of extremists to the smaller alt-tech sites. And, finally, we need a stronger international response to condemn political rhetoric that belittles, legitimises or even endorses the dangerous concepts and conspiracy theories of far-right extremists. If we fail to do so, they will continue to destroy innocent lives as well as the fabric that holds together our democratic societies. • Julia Ebner is a researcher at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, and author of The Rage: The Vicious Circle of Islamist and Far-Right Extremism