In what feels like an increasingly volatile world, it wasn’t long ago that Tui was steering a smooth course through the ups and downs of the tourist trade. While its rival Thomas Cook went from one mishap to another, Tui, which traded as Thomson in the UK until 2017, kept reporting solid results. It seemed to have got its strategy right by owning its own hotels, airline and cruise ships instead of packaging others’ together for slim margins. It bought extra ships to meet booming demand for cruises and became adept at selling its customers “experiences”, such as a visit to a ruin or a water park. As recently as December, Tui reported a fourth consecutive year of earnings up 10% or more and was confident about its prospects. But after two profit warnings this year, investors are braced for bad news when the Anglo-German tour operator reports third-quarter results on Tuesday. The first profit warning was in February. Demand for holidays weakened as consumers, still reeling from the boiling-hot summer of 2018, held off booking foreign trips. Many of those who did plan to travel opted for Turkey and north Africa, leaving the company with too much capacity in Spain. The weak pound also made it more expensive for Tui’s tour business to buy holidays in sterling. When Tui issued a second warning in March, the problem was the grounding of Boeing’s 737 Max after two fatal crashes. Tui’s fleet of about 150 aircraft included 15 of the 737 Max, with eight more due to start flying in May. The company estimated the cost of the grounding, including leasing replacement planes, at about €300m (£280m) if the Max stayed on the ground till the end of the summer. In that scenario, underlying annual earnings would be 26% less than the €1.18bn in 2018, it said. Airlines have since signalled the planes will not be flying any time soon and there are doubts if the 737 Max will go back into service at all. Ian Forrest, an analyst at online stockbroker the Share Centre, said: “People will want to hear more detail from the company about what their current estimate is [for the 737 Max grounding] because the situation is shifting all the time.” The grounding has reverberated throughout the travel industry. Ryanair has curbed expansion plans as a result and has said it may shut some airport bases. If things weren’t bad enough, Brexit is hitting consumer confidence, forcing travel companies to battle for bookings and sending prices down. Tui’s shares have lost almost half their value in the past year and with an unusually high dividend yield of about 8%, the payout looks to be under threat. Forrest said: “Hotels and cruises should still be a positive, but things are changing so much that it’s hard to know what to expect.”