This is exactly the kind of show that justifies an international festival since it is fascinating in its content and exploratory in form. Conceived and directed by Milo Rau, presented by NTGent and performed in French and Flemish (with English surtitles), it recreates a notorious homophobic murder that took place outside Liège in 2012, while asking probing questions about the way we do theatre now. One of the items in a 10-point manifesto drawn up by NTGent is that theatre is about process as well as product. So the evening begins with an account of how three professional actors recruited three part-timers for this particular project. The amateurs are a mixture of bashfulness and bravado and one of them, with a parent from Benin, laconically regrets always being cast as a type rather than an individual. But the bulk of a gripping evening is taken up with the story of Ihsane Jarfi who got talking to a group of men outside a gay bar in Liège in April 2012 and was subsequently tortured and murdered. Even though the killers were put on trial, we can never know the whole truth. Why did Ihsane get into the men’s car? Was their homophobia deep-rooted or drink-fuelled? These are some of the questions the play attempts to answer while honouring the victim of a senseless crime. One of the shocking facts to emerge is that at the trial Ihsane was seen as the guilty party because he was gay. I loved this show for its clarity, compassion and curiosity. It makes excellent use of video and live action as in the recreation of the killing, which plays out both on a screen and in an onstage car. The traditional barrier between pro and amateur actors is also eroded in a scene where the silver-haired veteran, Johan Leysen, and the middle-aged mum, Suzy Cocco, sit stark naked before a camera, registering the numbed horror of Ihsane’s parents. As a director, Rau has something of the ability of Ken Loach to ask disturbing political questions, while extending the possibility of the medium in which he works. This show – which, among many others things, portrays the economic depression of a de-industrialised city and proves theatre is a form of inquiry – marks him out as a major talent. • At Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh, until 5 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews