When I read this week that Olivia Laing would be sharing her James Tait Black prize winnings with her fellow shortlisted novelists, I was less surprised than some. Not because I know Laing (I don’t), but because her decision made sense. In 2017, I donated half my winnings for the International Dublin Literary award to establish a new prize for debut translators, the TA First Translation prize. The previous week, Jessica Cohen won the Man Booker International prize and announced that half of her £25,000 would be going to B’Tselem, an Israeli human rights NGO. What we spend money on – especially in a business where there isn’t enough to go around – is a statement of what we value. Prizes themselves are intended as statements of value, too. My own prize is shared between translators and their editors, because I want people to understand my esteem for the editorial role. (Bela Shayevich won the inaugural award for her translation of Svetlana Alexievich’s Second-Hand Time, sharing the modest pot with Fitzcarraldo Editions’ Jacques Testard.) A prize’s function can be activist, explicitly or not. A prize rewards a winner particularly, but also affirms that this is a category of thing in which excellence matters and should be recognised – endorsed by passion but also shored up by rigorous critical conversations. Personally, I’ve always been a fan of shortlists. Selecting a few books (often quite different) to celebrate and promote feels less arbitrary than one. The particular kind of masterpiece that may never survive five judges’ consensus-reaching to win a prize may nonetheless find room on a shortlist. Olivia Laing’s justly rewarded Crudo is a very fine novel, but so is Will Eaves’s Murmur, and so I imagine are the others that shared their list. (I’ve bought both on the strength of it, as I suspect have other readers.) I’m proud that David Grossman, Jim Crace and Janet Hong have been awarded prizes by juries I’ve sat on, but I’m just as proud that we shortlisted Alice McDermott, Mathias Énard, Roy Jacobsen or Fleur Jaeggy. All must have prizes? Well, not quite, but celebrating a handful of great books, carefully chosen, can be more satisfying than anointing just one. I presume Laing’s gift to her fellow shortlistees is made in this spirit. Every experienced translator I know gives generously to the profession There was another reason I wasn’t surprised, however. There persists a cartoonish perception of the literary world as competitive, bitchy, resentful, filled with petty feuds and jealousies. But this has not been my experience. Not to say that no such unpleasantness ever exists, but there’s plenty of the opposite, too. I work in literary translation, and I hope I am a good citizen within that profession, contributing in my way to the wellbeing of my peers – but I don’t think I’m at all unusual in that regard. Every experienced translator I know gives generously to the profession: mentoring the new generation, fighting for their writers and their readers, advocating for internationalism and pluralism and literary diversity. Translators collaborate, and they help one another find work. All of us who write and publish translations contribute to the cause, somehow. (We’re somewhat inclined to zealotry, I think.) So many other writers I know do the same – mentoring newcomers, fighting to diversify the pool of people who get published, finding ways of harnessing their own privileges for something like the common good. Always? Of course not. Don’t we also sometimes feel grumpy, competitive, jealous and inclined to be mean? Obviously. (Writers might be strange, but we’re still human.) But there’s a lot more of the positive than gets noticed. The only thing that makes Olivia Laing’s lovely gesture unusual is that there is money involved. The ALCS survey of authors’ incomes revealed a median annual income of about £10,500, and falling, so authors are not, typically, swimming in extra cash. But they give what they can, often very generously, whether the currency be time, enthusiasm or expertise. (In my particular case, I could give away only half of my winnings because I was moving house and needed the rest for central heating.) Laing’s gift is simply an unusual cash manifestation of a generosity and a solidarity I see every day among my profession. It just isn’t often more widely visible – it took a prize, and a large injection of cash, for it to be noticed. Isn’t that so often the way with prizes, and with money? • Daniel Hahn is a writer, editor and translator. His translation of The Society of Dreamers by José Eduardo Agualusa is published on 29 August