Inappropriate jokes, damp walls, poky dimensions and pests – all for an extortionate price per calendar month. The second series of the Channel 4 comedy Stath Lets Flats returns on Monday night, highlighting the nonsense, half-truths and dodgy tactics that can be peddled by that often despised figure – the lettings agent. To mark the occasion, we asked Guardian readers to share their stories of nightmare viewings and inept estate agents. Stath, a slick-suited London rental agent, is portrayed by the comedian Jamie Demetriou as idiotic but ultimately well-meaning. But judging by readers’ responses, the same cannot always be said for his real-life colleagues in the rentals business. “As a group of young students looking for our first house together, we were a bit anxious about our first viewing session,” remembers Ollie, from Bournemouth. “We were greeted by quite possibly the world’s most miserable man, who simply stated: ‘Don’t ever book a viewing at 4pm on a Friday. You will not get good service. Anyway, here’s the house ...’” Richard, from London, wrote of an agent who held on to a second key and let themselves into the house without warning him, walking mud up the carpeted stairs. After a particularly stressful incident, in which the letting agent locked him out of his own home on a Friday night, he decided to take drastic action. “The next morning I changed the locks and didn’t give the agent a copy of the keys. I have done that with every place I have lived in since.” “Back when I was at university, a friend and I went to view a flat in a block,” wrote Kitty, from London. “It came with a communal garden on the ground floor. After being there a year or so, we started to get annoyed that the garden was always hard to get into as the people who lived in the ground floor had put a padlock on the communal gate and not given anyone else the key. We made a point of asking them to use it often. “When we came to leave, the landlord was horrified. ‘That’s not the communal garden,’ he said. ‘Huh? The estate agent said it was.’ ‘No, the square of grass in the middle of the car park is the communal garden. I told him not to bother mentioning it because it’s so awful.’ So it turns out we’d been demanding access to their private garden for several years. No idea why they didn’t challenge us or tell us that. We were completely mortified.” That, to be fair, is a story worthy of a sitcom. Additional reporting by Lucy Rowan