The parents of a London teenager with learning difficulties who has been missing for almost a week in Malaysia have thanked teams taking part in a widespread search operation. Meabh and Sebastien Quoirin, whose 15-year-old daughter, Nora, has been missing since last Sunday, said terima kasih (thank you) on Saturday to those searching for her. In a short speech, Meabh Quoirin held back tears as her husband stood beside her, rubbing her arm. In a video broadcast on local media, she said: “We want to say thank you to each and every one of you. We know you’re searching night and day for Nora. “We see you working so hard and also praying with us and being with us. “You have given up your time especially at a special festival time,” she said, referring to Hari Raya Haji, the Islamic Eid al-Adha “festival of the sacrifice” celebrations. Quoirin praised the dedication and expertise shown by those looking for Nora. “To be with us here, it means the world to us. We are so grateful for everything that you are doing for us, everyone who is helping here and not from here. “We are extremely impressed by the effort, your expertise, your dedication, and we hope you find Nora. And thank you so much and terima kasih,” she said. The Quoirins, an Irish-French family who have lived in London for 20 years, arrived in the Dusun forest eco-resort in southern Negeri Sembilan state a week ago. The family fear Nora, who was born with the brain disorder holoprosencephaly and needs help with many aspects of everyday life, may have been abducted. The Irish band Westlife, who performed in the country this week, asked their fans to help look for the missing teenager, the Malaysian Star newspaper reported. Posters of Nora were flashed on giant screens before and during the concert and the band member Nicky Byrne pleaded with the 7,000-strong crowd to keep looking for her. “Help share [the poster] on social media. If you know anything about Nora’s disappearance, come forward,” he said. “We are from the same country, so this feels very close to us. We wish her family, who must be devastated, much love. “If you have any information, please go to the authorities,” Byrne said. The family have said they remain hopeful after police leading the investigation refused to rule out a “criminal element”. • Anyone with information is asked to contact the Lucie Blackman Trust at ops@lbtrust.org or +44 800 098 8485.