Your article on transgender groups was transphobic (“Politicised trans groups put children at risk”, News). I’m sure I don’t need to explain to a leftwing newspaper why presenting a minority group as a “heavily politicised lobby” putting pressure on non-group members in order to force children into unnecessary medical treatment is a bad and inaccurate idea. Particularly when no specific groups or actions on the part of this lobby have actually been cited. The assertions being made are astonishing – that a nefarious pro-trans lobby is putting pressure on the NHS and schools to make children transition. Why, then, did it not have one single transgender person or charity giving a comment on the claims? Surely an article making such sweeping statements should at least give a nod to an opposing perspective? The article promotes the idea that transgender adults are working in mysterious and harmful ways against children and young people. It is assertions like this that have led to the rise in hate crimes against not only trans people, but also gay people. LGBT people have often been seen as preying on children and this article reinforces this idea. Amy RaweSheffield My daughter came out as trans at age 15. I know that she was not properly supported and instead pushed down the trans pathway because only affirmation therapy is offered. Having met her psychologist at her gender clinic, I can confirm that the language used and therapy given were limited to affirmation therapy and any notion of underlying comorbid conditions dismissed. She was later diagnosed ADHD. I believe most media outlets are staying silent on these issues to avoid the backlash but, quite frankly, by staying silent they are complicit in the harm that is being caused to perfectly healthy gender non-conforming children. I do hope you will be covering this issue more. Thank you.Jill GardnerMilton Keynes Mark Townsend is wrong about towpath cycling (“The canal revolution”, supplement). It’s an essential safe corridor for zero-carbon active travel and it can be totally safe. The problem is with Mark’s riding style. He admits that “racing along the narrow path felt increasingly incompatible with other users”. I commuted in central London for many years and never did that – you simply slow down well in advance of other users and get off if necessary. (Although my trombone case did collide with a Camden bridge once, pitching me into the water.) We can share the towpath as we share the roads; in friendly, mutual respect for bargees, horses, canal residents, walkers, dogs and even kittens.Bruce WhiteheadSouth Queensferry, Edinburgh Your supplement on the canal revolution seems to have sparked huge interest among complete strangers in my lavatory arrangements, which, apparently, I am always happy to discuss. Thanks for that. Ian Grieve Shropshire Union canal Discussing the falling prosecution rate in rape cases, Barbara Ellen notes that “unless there’s full disclosure from the defendant, the police or CPS have been known to drop cases or refuse to proceed” (“Rape victims deserve more support every step of their way to court”, Comment). She means the complainant, not the defendant, but this partly explains why victims withdraw from rape cases: they realise it is they who are on trial, not the accused. My daughter was raped by the owner of a bar where she had a summer job. When it became clear that the process of seeking “justice” would destroy what remained of her fragile mental health, devastate her life for years and probably result in the rapist getting away with it, she decided, with our full support, to withdraw co-operation with the criminal justice system. I find it incomprehensible that anyone still believes that tinkering with this barbaric and benighted system by improving “victim support” will ever result in it delivering justice or operating in the public interest.Name and address withheld I was surprised to read the lurid account of the Triratna Buddhist community as a gay sex cult (“Teacher, Buddhist, predator”, special report, 21 July). I’ve practised Buddhism within Triratna for four decades and your article bears little relation to my experience. I write as an insider, but also as a woman playing a leading role in Triratna. I care deeply about our ethical integrity. The accusations of sexual misconduct have long been acknowledged. Triratna was born in 1967 in a culture of sexual experimentation and our founder, Sangharakshita, actively participated in this. We’ve learned through painful experience that people suffered and that Sangharakshita himself was sometimes the cause. We’ve reflected on our Buddhist ethical principles, gradually learning to bring awareness and compassion into the difficult area of sexual relationships. We’re still learning and since 2015 we’ve instituted rigorous safeguarding procedures in our UK centres, reaching out to anyone we know who’s suffered as a result of these difficulties. The report you cite is an initiative by several individuals within Triratna who are not “disaffected” but want to help move this process forward.Ratnadharini, incoming chair, College of Preceptors Triratna Buddhist OrderAdhisthana, Coddington Herefordshire With reference to your harrowing story by Jacek Dehnel, (“Pride meets prejudice in Poland” special report): so homosexuality and Islam are anti-Polish and foreign? Well, Karol Szymanowski (1882-1937), the greatest Polish composer since Chopin, was both gay and influenced by Islam. Nor have Poles been reluctant to accept Muslim influences despite the conflict with the Ottomans: the Polish aristocrat’s characteristic dress is a Turkish-style kaftan and the characteristic Polish sword is a version of the Turkish scimitar. The self-styled patriots are ignorant of their own history and the depth of the Polish commitment to freedom and tolerance. During its Commonwealth phase, Poland was one of the most tolerant nations in Europe, welcoming Jews, Muslim Tartars, Armenians and heretic Unitarians. During the partition period, Polish intellectuals and poets created a movement called Messianism, where the sufferings of the Polish nation would lead to the emancipation of all oppressed people, regardless of faith. Nothing less patriotic than the behaviour of this government, church and their thugs can be imagined.Michael KowalewskiMelbury OsmondDorset  Stewart Lee has come out as a social media celibate with no Facebook or Twitter accounts (“Can comedy survive in an age of outrage?”). My respect for your comic columnist has quadrupled!Geoff ReidBradford