Tens of thousands of protesters gathered at a Hong Kong park for a fresh rally on Sunday, after two months of increasingly violent clashes that have prompted severe warnings from Beijing and no sign of concessions from the city’s government. Police gave permission for a rally at the park after turning down a plan for a march from downtown Victoria Park to the central business district. The park can hold about 100,000 people but organisers expect many more. Rally-goers on nearby roads or other overflow areas can be charged with unlawful assembly, which can lead to a maximum of five years in prison. The Civil Human Rights Front, which has organised past protests that drew millions, called for a “peaceful, rational and non-violent” rally and online posts also urged “self discipline and calmness” after 10 weeks of intensive protests, many of which ended in violent clashes as police increasingly employed tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse the crowds. “We hope that there will not be any chaotic situations today,” said organiser Bonnie Leung. “We hope we can show the world that Hong Kong people can be totally peaceful.” On Saturday, a spokesman for China’s ceremonial legislature condemned US lawmakers voicing support for the pro-democracy movement and claimed Hong Kong’s 7.5 million people and Chinese population as a whole rejected the actions of a “very small group of violent protesters”. You Wenze called comments by US lawmakers including House Speaker Nancy Pelosi “a gross violation of the spirit of the rule of law, a blatant double standard and a gross interference in China’s internal affairs”. Hong Kong, a regional financial hub once known as one of the world’s safest cities, has seen numerous violent confrontations between police and hardcore protesters who have thrown rocks, bricks and Molotov cocktails and used slingshots and laser pointers to provoke police or inflict revenge. Ahead of Sunday’s rally, a post on lihkg.com, a forum popular with protesters, said: “Hongkongers can change our tactics in the ‘be water’ style instead of being ruled by anger and hatred.” Although the post called for protesters to shun protective gear and refrain from occupying roads and throwing objects – something many have increasingly resorted to – many online responses also dismissed the call for peace, insisting the movement would be ineffective if it stayed peaceful. Hong Kong had its first tear gas-free Saturday for weeks after three separate rallies took place in Kowloon. It marked the 11th weekend of protests in Hong Kong as residents continue to press the government to formally withdraw a controversial extradition bill – which would allow suspects to be sent to the mainland – as well as meet other demands. One group surrounded a police station in Mong Kok and threw eggs at the building until riot police charged and dispersed them. A police statement on Saturday night said an officer shot a bean bag round at protesters after some threw a metal bucket, a litter bin and various objects at officers and police vehicles from a footbridge in Mong Kok. Protesters also vandalised the offices of a pro-Beijing political party and labour organisation, the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions. Tensions have reached a new level during the past week. Following last weekend’s violent clashes with police, protesters swarmed Hong Kong’s airport. Demonstrators blocked passengers, forcing a shutdown, as well as clashing with police and detaining two men suspected of being spies in scenes pro-government figures and Chinese state media seized on as evidence of violent tendencies. The chaos at the airport have damaged the reputation of the campaign, with many criticising protesters for obstructing innocent travellers. Over the past week, state media outlets have published videos showing armoured troop carriers purportedly driving to Shenzhen, the south-eastern state that borders Hong Kong. Chinese officials have also released a series of threatening statements about Hong Kong’s protesters, with one claiming “terrorism” was emerging in the city after flights were cancelled. A front-page editorial in the Communist party mouthpiece People’s Daily on Saturday said protests in Hong Kong had been hijacked and incited by “internal and external anti-China forces” and questioned how Hong Kong’s economy could withstand such “suicidal attacks”. Associated Press contributed to this article