“I don’t live in a tent any more. Now, I live in a house made of concrete walls instead of plastic,” says 21-year-old Diba*. “I don’t have to take two-minute showers under the guard’s eyes any more, no one can invade my privacy here, security officers won’t check my ID all throughout the day any more. The extreme hostile living environment of Nauru is gone. “However, Australia is a bigger cage.” Hundreds of asylum seekers and refugees have been transferred to Australia and after a national campaign at the end of last year, all children were brought to Australia. The years on Nauru in the detention and processing system set up by the Australian government have taken a devastating toll on their mental health. Some were transferred only after a court order, despite medical reports and psychological evaluations repeatedly recommending their urgent removal from the damaging situation. Now in Australia, at least temporarily, many refugees are struggling to adjust. Accomodation is often more restrictive, and refugees have been unable to access services that doctors say are needed. In at least one case, a toddler was stopped from going to childcare despite doctors saying it was resulting in significant improvements. “Prolonged detention can cause serious mental health problems and recovery doesn’t always happen by moving in to the community, as specialist treatment is usually required,” says Dr Nick Kowalenko, from the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists’ faculty of child and adolescent psychiatry. Diba has been diagnosed with major depressive disorder, anxious distress and anhedonia. She has difficulty sleeping, fatigue, feelings of worthlessness, difficulties with memory and concentration, and recurring thoughts of suicide. She was transferred to Australia in November for acute mental health care, after five years on Nauru. Under the rules of Diba’s community detention, she “must not engage in any vocational studies or training … [or] in unpaid work, such as volunteering, unless it is approved by the department”. “There are many opportunities, but my access to them is forbidden. The Australian government is still punishing us, but through different type of deprivation,” she says. “I was enthusiastic to become a lawyer. I’ve asked from a dozen universities about the possibility of my enrolment, but I found it impossible. “I’ve experienced massive traumatic events, as a girl, as a child. But, the educational exclusion generates endless regret in me. I feel empty and numb. I am a dreamless girl now.” Says Kowalenko: “Social isolation is a risk factor for depression commencing and continuing. PTSD affects concentration badly. If a child has missed the opportunity for education this may affect them adversely and partly get in the way of recovery. “Being part of the community means actively participating in civil and social life and much of that, at the age of 16, for example, happens in educational settings. “Kids deprived of education opportunities do much worse and recovering is much more difficult and more prolonged, and kids are at much more risk of not recovering or only making a partial recovery. Education opportunity or work is a key element for successful recovery.” Three-year-old Arman and his 18-month-old brother were born on Nauru to Iranian refugee parents. A medical assessment by a senior mental health clinician, seen by Guardian Australia, said Arman had presented to South Australian child mental health services with “significant emotional dysregulation and sensory issues in the context of an attachment disorder, past and ongoing trauma, prolonged detention, and parental mental health issues which have impacted on their capacity to establish a structure and routine for [Arman]”. The Nauruan environment had been “frightening and unpredictable”, the family told the medical assessor. “The family was exposed to domestic violence in neighbouring homes, as well as violence in the community. [Arman’s mother Termeh’s] mental health continued to deteriorate after the birth of [Arman] in this context.” Termeh said her son’s behaviour included gouging walls with sharp tools, tearing curtains, and smashing into fridges with his scooter. In October, the family were transferred to Adelaide for medical treatment, and provided status resolution support services: a payment roughly equivalent to 80% of Newstart, accommodation and health assistance, as well as case management services. Childcare is an “additional service”, according to the department. Arman was put into external childcare, which one report said had resulted in “obvious improvements”. The senior clinician strongly advocated for a continuation of the childcare as an “essential part of the treatment process”, advising that if he was deprived of the childcare experience there would be a “significant deterioration in the functioning of the entire family”. Despite this, childcare was discontinued, says Termeh. “After three months, without any explanation, we were told by our caseworker that the government has stopped its support and Arman can’t go to childcare any more,” she says. The Department of Home Affairs told Guardian Australia that childcare was facilitated only on its approval. “Additional services are approved where there is evidence that the service is required, and all other alternatives have been explored by the parent in the first instance,” a spokeswoman says. “[State resolution support services] providers must clearly explain why childcare is required and demonstrate that all alternative arrangements have been explored by the parent in the first instance.” It is difficult for me to find a meaning for my life. I’ve been excluded from ... planning future study at university. Childcare isn’t required when there are two parents present, or if other adults in the household or family network can help babysit, she says. “Where a family’s circumstances have improved and childcare is no longer required, the department may vary its approval for additional services.” Venus, a teenage Iranian refugee who arrived in Nauru at the age of nine, was transferred to Australia at 14 with her family. She was admitted to the Brisbane Children’s Hospital upon arrival, and now lives on a community detention visa with her mother in Brisbane. “Except for school, Venus doesn’t have any other activity,” her mother, Tara, says. “I’m not allowed to work and I can’t afford any activity to improve my daughter’s mood. We are living in marginal suburbs. It is a two-hour drive from even my doctor’s office.” According to hospital documents seen by Guardian Australia, Venus was diagnosed with “adjustment disorder and reactions to severe stress as a result of prolonged detention in association with fear without resolution”. “Venus regularly draws, sketching out disturbing pictures which under ordinary circumstances would be ‘a highly ominous sign’ warranting immediate psychiatric assessment and possibly hospitalisation,” says Dr Barri Phatarfod, founder and president of Doctors for Refugees. Doctors linked her stress and trauma to living on Nauru and a pervasive sense of unremitting hopelessness. “It is difficult for me to find a meaning for my life,” Venus says. “I’ve been excluded from the program that my classmates have participated in, for planning their future study at university.” Venus said every time she spoke with her government caseworker, they said they were obliged to tell her she had to return to Nauru. Phatarford says the children and young people will likely need years of intensive mental health intervention, regardless of where they end up. “When these children are left essentially untreated in the same environment which ignited such a fatalistic worldview, it is extremely damaging psychologically and very hard to adjust when they are ultimately removed,” she says. “These young children need all the nurturing and security they can get right now. These children turn into adults and we’re already actively creating a sub-generation of deeply traumatised adults who may never achieve their potential on any level. Is that what we want as a country – to be creating further problems, rather than working towards a solution?” * Names have been changed Additional reporting by Helen Davidson In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123.