Swiss banks are to start charging their super-rich clients to look after their piles of cash – and the bigger the stash, the higher the charge. UBS, the world’s largest wealth manager, told its ultra-wealthy clients on Tuesday it would introduce an annual 0.6% charge on cash savings in Swiss francs of more than SFr546,000 (£460,000) The fee, to be introduced in November, rises to 0.75% on savings of more than SFr2m, with a minimum fee of €3,000 (£2,800) a year. Savings of SFr2m would attract an annual charge of SFr12,750. The 157-year-old bank, which holds $2.3tn (£1.9tn) on behalf of many of the world’s richest people, said it was introducing the fee to pass on the cost of negative interest rates set by the Swiss National Bank. The SNB interest rate is -0.75% and economists, polled by Reuters, said they expected the rate to stay in negative territory until at least 2021. The Swiss franc hit its highest level against the pound on Monday as investors bought the safe-haven currency following the escalation of trade tensions between the US and China. One Swiss franc was worth 85p on Monday, falling to 84p on Tuesday. It also hit a two-year high against the euro, with one Swiss franc worth €0.92. The UBS move follows that of Credit Suisse, Switzerland’s second largest bank, which said last week it would charge its clients 0.4% on savings above €1m from September. Smaller private Swiss banks Julius Baer and Pictet already charge some rich clients for large cash deposits. UBS has been positioning itself to attract more of the savings of the global super-rich as they seek out the stability and privacy of Switzerland’s banks at a time of growing financial instability across the world. It employs 23,600 people in its global wealth management division, “to provide tailored investment advice and solutions to private clients, in particular in the ultra high net worth and high net worth segments”. The world’s 500 wealthiest people lost 2.1% of their collective net worth on Monday, as US stock markets suffered their biggest one-day drop this year. The richest person in the world, Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, swallowed the biggest paper loss with his fortune falling by $3.4bn, taking it down to $110bn.