It’s an hour after Jordan Brookes’s life changed, and we’re sitting in a cafe yards from where he just collected the 2019 Edinburgh Comedy award. He’s still buzzing, obviously. “People talk about it being a weird out-of-body experience when you hear your name announced. I genuinely couldn’t believe I’d won.” He was selected for his part-improvised show I’ve Got Nothing. Stephen Fry, a winner of the first such award in 1981, presented the trophy, which comes with a cash prize of £10,000. It’s the cash that might – in the short term – make the biggest impact. Usually, Brookes returns to London in September and looks for a full-time job. It might be in a shoe shop, behind a bar – or in the line of work that generated Sunday’s headlines (“Ex-call centre worker wins top award”) after he claimed the prize. “I don’t come from money or from any sort of privilege,” he says. “I’ve always needed a secondary income to survive.” That may change now, after joining a roll-call that includes Frank Skinner, Steve Coogan, Hannah Gadsby, and last year’s champ Rose Matafeo, who is soon to star – it was announced this month – in her own BBC sitcom. Or it may not. The award “is still hugely revered,” says Brookes, 33, “but the outcome is not as stratospheric as it used to be”. This is the first of several double-edged remarks about the ex-Perrier award made by its new champion. He “gauges [his] success”, he says, “by continuing to enjoy what I’m doing. Anything beyond that, it’s ludicrous to get caught up in.” That opinion may not be unrelated to what Brookes tells me about the origin of his comedy career – which in turn filters into the dark, destabilising work that secured him the award. After the giddyingly disruptive Body of Work (nominated in 2017) and its hi-tech follow-up Bleed, I’ve Got Nothing is Brookes’s lightest offering, an off-the-cuff(ish) set that’s been called “a standup Waiting for Godot”. The conceit is that Brookes has “got nothing”, that he’s just killing time until something happens that he can fashion into comedy. In fact, he’s prepped 35 minutes of material to weave in, about his self-hatred, the end of the world, and seducing his mum. He’s also got a startling set-piece mocking the sincere thanks with which comics often conclude their shows. Why can’t comedy encompass that weird contradiction of being happy and sad, wanting to live and wanting to die? The irony is not lost on Brookes that comedy’s most illustrious prize has gone to a show that (in his words) “doesn’t exist”. But it was one he needed to make. Partly as a reaction against Bleed – which was broadcast to its audience via binaural headphones, and “was incredibly hard work and I came out very stressed,” he says. And partly because of “how I was feeling at the time,” he adds, “which was: I don’t know what to do with my life, I don’t know where to turn, I don’t feel safe, ever. So I thought: why not explore that on stage? That sense of there being no real hope. Let’s watch a human being deal with that for an hour in a weird way.” I’ve Got Nothing, then, is a play on words – from a performer with no script, and an artist with (he felt) no clear plan, no hope, no future. In that latter sense, it’s consistent with all Brookes’s work, in which his depressive, distracted inner monologue interrupts or infects whatever is happening on stage. “I always wanted my work to reflect where people are at their darkest,” he says. “Why can’t comedy encompass that weird contradiction of being happy and sad, wanting to live and wanting to die, feeling joyful and feeling sorrowful? Why can’t it be all of those things all at once? Why can’t it be confronting us with this stuff and also distracting us from it?” Brookes’ work does just that – which is just one of the ways in which he restlessly subverts your expectations of a standup show.He doesn’t use a microphone, he dresses like a castaway (barefoot, in shorts and a button-down shirt), and he doesn’t respect the audience’s personal space. (Nor – I can report from traumatic experience – critics’ anonymity.) His sinewy body and faintly ghoulish face (onstage, he memorably brands himself a “hipster Nosferatu”) are forever behaving oddly, scrambling the signals that might let us relax into the show. “There is a lot to be explored in performer-audience dynamics,” says Brookes, “and they’re changing over time. Audiences have become a lot more restless, our attention spans have been warped by the sensory overload of the world we live in. My act is a response to all of that.” The first time I saw Brookes, that confrontational approach to convention powerfully evoked the absurdist Dutch standup Hans Teeuwen whose disturbo-charged, deeply unsettling nonsense comedy took Edinburgh by storm 11 years ago. No surprise then that Brookes cites his first Teeuwen encounter as a milestone on his own journey towards comedy. “It transformed my understanding of what you could do and get away with,” he says. Another of his influences, I confess I wouldn’t have guessed. “I know it sounds disingenuous, but I think Michael McIntyre is incredible. When I started, I said I wanted to be the existential Michael McIntyre, doing observational stuff but about disillusion, nihilism or sadness, in an accessible way that would make people really connect with those sentiments.” Brookes – originally from Merseyside – was a late adopter comedy-wise, having spent his early 20s “living at home and incredibly depressed. My mental health was really bad. I really didn’t think I was going to make it out.” He managed, first by going to University of Wales, Newport (now defunct) to study animation. He began practising standup in Cardiff, bringing his first show to Edinburgh in 2015. By the following year, he was “the comedians’ comedian”, a cult performer with a buzzy act unlike anyone else’s. But he struggled – then as now – to see himself as a big-hitter or succumb to the allure of reputation and acclaim. That’s partly, he says, because “I have very severe impostor syndrome. I very much worry that I’m no good. And no amount of external validation from an awards body is going to change that.” Why does he think that is? “I don’t know. Probably because I didn’t go to Oxbridge, so I don’t have an inbuilt sense of entitlement.” Maybe. But it’s also because Brookes is deeply ambivalent about what success might mean. Yes, he believes a wider audience could enjoy his comedy. And yes, he’s up for the new creative and commercial opportunities that being an award-winner might bring. But “do I want to be pushing myself towards arbitrary targets that I know ultimately won’t make me happy?” he asks. “I’m not motivated to be famous or to make a lot of money. It brings out the worst aspects of a person when they pursue those things. And look at the state of the world. Why would you want to be a celebrated figure as the world crumbles? I just think it’s a narcissistic thing to wish for. So I’m undone by a feeling of pointlessness as well.” If you think that sounds rich from a man who’s just won comedy’s most celebrated prize – well, Brookes tells me he considered not attending the ceremony. “In some awful way I wanted to take a stand and say, ‘I’m not going to enable that.’ Because [the award] ruins people’s mental health. It makes people very bitter, that they have to compete with one another.” When I ask if he’d happily click his fingers and make the Comedy award disappear forever, he doesn’t hesitate. “Yeah, I would happily be the last winner of the Edinburgh Comedy award.” He laughs. “I would love to be the one that pulled the pin out of the grenade.” You might also think that Brookes’s talk of “pointlessness” suggests a man still in the shadow of mental ill-health. But “I’m in a good place now and have been for a few years,” he says. “Everyone has ebbs and flows, and I know it’s a stream I can tap into for my work. But broadly I’m very happy.” Happier still, now he’s joined the ranks of the fringe comedy immortals. “It’s a lovely thing and I’m so grateful,” he concedes, adrenaline still presumably fizzing in his veins. “It’s not important, ultimately. But I know I’ll look back at this moment very fondly. And it’s a huge thing personally for me to know where I was and see where I am now. It’s ridiculous. I started somewhere very far away from where I am now.” Jordan Brookes: I’ve Got Nothing is at Soho Theatre, London, from 2-7 September, then 10-15 February 2020