With the science of opinion polling under greater scrutiny than ever, and a somewhat misleading headline spreading in an instant, how can you know which insights count? Perhaps counter-intuitively, it’s less about sample size (let’s avoid a poor joke) than about quality. You will rarely get less than 1,000 interviews reported in the UK media, but twice the sample size does not mean double the quality. If there are issues with your sample then making it bigger doesn’t necessarily improve it. You should probably dismiss anything from social media (retweet for larger sample!) or a website (which can be gamed) Quality is about the robustness of the sampling technique. This is not as simple as face-to-face or telephone good, internet bad. Given the falling response rate to traditional techniques, a well-built online sample has the potential to be as good, if not better. This is because the polling company already knows much more information about the respondents than could be reliably established within a survey – for instance, whether they claimed to have voted in previous elections, how they claimed to vote (at the time), and how engaged or interested they are in politics (or anything else). You should probably dismiss out of hand anything from social media (retweet for larger sample!) or a website (which can be gamed by partisan interest). Suspicion of leaked internal polling is also justified, though more on the basis of publication bias (what about the polls which never sees the light of day) than because the poll itself is poor. Neither client nor pollster has an interest in misleading strategic guidance. The second critical factor is question wording – a good rule of thumb (attributed to journalist-turned-pollster Peter Kellner and subscribed to by most), is that you shouldn’t be able to tell the sponsor of the poll by the wording of the question. This is often hard – especially when trying to explain to a survey participant a complex idea like proroguing parliament or the technicalities of the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act. However, there are definitely some things to watch out for– leading questions can bias the result (as brilliantly depicted in Yes Minister); answer choices need to be as symmetrical as possible (in length, tone, and style) with a single, unambiguous clause for each choice; and there can be cherrypicking if similar questions are asked in multiple ways. The third thing to understand is how the data has been weighted and filtered. Both techniques can be legitimate, though are weapons of mass confusion. It’s difficult to discern from a story (let alone a headline or tweet), so you may need to get stuck into the data. All British Polling Council members agree to publish their results and reading a data table is the best means for establishing the credibility of a result. Things to look for include how strongly weighted the results are: you can tell this by looking at the demographic breakouts – if there weren’t (for instance) sufficient women in the sample, you will see a much larger weighted base size v unweighted base. The more it’s weighted, the greater the margin of error – and the less certain your results. You can also check whether a result has been filtered (only asked of certain respondents), or if a certain answer choice has been. This can be totally reasonable, as when the percentage intending to vote is filtered to include only those with a certain likelihood to vote. However, it’s good to check how many that means have been excluded. Many pollsters now interview more than a thousand people in order to ensure that they have more respondents for the horse race question, as the margin of error should arguably be judged on the base size for each question rather than the survey overall. Usually less justifiable is excluding people who “don’t know”. Most questions ought to have a “don’t know” option (at least in the first instance, prior to a question forcing the issue if desired), and on topics that are complex, this can be the difference between a plurality and a majority endorsing a particular view. In weighing up the significance of this, and all of the other things to look out for, be suspicious of big majorities for anything (especially in the current climate) – the polling adage is if it looks too good to be true, it’s probably wrong. Less important is who has actually commissioned the poll or done the fieldwork, especially if they are a member of the BPC. If you don’t like a result, or think their work is partisan, incomplete, or otherwise flawed – look at the data and root your argument in that, rather than attack the people who have done the work. Treat polling findings in a critical and informed way, subject to the potential bias you look for in any writing, and bear in mind that as tempting as flattering clients might be, good pollsters would rather be right than liked. • Rob Vance co-manages the London office of PSB and advises on campaign strategy, communications and research