It has been a brutal re-entry into normal life after summer, and no one is handling it particularly well. Unlike previous years we seemed, on first glance, to be doing so well. Air travel with four-year-olds is infinitely easier than with three-year-olds. We were lucky with immigration and sailed through in 10 minutes. And travelling from London to New York – east to west – the jet lag is a breeze. And then we all went back to work. The burden of keeping someone’s needs in mind when committed elsewhere is one my mother’s generation had no word for It is often said that parenting is harder labour than paid employment, and in most respects this is true. As all parents of young children know, at work you get to do extravagant things like go to the loo without someone following you in and talk to other adults without interruption. For every 10 minutes of applied concentration, you can spend another five futzing about on the internet. At the end of three weeks of unbroken time with my children, a treacherous part of me was looking forward to returning to my desk while they did their last week of camp before school. And we all had high hopes. After a break of this length, for a second the old routine looks inviting, something to which one returns with all sorts of cheerful resolutions. We would get up an hour earlier. We would eat more oatmeal and fewer gummy worms. I would, finally, learn to execute a French braid. God help me, on the plane back to the US I started reading a feminist reinterpretation of the Iliad. This bright new dawn lasted approximately 48 hours. And then the wheels fell off. I don’t mean we descended into chaos. But the transition back to real life became suddenly fraught and exhausting. My children, not usually clingy, rebelled against losing their mother’s undivided attention and embarked on a series of meltdowns. And in my excitement to get back to work, I’d forgotten one crucial thing: that on holiday, for all the hard labour of wrestling two four-year-olds in and out of bathing suits and up and down the country, I’d had only one grid up in my mind. The term “mental load” is a relatively new one, and as a neologism was desperately needed. The hidden burden of keeping every last detail of someone else’s needs in mind when you are also committed elsewhere is one my mother’s generation had no word for, and even now, it’s easy to forget why one’s hard drive is whirring. As the holidays ended, I felt my mind return to a split-screen formation and the energy silently siphon off to maintain it. The kids start kindergarten next week. They need immunisation boosters and to be fitted for school shoes. We have to sign up for the 7.30am school bus, and I need to brace myself for their unwillingness to get on it. I’d forgotten to buy uniforms, and had to run up to the one store that still stocked them, in the Bronx, with its 40-minute queue to get in. Meanwhile regular service at work resumed. My girls seemed to go through a similar transition: enjoying camp while fretting about the forthcoming leap into the unknown and feeding off my nervous energy. Time stood still over summer. Now it has fractured and sped up. I think we’re all in a mild state of shock. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist