Jeffrey Epstein, the shady businessman accused of running a child sex ring that allegedly catered to some of the world’s richest and most famous men, is dead, reportedly from suicide in a Manhattan federal jail. It’s an infuriating, unjust end that leaves Epstein’s victims with justice undone and the many of us watching this case with questions unanswered. But the end of Epstein’s life can’t mean the end of the inquiry into his deeds – and those of the many people who allegedly looked the other way, or even partook. That Epstein was even able to die by suicide suggests a huge breach. He was the nation’s most notorious federal prisoner at the time he apparently took his life, and had reportedly attempted suicide just weeks earlier. The world’s eyes were on Jeffrey Epstein – but prison guards apparently looked the other way. The first step in seeking justice must be a thorough inquiry into what went wrong. Why was Epstein so loosely monitored? Why was he removed from suicide watch? Why was he in his cell alone, contrary to protocol? Guards were supposed to check on him every 30 minutes – why, that night, didn’t they? How is Epstein’s alleged co-conspirator, Ghislane Maxwell, reportedly somewhere overseas and unaccounted for? And most importantly, who were the decision-makers at the top? All those who enabled this absolute failure of incarceration should pay a significant professional price. Online, conspiracy theories now abound. Observers suggest Epstein was killed by one of the men who may have been implicated in his crimes – maybe Bill Clinton, according to the fringe right, or maybe Donald Trump, according to the fringe left. The entire Epstein case has been shrouded and illusory, which does suggest that there is something darker, and deeper, than we are all seeing. Why else did Epstein get such a sweetheart plea deal from Alex Acosta,a former US attorney from Florida and then Trump’s labor secretary – a deal that, because it did not inform Epstein’s victims, violated federal law? That Epstein evaded true justice for so long, and then managed to cobble his reputation back together after serving his (short and gentle) time, had already raised suspicions of which powerful people had an interest in his discretion. That he was able to end his own life while supposedly under federal watch in a secure facility only feeds into the perception that the shadowy and powerful are pulling some dangerous strings behind a facade of justice. This is dangerous even if it’s not true. America’s criminal justice system, like our government generally, only functions if the population trusts it. The official explanation for Epstein’s death comes down to rank incompetence. And it’s probably true. But of course in this broader context it is fueling conspiracy theories. Of course even those of us who are skeptical of conspiracy theories are pausing here to wonder how this guy got away with so much – and whether the secrets of a great many rich and powerful men will die with him. The only answer is to refuse to let this inquiry end with Epstein’s life. An independent investigating body must look at every decision that was made, and every person involved, in the lead-up to Epstein’s death. Federal prosecutors have already said that they will continue their criminal inquiries into anyone associated with Epstein’s alleged sex trafficking operation. I hope now that Epstein is dead, his accusers will push even harder in their civil cases against his estate (although of course his death may also create some uncertainty and fear in vulnerable young women). The saddest part of this story is that the many women who say they were abused by Epstein as girls are now unable to look him in the face and demand he answer for his alleged crimes. Thanks to Epstein’s death, we may never get the full story. But every person who contributed to this spectacular failure must be held accountable. And every entity that was going after Epstein, from federal prosecutors to lawyers in civil court, should redouble their efforts. Epstein, a narcissist and coward until the end, escaped his obligation to face down the consequences of his abuses. His enablers must not be similarly relieved.