As I write this, squashed into the armpit of a city worker on the Central line in London, I am – on balance – terrified. Director Ed Madden and I have been working on A Table Tennis Play for a year. It’s an idea we’ve chatted about since our first show (Lemons Lemons Lemons Lemons Lemons), in 2015. But as my warm, shallow exhalations echo around the concave landscape of this stranger’s underarm, I worry the play might be at best underdeveloped and at worst innately, inescapably fucked. Set across a weekend, it follows a woman who, boyfriend in tow, returns to her childhood home to clear out the basement and forms a strange, fleeting bond with the 18-year-old tennis prodigy who now lives in the house. The action unfolds around a knackered old table-tennis table. In early drafts, the table tennis action was near constant. We’ve pared it back, but the key moments revolve around the actors batting a ball back and forth in a particular manner. Nothing like a challenge! We kicked off rehearsals with a read-through. Hearing it out aloud for the first time feels like that bit in The Wizard of Oz when it goes from black-and-white to colour. The great relief is that our actors – Rosa Robson, Beth Holmes and Euan Kitson – can all play table tennis pretty well. Decent, long rallies. You don’t want the audience sitting there thinking “I could beat them” instead of engaging with the story. Lizzy Leech talked us through her set design. It is imaginative, smart and involves several thousand table-tennis balls. The current draft is hovering above the real drama of the thing. I wonder if I’m overvaluing subtlety or ambiguity and undervaluing more explicit, muscular conflict. But then I remember that the most dramatic moments in my life, in my friends’ lives, have rarely involved shouting and screaming. We’re rehearsing in the Orange room in the Nursery Training Centre near London Bridge. Occasionally, we hear a smattering of improvised Shakespeare, a gargle of “MEMORY ALL ALONE IN THE MOONLIGHT”, or see a naked buttock pass by a door. The Turquoise room is only accessible through our space, so we’ve made friends with the group there, who apologetically tiptoe through our rehearsals whenever they need the loo. One of them looks like Michael Palin. We worked on the middle scene. The actors found something really tender and sensitive, and it felt as if a weight lifted in the room. Ed and I caught one another’s eyes with a look that said: phew. Now the job is to earn that scene in the first half of the play and properly pay it off in the second. When I reflect on what semblance of a “process” I have, it often boils down to this: imagining a moment that is funny, or emotionally or thematically potent, then figuring out what needs to happen to make that moment as powerful as possible. The man who isn’t Michael Palin gave us a big wave and a smile today. No actors in today. Ed and I tried to fix the play. Over the last few years we’ve developed a good shorthand. This is useful because we’re aiming at something tonally specific. We spent a load of time talking about how a scene that currently “zigs” needs to do more of a “zag”. This is nonsense but also saved the play. We blind “tech-ed: the show with our sound and lighting designers. Since this a fringe show, we have four hours in total. So Ed, sound designer Richard Bell, lighting designer Charlotte Burton and I sat round and talked through, blindly, each cue in the play. While this is obviously not ideal, there was something oddly lovely about it. Like, in order to combat our limited resources, we were engaging in a communal act of imagination. Which is exactly what we do at the theatre. Our first run. The actors were absolute heroes. Richard came in and laughed at all the right moments. I therefore now love him more than I have ever loved anyone ever. (Sorry Mum.) The main thing we learned is that a big moment in the middle of the play has to be moved to the end. This is not as chronologically jumpy as it sounds. Ed and I love set pieces but you’re probably only allowed one in an hour-long show. Another new draft. We need more of a sense of one character’s day-to-day life outside of this particular weekend. It’s difficult without getting too horribly exposition-y. The trick is to embed it in action. This is my fourth play. My first drafts are weird, my seconds sad and my thirds funny. Or are trying to be. First drafts are splurges of inspiration that don’t fit together. The ones that follow sometimes feel as if they are screaming “THIS IS SERIOUS, TAKE IT SERIOUSLY”. The fourth draft is about texturing the thing. Seriousness doesn’t have an impact if it’s relentless. It’s a cliche, but I started writing plays when I realised being a songwriter/rockstar wasn’t going to pan out. I still think of plays like songs or albums. I did a play earlier in the year with Paines Plough and Theatre Royal Plymouth called You Stupid Darkness! A Table Tennis Play is like its B-side. That play was major key and hummable; this one feels minor key and more mysterious. On a slightly distressing note, our table tennis balls are stuck in China. This was the Hot Day. Just when it feels as if this little fringe show is the BE ALL AND END ALL, Boris Johnson becomes prime minister and the temperature hits 39 degrees. We did another run. In our non-air-conditioned room/volcano. The script changes have been hard on the actors, but they’ve already got most of the lines down. I hope the play gives them the showcase they deserve. Ed and I picked up light fixtures for the set from the London Palladium just as Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat was ending. We emerged from stage door to be greeted by around 50 Jason Donovan fans, who could not have been more disappointed. Lizzy, Ed and Rosa drove the set up from London in a hired van. It took them 10 hours. Kudos. I pulled off my third all-nighter in three weeks doing another (final) pass of the script before sending an apologetic email to my wonderful publishers, Nick Hern Books. We’ve restructured the middle section to make one of the characters’ journeys clearer. We go into tech like it’s a World Cup final or a battle to the death, powered on caffeine and overblown metaphors. We speed through, just about get it down in time and retreat to the pub. We got through it! Rosa described the show as feeling like a cat dragging its claws through a set of curtains. The curtains being her brain. It’s strange how different the play feels in the actual space – how much the tone has shifted. I hope we can marry the intimacy we found in that rehearsal room with the production values of the theatre. A huge leap forward. The actors are enjoying themselves more. It’s not perfect but it’ll keep improving. As I walk back through the Edinburgh meadows before the festival officially starts, I feel lucky. So little of a writer’s life is spent in the rehearsal room. And so much of that time is spent worrying that the thing you’ve worked so hard on might not have the space or resources to become all you wanted it to be. It’s important to step back and remember: a team of searching, talented actors are working with a brilliant director and a cracking creative team to bring something I’ve written into the world. And at this moment, thousands of people around this city are having a similar yet entirely different experience. A Table Tennis Play is at Underbelly Cowgate, Edinburgh, until 25 August Read all our Edinburgh festival coverage