A lettings agency that posed as a membership club to dodge tenancy laws has been fined more than £40,000 in the first prosecution of its kind in the UK. Lifestyle Club Ltd pressured tenants to sign a contract without inspecting the terms or the accommodation, charged them a non-refundable “joining” fee and “membership” fee worth a month’s rent instead of a deposit, and directed those who complained to a non-existent redress service. The company operated from the same trading address as Lifestyle Club LSC Ltd which was exposed by the Observer last year. While Lifestyle Club LSC marketed the properties – aimed at young overseas renters – tenants’ contracts were with Lifestyle Club Ltd. The terms and conditions reserved the right to evict tenants with seven days’ notice instead of the 28-84 days required by the Tenancy Act. Its terms and conditions allowed its agents the right to enter private rooms unannounced at any time while banning visits from non-members. It required tenants to maintain and replace appliances at their own expense, leave any furniture they had paid for when they moved out and levied large fees for “breaches” of membership. One group of flat sharers was charged £90 for leaving unwashed dishes in the sink. The companies’ self-employed agents were charged similar levies for breaching sales targets or taking time off. Last week the director of Lifestyle Club Ltd, Gian Paolo Aliatis, was required to pay £42,273 in fines, compensation and costs after pleading guilty to three charges of unfair commercial practice. In a prosecution brought by Islington Trading Standards in London, Aliatis admitted passing the lettings agency off as a membership club to avoid the legal regulations for lettings agents. Under the law, tenants’ deposits must be refundable and paid into a tenancy deposit protection scheme. Aliatis admitted that his firm demanded a non-refundable “joining” fee. He also admitted pressuring customers into signing a “membership agreement” without giving them time to read and understand the document, and denying potential tenants the chance to view a property before signing. Rental payments were passed off as a “monthly contribution fee”. While letting agents are required by law to belong to a registered redress scheme, Lifestyle Club Ltd instead directed anyone who raised a complaint to a fake independent mediation company. Diarmaid Ward, Islington Council’s executive member for housing and development, said: “This is a major victory for private tenants, not just in Islington but right across the country. Our determined trading standards team has led to a landmark prosecution sending a clear message – simply changing a few words in the paperwork does not put you above the law.” In March, Lifestyle Club LSC was fined £22,299 and its director Tiina Lehtla separately fined £7,983.33 in a court case brought by neighbouring Camden Council. The company was found guilty of ignoring a statutory requirement to supply the council with details of the property management and the tenancy contracts for two unlicensed, unsafe multi-occupancy homes in London. In his summing up, the judge accused the defendants of putting safety at risk to maximise revenue. “They did not apply for licences in the hope of avoiding an inspection, which would have resulted in expense to bring the properties up to standard,” he said. “The tenants were from abroad and the most in need. They were given ‘membership’ agreements instead of tenancy agreements in an attempt to curtail their rights. “The obstruction of the local authority, by not returning the statutory notices, was deliberate, and a commercial decision to try and frustrate the investigation by environmental health officers.” Lifestyle Club Ltd went into voluntary liquidation in February and Lifestyle Club LSC faces being struck off the Companies House register.