Owen Jones (No one should have to pay to pee, 2 August) confuses two issues: the provision of toilets and their cost, especially given that “spend a penny” has its origins in the concept of paying to pee, and when it started a penny was quite a large sum. It is, however, the need for toilets that can be used that truly matters. This issue is not limited to the UK, as it is very much a problem where I live in the Netherlands, too. Having had surgery and radiotherapy that has drastically altered my control over my bladder, I am someone who plans going out around the availability of adequate access to toilets. This becomes a particularly complex matter when going on holiday. I was therefore pleased to learn about a German system called nette toilette. A number of German towns and local authorities (now in excess of 270) have worked out that it is much cheaper to get someone else to provide toilets than to have to fund their construction, operation and maintenance themselves. A council thus pays shops, cafes, etc that have toilets if they make them available to people who are not customers. (They then display a sign on the shop door/window.) I note from the Wikipedia entry that this new system is reckoned to cost the city of Bremen €150,000 a year rather than €1.1m to provide WCs themselves. I am also glad of another toilet-related development that you find more and more on this side of the Channel, namely the ability to pay at the turnstile of the WCs in stations and motorway services by using your bank card. Though those turnstile arrangements do tend to mean that you find that your wallet fills up with the little refund vouchers you get that you can spend in the associated cafes and shops.John MorrisThe Hague, Netherlands • Exeter city council – marketing mantra: “Live Better” – has just closed 15 of its 26 public toilets. The endless sloganeering and vacuous manifesto-speak (“We want the narrative to be owned by individuals and organisations committed to playing a full part in the promotion of the city”) take no account of the real and sometimes pressing needs so well described by Owen Jones. The “narrative” is selective. Those who protested were ignored.Peter KaanExeter • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition