Name: Vanessa AgyemangAge: 30Occupation: Artist and online retailerIncome: £32,000 I’m definitely good with money. My grandmother was an excellent saver and ended up building a mansion in Ghana. On the other hand, my parents were not so great with money. I saw how they handled financial situations and I just thought that can’t be my life. So I chose my grandmother as my role model. I’m pretty money conscious. I use an Excel spreadsheet to budget, with allocated amounts for household bills, entertainment, personal grooming, and so on. This, together with my Monzo card, really helps control my budget and work out exactly what I’m spending. After university I worked in corporate design but I fell out of love with it. My aim was to quit and start my own business, but everything changed when I was scouted and won a Top Model of Colour competition in 2013. It led to a great modelling career, working with brands like Bobbi Brown and John Lewis and being featured in the Evening Standard magazine and the front cover of African magazine Zen. But modelling was difficult. There are highs and lows. I’d go from periods of being booked every single day, to no work for a month. I craved stability and I wasn’t gaining it from modelling. I knew I needed consistent work and wanted to return to design – but on my own terms. I began to think of ideas that could lead me to creative freedom and, while out with a friend, I had the lightbulb moment of making African-inspired lampshades, inspired by my British Ghanaian dual heritage. I quit my modelling career after six years and started Copper Dust four years ago. I now sell via Etsy, Not On The High Street and my own website. I’m now trying to scale up and look for capital to expand the business. Being an entrepreneur you have to be creative with your income, which means diversifying your skills. So as well as having Copper Dust I do business consultancy to help small business startups, branding and digital marketing, workshops and interior styling. My annual income comes to about £32,000. I live in London and the largest part of my pay cheque is on rent for my studio flat and my work studio, which in total comes to about £600-£750 a month. My work studio is cheap as it’s a community space which supports artists. It took about a year to find. I probably spent about £200-£300 a month reinvesting in the business, with money spent on hosting my website, business insurance, and marketing. If I do have money left over I spend it on experiences. I’m a big fan of independent restaurants, especially as I used to manage a restaurant for three years. I’m into steak and good Italian food. I prefer family-run places; they’re more personable, even if the price is slightly higher. In a good month, I aim to spend about £120-£150 on food shopping but in a bad month it might rise to £200-plus. I also spend about £50 a month on meditation, spin classes and swimming. I’m quite lucky to be able to travel about three or four times a year. It’s a mixed bag; sometimes they’re small trips, other times big holidays. This year I’ve visited Portugal and New Orleans, and I’ll be going to Ireland in October. If I’m about to go on a big trip, I’ll bootstrap before I go and then have an emergency fund set up for when I’m there if I need to splash out. I used to be obsessed with saving for a deposit for a property. All my friends were getting married and buying houses, and I used to compare myself to them. But being a creative your income fluctuates and goes from one extreme to the other. I know I need to focus on me and my business and see that flourish before committing to other financial goals.