Bringing your work home with you takes on a whole new meaning in Dominic Cooper’s Victorian terraced property in north London. One bedroom is furnished entirely with pieces from the New York hotel room set seen in Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again in which he reprises his character Sky. “I really needed to do the room up quickly and so I bought all of the furniture from that set after the film was finished. I call it the Mamma Mia! floor.” Occupying the second and third floors of a three-storey terrace, the property comprised a two-bedroom flat on the third floor and a one-bedroom on the second floor when Cooper bought it. Seeing the potential to extend into the eves of the roof, he enlisted E2 architects to create an upper floor open-plan loft-style kitchen-living space, adding reclaimed rustic timber joists in the ceiling and an exposed brick wall to contrast with the grey brick tiles in the sleek, modern white kitchen. A skylight punctuates the wood joists, flooding the room with natural light. “I’ve been slowly working my way down the building,” says Cooper, “buying different bits of it and turning it into a home.” The actor first stumbled across the property when he and his former flatmate James Corden were looking for places to buy. “The area had the same feel to it as Blackheath where I grew up, and I loved its proximity to Soho,” he says. “It’s so important to have a cosy nest to come back to, in among the chaos and madness of having a job where I travel so much. One of my favourite things now is to walk through Regent’s Park and get into the heart of the city. It’s a really nice, mind-clearing journey through greenery into the hustle and bustle.” A place to relax, the flat has also been a party pad in its time. “I actually have a letter framed on my wall from my next-door neighbour when she was much younger, which says, ‘Please, Mr Cooper, I have my Spelling B competition tomorrow morning and it’s now 5am and you’re still playing drum and bass.’” The home mixes modern design pieces, collected vintage furniture and an unusual number of lamps. “I have a kind of light fetish,” he admits. In the upper living area a record player from New Orleans sits on an old teak Danish sideboard and piles of photography books hold up a rickety glass coffee table that once belonged to a friend’s father, a scenic artist at the Royal Opera House. “He lived on a houseboat in Chelsea and that table reminds me of so many great times we had on the boat, like wonderful New Year’s Eve parties.” A rather sturdier dining table from Roche Bobois takes centre stage in the kitchen, with a set of Eames 1958 aluminium chairs. The sculptures remind me of my grandmother. I used to watch her at work and she was always covered in clay Prints of the Rolling Stones’ Sticky Fingers album cover and Kraftwerk’s 1975 Radio-Activity hang on the walls, the latter a gift from a friend for the opening night of the play Phèdre at the National Theatre, in which Dominic starred as Hippolytus opposite Helen Mirren. Downstairs, a figurative sculpture by his grandmother hides in a wall nook, and her sculpture of a ballerina swirling around in a snow globe is perched on the glass shelves in the guest room ensuite. “She sculpted the dancers along with other pieces,” he says. “I used to watch her make them in her conservatory when we lived in Blackheath, and remember her always being covered in clay, so I love having them around the place to remind me of her.” Her Ukiyo-e Japanese art prints, which she bought in the 80s at Liberty, now hang above an antique chest of drawers in one lilac-hued bedroom offset by a brown fabric feature wall that faces a painting of a female nude, another gift, this time from the artist Jonathan Yeo. A cherry maroon wall in an office-turned-guest bedroom provides a bold backdrop for a 60s fold-down bureau and shelves filled with artefacts, vintage cameras and, jokes Cooper, “all my OCD colour-coordinated books.” A bright red padded leather chair – one of two he acquired 15 years ago from the office of theatrical agent Pippa Markham, credited with helping Ian Dury’s acting career – sits under a midcentury glass and wood desk, yet another recycling gem from the set of Mamma Mia! At every turn there are smart colour touches and textures, such as the dark inky green palette in the ensuite bathroom that works a metal and glass industrial aesthetic. A bronze sculpture by his mother blends into the coppery tiled shower walls. “I chose those tiles because they reminded me of the stage in Waiting for Godot, a play I did years ago at drama school. We built this huge cube of rust,” he explains. “When I saw that tile it was exactly the same colour, and I thought it would look great.” There was never a grand interiors masterplan for Cooper’s home, but he likes how it’s worked out. “It’s been a progressive process. I’ve got to know the place and have added things along the way. I’ve loved buying little bits of furniture here and there over the years, and I think the more you do that and accumulate other things from different places, you add parts of your life into the building. It makes for a much more personal space, where each little corner has something to do with someone or somewhere you remember.”