In the past, pop has represented the ultimate fairytale story via the promise of a seamless transformation from the mundane to the megastar. In the 90s, the Spice Girls became the biggest cultural phenomenon on the planet after answering an advert in The Stage, while up until recently shows like The X Factor and Britain’s Got Talent have taken receptionists, call centre employees and recent stage school alumni and made their dreams (temporarily) come true. In 2019, however, numerous artists are balancing the glamour of pop with nine-to-fives: dance-pop duo Nimmo funded their recent debut with “normal” jobs after leaving a previous major-label deal, while Rosie Lowe supplements her income as a part-time piano tutor. Most interesting of all are the four members of Unperfect, a new UK girlband signed to the independent label Xenomania by Brian Higgins, AKA the mastermind behind Girls Aloud, who all have day jobs. Scour their Instagram stories and in between the heavily styled press shots and obligatory Spotify promo you’d come to expect from any self-respecting pop act, there are videos of Soipan (full-time mum and part-time barmaid), Tiah (student), Chloe (model) and Siobhan (administrative personnel assistant for Lidl) going about their daily business. “I love working for Lidl, but being in a girlband is my dream,” Siobhan, 26, tells me on the phone on the one day a week she isn’t working in the supermarket’s Southampton warehouse. “With music, you never know what can happen,” she continues, echoing a new, more cautious approach to that notion of fairytale. “I’m working because, if anything happens, I need to pay my mortgage. I want to get to a point where I can just do music, but at the moment it’s not possible.” Do her Lidl colleagues wonder why she’s still working there? “Yeah, every time I come back from video shoots – which I do in my holiday time – they’re like, ‘Oh, I thought you’d be off making your millions,’ and it’s like, ‘You don’t get it.’” It’s this strong DIY ethos that feels so at odds with the continued stereotype of the so-called “manufactured” pop act, one in which a genuine passion for music is assumed to be at the bottom of a long list. As Siobhan is quick to point out, this isn’t a case of them playing at being in a band. “It’s a sacrifice, but all of us know what we want. Like, Soipan has a son, so there’s no way she’s messing around – she needs to provide for him.” While Unperfect aren’t the only pop act to finance their careers via alternate means, the fact they’re a girlband, AKA the emblem of pop frivolity, makes it feel even more grassroots. It’s also a situation that requires a high level of WhatsApp dexterity. “Because we’re all so busy, there are lots of group chats on the go,” Siobhan laughs. “I’m tired, not going to lie.”