Barely an hour had passed since perhaps the greatest victory of Warrington’s modern history and Steve Price was already keen to look ahead. After the Wolves’ defeat in six consecutive major finals before Saturday’s 18-4 success in the Challenge Cup final against St Helens, few would have begrudged Price and his players the opportunity to celebrate for at least a few days: not least Salford, their Super League opponents on Thursday. Yet the message from the Warrington coach was clear. “We’re going for that big one now,” he insisted. Purists will argue that winning rugby league’s oldest prize at Wembley is indeed the big one but it is understandable why everyone associated with the Wolves values the league as the one that really matters, given they have not been crowned champions since 1955. Price’s ambition is shared by his chief executive, too. “We’ve got the desire to be the biggest club in Super League, and we know that to be regarded in that way, we have to win the league,” Karl Fitzpatrick said. “This club wants to win the double this year, make no mistake about it.” Ending their recent hoodoo in finals certainly reaffirms the belief that they can push for the double this season. To do that, they must first address their horrendous league form: five consecutive defeats have taken them from being play-off certainties to racing numerous others for a top-five spot. Winning at Wembley against the red-hot favourites and runaway league leaders certainly provides confidence aplenty for the run-in, though. “I think the performance and execution of the gameplan will go down in history,” Fitzpatrick said. “I’ve spoken with Steve and the focus has already turned to Salford on Thursday night. There are going to be some sore bodies but we’ve got the belief.” Warrington have threatened to dominate British rugby league on several occasions in recent years but their failure to win a Grand Final has prevented that from happening. With Price at the helm for the foreseeable future, however, Fitzpatrick sees no reason why his plan to take the Wolves to the top of the sport cannot come to fruition. “A golden era? Who knows,” he said. “We’ve always been there or thereabouts but winning this after losing six straight finals certainly sheds a bit of the reputation we’d probably picked up. I think we can get stronger, too; we were without our marquee player in Blake Austin and we’ve young players who will get better. This has to be the start, not the end.” But what of Price? It is typical for successful Australian coaches in Super League to return home to the NRL at some point and Fitzpatrick admits his coach may well be no different. However, with the 41-year-old under contract for at least two more years, there is the opportunity for Price and his squad to create a serious legacy. “We moved very quickly to extend his deal last year,” Fitzpatrick said. “His attention to detail is incredible. He delivered a coaching masterclass on Saturday but above all else, Steve is a very loyal guy. There were rumours about him going home last year when we were discussing an extension but we shook on a deal and he was true to his word.” Price’s name has already been mentioned with one soon-to-be vacant role in Australia. Newcastle are looking for a new coach and Saturday’s success will only further strengthen his credentials. “We’ve not been approached by them – as I say, he’s a loyal guy and that’s a nonstarter as far as I’m concerned,” Fitzpatrick added. Warrington will celebrate Saturday’s success with a homecoming parade in the town on Monday. It will likely be an occasion for everyone to savour, but don’t be fooled by the scale of the celebrations. This club, if they get their way, are by no means done yet.