Another year, another series of the Great British Bake Off. You know the deal by now. There’s a tent full of passionate home bakers, and week by week their will to live will be slowly eroded by impossible challenges that ask them to explain the quantum concept of particle-wave duality via the medium of biscuits. The new series of Bake Off begins next week, and it will be identical to every other series of Bake Off, and the only variation will be the influx of new contestants, so let’s rank them in terms of potential from worst to best. There’s a very good chance that Dan is a lovely person. However, between his deep-V shirt, his unguarded beard and his manbun, I am terrified of how much he’s going to shed into his food. Prue Leith is pushing 80, for crying out loud. A clump of hair in a Victoria sponge might finish her off. Although Rosie routinely performs life-saving surgery on sick animals, something about her demeanour here suggests she deals badly with stress. My guess is that she’ll be escorted from the tent after a fortnight for flinging a pan of boiling sugar at Sandi Toksvig’s head. Jamie looks a bit like a young Joaquin Phoenix. But ask yourself this: what would you do if Joaquin Phoenix gave you a cake? That’s right, you’d throw the cake away and set fire to the bin. It only seems sensible to do this with any cake given to you by this man too. No. No. Absolutely not. Let’s just study this picture for a moment. Not only is Michael’s apron absolutely filthy, but he’s also pulling the most terrified facial expression I have ever seen. This man is a complete danger. He has no discipline. He’s going to kill someone. In the press kit that accompanied the images of the new contestants, Phil is asked about his happiest Bake Off experiences. He replies “Being minibussed into the site”. That’s his happiest experience. A minibus. The man is the walking manifestation of the concept of doom. Henry is appearing on the Great British Bake Off because he was a Great British Bake Off superfan as a child. The Great British Bake Off is now creating its own contestants, and this means that Henry is the GBBO equivalent of Big Brother’s Brian Belo, and this means he is not to be trusted. I don’t trust Steph either. In her contestant photo she has made a towering multi-tiered sponge, which seems impressive. But look closer. Those tiers are not tidy at all. She looks like she’s just dustpan-and-brushed a pile of crumbs together. She’s fooling nobody. You’re fooling nobody, Steph. In her contestant profile, Amelia describes herself as ‘pretty happy’ and ‘a positive person’. I am 90% sure that this makes her a psychopath. Why are you making so many notes, Helena? WHY ARE YOU MAKING SO MANY NOTES? Are you collecting data on us? Are you going to sell our secrets to the Russians, Helena? Oh, you’re not actually making notes, you’re just painting some icing with a brush that looks like a pen. Still, I’ve got my eye on you. Michelle didn’t have a wedding cake. She’s a Great British Bake Off contestant and yet, on a day when tradition demands cake, she chose to shun cake. Michelle is clearly some sort of arch cake dissident, and my honest belief is that her one true aim is to destroy Bake Off from the inside out. In which case, I can only applaud her. Alice is so beautiful and wholesome that the BBC used a giant photograph of her when it ran a story about the new contestants. This means her progress will inevitably be derailed as bored viewers use social media to concoct a story about how she’s probably having an affair with Paul Hollywood. Same as it ever was. David has a very precise look, which quite frankly Dan could learn a thing or two about. He also invented a type of cake that villages in Malawi could steam over an open fire, which means he is already well-versed in international cake outreach. He is the closest thing to a Terminator this year’s batch of contestants can offer. In her contestant profile, Priya is asked who would be most surprised to learn that she had entered Bake Off. She replies “I have kept in touch with people from work,” which means that she’s left work. Why did she leave work? Because she won Bake Off, that’s why. My logic is watertight, and you may all congratulate me when this series ends.