Edinburgh’s Summerhall has a rowdy late-night festival hit with Square Go, which imagines a school fight with all the excess of professional wrestling. The mood is more subdued for its breakfast show Bout, an exploration of brotherhood through the motif of boxing. It’s performed – literally toe-to-toe at times – by three barefoot siblings from Taiwan’s Chang Dance Theatre and has the same grace and depth as last year’s Bon 4 Bon, in which they similarly drew upon their memories of childhood. Bout opens with one of the brothers pacing the stage alone. Another soon follows him. A third falls into step. When one of them hits the floor, he lies motionless while the others share a duet whose intermittent freeze-frames are suggestive of sports photography, all the intent and reaction captured in stillness. Has the prone brother been KO-ed? Or is he merely dreaming in the corner of a shared bedroom? Bon 4 Bon explained how the boys grew up in close quarters and exuded warm nostalgia with its fresh, bursting tales of eating mangoes on hot days. That show’s soundtrack looped Paul McCartney’s Blackbird and the music of Bon Iver, whose track Babys is used in Bout, delivering a summery rush to some fluid B-boy moves. But this time the choreography, by dancer Chien-Hao Chang, has more unsettling layers, the mood set by David Lang’s haunting Stick Figure for chamber ensemble. The dancers repeatedly lean on each other with a tangible ease, yet more than once the show captures the moment where play-fighting betrays genuine grudges. The brothers spiral between stances and their handstands and other childhood poses become more literal boxing bouts, with one of them taking the role of referee: familiar to any sibling who has ever played peacekeeper. The trio are dressed alike in understated suits but their age range and the cut of their clothes means they don’t all look exactly like adults. A suit can just as easily exaggerate boyishness. Only the solo choreography lacks punch. Perhaps these brothers need each other’s bodies to spar with and support? When they do, Bout floats like a butterfly and stings like a bee. Bout is at Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.