This is most heartening news. Softly, softly does it in the way that water can wear away stone. I applaud Mr Corbyn for taking the calm, sensible line that he has, and members of other political parties for coming together to present a unified front in the midst of this impending disaster. We have the mother of parliaments and parliamentary democracy will win through in the end with the aid and advice of sound constitutional lawyers and the support of Mr Speaker. Either in the Commons, or within the historically significant walls of Church House, this outrage will be nipped in the bud. MisterBadger1966 This meeting will stand as an example to a world that is failing to confront the damage caused by Trump, Bolsonaro, Duterte, Orbán and all of their ilk as the list grows longer. It is not enough for good people to do nothing or look the other way while those who care little undermine stability, encourage divisions and grow braver in their actions to limit freedoms which were hard won and costly to preserve. This is the UK at its best. Linda Casey Quite something to see John McDonnell and Anna Soubry (poles apart on so much) poised to sign that declaration, with other MPs queuing up to do so. Congratulations and appreciations to all involved. Now hold together. There will be attempts to divide you and ensure your goal of stopping no-deal Brexit fails. Resist those attempts. jessthecrip The problem with today’s events is that Corbyn is giving all of the ground. There’s this de facto idea that a vote of no confidence won’t work without testing the resolve of those right wingers in the face of it. However Corbyn will try to make himself look magnanimous and inclusive it does make him look weak. It’s a very uncomfortable moment for him and his followers. It has allowed Labour right-wingers such as Starmer to paint the move as anti-Brexit rather than anti-no deal, which damages Labour’s Brexit position. I think it is Corbyn’s worst day in a long time and has reduced the chances of him ever becoming PM. This isn’t about “tribalism” as many are saying – it’s about Corbyn asserting his authority given his position as leader of the opposition and not allowing himself to be bullied. It’s debatable even if the prospects of no deal have been reduced but one thing is for sure, left-wing governance has taken a serious credibility hit just at the time when it most needed a boost. JamesH1974 No 10 source: “It’s utterly perverse that Corbyn and his allies are actively seeking to sabotage the UK’s position. This coalition of anti-democrats should be honest with the British public, they are against us leaving the EU no matter what.” It’s appalling that No 10 can accuse MPs of sabotage and being anti-democratic. We expect it from people like Farage, and from the right-wing press, but it’s shocking to hear statements from government which reflect those prejudiced views. milinovak Green, Plaid, SNP and Lib Dems are at least being consistent with their anti-Brexit manifestos they were elected on. Labour however are behaving very badly, they promised to honour the referendum result before and after it, and at the last general election. Now they are doing everything they can to prevent Brexit, with no mandate to do so. Treflesg The Church House declaration is progress, at last. A no-deal Brexit would be bad enough, but the real and present threat is a slow-burn coup d’état by Johnson and his cronies. [They] should be held back by every legal and parliamentary device possible. Let’s hope today is the day when the fight to save our country really starts. dand Opposition parties working together in apparently genuine spirit of cooperation to prevent no deal. They do this by legislating to force Johnson into requesting an extension. They know the EU will want to see either an election or referendum with remain option as a condition. If the plan fails then the backup is a vote of no confidence then either an election in October, of unity government to get an extension and an election after that. So all prospective paths for our brave anti-no-deal alliance lead to a general election this autumn. SNP and Lib Dems will gain seats, that’s pretty clear. But surely given the current state of polls they all know that they need to work together in the election itself, otherwise the split remain vote and possible Johnson/Farage pact leaves Johnson with a majority and we leave with no deal in March next year, at which point no one on the opposition benches is going to look big or clever. richbrierley My view is that holding a general election after an extension is achieved is the simplest and most democratic way to prevent no deal and to let the people of this country decide our future. – Jeremy Corbyn. No Jeremy, this is the best way for the people to decide the government, not Brexit. A general election is not a single issue vote and as long as you continue to obfuscate and conflate these issues for your own political ends you will not be trusted on the issue nor command the support of those trying to prevent a no-deal Brexit. jazzbag This obsession with publishing documents that show that Brexit will have dire consequences is an utter waste of time. Those of us who oppose Brexit already know it will have all sorts of negative consequences – it’s one of the main reasons we oppose Brexit and have since the start. Those of us who are for Brexit either don’t care or don’t believe those documents. That effort should be put to more practical and productive use, especially given how little time is left and that we have a government clearly intending to crash out of the EU come hell or high waters. As for legislation, like so many thing Brexit, everyone seems to talk in vague terms on both sides. Of course parliament will try to pass legislation to stop a no-deal Brexit ... but what would that legislation look like? What can be passed that would work? And that’s if it can even be passed. Nothing’s work so far and they’ve had three years to come up with something. The Werewolf