In a world of political spin, a single smart soundbite can sometimes take over an entire complex story. Wednesday’s meeting in Berlin between Boris Johnson and Angela Merkel was a classic example. In advance, it had been billed as a stubborn confrontation with no expectation of agreement on Brexit. Then, in the press conference that followed their meeting, the German chancellor speculated that solving the impasse between the European Union and the UK over the Irish backstop might take two years of negotiation before adding: “But maybe we can find that solution in the next 30 days.” Mrs Merkel’s remark was a textbook stratagem. Mr Johnson picked up her words and ran with them, calling it a blistering timetable. The words instantly became the story of the day, generating a clutch of British newspaper headlines like “30 days to ditch the backstop” (Daily Telegraph) or “30-day deadline to avert no deal” (Guardian). In Paris on Thursday, Emmanuel Macron endorsed the idea, even while saying that the backstop remained indispensable both for Irish stability and for the single market. Yet what has really happened as a result of Mr Johnson’s first foray into continental Europe this week? In appearance, a form of progress, in the shape of an openness to further discussion through September. Good as far it goes. But in substance, not a lot. Neither the German nor the French leader moved from their commitment to the withdrawal agreement. Nor, unvisited in Mr Johnson’s travels, has there been any change from the Irish government at whom, on one Brexiter reading, this activity is all focused. For his part, Mr Johnson offered no hint that he might be more interested in a negotiated deal than the no-deal outcome for which active preparations continue and which remains the biggest issue for MPs. Nevertheless, the German chancellor’s dozen words have had some metapolitical effect. Downing Street has called them a chink of light, implying both that a variant of Theresa May’s negotiated deal may be a possibility after all and that this is actually what Mr Johnson prefers. This has the effect of changing Britain’s Brexit conversation away from the seeming inevitability of no deal, which has been the main message of Mr Johnson’s four weeks in office so far, and towards the more detailed practical and political options that would be involved in a fresh approach to the backstop. The central question is whether this is anything more than a game, in which all sides try to sound open to reason and alternatives while, at the same time, nothing changes. The worldly answer is that it is not. As Mr Johnson headed back to London, Britain remains headed towards no deal. Nothing that he has said in public is a remotely serious attempt to prevent that. There is no suggestion that he intends anything different in private. The logical conclusion is that we are all bystanders in an elaborate, polite, but irresistible masquerade whose purpose is to prepare the ground for the participants to heap blame on one another when the inevitable comes to pass, Britain crashes out and Mr Johnson calls an election in which he blames everything on Europe. Yet any deal remains better than no deal. All sides know this. Almost all MPs and the overwhelming majority of businesses know it too. Even Mr Johnson knows it in his way. If the 30-day idea is to mean anything substantive, it means that the country and parliament should redouble their efforts to force the government to be serious about a negotiated deal. That means the Commons sitting through September to stop Mr Johnson running down the clock. It means some difficult compromises. But it is the only way for the words that have been spoken this week to have any chance of being turned into reality.