Director Sam Collyns’s powerful film about the events surrounding the IRA’s assassination of Lord Louis Mountbatten in Sligo in August 1979 is a respectful masterpiece, which uses Mountbatten’s death as a springboard to discuss the other lives taken by the terrorists that fateful day in revenge for Bloody Sunday: three others aboard his boat Shadow V and 18 British soldiers murdered in Northern Ireland. Friends, relations, military commanders and even former IRA men tell the dreadful tale. Mike Bradley Over five consecutive nights, this show highlights certain animals to illustrate the conservation work done at zoos around Britain. It starts with an enjoyable episode that takes in efforts to gender a baby sloth, the introduction of a pair of endangered Chinese alligators and a health check on three tiger cubs. MB “It’s like juggling 12 chainsaws on fire.” Welcome to policing in 2019, as a mixture of rising crime and depleted resources is stretching capacity to breaking point. This series observes the work of police control centres, where impossible decisions about which dangerous situations to prioritise are a fact of life. Phil Harrison Creator-star Jamie Demetriou is too busy being daft to labour the topical satire angle but, now in its second series, this lettings agency sitcom is bang on the millennial moment, while Stath is already an all-time classic character. Every syllable he utters is a precious gem of north London gobbledy-Greek. Bless you. Ellen E Jones The German design genius Dieter Rams is worshipped by many (including the Apple guru Jony Ive). This documentary portrait explains why the “less but better” philosophy of the man behind so many of Braun and Vitsoe’s landmark concepts appeals to his loyal followers. MB As Jesse Armstrong’s terrific dynasty drama continues, Kendall and Roman Roy are competing frantically for their father Logan’s affections, unaware that he has chosen their sister Shiv for the top role. She, though, is concerned that the passing of the baton is taking longer than expected – is Logan stalling for time? Gwilym Mumford Gravity 8pm, Sky Cinema Greats No aliens in Alfonso Cuarón’s riveting space thriller, but Sandra Bullock’s Ryan Stone is as dauntless a heroine as Sigourney Weaver’s Ripley. Their orbiting spacecraft wrecked by flying debris, Stone and veteran astronaut Kowalski (George Clooney) need simply to get home alive – and it’s a gut-wrenchingly suspenseful ride. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Wolves v Manchester United 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event United look to build on their strong start at Molineux.Speedway: Poole v Swindon, 7.30pm, BT Sport 1 Premiership action from Poole Stadium.Major League Baseball, midnight, BT Sport 1 Coverage of a top-flight match as the season reaches its sharp end.