I was in my early 20s studying in Paris when Leonard Bernstein came to the city to conduct. Whenever Lenny was in Paris, he would come to pay his respects to Nadia Boulanger, the venerable teacher with whom I was studying. She put on a dinner party in his honour and I was one of only two of her students to be invited. I remember being overwhelmed by the concert the night before, when Bernstein conducted Berlioz’s Carnaval Romain, Schumann’s Second Symphony and Shostakovich’s Fifth. He found a way to turn the Orchestre National de France into a world-class thoroughbred, and he opened my ears to Schumann’s often maligned orchestral world. He turned to me and said: “Let’s get outta here!” I had no idea what he had in mind, but we slid out of the room and hailed a taxi. At one point during the meal, he turned to me and said: “Let’s get outta here!” I had no idea what he had in mind, but we slid out of the room and hailed a taxi. Lenny arrived late at Nadia’s dinner party, perhaps a little the worse for wear. He gave her a bear hug, then lifted her up off the floor and spun her around the room in a mad waltz. My 80-year-old teacher took it all with good grace. She was clearly very fond of Lenny and susceptible to his charisma and extraordinary energy, as were all of us who met him. He seemed restless and easily bored. I watched him picking up student manuscripts lying on the table and muttering rather too audibly: “Oh my God, this is the dregs of Fauré!” At one point during the meal, he turned to me and said: “Let’s get outta here!” I had no idea what he had in mind, but we slid out of the room and hailed a taxi. For the next two hours, we zigzagged around Paris. He was the most engaging, congenial company. He asked me about my way into music. I mentioned that I had met the famous Lebanese singer Fairuz in Beirut during a gap year, and that I ended up playing my violinin the tiny band that accompanied her, cross-legged on a carpet on those evenings when she sang at the Casino. Lenny was one of the most wide-ranging eclectic musicians you could ever wish to meet, but it never occurred to me that he would also have known her iconic songs. Yet he did – and we sang all the ones we could recall at the tops of our voices in the back of the cab as we sped through the city. I was dying to ask him about West Side Story. I’d wanted to meet him ever since I bought the LP of the musical as a teenager. I was 15 when the show came to Her Majesty’s Theatre in London in 1958, I queued up and went to see it three times. It completely bowled me over. There was something galvanising in the way it reworked theRomeo and Julietlove story, transposing it to 1950s New York, that battleground for ethnically divided street gangs. Above all there was Bernstein’s brilliant palette of orchestral colours and the rhythmic zest of his dance music, as well as the seamless way Jerome Robbins’ choreography was woven into the story. Lenny was a true musical magpie, borrowing and transforming music he’d picked up along the way. Had his music for “the Rumble” scene been influenced by the storm scene in Britten’s opera Peter Grimes? He looked at me quizzically and said: “Yeah, you got me there!” And what about the fabulously catchy huapango rhythm of America (“I like to be in America! / OK by me in America!”)? Its rhythmic pattern put me in mind of Monteverdi’s opera L’Orfeo – that characteristic alternation of bars of 6/8 and 3/4 time that runs all through Orpheus’s aria Vi Recorda, o Boschi Ambrosi. He seemed to imply he might have dredged up some memory of it when, as a 17-year old, he’d first heard Nadia Boulanger introducing students at Harvard to the wonders of Monteverdi. I was interested to know how he conducted the piece: did he stick to two-in-a-bar throughout, or did he beat the 3/4 bars in three? “The latter, of course,” he said. I was chuffed to bits. West Side Story was, as we now know, the product of fierce creative tension between its four main collaborators - choreographer Jerome Robbins and Bernstein the composer, author Arthur Laurents and lyricist Stephen Sondheim. But it came together through a magnificent pooling of their great talents. Sondheim arguably was the one who saved the day, replacing whole chunks of Bernstein’s purple prose with lines that were spare, succinct and which hit all the right notes time after time. I started to study the score seriously. It seemed to chime perfectly with those heady times during the student riots of May 1968. I went regularly to the Sorbonne to witness the heated debates between the car workers from Citroen and Renault and the students who had occupied the university. As for West Side Story, I am convinced it has a lot to convey to us now in these times of great anxiety and racial tension. The social themes it explores are more subtle, complex and pervasive than they were 70 years ago. Today, shockingly, there is more cultural misunderstanding, bigotry and, crucially, a social failure to address, integrate and empower young people in effective and constructive ways. There’s a scalp-crawling moment in the 1985 documentary about Lenny’s remake of West Side Story with opera stars Kiri Te Kanawa and José Carreras when Lenny loses his rag with Carreras, who struggled to master the tricky jazz rhythms. The clash was borne of Lenny’s frustration and his longing for West Side Story to be treated seriously as an offshoot of classical music – the underlying reason why he cast two opera stars as his Romeo and Juliet. But it isn’t a conventional opera. It is a unique amalgam of Broadway musical, hip-hop, jazz and Latin American beat, held together by a composer with a classical background and a symphonic toolkit. No one but Bernstein could have conceived of binding these disparate elements together by using the ambiguous (and spooky) musical interval of a tritone (an augmented fourth). It is a work of genius, one that raised the level of American music theatre to heights rarely reached since its first appearance. I’ve waited a long time – 61 years to conduct West Side Story. It may not belong to the kind of repertoire that people associate with my name, but it’s been a part of my life for so long, and I’m thrilled to get this chance to conduct the work I adore, with its scintillating combination of wild rhythmic energy, great tunes, romance and American vernacular. • Sir John Eliot Gardiner conducts West Side Story at Usher Hall, Edinburgh, with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra on 5 and 6 August. He was talking to Stuart Jeffries.