Set in west Wales, Niall Griffiths’s new novel begins on a mountainside in the aftermath of an open-air rave, as three troubled strangers witness the mysterious vision of a spectral, floating woman. At first, the apparition seems to be more MacGuffin than comedown, as a means of immersing us in the characters’ stories. Their travails, told in vernacular point-of-view chapters, hint at the past causes of their present difficulties, from childhood abuse to domestic violence. There’s Adam, an ex-addict volunteering at the rehab centre that helped him get clean; Cowley, a dragon-tattooed, Leave-voting hardman who, priced out of the building trade by “Stony-hands or Poles”, turns to the gangsters lining up for his services; and Emma, a single mother fending off a sleazy hookup who denounces her as a welfare cheat after she rejects his gift of a dildo moulded from his penis. Pairing Irvine Welsh’s demotic vim with the conspiratorial frisson of a David Peace novel, it's strange and compelling Benefit sanctions and service cuts imperil the trio’s hard-won equilibrium. Adam goes on a cross-country bender that gets him caught up in another addict’s money-lending scam; Cowley accepts cash to compete in illicit bloodsports; Emma plunges into a vortex of rough, random sex. While the squalor is sometimes laid on thick, there’s a thrilling sense that Griffiths is taking seriously lives that many novelists ignore and the book’s riotousness means it’s neither dour nor sermon-like. At one point, Adam recalls watching Avatar on acid and ranting about how “there were people here, on this planet, suffering, being shat on, and there’s this prick painted blue getting all emotional about pixels”. Tub-thumping speeches recur, drawing a line from the battle of Orgreave to austerity to Brexit as instances of the state punching down: one page moves from “them who shot that Brazilian feller or who lied about Hillsborough” to “the bankers” to “fuckin Farage and fat Boris… all these cunts that do their best to defer blame, to fuckin weasel out of everything bad that they’ve done”. The novel’s opening scene ends up far from being a MacGuffin, but, instead, its focus. The possible redemption for Britain’s fraying social fabric emerges in the shape of a growing commune on the mountainside where the vision was seen, after Emma’s blog about it trends on Twitter. Pairing Irvine Welsh’s demotic vim with the conspiratorial frisson of a David Peace novel, Broken Ghost is strange and compelling. Would Emma’s post really reach Love Island levels of virality? If not, maybe that only lends weight to Griffiths’s point about Britain’s malaise. But in narrative terms, his view of digital life rings false, not least in segments portraying online discussion of the commune, reminiscent of Private Eye’s satirical column From the Message Boards. There’s also a certain bathos in how the novel segues from its spectacularly bleak climax of bloodthirsty police violence to the acknowledgments, where Griffiths points out: “Oh, and as far as I know, Cardiff city council does not, never has, and never will utilise anti-homeless spikes.” But since it suits the novel in one scene to imply otherwise, this seems a fairly damaging admission: that, however visceral or inspiring, Broken Ghost’s portrait of state-sponsored social breakdown has a thumb firmly on the scales. • Broken Ghost is published by Jonathan Cape (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99