The traditional religious funeral is dying a death, according to a report that also reveals the soaring popularity in the UK of no-frills or “direct cremations” – a cheaper and less conventional sendoff with no mourners present. The UK’s largest funeral director, Co-op Funeralcare, found one in 10 people want a traditional farewell, underlining the growing popularity of personalised, bespoke ceremonies without the formal trappings. Based on feedback from its funeral directors from more than 500,000 ceremonies conducted in the past five years and the views of 4,000 British adults, the study reflects changing trends and attitudes towards death. One in 25 funerals arranged by the Co-op are direct cremations, perhaps inspired by the wishes of the late David Bowie. The musician, who died in January 2016, was cremated with no family or friends present after specifying that he did not want a funeral service (his ashes were scattered in Bali). The findings build on the Co-op’s national study into dying in the UK, for which more than 30,000 Britons were questioned last year, in an attempt to break taboos around bereavement and ensure the wishes of the deceased are followed. Samantha Tyrer, the managing director of Co-op Funeralcare, said: “The funeral sector is rapidly changing. More so now than ever before we’re seeing requests for wonderfully personalised ceremonies, whether that be on the 18th hole of a golf club, or having a pet dog present. The choices are endless and so it’s absolutely crucial that people make their wishes known to ensure they’re not missed.” The study also found the use of formal pallbearers to carry coffins has declined in the past five years. Requests for ceremonies to take place away from churches have increased, with locations including a zoo, on a bus, on a golf course or in a teepee. Most of the Co-op’s undertakers had arranged a funeral where mourners wore bright clothing and half have known mourners to dress in jeans and tracksuits. More than half (57%) of funeral directors had received requests for pets to be present at funerals, whether leading the hearse, attending the service or joining the wake. Three-quarters had organised unusual floral tributes including a packet of Werther’s Originals and a 3D lion’s head, while traditional coffins were being replaced by rainbow colours, football team crests and leopard print. Humanists UK, the largest provider of humanist funerals in the UK, welcomed the findings. Its director of community services, Teddy Prout, said: “This report gives insight into the changing nature of funerals in the UK, including the increasing numbers opting for personalised, bespoke funerals over traditional religious funerals, which are in decline. This is reflective of the huge societal shift of more people identifying as non-religious than ever before and with that, perhaps, comes more open attitudes towards death.” Co-op Funeralcare conducts almost 100,000 funerals every year for more than 1,000 regional funeral homes. The industry is being investigated by the Competition and Markets Authority to see if people are being charged too much.