Last week in the Guardian, I commended those of a bookish turn of mind to surrender themselves to the BBC’s 10-hour adaptation of Marcel Proust’s In Search of Lost Time, broadcast over the bank holiday weekend on Radio 4. I had reckoned without the cricket, but even so, long weekends are, well, pretty long. So did the series deliver on its promise to transport us, like the narrator himself, back to the riverside at Combray and the salons of Paris? One of the central issues that faced dramatist Timberlake Wertenbaker and director and producer Celia de Wolff was how to balance the unparalleled sense of longueur of Proust’s vast roman-fleuve and the recollection of dramatic, frequently fruity incident. It is easier – and perhaps especially so in the grammar of radio – to convey dinner-party repartee than moments of reflection, even when they are performed by the measured, deliberate Derek Jacobi. Thus the ear was drawn more naturally to, for example, Frances Barber’s conspiratorial Madame Verdurin as she gossiped and plotted and decided who was in or out of her social circle. Equally tricky to pull off is the layering of a man in old age summoning up the confusion of the adult behaviour he witnesses in childhood – in our narrator’s case, the social hierarchies embodied by the aristocratic Guermantes family and the unwisely married Swann, which he dimly apprehends but whose import and nuance he naturally misses. “Greedy for happiness,” he muses in later life, of his would-be friendship with the Duchesse de Guermantes (played here by Fenella Woolgar), “I asked nothing more from life in those moments than that it should consist always of a series of happy afternoons”. But life is not always anything, and nor can happy afternoons dispel the other lives that the child experiences, perhaps most notably, and strongly present in this adaptation, the anguish and fear he feels when he is separated from his mother, “his sad evenings and wakeful nights”. Childhood agonies give way to a broader sweep of desires and losses as Combray recedes and the seaside town of Balbec and boulevards of Paris arrive; and when the cast of characters enlarges to include the narrator’s love objects, Gilberte (Emma Mackey) and Albertine (Hattie Morahan), Swann himself (Paterson Joseph) and the rakish, libidinous Baron de Charlus, played with gusto by Simon Russell Beale. It was an intriguing 10 hours, brought together with care and expertise, but what did it amount to? There was a sense, for me, that to take on such a mammoth work, now often used as a byword for something hard to attempt, needed a more innovative approach to truly hold listeners either unfamiliar with the work altogether, or so immersed in it that they didn’t need to be reminded of, as it were, its greatest hits. I would, perhaps, have dispensed with the background sounds of strings, and realistic sound effects of tinkling laughter and glasses clinking, and gone for something fresher and more unexpected. But the words were still there; and if one treats this adaptation as an introduction and companion to Proust’s characters and most pressing themes, it is well worth a listen.