Monday 16 August 1819 was a beautiful summer’s day, when at least 60,000 people came in their Sunday best to St Peter’s Field in Manchester for the peaceful demonstration that turned so tragically into the bloody Peterloo massacre. On 16 August 2019, by contrast, there was a relentless downpour of the worst Mancunian variety. But the spirit of 200 years ago was not the least bit dampened by the torrential rain. In our complex world of lies and fake news and sinister manipulation, democracy is under threat on so many levels. And the radicals and reformers of two centuries ago have much to teach us – the lessons of Peterloo go far beyond the issue of universal suffrage. As John Thacker Saxton, a real-life radical played by John-Paul Hurley in my film, says: “Though we can easily forgive a child who is afraid of the dark, the real tragedy of life is when men are afraid of the light.” When we were kids, these buildings were pitch black. How surprising to see their true beauty after the Clean Air Acts I was privileged to have been invited to take part in From the Crowd on the bicentenary, a lively community performance on the site of St Peter’s Field. It involved over 100 people from a wide range of backgrounds, including a number of descendants of victims of the massacre. The event was in fact not so much a conventional performance as a bold reflection on the history of protest, especially in the UK, and on the relevance of Peterloo to our contemporary world. At 1.30pm, the precise time the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry began their violent assault on the crowd at Peterloo, 18 of us read out in turn the names of those who died of their wounds on that fateful day. After the last name had been read out, we were to observe a minute’s silence and then the bells of Manchester town hall were supposed to chime 18 times. But, owing to a technical hitch, no bells sounded. This meant that the minute’s silence went on for several minutes. Nearly 4,000 people silently meditating in the pouring rain is a deeply moving experience. So many thoughts, feelings, ideas, memories, hopes, fears, all in those few precious minutes … The Midland hotel, right in front of us, was built on the site of the house from which the misguided magistrates watched the meeting, before so stupidly instructing their forces to attack. Suddenly, I felt a rare sense of connection to those events on this very spot. Odd, in a way, as I’d wandered about there so many times recently in the course of researching my film about the massacre. And I’d already known the area well, both from growing up in Salford, and as an adult, mostly ignorant about Peterloo, which was hardly mentioned in school. We were so close, too, to the spot where Henry “Orator” Hunt and the others stood on the hustings – two horse carts – by what is now the Radisson hotel, but was in my youth the Free Trade Hall concert venue. Like the nearby Central Library, where I saw my earliest plays in the tiny library theatre, and the town hall itself, Waterhouse’s gothic masterpiece. When we were kids, all these buildings were pitch black, which we thought was their natural colour. How surprising to see them revealed in their true beauty after the Clean Air Acts. What if the folk at Peterloo, who were fighting for the vote, could time-travel to 2019? Would they not be appalled and disgusted by the fact that we have the vote, yet so many people don’t use it? Would they not be astonished at the deceit of Brexit? At how working-class people still starve two centuries after the iniquitous Corn Laws? That last year there were 1.6 million recipients of emergency food parcels in the UK, half of the contents going to children? Nellie, the poor mother in my film played by Maxine Peake, referring to the Corn Laws, asks, “When has the government ever done anything to help us?” She would be astonished at the cost of living now that drives so many to despair, by the five-week wait for universal credit, by the likely rise in food bills of £190 per annum per person because of Brexit, by zero-hours contracts, and by a health minister who refuses to rule out deaths caused by lack of medicine if the UK leaves the EU with no deal. Brexit is the epitome of democracy under threat – indeed, of democracy gone wrong. To end this awful impasse we must have another referendum, one that is not afflicted with the lies and spin of 2016 – the People’s Vote. The spirit of Peterloo must endure. These thoughts and feelings, and many more, raced through my head and heart as I stood, wet and silent, with many kindred spirits. • Mike Leigh is a film director