The health secretary has announced a proposed overhaul of NHS health screening that could scrap GP consultations for millions of people, replacing them with online programmes and AI. The idea is that the one-size-fits-all system for routine health MOTs offered to those over 40 has become old hat. Those between the age of 40 and 74 are currently called into their GP surgery every five years for checks on weight, cholesterol, blood sugar and blood pressure. This is to see whether patients are at risk of problems such as diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease and stroke. Now Matt Hancock says we need to be utilising technology and sophisticated data collection to direct help to those most in need. These changes may see in-person checks being reserved only for those deemed high risk, with everyone else expected to rely on predictive online algorithms. “Personalised, preventative healthcare is mission critical to the future-fit healthcare service we want to build,” said Hancock last week. “We must harness the latest technology and techniques to move away from the one-size-fits-all approach of the past.” This word-salad could sound vaguely compelling were it not for, you know, the Conservatives’ record of disingenuous promises of healthcare reforms that gloss over the lived experiences of millions of people in the UK. This latest bid for “improving” the NHS just feels like yet another “Hey, look over there!” illusion of progress from this government, while the well of distress and destitution beneath them continues to swell. We have no idea yet of the reliability of any predictive tool used to estimate risk (an evidence review begins this autumn), and many GPs have already raised concerns. But we must also think about how, in the face of habitual underfunding of public health, potentially removing face-to-face contact with GPs reeks of yet more cost-cutting, as well as continued, wilful ignorance of the members of our population most in need of intervention. We already know, for example, that one of the greatest causes of suffering on earth is poverty. “With general health screening you have to ask: who is the target?” says Jonathon Tomlinson, a Hackney GP and author of the A Better NHS blog. “We already know who dies prematurely: people with learning difficulties and serious mental illnesses die at least 20 years younger then anyone else – [even more so than] the homeless, prisoners and drug users. We don’t need to screen because we know who they are. We need more effective interventions for the people we already know to be at risk.” Tomlinson also points out that there have been “27% cuts to drug treatment services in the last three years, with a 17% rise in deaths”. So what does Hancock mean, exactly, by the one-size-fits-all approach? Replacing human contact with AI is just one of the measures outlined in the government’s green paper on preventing ill health over the next 10 years, and critics say it lacks ambition in tackling wider health inequalities. If we want to talk about effective, targeted interventions, what about the systematic fund-pulling from services such as Sure Start – shown to deliver massive health benefits to children and their families in the most deprived areas of the UK, saving the NHS millions of pounds? Is the health secretary dusting over the fact that childhood trauma has been shown again and again in clinical research to be the greatest risk factor for ill health in adulthood? If we’re talking about prevention, what about the children who are eating toilet roll and scavenging in bins because their parents – no doubt starving themselves – can’t afford to feed them without free school meals? Does Hancock not think that in 10 years many of these children may be carrying the trauma of that poverty in their young adult bodies? Underlying the implications of this move is what Tomlinson refers to as a “libertarian ideology” that is against “universal, evidence-based approaches like a sugar tax or banning soft drinks in school”. It is, he says, based on the disingenuous assumption that an “unemployed, frightened single mum in the East End of Sheffield has the same freedom to choose a healthy lifestyle as a middle aged man in west London with a PA and a loving wife with a nanny”. Removing even more opportunities for human contact is cruel. So many people have been thrust into furrows of loneliness by a government that has promoted individualism while attacking services that centre on “soft” relationships. Cuts to community hubs, compounded by insecure living arrangements and low-paid work, shrink a person’s world. It is not a stretch to say that many towards the upper end of the age bracket targeted by this motion may go considerable periods without properly talking to – or being touched by – another human being. A conversation with a GP who knows you well as an individual is not just a health check, it is meeting a basic need for human connection. Yet even this, it seems, should be sacrificed to the false god of efficiency. • Eleanor Morgan is an author and is training to be a psychologist