With its seamless indoor and outdoor living spaces, and its Australian owner, this contemporary family home is more Brisbane than Britain. Tucked behind a suburban street, the plot, which formerly housed garages, is bordered by a stream with parkland beyond and surrounded by greenery. “When I get back from work I’m greeted by views of woodland, and the sounds of water and birdsong; it’s instantly calming,” says Pia Fairhurst. She shares the home with her husband Jonny and their daughters Paris, nine, and Amelie, six. “We loved the idea of having no direct neighbours, and access to the garden from all sides.” The house takes full advantage of its bucolic setting: glazed doors connect each of the key living spaces with an outdoor terrace. Outside a reading room’s picture window, hardy ornamental grass (Stipa tenuissima) sways gently in the breeze and masks a rare glimpse of a nearby house. Indoor plants such as Ficus elastica ‘Abidjan’ (rubber plant) and Euphorbia triangularis (chandelier tree) bring bursts of green inside, too. The architects, 31/44, laid out the ground floor as four rooms: an eat-in kitchen with plywood units and walls; a utility room; a double-height reading room with a wood-burning stove, a skylight, and a vibrant mural painted by artist Emma Jones (emmajones.ink); as well as a more formal living space with a built-in fireplace. All the rooms are positioned around a cross-shaped hallway. On the first floor are a master bedroom, a further three bedrooms and a bathroom. A large roof light above the entrance hall brings daylight into the core of the building. It was while visiting the home of one of the cofounders of the architectural practice, as part of London’s Open House festival in 2016, that the couple learned the firm had just completed this house for a developer. “We hotfooted it over that afternoon,” Jonny says. “We could only peer through the gates, but that was all it took.” The flooring is a combination of large-format grey tiles and pale oak boards; oak veneer is used for the kitchen cabinets as well as the living room walls, the latter nodding to panelling found in more formal homes. Emma Jones also created the mural in the hallway, featuring monochrome botanical drawings. Planters suspended from the galleried staircase introduce more pops of chlorophyll. The furniture includes a smattering of modern-day icons – Hella Jongerius’s joyous Polder sofa and the Slow chair by Ronan and Erwan Bouroullec – mixed with mid-20th-century pieces such as a G Plan coffee table. Inspired by the late landscape designer John Brookes – who created gardens as outdoor rooms, making areas for sitting and enjoying different views of the house and garden – the outdoor spaces include a sitting area, a dining area and two play areas for the children featuring a sunken trampoline, bars and a tree swing. There is also a kitchen complete with a vegetable garden, herb garden, barbecue, tandoor and pizza oven. Contemporary pieces by Danish brand Hay (hay.dk) furnish the outdoor seating areas, selected because they are lightweight and their minimal lines don’t obstruct the views from the house; the dining area features a table and benches from a German beer hall (found at a local market). “The furniture is intended to live outside all year round,” Pia says. “We soften it in warmer months with cushions, throws and rugs.” The garden is an ongoing project: “This year we have sown wild grasses and meadow flowers at the back of the house for a more organic effect, so that it looks like an extension of the park,” Pia says. Jonny, meanwhile, is planning to build a structure to cover the outdoor kitchen. “That way we can easily cook outside in the rain – or even the snow.”