Two people have been arrested after a protest against an Irish unity march caused a riot in Glasgow. Riot police, mounted officers, a helicopter and dog units were used to quell “significant disorder” in Govan on Friday. The first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, condemned the incident, tweeting: “What happened in Govan last night was utterly unacceptable. My thanks to Police Scotland for their response. “I welcome Glasgow city council’s commitment to review the procedures around marches. Peaceful protest is a part of our democracy – violent and sectarian disruption is not.” Officers said the planned march, organised by the James Connolly Republican Flute Band, was met by hundreds of “disruptive” counterdemonstrators at about 7pm. Police Scotland said this led to significant disorder around Govan Road, which was blocked by officers. Witnesses reported smoke bombs being used. Glasgow city council advised of the roadblock in a traffic bulletin. Govan subway station was also closed due to the incident, but has since reopened. Once the road reopened at about 9.45pm, a few police vehicles remained in the area, including riot vans. Debris and what appeared to be makeshift barriers could be seen at the side of the road. In a statement on Friday, Glasgow city council described the disorder as “unacceptable”. On Saturday, police arrested two men aged 37 and 21 after the alleged public disorder. The Scottish justice secretary, Humza Yousaf, said: “Last night’s scenes in Glasgow were totally unacceptable. I have spoken to the leader of Glasgow city council this morning and welcome the council’s strong statement of intent. I reiterated that the Scottish government stands ready to support the council in any way we can. “We will take the necessary actions to keep our streets safe from the sectarian thuggery we witnessed last night. Scotland is a diverse, multicultural and tolerant society and any form of violent disorder is completely and utterly unacceptable to the Scottish government and the vast majority of Scots.”