A dozen carefully curated episodes of Friends are to be shown at selected cinemas to mark the sitcom’s 25th anniversary. It will be known as The One With The Proof That Time is a Flat Circle. Of all the things that people say to induce a breakdown mid-conversation (usually involving the Back to the Future trilogy, which is now all set in the past), anything involving Friends is the worst. Every rerun demands you face the fact the 1990s were not in fact 10 minutes ago, as your mind habitually insists. They were quite a different time, without smartphones, without Twitter and without all the emotional detritus and joint pain you have acquired since then. Friends has become social history for millennials. Look at the carefree young people unsaddled with debt, unburdened by the resurgence of fascism, and buying coffees without gouty economic columnists excoriating them for not putting their latte money down as a house deposit. And they watch it as we watched our forebears watch Lord Carnarvon pull treasures from Tutankhamun’s tomb; as a problematic distillation of then-contemporary attitudes which modern mores now excoriate. There’s The One with the Fatshaming of Monica, The One with Ross’s Male Nanny Homophobia, The One Mocking Chandler’s Perceived Homosexual Traits, The Many Ones Exploiting Gendered Precepts – and lots, lots more. And they’re all right and they’re all wrong and so were we and everything and nothing is still funny and everything is built on sand and what even means anything any more. There is only one constant: Jennifer Aniston had the best hair and comic timing of her or any other generation. That’s The One To Which I Will Brook No Riposte. News of the Kennington pong – a strong and so far inexplicable smell of sick that has permeated a London tube station for months now – provides a useful reminder of the upsides to being a congenitally anosmic, as I am. Which is not nearly as painful as it sounds – it means having been born without a sense of smell. In the spring and summer especially it is brought home to me how much I am missing. You cannot go five minutes without someone suddenly stopping, breathing deeply and exclaiming something about fresh grass, flowers, barbecued meat or, if you’re very unlucky, the fragrance of soil after a shower of rain. “It’s called petrichor!” they say. “I know,” I snarl. “We all learned that off Twitter at the same time and it infuriates even those to whom it actually means something.” There tend not to be too many pongs around. People who can smell perhaps don’t realise how fortunate they are to live in times as basically unstinky as they are now. For every wrinkled nose I see, my attention is (albeit futilely) drawn to a dozen pleasant and – by all accounts – even life-affirming odours. So I advise all the olfactorily blessed to head to Kennington tube to get a whiff of what’s going on down there and remember that for most of history this would be the norm, and I would be the lucky one. Our National Grid is found to be permanently on the brink of collapse, plunging the country into darkness and chaos. The 12,000th provable untruth out of the puckered orange sphincter muscle that doubles as Donald Trump’s mouth is recorded this day. One of his officials wants to rewrite the poem on the Statue of Liberty to make it clear that it is a specific rather than general invite (to the poor, but not too poor, to the tired who just need a bit of a rest before enterprising their way to billionairehood and the huddled of only certain approved skin tones – and presumably alter the US motto to “E Pluribus Fuck You”). I care not. For I am stuck in a greater hell. I am trying to book train tickets online. London to Edinburgh. But this journey has apparently never been done before. It’s just not possible. London, the internet says? Edinburgh, it murmurs in confusion. Well, maybe … no, wait, two passengers? That changes everything! No, for the worse. Here is a price I have calculated according to no possible rational process. Yes, eleventy-billion shillings for one-and-a-half seats in the wrong direction. No! This week a mother apparently confiscated her daughter’s phone so the teenager started using the family’s smart fridge to tweet. Admittedly it was probably a hoax, but I should be able to book a train ticket online without weeping tears of blood. In the meantime, we are going to walk. My psyche is soothed. I am reading my first Georgette Heyer. It is called Simon the Coldheart and it is great. It’s not one of her usual products, Regency romances, because I hate a) romance and b) the Regency period (once history has fancy furniture I lose interest). It is one of the handful she wrote set in the middle ages or earlier. Even more restorative was the fact that when I idly scanned my shelves upon finishing it, I found two more of that handful already there, bought years ago and ignored since until need focused my eye. This the great thing about books, and the answer to anyone who looks in bafflement at you for buying hundreds more than you can ever read each year. It’s like laying down wine, but it’s you who changes and matures until you’re ready to consume your stores. And it suggests a deep, unsuspected order to at least your inner universe; in some way or other, whenever I bought Royal Escape and My Lord John, my subconscious knew me better than I knew myself. How profoundly consoling is that? “Australian farmers jailed for smuggling Danish pig semen in shampoo bottles” … “Alan Partridge saves Steve Coogan from lengthy driving ban” … “New Zealanders warned off eating sexy pavement lichen.”These have all been headlines this week. OK, I thought, clinging to my Heyers like a drowning man to driftwood, it’s fine. Obviously I missed more memos that I thought when I was trying to book those tickets, but I’ll catch up and all will be well. And then I found out that the salmon cannon – wide rubber hoses through which fish are shot over hydroelectric dams that block their migratory paths so that they can do their spawny salmony business on the other side, a video of which has been doing the rounds on social media – is real, where I had spent the week assuming that it very much was not. I am taking to my bed with my books and do not intend to stir from it or the middle ages for a very long time. Call me only if things improve.