The state-owned Royal Bank of Scotland has reportedly selected Alison Rose as its next chief executive, which would make her the first woman to head a major UK bank. RBS is expected to name Rose‎ as Ross McEwan’s successor in the coming weeks and regulators are understood to be considering the bank’s application to appoint her, according to Sky News. None of RBS’s main rivals, including Barclays, HSBC and Lloyds Banking Group, have ever appointed a woman for any of the top three boardroom positions in the male-dominated industry. Rose was promoted to the role of deputy chief executive at NatWest Holdings last year, the “ring-fenced” part of RBS which excludes the riskier investment banking business. She also serves as the chief executive of commercial and private banking across the group. Rose has worked at RBS for more than 25 years, mainly in its investment bank, and recently led the Rose review, a Treasury-commissioned inquiry into the barriers facing female entrepreneurs. The Guardian disclosed in April that Rose was seen as the frontrunner to replace McEwan, who has since announced he is to become the chief executive of National Australia Bank. Rose has kept a lower profile in recent years compared with other female City high-flyers – such as the investment fund manager Nicola Horlick and Dame Helena Morrissey, the head of personal investing at Legal & General – but is highly regarded in the banking industry. She was the only woman in the boardroom when she attended her first meeting as a senior RBS executive. Having travelled extensively as a child with her militaryfamily, Rose settled back in England aged 15. She initially wanted to become a diplomat but joined National Westminster Bank as a trainee in 1992 after graduating with a history degree from Durham University. Currently the most senior woman in British banking is Shriti Vadera, who chairs Santander UK, the fifth-biggest high street lender. RBS, which is 62% owned by the taxpayer after its £45.5bn government bailout during the 2008 financial crisis, also has a female finance chief, Katie Murray, who was appointed late last year. RBS said on Saturday: “The process to appoint Ross McEwan’s successor is ongoing. Our next CEO will be confirmed in due course, once an appointment has been made.”‎ ‎ Earlier this week, McEwan endorsed the view of Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, that a no-deal Brexit would render a “substantial number” of businesses no longer economically viable. McEwan said: “[Mr Carney] has been sort of painted as the doom and gloom person, [but] I think he’s the person in the most realistic position in this country to see what’s going on and what’s likely to go on.”