When the Margate company 1927 brought Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea to the Edinburgh fringe in 2007, it felt like a discovery. Here in the dank Underbelly was a fusion of live action and animation in a sequence of vignettes like tales from a warped storybook, all presented in a distinctive monochrome aesthetic. It won every award going and set 1927 on course to become darlings of the international festival scene. Since then, Suzanne Andrade and Paul Barritt’s company has worked with director Barrie Kosky on The Magic Flute, presented Golem on the BBC and toured to 40 countries. You could see Roots as a reassertion of core values. Drawn from the Aarne index, an archive of traditional tales in the British library, it bills itself as a “collection of folk jokes”. There’s the one about the cat that won’t stop eating, the morality tale of the man who shares a house with Poverty, and the fable about an ogre who challenges a town to a laughing contest. Although unfamiliar, they have the recognisable tone of the fairy stories we grew up with, giving the company plenty of scope to be playful. Lillian Henley’s live score is performed on an oddball assortment of fiddles, saws and bass guitars, while Barritt’s animations allude to everything from children’s picture books to 50s French fashion and 60s psychedelia. Faces caked in white paint are forever poking through the projection screen, all terrified eyes and fretful mouths, helplessly caught in a world of animation. Although it has its moments of dark humour, such as the tale of the parents who drown their child in order to have more food for themselves, the mood is light and whimsical, an ephemeral summer entertainment. Had we been back at the Underbelly 12 years ago, the style of this show would have seemed revelatory, perhaps even essential. Now, however, presented by the Edinburgh international festival, there is neither novelty nor urgency. It’s harmless fun, with a smattering of good jokes and plenty to delight the senses, but it has nothing to say about the world, nor any compelling reason to be here now. • At Church Hill theatre, Edinburgh, until 25 August.