A Metropolitan police officer is under investigation after appearing on Nigeria’s version of Big Brother despite being denied permission to do so. The force said PC Khafi Kareem, 29, had been granted unpaid leave for an “unrelated reason”. Africa Magic, the TV company behind Big Brother Naija, said that she had joined the show “so that she can do societal good”. A profile of Kareem on the broadcaster’s website said she would spend the 30m naira (£68,000) prize money to host a travel show touring Nigeria’s “beauty spots” and “invest in charitable causes”. The Met said Kareem’s request to take part in the programme had been denied and an internal inquiry has now been launched. A spokesman said: “A PC attached to the Met’s transformation command requested permission to take part in a reality television entertainment show in Nigeria. Permission was not given. The Met is aware that the officer has since appeared on the show without authority. “The Met does not support the officer’s appearance nor does she represent the Met while appearing on the show.” The force added that officers who were found to have breached police standards of professional behaviour could face misconduct proceedings. In a statement posted on Twitter on Tuesday, a spokesperson for Kareem described her as “a proud black female police officer who prides herself in her work” and accused the Sun, which broke the story, of a “brazenly sensational and defamatory outburst”. It continued that she has “dedicated her youthful years protecting and serving with her many skills which include the ability to speak at least five international languages” and accused the newspaper of echoing a “repressive culture of shaming and characterising women for their sexual decisions and life choices”. The Sun had described Kareem “having steamy bedroom romps on TV”. Last year, Kareem appeared alongside the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, as she launched a recruitment drive aimed at women outside New Scotland Yard. Speaking to the Guardian, she said she had passed exams to become a detective and had planned to take sergeant exams in the spring of this year. “I didn’t want any career to be off-limits to me because I was a female, or a black female,” Kareem said. She added that as a special constable on her estate in west London, she had faced criticism from some within her community but wanted to be part of the Met’s transformation. “I figured it’s best to change things from the inside out. Instead of just shouting and complaining about things, it’s better to do something about it.”