Jesus H Christ in a duffle coat! Where do you even begin? Let’s start with your round 22 league leader, the Brisbane Lions. If you’d have said that with a straight face at the start of the year you’d have either been committed or seconded to work in the AFL’s PR Department. According to an exceptionally unscientific point of view, surely this wasn’t possible. But after one of the season’s greatest games – a one-point win against Geelong – here we are. “It was a tough game, gee it was a tough game,” said Brisbane coach Chris Fagan with the charm of a small-town mayor. “You know, from where I sit at ground level, the bodies were hittin’ hard today.” It is difficult not to get caught up in the great story that is the Brisbane Lions and the man who coaches them. In the wild, Fagan could be mistaken for the club’s property steward, and a man who is there for no other reason that he loves his club and the game. And he, along with more than 35,600 fans at the Gabba, had just seen one of the games of the year. With the Lions down by less than a kick and just a minute-and-a-half to play, the former Cat, Lincoln McCarthy, climbed on the shoulders of Jack Henry and took (in the lingua franca of old school football) a hanger. We are fast approaching the time of year when a moment can be every bit as important as a collective body of work and McCarthy made sure his counted, kicking the goal from 30-metres out to give the Lions a lead they’d not surrender. “I suppose the lesson in that is, Linc didn’t have a great game today, but he had a great moment,” said Fagan “And that is what finals are about, so it is a good lesson for everyone, you can be down, but you can find a way to influence and he was able to… and his composure to kick the ball through the middle was terrific.” Terrific was everywhere for Brisbane on Saturday, although it’s not quite adequate for Charlie Cameron. Looking at a stats sheet can sometimes have the effect of obliterating the player who makes the stats. The image of Cameron using intelligence and speed to get a metre clear, goal-side of his opponent and kick the ball through the goals without breaking stride is a sharp reminder that a calculator may not be the most useful tool in plotting the sheer joy of watching the Brisbane forward play. Last week, Fagan compared him to Cyril Rioli, which Cameron shrugged off with an “I’ve got a long way to go”. If he can hold his form through September, he’ll be a hell of a lot closer. Geelong now falls a game behind the Lions but, for small comfort to Cats coach Chris Scott, showed the sort of form not seen since the bye. Even in the best of times – and a one-point loss on the road after leading by 17-points in the last quarter isn’t the best of times – Scott can come across has having all the charisma of lint. In his disappointment of one moment in the last quarter, he took the LinkedIn sledgehammer that has battered the language of our game and said: “There are lots of mistakes in the game, through lots of different stakeholders.” Round 22 had hit its KPIs before Richmond hosted the West Coast Eagles at the MCG, but by four in the afternoon it had smashed them. If Saturday’s contest between first and second was great, Sunday’s one between third and fourth was even better. Reprising the role of the 2018 Grand Final Eagles, Richmond fell five goals behind early at the MCG and spent the rest of the game slowly working its way back into the contest. From quarter time through to half-way through the final quarter they kicked eight of the ten goals scored, with more than five times the shots on goal. Their place back in the top four was eventually secured with a Jack Riewoldt snap for goal in the 29th minute, which gave the Tigers a six-point lead they would not surrender. Richmond now has what teams want most leading into September – continuity. Nowhere is this perhaps more evident than their midfield lead by a Dustin Martin that is approaching the 2017 version. On Sunday he had 35 touches, which in and of itself doesn’t tell you as much as how damaging he is with the ball in hand. On Sunday his 818 metres gained was challenged only by Shane Edwards’ 715. Along with Dion Prestia, they are – to borrow an old sponsor’s slogan – the tiger in the tank and a sign that Richmond will once again be hard to top. Which brings us to the question, how do you top the round we just had? One way would be to have the Tigers host the Lions at the MCG to determine the final shape of the top four. Here’s hoping “Pops” Fagan was right when he said: “That’s a good taste of what’s to come.”