My grandmother is frail and in her 90s. She has three children, including my mother. My mother’s siblings have problems with addiction, and mental health issues. One of them lives with my grandmother. Neither of them works and they have been on benefits most of their adult lives. They have taken every spare penny that my grandmother has had since her husband left her. She owns her own home, and some years ago they persuaded her to take equity release to help them out financially. She has been paying off the interest from her pension ever since. My mother works hard on a low salary and has been paying my grandmother’s bills for years. My grandmother has been classed by social services as a vulnerable adult; my mother has power of attorney. Her siblings are no longer receiving money from my grandmother’s pension. My grandmother wants to split the house between her children when she dies. Some years ago, she asked me if she could leave my mother’s siblings’ shares of it to me, to then give the money to them – they would lose their benefits if they inherited. I am under no legal obligation to hand over the money. However, my mother is putting me under a lot of pressure not to give it to them as she says they have already had their share, have treated their mother very badly and will just spend it on drugs. But one of them is violent and manipulative, and I believe I would be in physical danger if I did not give them the money. I believe my grandmother cannot change her will as she has been assessed as lacking capacity to deal with financial matters. What should I do? What a complicated moral situation for you. I consulted Ian Bond, the chair of the Law Society’s wills and equity committee. You have a number of options when the time comes: you could keep your share of the financial proceeds from a sale of the house and withhold it from your mother’s siblings, but this goes against your grandmother’s wishes and may weigh on your conscience. The siblings might also contest this, which would result in considerable legal fees. And if, as you say, one of them is violent this could put you in danger. You could distribute their share to their children instead but that would also be against your grandmother’s wishes. It might also pit the children against their parents. The only answer is to go back to the beginning: do what your grandmother wanted, but perhaps with some caveats. You say your mother’s siblings have already had money from your grandmother – unless there is evidence to the contrary, it could therefore be argued that they have received some, or all, of their inheritance. You also said your mother has paid for her mother’s household bills – and continues to do so – presumably with her own funds. If you can, work out who has received what, who has paid what, and keep a record. You could ask the lawyer who keeps your grandmother’s will to lodge these calculations with the will. This way, when your grandmother dies, you can work out who is owed what by taking into account the sums people have received and distribute the monies accordingly. As to your assumption that your grandmother can’t change the will – that may not be an issue because you yourself can apply to make changes. If a solicitor has deemed her incapable of altering her will (or she may not want to for the reasons stated), you can apply to the court of protection to have it altered. In theory, anyone can do this (not only someone who has power of attorney). See gov.uk/apply-statutory-will/how-to-apply. However, you must inform anyone who might be affected and they can then contest it. If it proves straightforward, the court can approve your application to alter the will; if not, it is likely a full hearing will be held to help the judge decide what to do and on what terms. The judge rules on what he or she feels the best interests of the grandmother would be. Incidentally, your grandmother is correct in assuming some benefits may be affected by an inheritance, but it would be her children’s responsibility to declare relevant changes in their financial circumstances, not yours. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.