Tropical Storm Dorian is gathering strength and hurtling on a path to hit Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, while dumping torrential rain Tuesday on the Windward Islands of the eastern Caribbean. The storm is expected to hit Puerto Rico as a hurricane on Wednesday, just shy of two years since Hurricane Maria devastated the US territory in a catastrophe from which the island has yet to recover. The US national hurricane center issued tropical storm warnings for Martinique, St Lucia and St Vincent and the Grenadines. The center said the storm has maximum sustained winds near 50mph and is forecast to strengthen during the next 48 hours before whacking Puerto Rico. “Dorian is forecast to be a hurricane when it moves near Puerto Rico and eastern Hispaniola,” the center said. The storm was expected to dump three to eight inches of rain in the Windward islands, with isolated amounts of 10 inches. Much of Barbados shut down as Dorian approached and authorities urged residents to remain indoors amid reports of electrical outages and other minor incidents. Minister of home affairs Edmund Hinkson said Tuesday that Dorian “is said to be weakening and that is great news, but we are not out of danger yet”. In St Lucia, prime minister Allen Chastanet said “we are expecting the worst”. He had announced that everything on the island of nearly 179,000 people would shut down Monday evening ahead of the storm, but it remained below hurricane strength early Tuesday. In Puerto Rico, hundreds of people have been crowding into grocery stores and gas stations to prepare for Dorian, buying food, water and generators, among other things. Many are worried about power outages and heavy rains. Some 30,000 homes still have blue tarps as roofs and the electrical grid remains fragile and prone to outages even during brief rain showers, following the category four Hurricane Maria’s onslaught in 2017. Forecasters said the storm could pass near or south of Puerto Rico on Wednesday and approach the Dominican Republic on Wednesday night. On Monday, Puerto Rico governor Wanda Vazquez signed an executive order declaring a state of emergency and provided a list of all the new equipment that public agencies have bought since Hurricane Maria. “I want everyone to feel calm,” she said. “Agency directors have prepared for the last two years. The experience of Maria has been a great lesson for everyone.” She said public schools will close Tuesday afternoon and that at least one cruise ship canceled its trip to the island. She said those without a proper roof can stay in one of the 360 shelters around the island.