When Aldwyn Roberts, better known as Lord Kitchener, stepped off the deck of the SS Windrush in 1948, he sang a few lines of his new song, London is the Place for Me. It’s been more than 70 years since that fateful moment, when hundreds of Caribbean Commonwealth citizens made the UK their home, but Roberts’s spirit and that of the Windrush generation could still be felt at Notting Hill carnival, Europe’s largest street festival. Michael Oliver, who goes by the name of Bubbles, dressed up as Roberts to honour his parents’ generation. He was carrying a briefcase with the word “Windrush” plastered on one side, while another famous Lord Kitchener lyric, “the road made to walk on carnival day”, was on the other side. The 68-year-old said: “You can never get rid of the template. This group of people played a great part in this whole thing. They came here and brought all their culture and we have enhanced the culture.” Oliver was keen for the carnival not to be taken out of its historical context. “It’s a celebration, but it’s a deep thing. It’s more than just coming out on the street and getting drunk.” London’s first carnival was held in 1959 in response to a series of racist attacks and rioting that spread from Nottingham to west London, where white youths went out targeting black people. The carnival was put together to celebrate the culture of the local community because, according to a brochure handed out during the time: “A people’s art is the genesis of their freedom.” Krysta Billong, who travelled from Paris, said: “It’s still about celebrating black people and our freedom.” The 30-year-old has come to the carnival regularly over the last decade. She was dancing on the Red Bull Music x Mangrove float with her friend Jeannine Fischer, a dance instructor. “We’re celebrating blackness, we’re celebrating Caribbean and Africans, and we do it in the sun, with good music and with some jerk chicken of course,” Billong said. They were part of more than 1 million people to descend on west London this bank holiday weekend to celebrate the two-day festival known for its mas bands, where themed costumes meet with music, steel pans and booming sound systems. Levi Roots turned to the Jamaican word brawta to describe the atmosphere at carnival on Monday. “It means the cherry on the top of the sweetness. Yesterday was the starter and today builds on that,” he said. Roots, 61, still remembers his very first carnival in 1976; he had just come to England from Jamaica. “It was my first experience where it was a place that was about Caribbean people. It was great to see Caribbean people in their essence doing what we love, sharing food and music,” he said. Roots said he was not surprised that carnival had morphed into Europe’s biggest street party. “We’ve been waiting for everyone to wake up to what’s been done here. Carnival should be taken as seriously as the Chelsea flower show and Glastonbury.” Roots made a name for himself selling his Reggae Reggae Sauce, first on a stall at carnival, then at all major retailers across the country. Roots said he was honoured to be on one of 10 Notting Hill carnival ambassadors. “It’s absolutely amazing. I started here, where it was just me trying to raise a few quid for my kids to buy trainers and now I get to represent what carnival is about,” he said. Edmond and his wife, Gene, were dressed as sailors to not only celebrate carnival, but also the 50th anniversary of Edmond moving to London. “They’ve used carnival to remind people of Windrush, who came here and brought carnival here. We grew up with this, it’s part of our nature and to see it develop has been amazing.” He laughed when asked if he loved or hated the city: “I can’t say I hate it but I can’t say love … let’s go with like.” Nicole got up at 6.30am and travelled with her aunt Leynoe from Hertfordshire to celebrate her 28th birthday. “I’ve come since I was four and I love the vibe and the music. It’s putting us in the limelight and reminds people that not everything should be negative when it comes to black people.” Leynoe said carnival was like a drug. “We’ve been doing it for years and years and years and we love every minute of it. I’ve become addicted,” she said. Mercedes Benson, 27, who was dancing as part of the Mangrove mas band, admitted she only had two hours’ sleep, but said it was not going to hold her back. “It’s carnival weekend, it doesn’t stop. It’s electric, it’s buzzing and full of laughter and love.” Roots was keen to give credit to the festival organisers, who he said were under immense pressure to either move the carnival or stop it all together. But Edmond, who lives round the corner from the festivities, is not too worried. “They’ve been trying to move carnival for 40 odd years and they haven’t succeeded. The bands are local and so are we. We’ll come out to the street every time.”