After making the shortlist for the UK’s top nature-writing award three times, Robert Macfarlane has finally won the Wainwright Golden Beer book prize for what judges called his “best book”: a journey into the worlds beneath our feet, Underland. Macfarlane took the £5,000 prize on Thursday afternoon for what is his eighth book, exploring everything from the ways trees communicate through underground networks to the depths of Greenland’s glaciers. Judges called Underland “a passionate book which celebrates the natural world in a way that will enthuse and delight nature lovers and book lovers alike”, as well as a “unique plea that demonstrates the urgent need for us all to lessen the impact of human life on the natural world”. The author was shortlisted for the Wainwright last year for The Lost Words, his and Jackie Morris’s celebration of the words of the natural world which are disappearing from everyday life; as well as in 2016 for Landmarks and for The Old Ways in 2014. Macfarlane said that he was honoured to win a prize named after Alfred Wainwright, whose Guides to the Lakes “were among the first books to lead me up into the mountains”. “Robert has been shortlisted for the prize four times now, so, it feels right that this book, which we all considered to be his best, has finally won. He writes in a beautiful, lyrical style and this book is a claustrophobic thriller of sorts,” said chair of the judges Julia Bradbury. “He takes his subject and excavates it comprehensively.” The Wainwright celebrates the best books about nature, travel and the outdoors. This year’s shortlist also included Isabella Tree’s Wilding, about her experiment handing her farm at Knepp back to nature, and Luke Turner’s memoir about his sexuality and experiences in Epping Forest, Out of the Woods. Macfarlane praised his fellow contenders as “exceptional”. “This year’s prize speaks of the fear and hope that characterise our relations with the natural world in today’s crisis-contexts of climate breakdown, species loss and habitat degradation,” he said. “The work celebrated by the 2019 prize fuses politics, ethics, pragmatism and poetry -- and shows a centuries-old tradition of literature flexing and responding to contemporary pressures.”