It’s my sad duty to inform you that the city of Sydney as we know it is set to be destroyed and replaced by the totalitarian spectre of a chilling dystopia. At least, that’s if you believe the Daily Telegraph’s latest reporting on the lord mayor Clover Moore’s 2050 vision. Moore has outlined a concept for how the city could look that year as part of the City of Sydney council’s broader move to make the city more sustainable. Given the spectre of rising sea levels in a harbour city that has already declared a climate emergency, you would expect future planning to help mitigate the worst of these scenarios, if for no other reason than to help keep its spot on the most liveable city rankings. Instead, the Telegraph describes Moore’s future Sydney as a “wacky dystopian vision”. The City of Sydney Liberal councillor Christine Forster is quoted in the piece criticising Moore for “scaring children with alarmist rhetoric”, citing a feedback session that described children as being deeply anxious. Won’t someone think of the children? Not in a “handing them a better world” sense, of course, but at least coddle them until they inherit the worst of our sins. We really must figure out how to teach our children that their quality of life may be greatly reduced due to our inaction, but in a way that excites them. Perhaps Frozen 2 can be set in a steaming puddle or something. The Institute of Public Affairs, a thinktank partly funded by a mining giant and consistent in their unscientific denialism, are invited to pull up their diesel-fuelled clown car and spout off unchallenged, misleading statistics and claim the focus on climate change is “nonsense”. But, I’m afraid to say, the Telegraph is entirely correct. Clover Moore is building a dystopian world, which we shall call Cloverfield, in which Fahrenheit 451 is just the expected low temperature on a weather report for a spring day. What is this dystopian “radical climate agenda” that has frightened the Telegraph much more than the benign fact of Greenland rapidly melting away before our eyes? Well, unlike the atmosphere itself, the future Sydney can only be described as chilling. The Telegraph reports the vision for Sydney includes cars “banished underground” in a dramatic depiction of what some would call a tunnel. Renewables will power the city and single-use plastics will be banned. Will this ban be under pain of death? We can only assume yes. The poor, hapless residents will also be subjected to air conditioned “public urban cool rooms”, according to the report. This is pure Orwell. Who can forget the frightening moment in 1984 when poor Winston Smith is thrown into Room 101 only to be confronted by what he fears most: ducted air conditioning. Trains and light rail would be powered by renewable energy, urban farms would feed the city. On its face, this sounds like a great thing. Climate change is already driving global hunger and a major, growing city investing in its food security seems to have no downside. But you have to understand dystopian double speak. Urban farms? That’s clearly a thinly veiled guise for eating people. Moore may be an independent but this is a platform for the Soylent Greens. This is not a future we want. Sure, the government’s own modelling predicts higher temperatures and more extreme weather events, yet this is no reason to be frightened or even plan for this scenario. Rather, we should simply keep stumm and politely melt into the concrete. • James Colley is a comedian and writer for Gruen, Tomorrow Tonight and The Weekly. He’s the author of Tries, Lies and Meat Pies with Sam Thaiday and Too Right as Peter Chudd