People in Indian-administered Kashmir who had faced spending the Eid religious holiday under curfew, with food shortages in locked-down urban areas, were on Saturday reportedly busy buying food after restrictions were eased. Landlines, mobile phones and the internet all remained blocked, however, preventing them from calling relatives or friends. The easing of the curfew followed major protests on Friday that reportedly saw at least 10,000 people take to the streets of Srinagar to demonstrate against Delhi’s withdrawal of special rights for India’s only Muslim-majority state. Police reportedly responded with teargas and rubber pellets to disperse the protest – the largest to take place since the state was placed under an unprecedented communications blackout last week. An Indian ministry of home affairs official called the reports “completely fabricated and incorrect”, adding: “There have been a few stray protests in Srinagar/Baramulla and none involved more than 20 people.” The BBC released a video appearing to show huge crowds marching through the streets of Srinagar, carrying signs that read “We want our freedom” and chanting “Go back, go, India, go”. The footage shows people scattering and running for cover as police fired teargas. The communication blackout has resulted in little concrete information as to what is happening in Kashmir. Fears have been expressed about food shortages in the state. Syed Asim Ali, who returned to Delhi from Srinagar on Thursday, said his family was low on food and had been eating dried vegetables stored as emergency supplies. “There is going to be a terrible food shortage in a few days,” he said. “We managed to buy dairy supplies [from shop keepers who had closed their doors], but they were saying all the supplies from Jammu had been blocked.” Baseer Khan, the senior administrative official of Kashmir Valley, said essentials such as food, grains and meat would be delivered to different parts of the region by Sunday. There are also fears about access to healthcare. One doctor at a hospital emergency department in Srinagar said patient numbers had drastically reduced last week. “On an average day we see over 1,000 patients, but now less than 100 manage to reach here,” the doctor told Agence France-Presse. Ambulance services weren’t working and people trying to drive to hospital were reportedly turned away at checkpoints. Ali got to a pharmacy to pick up medicine for his child, he said, but supplies were worryingly low. India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, said the removal of Kashmir’s special status would bring prosperity and free the state of terrorism. But the decision is widely opposed in Kashmir, where even prominent pro-India politicians have been detained. The move strips Kashmir of the autonomy it was granted in exchange for joining the Indian union after independence in 1947. It will lose its constitution and flag. Rules that prevent outsiders from buying land are also being scrapped, prompting fears that the territory’s demography and way of life will be altered. Delhi’s announcement has also escalated tensions with Pakistan and been condemned by China and Iran. According to the semi-official Fars News Agency, Ayatollah Mohammad Ali Movahedi Kermani, an adviser to Iran’s supreme leader told worshippers that India’s actions were “an ugly move”, Associated Press reported. In Pakistan, many are demanding a tough response from prime minister Imran Khan. Thousands of supporters of Jamaat-e-Islami, an Islamist party, marched through Islamabad on Friday condemning Delhi’s action. In one of the city’s biggest shopping centres, visitors also called for action. “Khan should come up with an effective policy to show the world what India is doing,” said Anam Rana, a student at Quaid-e-Azam university. “We should talk of peace with India but we can’t clap with one hand,” said Awais Siddiqui, a telecoms engineer. Khan suggested Delhi might carry out ethnic cleansing. He has expelled the Indian high commissioner and halted trade, while Pakistan’s army chief has said forces would take any action to “stand by” Kashmiris. “They can’t be silent because if they are it will be seen as a defeat. For many years they have used Kashmir as a symbol of national unity,” said Khalid Shah, an associate fellow at the Observer Research Foundation. Khan has vowed to go to the United Nations and lobby heads of states, although the response so far has been muted. “Ultimately, Pakistan may be frustrated on the world stage, which enhances the likelihood that it may try to resort to sub-conventional uses of force – pushing back at India by encouraging its militant assets,” said Michael Kugelman, a South Asia expert at the Wilson Center in Washington. “The next time there is an attack in Kashmir, India will blame Pakistan, regardless of the facts,” he added: “And then the two sides will find themselves in an immediate crisis that could well escalate into a conflict.” In Kashmir, hundreds of migrant workers have fled, fearing unrest, while thousands of villagers living along the heavily militarised “line of control” dividing Kashmir between India and Pakistan have also left their homes.