On a discreet side street in London’s Mayfair, midway between the Saudi Arabian embassy and the Dorchester hotel, stands a building described by its owners as one of the “most exclusive office locations in the world” in “an area renowned for character, prestige and opulence”. On the fourth floor of the block is the office occupied by more than a dozen different companies that form Sir Lynton Crosby’s CT Group empire, dealing with everything from traditional lobbying to data science, reputation management for wealthy clients, and political campaigning. This is the hub of a group of companies stretching from Sydney, Canberra and Auckland to Washington DC and Milan with other outposts on the way. “Whether winning elections for prime ministers, or helping the world’s leading businesses stay ahead, CTF Partners offers clients an unparalleled range of experience and an unrivalled record of success,” states the website for the main UK-based political consultancy arm, which was co-founded by Mark Fullbrook – who took leave to run Boris Johnson’s successful campaign to be Conservative leader. Yet some current and former staff members have spoken about what they described as incidents of misogynistic bullying at the company in recent years, which they say is staffed by a handful of senior executives and a large number of highly ideological rightwing twentysomethings who help run campaigns around the world. One person who worked in the London office described how the company sometimes hired the children of Conservative donors and the offspring of prominent media executives at rightwing news outlets in order to aid their campaigns: “No experience, no knowledge, no interest, no ability. It’s like a posh kindergarten with no one in charge. It would make a good sitcom but in real life it’s scary.” CT Group strongly denied the claim and said they hired entirely on merit. In recent years a key presence in the office has been two young digital strategists from New Zealand called Sean Topham and Ben Guerin, who were employed on retainers of over £10,000 a month to run digital campaigns on behalf of CTF in 2017. The duo, who acted as subcontractors through their own Topham Guerin digital consultancy, have since gone on to play a key role in the unexpected election victory of the rightwing Liberal party in this year’s Australian general election. Topham gained a reputation for misogyny within the company, according to three former staff members, who said at one point he celebrated the fact a woman had been forced out of the office as a “confirmed kill”, a military term supposedly referencing a person shot by a sniper. He was also accused of celebrating the departure of a number of women from CTF’s Sydney office. Topham, through his lawyer, denied any such incidents took place. CT Group said suggestions that their office was in any way tolerant of bullying were “deeply offensive, self evidently extremely defamatory, and wholly untrue”. They said they bring in an independent HR consultant to conduct an annual independent staff survey and that the outside staff have “rarely seen such high scores in terms of levels of staff satisfaction” in any company. “Were any incidents of sexist or bullying behaviour committed by our clients’ staff to take place, they would be dealt with firmly and swiftly,” said the lawyers, who said it was the knowledge and belief of office boss Sam Lyon that “no conduct of this kind has taken place, and he would not tolerate an atmosphere that permitted it”. When presented with descriptions of the incident involving Topham that took place in 2018, which had been reported to managers, Crosby’s lawyers said that the Guardian had been misled by “disgruntled individuals” providing “false and highly defamatory information”, without denying that complaints had been made. Blue-chip clients regularly turn to CTF to carry out their work on difficult projects. Airbus confirmed they had employed the company to run lobbying campaigns in 2017 and 2018 after the company’s Super Puma helicopter was grounded over safety concerns following a number of fatal crashes while carrying workers to North Sea oil rigs. This involved producing an unbranded Facebook page and accompanying “news” website named Helicopter Newswire to spread positive news about the helicopter, at a time when trade unions were campaigning for tighter safety regulations. Airbus insisted their work was limited to official material and did not indulge in disinformation. In another example of the company’s operations, CTF employees helped run a grassroots online campaign against the cycle superhighway along London’s embankment, despite this being one of Boris Johnson’s flagship policies as mayor of the capital. Multiple sources said the campaigns – under the banners of Londoners for Transport and Unblock the Embankment – were being funded by property development business Canary Wharf Group, which believed the cycle superhighway was slowing drivers trying to reach its financial services offices in London’s Docklands. At the same time, to provide an alternative solution, CTF staff also oversaw an apparently pro-cycling astroturfed campaign on Facebook named Square Mile Cycling. This urged politicians to divert cyclists displaced by ripping up the Embankment route through the City of London’s financial district. This would potentially slow down traffic in the Square Mile – the main rival of Canary Wharf Group. Canary Wharf Group said that “major roads in central London are overstretched beyond their capacity” and they are committed to improving safe cycling infrastructure. They declined to comment on whether they employed Crosby’s company to run the two apparently artificially warring Facebook campaigns.