In anticipation of its new season, Saturday Night Live just announced a return date of 28 September, while also unveiling the first round of guest hosts and musical performers including Woody Harrelson, Billie Ellish, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Taylor Swift, Kristen Stewart and Eddie Murphy. Exciting a line-up as that is, viewer anticipation is likely tempered due to the quality of the show’s previous season, which was largely underwhelming and contained a number of true low points. To be sure, season 44 also had its share of highs, but it’s undeniable that SNL has struggled in recent years. Still, that’s no reason to write off season 45 just yet; the show can turn things around by following a couple of important leads from last year and making a few crucial changes. As the 2020 primaries continue to ramp up, Saturday Night Live has its work cut out, especially when it comes to its cold opens. With only a couple of exceptions, these were routinely the worst part of last season, as the writers seemed content to merely reference whatever political talking point was making the rounds that week without offering any insight or even much in the way of original jokes. This laziness extended to stories with ready-made setups, such as Brett Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearings or Michael Cohen’s testimony to Congress, all of which coasted on mediocre celebrity impersonations that fizzled from memory as soon as “Live from New York...” was uttered. Meanwhile, slower news weeks saw scattered Fox News or Meet the Press segments rush through a handful of topics with zero focus. Tied as they are to the current moment, cold opens rarely age well, but even taking that into account, we expect better than the likes of the cringe-worthy Deal or No Deal/hamburders sketch. If SNL hopes to remain culturally relevant for the new election cycle, they really need to step up their political comedy in general. Key to that is the need to … There is a case to be made that Alec Baldwin is one of our greatest living comic actors, his long history with Saturday Night Live being a big part of the argument. That said, his portrayal of Donald Trump these past two seasons has been nothing short of embarrassing, his initially brutal impression during the 2016 primaries morphing into the most insufferable recurring character on the show. Worse still, it’s an almost entirely toothless portrait, in spite of Baldwin and the writers’ clear disdain for the President. As was the case with Will Ferrell’s interpretation of George W Bush, Baldwin makes Trump into such a harmless bozo as to makes him almost lovable – or at least, he might be lovable if Baldwin wasn’t mugging the entire time. At this point it’s clear no parody can match Trump (or for that matter, our political landscape as a whole). Nevertheless, this particular one has run its course, something Baldwin himself seems aware of. He’s said he won’t be returning to the role for this season, and though that has yet to be confirmed, let’s hope it’s true. Speaking of someone overstaying their welcome, let’s also hope season 45 involves … This is probably something we don’t have to worry about, given it’s unlikely Davidson will be in the public eye as much now that his whirlwind/broken engagement to Ariana Grande is well behind us. But while it’s entirely reasonable to expect the comedian to use his personal life as fodder for his own material – including regular turns on Weekend Update – the show relied on it far too much during the first half of last season, to the point where it often felt like we were watching The Pete Davidson Show, featuring the Cast of SNL and Special Guests. Davidson is a divisive screen presence to begin with, and while I’m not suggesting he necessarily be used sparingly, his personal life should be, especially since all the attention resulted in a troubling public cry for help and subsequent on-set wellness check by police. For the guy’s own wellbeing and peace of mind, let’s let him do his job and be a regular cast member. On the topic of public controversies involving Pete Davidson, one thing the show absolutely must do is … The most infuriating moment of last season and one of the all-time great embarrassments in its history – was the on-air apology issued by Davidson, on behalf of SNL, to Republican Congressman Dan Crenshaw over a quick joke about his appearance during a prior Weekend Update segment. You can argue that the joke itself was in poor taste, but if SNL is going to start handing out apologies to people on that front, there are others far more deserving of one than the representative from Texas. Even worse than the apology was the way the show brought out Crenshaw and let him get in a few comeback jabs of his own, before allotting him time to spout a dopey – and insincere – appeal towards mutual respect in the face of political differences. Satire requires the satirist to have a backbone, and while SNL’s days as a counterculture staple are far behind it, the show loses all credibility by kowtowing to conservative’s faux-outrage and platforming the likes of Crenshaw. Moving on to less controversial matters, one thing to show needs to do is… Adam Driver’s insane Career Day sketch from last season’s premiere was one of the most hilarious and endlessly rewatchable in years. Along with other standouts like the Weezer sketch and The War in Words, it served to remind us that Saturday Night Live is at its best not when it’s trying to be politically or culturally relevant, but when it goes all in on idiosyncrasy and absurdism. This works especially well with hosts known for their serious and dramatic personae, such as Adam Driver, Claire Foy and Liev Schreiber, all of whom turned top-notch work last season by going weird. One final thing the show could do to turn things around next year is… So, yeah, there’s a less-than-zero chance of this happening, given that Update co-anchors Colin Jost and Michael Che are also the head writers. But Weekend Update is supposed to be the centerpiece of Saturday Night Live, something we look forward to every week. For that to work, we need a host or hosts with personality and chemistry. Close as they appear to be behind the scenes, Jost and Che have neither, coming off at most as smug and bored respectively, and merely tolerable of one another. This state of affairs might be more tolerable to us if the material they give themselves was stronger, but alas, that’s not the case. Since Jost and Che are not going to up and relinquish their roles as Update hosts, they could at least need to conduct themselves outside of the show with a bit more dignity. It’s hard to have much faith about the direction of Saturday Night Live when its head writers pitch a fit over legitimate criticism. With all of this said, we know that the historical map of Saturday Night Live is filled with peaks and valleys, which is enough to give us hope that season 45 rises to the occasion.