Queer Eye’s Karamo Brown has always been an outspoken advocate of “meeting in the middle” – believing that many of America’s problems could be solved if Republicans and Democrats worked together more. Last year, he met with Karen Pence and her chief of staff to discuss federal spending on arts programs. And he’s previously said that all American citizens need to “support Trump”. It appears this kumbaya philosophy has finally landed Brown, one fifth of the Netflix makeover show, in serious trouble with fans and critics. The TV star ignited a firestorm of criticism after calling his Dancing with the Stars cast-mate Sean Spicer a “good guy”. “He’s a really good guy, really sweet guy,” Brown said of Spicer, a former White House press secretary in the Trump administration, during an interview with Access. Fans were quick to point out the harm Spicer had inflicted on the LGBTQ community and scores of other minorities. It was also pointed out that the Trump administration has worked to chip away at trans rights – by, for example, supporting so-called “bathroom bills” and banning trans military members – under Spicer’s tenure. But Brown was not open to the criticism. He deleted his entire Twitter feed overnight after responding to a handful of critics in since-deleted tweets. His Queer Eye cast-mate Bobby Berk expressed his sympathy and support for Karamo on Twitter this morning before quickly deleting the tweets. A screenshot of the tweets shows the  designer saying: “I’m very saddened by what my castmate @Karamo is having to deal with … When backed in a corner about voicing his opinions about @SeanSpicer Karamo’s media training kicked in.” Berk also attacked ABC for politicizing Dancing with the Stars and giving Spicer a platform. “It’s called Dancing with the STARS and that fact that you’re calling him a star is disgusting.” The fight is part of a larger issue. Spicer has repeatedly been embraced by segments of the entertainment industry and academia, from appearing at the Emmys to taking a position at Harvard. Prominent queer voices online have been quick to note that this is not Brown’s first time coming out in questionable defense of Republican figures. During an appearance on the podcast Keep It!, Brown talked at length about wanting to see Donald Trump and his administration do well. “I did not vote for President Trump but I do need him to succeed at this point,” he said. “We need to listen and love the people that hate us.” Brown faced pushback from the host, Ira Madison III, a queer black man, and listeners after the podcast. The discord provided a brief glimpse at the pressure black entertainment figures face to be a voice for the entire black community and never make missteps. This is true for almost all popular figures of marginalized identities: a silent pressure to be a “model minority” – to an audience of millions. The pushback Karamo is facing shows a “meet in the middle point” approach simply does not cut it in 2019, even in the space of a seemingly innocuous show like Dancing with the Stars. Berk was right to critique ABC for politicizing the show and blindsiding Brown, but in our current state of affairs, everything is political and resistance is vital at all times. There’s your free media training. 