On stage there is a digital clock, and as the scarlet seconds tick away, the drama – Sophocles’s Oedipus, in a brilliant modern version written and directed by Robert Icke, with the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam – happens in real time. This show is one of the unmissable highlights of Edinburgh’s international festival. Hildegarde Bechtler’s sleek set returns us to the world of Ivo van Hove’s astounding Roman Tragedies (Icke, just finishing as an associate director at the Almeida in London, is often described as Van Hove’s English protege, although he is victoriously his own man, his 2015 Oresteia another theatrical winner). The family likeness between these Dutch productions is unmistakable: Oedipus’s office space recalls Julius Caesar’s in Roman Tragedies. It’s a power hub of sleek lines, swivel chairs and screens that never sleep. Icke’s adaptation begins with footage of Oedipus as a politician, on the eve of a presidential election: “We are sick,” he tells camera and crowd, “the state body is sick.” Oedipus is played with magnetic naturalism by Hans Kesting (also Mark Antony in Van Hove’s production). He is relaxed yet wired and, with Creon, a suitably stressed Aus Greidanus Jr, as spin doctor, expected to know the way forward for his country. But before long, the man will cease to know who he is. Knowledge is key as we touch on a familiar question: how much should we know of our politicians’ private lives? The thrilling power of this show is in hearing classical dialogue in a contemporary context. We listen to what Oedipus and his family are feeling. Emotion is pared to the bone, in keeping with the bare lines of the set. There is a visceral inescapability to the talk. And it’s fascinating watching theatre in another language – you miss the nuances and become hyper-aware of the body language. Dutch, with its vicious Rs, sounds on a dangerous roll (there are subtitles, obviously). One or two shaming English phrases sing out, such as “new age bullshit”. The cast is first-rate – flawless. As Jocaste, Marieke Heebink is devastating – and devastated – as she spills the details of her past to Oedipus. Frieda Pittoors as Merope, the woman who passes for Oedipus’s mother, is excellent too: a brittle old lady, comically marooned, never parted from her handbag. Tiresias (Hugo Koolschijn) has a weariness in his blindness, and the moment in which he describes the enormous sky and the tininess of human beings is beautifully achieved. The scenes at the family election night dinner are marvellous. You sense the hubris of premature celebration – the guzzling of champagne, the boasting with mouths full – and there is a wonderful moment in which the homosexuality of one of Oedipus’s sons is revealed. In Icke’s hands, Oedipus becomes a play about love. But it’s also about accepting your fate. There is an extraordinarily powerful moment in which Oedipus stands – idly bouncing a tennis ball – and says: “You start in the dark. You breathe your way out.” Roots is a show for grown-up children. Playfully grim – not Grimm – folk tales have been adapted by Suzanne Andrade and Paul Barritt from the Aarne index in the British Library. 1927 Theatre Company first wowed the Edinburgh fringe in 2007 with Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea and has since become internationally known for hybrid productions in which acting, animated film and live music make singular theatre. The tales come with no plodding morals attached. If there is a cautionary theme, it’s that greed gets you nowhere, literally, in the case of a black-and-white cat. The cat’s perkily predatory tale is meticulously told. Its limbs are animations, its face belongs to Andrade – piquant and white, peeking through a hole in the screen, like a trapped meringue. The cat eats porridge, a postman and all the bodies in a graveyard before encountering the devil and God and gobbling them up too. What is left when everything has been consumed? This sophisticated anthology also includes a luckless man, an unremarkable woman and a wrong-headed king; I marvelled at the stagecraft in bringing them all to life (I’d not seen 1927’s work before). In particular I relished the story of a glamorous ant with velvet antennae. What a shame her marriage, after a rainy honeymoon in Orkney, should end – spoiler alert – with the drowning of her mouse spouse in a pot of ragout. The tale of three fish is stunning too, involving two brutal parents and a doomed child, afloat on a decorative sea of grey-and-white fish that turn gold when caught. There is magic in the contrasts between the stillness of the drawings, the moving animation and living flesh. And Lillian Henley’s playful score caters for instruments that include a donkey’s jaw, a nose flute and a dulcimer. Like finding a Gideons bible in a hotel room, you discover a green hardback on your seat at Tim Crouch’s Total Immediate Collective Imminent Terrestrial Salvation for the National Theatre of Scotland, an unusual page-turner of a production. The page (intriguing illustration by Rachana Jadhav) and stage mirror one another. Each time an actor says: “OK”, we turn over a new leaf. But the show is not about improving initiatives: it centres on a cult leader – played by Crouch – who believes the end of the world is nigh. We are encouraged to question his absolutist view. The show could be seen as a resistance to Cassandra-like thinking in general (it does not address, let alone deny, the climate crisis). Audience members are invited to share the role of Sol, the cult leader’s frightened daughter (arrestingly played by Shyvonne Ahmmad). They read aloud some of her lines from the green book (nice work from the audience at the Wednesday matinee), and address themselves to another survivor, Sol’s mother Anna (played with sympathetic immediacy by Susan Vidler). The show makes us consider whether our words/thoughts are our own. And the final surprise of this tense, original and provocative piece is that it shows there can sometimes be wisdom in drawing a blank. Star ratings (out of five)Oedipus ★★★★★Roots ★★★★Total Immediate Collective Imminent Terrestrial Salvation ★★★ • Roots is at the Church Hill theatre, Edinburgh, until 25 August • Total Immediate Collective Imminent Terrestrial Salvation is at the Studio, Edinburgh, until 25 August, then at the Jerwood Theatre Upstairs, Royal Court, London, 3-21 September