At once a love letter and a massive screw-you to theatre, this punk-rock manifesto is not a play for the faint of heart. A brilliantly confrontational shock of a show, Tricky Second Album makes you question what art is really worth. It’s angry, messy and painful. You might want to have a drink first. Best friends Nora Alexander, Dora Lynn and Kat Cory are obsessed with the electronic band KLF’s infamous stunt of burning a million pounds. When asked why they did it, the KLF couldn’t say. Over the course of an audaciously anarchic hour, In Bed With My Brother use the event as a springboard for a ferocious takedown of our capitalist consumer culture where the elite, with money to burn, set the rules of engagement. Though the theatre-makers’ anger ricochets deeper into our society, their specific target is the Edinburgh fringe, of which their show is a part, and its exorbitant cost for performers. With their intention clearly laid out to break all the rules of theatre, they smartly twist conventions, diving into tropes while burning them at the edges. There is a terrifying, electric sense that anything could happen next, the distinctively dangerous mix of alcohol, wires and unpredictable rapid movement making it a stage manager’s nightmare. That one show was cancelled due to health and safety concerns only adds to the excitement. Underneath the we-don’t-care attitude is a keen sense of desperation. One of the performers is eight months pregnant, and with haunting tableaux they use her protruding naked belly to ground the show’s anger. There is something concretely shocking about the imminent arrival into a reliance on such an unfair, uncaring industry. As flyerers stand outside in the rain losing thousands of pounds through the month, Tricky Second Album sometimes feels a living eulogy to the fringe. Exhilarating, exhausting, messy and brave, the show makes the expense of this hideous, brilliant festival tangible. It’s all pointless. It’s all vital. I leave the theatre both wanting to burn it all down and desperate for it to stage this again – so everyone can watch the flames. At Pleasance Dome, Edinburgh, until 18 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.