A mobile phone with a video shot by Kam McLeod and Bryer Schmegelsky could hold the key to why they embarked on a killing spree in Canada. The two teenagers suspected of killing Australian tourist Lucas Fowler, his US girlfriend Chynna Deese, and Canadian botanist Leonard Dyck, left a “last will and testament” video message, according to the Toronto Star. Kam McLeod, 19, and Bryer Schmegelsky, 18, apparently recorded the video message on their mobile phones before taking their own lives in remote bushland in northern Manitoba. About 30 seconds of the video was shared with family members of the former fugitives. McLeod and Schmegelsky said goodbye to their families in the video and described their wishes for their remains, according to a family member interviewed by the Star. The video could be the key to explaining why the two teenagers, who weeks before were working at Walmart, became the focus of one of Canada’s biggest manhunts. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) were reportedly in possession of the full video recording. McLeod and Schmegelsky, from Vancouver Island, were found dead in bushland near Gillam, in the remote northern province of Manitoba, on 7 August. The RCMP announced on 12 August that autopsies pointed to the teenagers taking their own lives. Two guns were found with the bodies and were undergoing forensic analysis to determine if they were the weapons used to shoot Fowler, 23, from Sydney, and Deese, 24, from North Carolina on the side of a British Columbia highway on 15 July. The couple’s Chevrolet van had broken down, leaving them stranded in an area with minimal mobile reception. McLeod and Schmegelsky were also suspected of killing 64-year-old university botany lecturer Leonard Dyck four days later on another highway in British Colombia. The teenagers drove Dyck’s Toyota RAV4 3,000km east to Gillam, sparking a massive manhunt that eventually led to the discovery of their bodies. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found atwww.befrienders.org.