If I had to think of a moment in my life where racist language was used against me, nothing comes to mind. But if I had to think of a moment in my life where I was exoticised, where notions of cultural idealism were projected on to me, where false assumptions were made about me – I have an abundance of examples. “That’s an interesting name.” “Oh cool! I’ve always wanted to climb Everest.” “That’s why you have such tanned skin.” “They’re Buddhist there aren’t they? If I had to choose a religion, I would definitely be Buddhist.” I have lots of pride and love for the part of myself, my family and my heritage that is Nepalese. Yet I often feel uncomfortable acknowledging that I am a person of colour. I have experienced next to no racism, and to give myself a label which implies that I have seems almost superficial, and diminishing to the very real struggles of others. It’s not difficult to pinpoint reasons for this. The exotification of eastern cultures and spirituality has a long tradition in the west, and south-east Asian nations such as Nepal are held in particularly high regard in the Australian imagination. It’s because of this exotification that my own experiences of race have been positive compared with those who have different ethnic backgrounds. Lebanese-Australian student Layla Mkhayber speaks with educated nuance on why mixed race and second-generation Australians experience widely different levels of discrimination and vilification based on their specific ethnicity. “There’s definitely a bit of a hierarchy when it comes to racism in Australia,” she says. “And it’s basically, like, ‘Who’s more palatable to this idea of white Australia that has been created?’ “I would say that the racism is different. It’s worse for people who have darker coloured skin, who are visibly religious.” For her, intersectionality is an incredibly important aspect of the conversation around racism. “Islamophobia and racism are gendered. And they first and foremost affect women … If I go further, they’re not just gendered but affect the most marginalised and vulnerable people in communities.” Her reflections are insightful and she speaks with a wisdom that comes from personal experience. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On her first day of university, Layla was walking through Sydney’s Victoria Park when a woman sitting alone began yelling at her without provocation. Many insults were thrown at her but the one that stood out was “terrorist”. It is the nature of Australia’s current racial climate that obvious religious clothing subjects Layla, who chooses to wear hijab, to this particular type of religious vilification. Experiencing such horrific racism in your country of birth is an enormously difficult thing to come to terms with, and can contribute to a crisis of identity and belonging. Layla was born in Australia but both of her parents are from Lebanon. Like so many second-generation migrants, her identity is far more complex than her ethnicity. “Do I identify as Australian, Australian with a Lebanese background, Lebanese-Australian, Arab-Australian?” she says. These are the types of questions that mixed-race and second-generation migrants all confront at some point in their lives. “I definitely strongly identify with being Lebanese, being Arab, and I think it’s because I’m so othered here, I’ve come to latch on to the part of my identity that is othered,” says Layla. “I’ve kind of just accepted that, despite the fact that I was born and raised in Australia, Australia will probably never accept me.” For Dahyo Lloyd, a Chinese-Australian student at the Conservatorium of Music, different questions of identity and racism stand out. He says that he hasn’t experienced racism at any harmful level, yet he provides valuable insight into the idea of exotification. “People who have noticed that I’m half-Chinese, or who have noticed my race and made a thing out of it, have sort of been trying to show to themselves, or to show to me, how culturally sensitive they are … I had someone come up to me at a party and begin talking about how they’ve lived in China and all these Chinese foods and stuff. They brought it up and I’m like ‘Dude, I’ve only been to China a few times.’” When I began high school I was still growing into my skin, and rarely thought about my Nepalese identity. I had an Australian accent, my skin was light enough to blend in and I felt and acted Australian; that was all that mattered. In my later high school years a shift occurred and I came to both embrace and romanticise my Nepalese heritage. I wanted to understand the language and the culture and my relationship to it so badly that I willed it into reality through inauthentic means. I started carrying around a Nepalese shoulder bag and wearing the handmade necklaces and bracelets, which my father brought home from Kathmandu, to school. I had this impression that pretending to be more ethnic and cultural than I felt might just make me so. It was in my final year of school that I became conscious of the fascination that some people in my community had with eastern spirituality and culture, and how it influenced their behaviour around and perception of me. The Blue Mountains is home to a circle of insular counter-cultures that reject a lot of mainstream western ideas in favour of eastern ones, and there is no doubt that the romanticisation of eastern culture that exists there greatly influenced my own formation of identity. I loved having claim to a culture that displayed prayer flags on the veranda, and to a country known for the highest, most beautiful mountains in the world. It wasn’t until I left the Blue Mountains for university in Sydney that I began to realise how inauthentic and superficial this exotification was. While I’ve tried to distance myself from this mindset, I haven’t forgotten it, and it is still part of the reason I feel a pull towards Nepal and Nepalese culture today. It’s also part of the reason why I haven’t experienced racism in the same way that other mixed-race and second-generation migrants do. And for that – despite the deep frustration which projected exotification can cause – I am grateful. • Ranuka Tandan is a media and communications student at the University of Sydney