Soulful laments for the passing of a golden age of broadcasting freedom, for a time when news editors and documentary-makers were kings, are fairly standard at the Edinburgh television festival. Back then, the newsrooms were full of smoke and dynamism. Decisions were made on the hoof, with no recourse to compliance rules nor balance guidelines. So Dorothy Byrne’s startling MacTaggart lecture last week was a true tonic. This accomplished messenger from the past, a woman who, unusually, still has a top job in television, reminded us it was really not such fun in those frontier days. Yet she was very funny about it. Self-styled as the first “wee old lady” at the MacTaggart lectern, Byrne, who is actually only 66 and runs Channel 4’s news and current affairs programming, bewitched her audience with memories of the male-dominated agendas that once held sway and of working atmospheres she has previously likened to a men’s lavatory. While Byrne made other key points about today’s climate of political division and about handling the distrust of “mass media”, her best zingers were rooted in TV history and came out with all the pent-up force of an oil gusher. After all, Byrne, who started her 40-year career at Granada in Manchester, has had to watch a succession of men delivering the annual MacTaggart lecture, with a few exceptions. Most of these men were illustrious enough, but others not so much, and one, according to Byrne, was downright sordid, although he remains as yet unnamed. Even her audience came under fire: “Tonight, there’ll be no shortage of sexist bastards, possibly among you in the audience.” The real power behind Byrne’s amusing and score-settling speech was its account of how hard it has always been to tell important stories. At Granada, an early suggestion that World in Action tackle the issue of marital rape was initially dismissed as the stuff of morning TV chitchat, recalled this wannabe “methuselah” of telly. Byrne would have to concede that the Irish writer Edna O’Brien, at the grand age of 88, is much closer than her to methuselah status. But O’Brien also knows how it feels to have stories suppressed. Celebrated in New Review, O’Brien is publishing a 19th novel, Girl. It is set in Nigeria and tackles a story of the abuse and terrorising of young women that Channel 4 has also chronicled. But in 1960, O’Brien’s beloved coming-of-age novel, her gentle and sensitive tale The Country Girls was banned in Ireland, as was Girl With Green Eyes in 1962, and two years later again, Girls in Their Married Bliss. These fictional stories of sexual yearning, misadventure and female defiance were regarded as beyond the pale in Catholic Ireland. What is more, in O’Brien’s tiny hometown in County Clare, her mother was warned that if her errant daughter ever returned she would be “kicked naked around the town”. This weekend, O’Brien said she is not yet “throwing in the towel” and still regards herself as capable of real anger, “but I am not old and bitter”. Her Scottish junior, Dorothy Byrne, another indomitable phenomenon, although a whippersnapper in comparison, is also promising more. In Edinburgh, she urged her fellow news and documentary programme-makers, both men and the women, to stand up together to tell braver stories. Although, Byrne wryly admitted, it is harder to find women among her senior peers: “What happened to them? Were they all murdered?” History, we often hear, gets to be told by the victors. Surely by now these two arch-survivors can be counted as winners? If so, perhaps the rest of us have less to fear. • Vanessa Thorpe is the Observer’s arts and media correspondent