Jonathan Woodgate said Middlesbrough remain “a work in progress” despite his first win as head coach against Wigan. Britt Assombalonga’s 23rd-minute header was enough to seal Woodgate’s first three points since succeeding Tony Pulis in the summer. But the Middlesbrough manager, knowing his team were far from convincing, does not want anyone to get carried away and has warned that there will be peaks and troughs throughout his first season in charge. “It feels great but the secret is, even when you lose, you don’t get too low and when you win don’t get too high, so stay level-headed,” said Woodgate. “I have said numerous times now, this is a work in progress and I have said to the fans, it is going to be a rocky road.” Sheffield Wednesday moved top of the Sky Bet Championship after a 1-0 victory over Luton. Kadeem Harris scored the only goal in the 54th minute as Wednesday overtook Leeds and there was further pain for Luton as Martin Cranie was carried off on a stretcher in the second half. Derby could also have gone above Marcelo Bielsa’s side with a victory but they lost 2-1 at home to Bristol City as their new manager Phillip Cocu’s stuttering start to the season continued. The former Rams forward Andreas Weimann opened the scoring in the 16th minute and Josh Brownhill added the second on the stroke of half-time to lift the Robins to fourth as Jack Marriott’s 85th-minute goal came too late for Derby. Birmingham secured their first home win over Barnsley in 11 years as Lukas Jutkiewicz scored for the fourth successive league match at St Andrew’s. Jutkiewicz’s 69th-minute header was added to by Álvaro Giménez as Blues returned to winning ways after taking one point from their last two matches. Blackburn’s manager, Tony Mowbray, had won more league victories, seven, against Hull than any other team heading into their clash at the Kcom Stadium and he extended that with a 1-0 win courtesy of Derrick Williams’ first goal since April 2017. Rovers, who hit the woodwork three times in the first half, were helped by Jarrod Bowen missing a penalty in the 13th minute. In League One Shrewsbury pulled off an incredible 3-2 comeback win away at Accrington Stanley. Colby Bishop and Dion Charles put Accrington two goals ahead but a Mark Hughes own goal and strikes from late substitutes Fejiri Okenabirhie and Daniel Udoh in the final 13 minutes sealed three points for the Shrews. Coventry had two players sent off in the second half against Portsmouth at Fratton Park but still left the south coast with a 3-3 draw. Fankaty Dabo and Gervane Kastaneer were given their marching orders but the Coventry kept scrapping and Michael Rose equalised four minutes from time. Jordy Hiwula had put Coventry ahead inside four minutes, but Portsmouth cruised clear through goals from Ronan Curtis, John Marquis and Gareth Evans before Matt Godden’s 75th-minute penalty gave the visitors hope. Blackpool moved top after preserving their unbeaten record with a 2-2 draw at Gillingham. It looked bleak for the Tangerines when an Alex Jakubiak double put Gillingham in charge, but goals from Sullay Kaikai and Armand Gnanduillet during a four-minute spell before half-time ensured a share of the spoils. Blackpool moved one point above Lincoln, whose first defeat after three straight wins came with a 2-1 loss at MK Dons. Callum Brittain struck after just two minutes for the home side and although Tyler Walker equalised shortly afterwards, George Williams scrambled home the decisive goal midway through the opening period. Veteran striker Adebayo Akinfenwa looked to have taken Wycombe level on points with Blackpool when a close-range header put his team ahead at Fleetwood. But Wanderers were denied in the 90th minute as Paddy Madden equalised to give Fleetwood a 1-1 draw. Like Coventry, Tranmere went down to nine men, seeing Corey Blackett-Taylor and Oliver Banks dismissed early in the second half against Bristol Rovers at the Memorial Stadium. Rovers already led through an early Jonson Clarke-Harris goal, and Taylor Smith’s penalty two minutes from time secured victory. Kayden Jackson’s stoppage-time goal edged Ipswich past AFC Wimbledon 2-1 at Portman Road. Nesta Guinness-Walker put the visitors ahead before James Norwood equalised nine minutes from time. Scott Fraser hit a hat-trick in 23 second-half minutes to give Burton a 4-2 success at Oxford. Jake Buxton also netted for the visitors, with Cameron Brannagan and Anthony Forde claiming Oxford’s goals. Aiden McGeady and Charlie Wyke were on target for Sunderland in a 2-1 success at Rochdale either side of a Callum Camps goal, and Peterborough continued Southend’s dismal start to the season through a 2-0 away win secured by goals from Mohamed Eisa and Ivan Toney.