Sara Pascoe’s ludicrously sweet black-and-white puppy is lounging on the floor in front of her. Fresh from a photo shoot, Pascoe is in a shiny dress that gives her the look of a Disney character, albeit one who wants to talk about whether evolutionary biology will ever allow us, as a society, to move beyond shame. (She doesn’t think so; the flush of it teaches children not to do something they shouldn’t, so it serves a purpose.). “Sorry,” she says, breaking off for a second. “I’m just looking at my dog being adorable.” He is being adorable. “He’s just having a little stretch. But I think what’s really interesting about politics and the people who are good politicians – and I don’t say this because I agree with their politics but people like Nigel Farage, who’s been an incredibly influential politician, and Boris Johnson and Donald Trump – is the unapologetic-ness. I mean, we associate power or alpha-ness with, ‘I am right.’ Maybe some people grow up with fathers who were like that, ‘Don’t question me’, so we can’t help but respond to men who behave that way.” ‘Standup is a place where, as long as it’s funny enough, you can say your most shameful things’ Those who know Pascoe’s comedy – and now that it has been given the mainstream approval of a primetime BBC2 special, LadsLadsLads, filmed at the London Palladium, more will be familiar with it than ever before – will recognise the way her mind leaps from point to point, skimming like a stone across water before it splashes into a punchline that wraps it all up. Now 38, she has been doing standup since her late 20s, has popped up in some of the BBC’s funniest sitcoms of the past decade (Twenty Twelve, W1A), written a fascinating sort-of autobiography, Animal, that mixed feminism, memoir and evolutionary biology, and made a name for herself as a panel show regular, reliably stealing the show with her erudite whimsy. But this year, particularly, has been her year. LadsLadsLads won her a coveted comedy solo hour on the BBC. And now there is Sex Power Money, her second non-fiction book, which started life as a desire to find out more about porn – she doesn’t watch it – and ended up as an insightful, sensitive study of modern masculinity and sexual economics. It is not necessarily the most immediate material for a comedian, but Pascoe has a knack for artfully juggling the high and low. Unlike most of her peers, she is not going to the Edinburgh Fringe this year. “No, I’m going to Georgia to film a documentary about jobs that are about to stop existing,” she says, because of course, that’s what she would be doing instead. “My thing is, I am a little bit of a silly billy, but I’m much more of a Hermione,” she says, referring to the Harry Potter nerd. “I will fall over if you want me to fall over, but I’d really like it if we actually learned about Georgia.” It is a neat summary of what she does. She refers to her brain as “fizzy” more than once, and though she is more serious and reflective in conversation than her garrulous on-stage persona, she does tend to fizz. She speaks enthusiastically, in great long paragraphs that hoover up ideas from the air. “Since I was really small, my mum says I wouldn’t talk at breakfast because I would just read the back of the cereal packet,” she remembers. “I used to steal from the library, which is a crime and it’s bad, but I just couldn’t get enough books, and I also didn’t like to give them back once I’d read them. I just read everything. I get a fizzy thing in my brain, like a nice glass of wine, and I want to know facts and I want to understand.” She was born in Dagenham, east London, and grew up in Romford, Essex; her parents divorced when she was small, and her father moved to Australia, leaving her mother to bring up her and her two younger sisters. They weren’t particularly well off, “but not in any kind of tortured way”. She takes her shoes off and points at her little toe. “When I was little, I wore shoes that were too small for me for years, so my feet grew weird, so my little toenails grow and then they just fall off and then they grow again.” One of her little toes is lacking a nail. She points at it. “That’s the only sign of poverty on my body.” She may do silly billy well, but much of Pascoe’s comedy is personal and revealing, and on stage she often gives the impression of a woman who does not know what a boundary looks like. After watching her standup and reading her books, I feel as if I already know everything about her. “Well you do, in a way,” she says. Often, someone will come up to her after a gig and ask her how her mum is. “I’ll go, ‘All right?’” she says, with mock-suspicion. “I’m thinking: ‘Did this person go to school with my sister?’” In LadsLadsLads, which followed her break-up with fellow comedian John Robins, she talked extensively about sex, being single and the celibate year she imposed upon herself after they split. (Robins gave his side of the story in his own show, The Darkness of Robins.) She met her current boyfriend, Australian comic Steen Raskopoulos, doing comedy, too. “Comedy,” she laughs. “Everyone is comedy. There are horrible terms for women who only sleep with comedians. You’ve heard ‘gag hag’, or my agent once called somebody a ‘clown bike’, which I hadn’t heard. It’s harsh, isn’t it?” she laughs. “But the reason I forgive myself is that I used to do gigs seven days a week, I didn’t have a social life, and what tends to happen is that people have a drink after work, which means you’re up quite late with people…” She says she never fancies anyone straight away. “But then you see them for the third or fourth time, and think, ‘Oh I’m looking forward to seeing that person at the gig tonight.’ And also, you get to hear them do their stuff, and they’re either good at their job, which is sexy, and you get to learn a little bit about them, and then there are some people you might think are sexy and you hear their standup and you’re like, ‘Oh my God, what an awful person.’” As Pascoe’s star has risen, she has come to understand the reach of what she talks about on stage. While she is certain that, “Standup is a place where, as long as it’s funny enough, you can say your most embarrassing things, shameful things and disappointing things,” she has learned that mentioning real people has consequences, particularly when she includes her family. “My dad lives in Australia, and my mum brought us up pretty much by herself, but he’s in my life now and I really love him,” she says. Some of her family have a WhatsApp group, and will talk about her TV appearances on it. “And I have the potential to hugely hurt my dad with tiny little asides. I’ll just say this thing about, ‘My dad didn’t love me,’ and it’s just stupid and then it distills back down to this little jagged thing in the heart that you’re nearly 40 and still not over it.” A couple of years ago Pascoe was on the laddy weekend breakfast show Sunday Brunch. “I’m glad you brought that up,” she says, looking entertained. During a recipe segment, host Tim Lovejoy asked what she would and would not use for material. “People… might think you’re trying to make them look stupid,” she explained, before adding, cheerfully, “Or they don’t want everyone to know about their abortion, so you have to double-check.” You could feel the tension radiating out from the screen. “They acted like I’d said I kill babies,” she says now, laughing but incredulous. “Like, I knife them in the head, like I’ll give anyone an abortion who’s watching. I mean honestly, they acted like I’d said something so crude. Part of having it as a human right is that it’s also possible to talk about it without shame. Even on breakfast TV sometimes.” Pascoe wrote about her own experience of abortion in Animals. “One in three of their female viewers will have had a termination. And I really checked myself afterwards, like, ‘Do I regret it?’ But it was just the worst thing I could think about at the time, as in, in terms of if you were going to expose someone.” She laughs. “I’ve never gone on again.” One of the funniest lines in LadsLadsLads has her explaining that standup comedy is: “Just telling other people things about yourself that you should be very ashamed of and them thinking you’re joking.” She is aware of the contrast between what she does now and her early ambitions, which were notably more earnest. Pascoe had no desire to be a comic. She wanted to be a serious actor. She was studying English at the University of Sussex when she saw a piece of physical theatre about chimps learning sign language, obviously, and had an epiphany. She wanted to do political theatre, she wanted to agitate, she wanted to help change the world through art. She laughs. “And I’ve ended up doing silly billy.” For a while, she didn’t even like comedy, though watching The Mighty Boosh in her 20s cured her of her prejudices. “I really loved the ridiculousness of it and I thought it was so charming. I don’t think I realised that adults could be stupid as well.” It was going out with a standup comedian and then breaking up with him that led her to pick up a microphone. “I went to watch him do a gig and it was boys holding notepads being terrible. And I was like, ‘Oh I can do that. I can be terrible with a notepad!” When they broke up, the pieces fell into place. “A broken heart is a perfect time to do standup, because if it’s been a horrible heartbreak, you’re at the bottom of your own barrel. If you go on stage with nothing to lose, nothing bad can happen, and it actually makes you quite fearless.” She also thought that doing comedy herself would help her understand her ex. “And the second I did standup, I understood everything.” Her first gig was to 12 people in Balham and nobody really laughed. “I had a medium-to-bad time. But you get a physiological reward when you do something that scares you. For me, it was this lightning bolt of, ohhh, this is what I was meant to do.” She had been an actor, a tour guide, a backing singer in a hotel near Nottingham for Robbie Williams’s dad, but finally, she had found her calling. “I’d been writing a diary since I was 14, and standup is your diary. You just work out which bits to tell people, but it is your diary. I was like, ‘This is it, it’s like Shakespeare’s time, you’re a one-man band, you go from town square to town square and you lay out your stall and you tell your stories.’ My dad is a jazz musician, and he must have seen me do a terrible gig, because they were all terrible for years, but maybe three months in he said, ‘You’ve cracked it. You’re just going to be you, aren’t you?’” Pascoe has now entered that rare club of comedians who are household names. Partly, it’s because she’s been a prolific guest on panel shows like 8 Out of 10 Cats and Mock the Week. Contrary to the usual line about how women rarely enjoy doing them, Pascoe absolutely loves doing panel shows. “A panel show is, would you like thousands of pounds? Yes please. Would you like to come and sit with your friends? Yes please. Do you want a wine in a mug? Yes please. Oh, buy yourself a new dress, why don’t you? All you have to do is sit there and talk to your friends and then someone edits your worst bits out. It’s like the best version of you on your night out.” She readily admits that, over the past couple of years, her life has changed completely. “Well, you have much more money, that’s hugely life-changing; people don’t talk about it very much because you’re supposed to be really embarrassed.” She says she often talks to other comedians about how much she’s being paid, so they can all negotiate better. “Money is so connected to freedom, autonomy, options, owning property. I just bought a house, I can get a dog, so this is the happiest thing that’s ever happened to me.” Having money means Pascoe has time, too, in a way that she’s never had time before. She wants to do an economics degree and she wants to write a novel. “This is going to sound audacious, but hear me out,” she says. “In terms of long-term ambitions, I really wanted to be an actor until I was 40, and then I wanted to write novels, and then I wanted to be prime minister.” She laughs, but she is totally serious. A few years ago, she appeared to be considering giving up comedy entirely to pursue politics instead. “But I really went off the idea of politics,” she says. She grew frustrated at the system, at how little it would be possible to change. Given how on-track her life has been so far, doesn’t that scupper the big plan? “When Boris got in, I started thinking, ‘Hang on!’ Obviously you say stuff in standup and think, ‘I could never be a politician now. I’ve talked openly about having an abortion, or I’ve had sex with loads of people.’ And then Boris gets in.” She smiles widely. “Do you know what? Just don’t apologise.” Sex Power Money is published by Faber on 29 August at £14.99. Buy a copy for £10.49 at guardianbookshop.com Hair and Makeup by Suzie Narden using Elf, Ciate, Perricone MD makeup and Moroccan oil hair products