Deborah Levy has won critical acclaim in recent years for her two slim volumes of “living autobiographies”, Things I Don’t Want to Know and The Cost of Living, both unsparing interrogations of her experience in the context of broader literary, feminist and political history. One review of The Cost of Living described Levy’s internal world as “a shape-shifting space where past and present coexist”. The description would also serve perfectly for Saul Adler, the narrator of Levy’s seventh novel, The Man Who Saw Everything. For Saul, the blurring of past and present takes on a more literal, urgent reality. In 1988, aged 28, Saul is hit by a car on the famous Abbey Road zebra crossing in London. Or is he? In the immediate aftermath of the accident Saul, a student of eastern European communist history, breaks up with his photographer girlfriend, Jennifer, moves to East Berlin, falls in love with his host, Walter, who is a Stasi informer, sleeps with Walter’s sister and ends up possibly betraying them both, accidentally, to the authorities. But Saul’s account becomes increasingly unreliable; he whispers intimate confidences to Walter about events yet to happen, including the fall of the Berlin Wall and the reunification of Germany. Images, faces and incidents recur as motifs in both London and Berlin, unsettlingly out of context. Halfway through the novel, Saul is hit by a car on the Abbey Road crossing in 2016, at the age of 56. This time, the damage is serious; he wakes in hospital, drifting in and out of morphine dreams. Jennifer, now a celebrated artist, is by his side; so is his father, whose ashes Saul buried in the GDR in 1988, and Wolfgang, the man who ran him over. “His wing mirror, from which he had glimpsed the man in pieces crossing the road, had shattered. A thousand and one slivers of glass were floating inside my head.” A Man in Pieces is the title of one of Jennifer’s photographs from the early exhibition that made her famous: a naked portrait of Saul, but fragmented into its individual components. In Levy’s impressionistic prose, Jennifer always feels just out of reach as a character, but her purpose in the novel is clear: “Jennifer was making a career from looking. At me.” As the title ironically implies, this is a book about seeing and being seen; about who does the looking and how our gaze is always selective. Eyes and lenses are recurring motifs. In Jennifer, Levy reverses the traditional idea of the male gaze and the artist’s muse, echoing her interest in Medusa in The Cost of Living – a female figure whose regard, when turned on men, is both powerful and dangerous. “It was true that I had no idea how to endure being alive and everything that comes with it,” Saul reflects. “Responsibility. Love. Death. Sex. Loneliness. History.” Levy handles her weighty themes in this slim novel with a lightness of touch and a painfully sharp sense of what it means to look back on a life and construct a coherent whole from its fragments. The Man Who Saw Everything has already been longlisted for the Booker prize; a third shortlisting for Levy would be well deserved. • The Man Who Saw Everything by Deborah Levy is published by Hamish Hamilton (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99