On an unfavourable day, viewing Brexit-era Britain from the outside is like watching a goldfish circling the castle ornament in its bowl. The country seems short of memory, hazy of sight and prone to fluttering around kitsch visions of the past. The reporting of Boris Johnson’s tour of Europe was a case in point. Eurosceptic tabloids celebrated the supposed infectiousness of the prime minister’s optimism: “Ja, we can,” ventriloquised the Daily Mail over a photo of Angela Merkel sharing a drink with him. On Friday, the newspaper covered his return from a meeting with Emmanuel Macron with a shot of him raising his hands over his head in victory. By contrast, some Remainers saw in Merkel’s comment – “we could also find [a solution] in the next 30 days, why not?” – an attempt to mock or troll the prime minister. They rolled their eyes at film footage seemingly showing Macron urging Johnson to get his feet off a table during their meeting in the Élysée Palace. The Brexiters were farthest from the mark. It was simply not true, as even the BBC implied, that Merkel suggested that the Northern Irish backstop has a decent chance of being replaced within a month. And Peter Oborne’s claim in the Mail that “Johnson triumphed in Berlin” was utter nonsense. The German chancellor had not remotely wavered from her red lines. Like other EU leaders, she remains committed to avoiding a hard border on the island of Ireland and will only resile from the backstop if Britain comes up with a viable alternative. Macron went even further, stressing that the mechanism is “indispensable”. Yet neither did the prime minister experience the slap-downs that some on the other end of the spectrum detected. Merkel’s comments were no mockery; not for the first time, British commentators of various stripes were reading too much into her words. And full footage of the Paris incident showed Macron joking that Johnson could put his feet on the table. The prime minister obliged only for fractions of a second, cameras flashing, before continuing their conversation in a more respectful pose. While EU leaders have not changed their conditions, the looming deadline of 31 October is prompting them to re-engage with the question of how to make those conditions sellable in Britain. Their exasperation mingles with regret and a serious desire to minimise the losses from Brexit. Not for them the childish diversion of trolling a major head of government for likes. The facts, the raw realpolitik, of the matter are quite simple. EU leaders want to protect Ireland and believe that they have already gone far enough in Britain’s direction by proposing a backstop allowing some of the benefits of full membership without the costs. Brexiters want to leave the club on unrealistically favourable terms and under their current leadership tend to impatience. Remainers want to stop the process, but are divided and do not have an easy path to power. Any deal will require compromise. In the absence of a mutually acceptable deal, the EU is, of the two parties, the much larger and better prepared to walk. The brutal logic of 1:9, the ratio of British to remaining EU GDP, cannot be gainsaid. Seen from some corners of Brussels, such calculations are the only ones that matter. This bare reading of the facts is misleading, however, as it does not take into account what one might call the history factor. Perceptions of history are emotional. They get in the way of bald calculations of power and narrow advantage. That makes the developments of the next weeks much harder to game out than the realpolitik alone might suggest. The subject is the interest linking all of the major players in the Brexit drama. Macron and Merkel are both history nerds and devour books on it. The chancellor celebrated her 60th birthday five years ago by inviting the historian Jürgen Osterhammel to lecture her guests on “the horizon of history”. She later gave members of her cabinet copies of The Sleepwalkers, Christopher Clark’s account of the prelude to the first world war. Johnson and Jacob Rees-Mogg have both written their own, albeit poorly reviewed, history books, while Dominic Cummings writes about alternative outcomes of recent political events as “branching histories”. For their part, Remainers often turn to Britain’s intensively European past for proof of the country’s essential link to the continent. And all sides, implicitly, have a historian’s nagging interest in the future; in what the past says about what is to come; in what sort of places Britain and Europe will be in 2100 or so. This Historikerstreit may make a no-deal Brexit more likely. Remainers see their struggle as a battle for the country’s open, European soul. Brexiters are often fond of Britain’s supposedly buccaneering (the term seems almost obligatory) past and want a similarly free-roaming future. All of that makes the two sides within Britain fiendishly hard to reconcile. Meanwhile, Merkel considers it her historical role to keep Europe together in turbulent times, which means ensuring that Brexit does not entail the sort of benefits without costs that would make leaving the club, or threatening to do so, a tempting option for others. And Macron wants his presidency to be remembered as the time when not just France but Europe fought back against decline and defended its common sovereignty in a world increasingly defined by rival power blocs. His long-termist ambitions leave scant room to coddle Britain: the president fears that Brexit is taking up time and energy that might be used in making the rest of Europe fit for the future. With the prospect of parliament agreeing to a compromise deal low, he is more inclined than Merkel to cut Britain loose. A clear sense of history can, however, also strengthen the case for compromise. Spoiled by their island history, Britons are relatively blithe about chaos and rupture, but even this has its limits. Remainers and most Brexiters fear a no deal and neither side wants to be held responsible for the disruption it would probably unleash, for the national change of course it could cause. Nor does any continental European leader want to go down as being responsible for that chaos. The EU is more concerned than Westminster realises about the geopolitics of a hard or no-deal Brexit. Its leaders are kept awake at night not by the prospect of reduced BMW sales but of Britain falling prey to a tug-of-war between big external powers such as the US and China. The meetings in Berlin and Paris were thus more nuanced than either sides of Britain’s polarised politics acknowledged. Technocratic debates will seem to dominate the next few weeks. But they will be but a battleground on which rival historical visions, theories about the past and hopes for the future, will clash. Where facts are contested or still to be made, emotions reign. And so it is in the Brexit saga. The entities of “Germany” and “France”, “Brexiters” and “Remainers”, not to mention various other EU countries and intermediate and sub-camps in the British political ring, all contain contradictory impulses. All are in flux. Prominent players of all shades are constantly assessing and reassessing their place in history. Johnson’s meetings, including his G7 debut in Biarritz on Sunday, only emphasise this contest between rival pasts and futures. How, given these realities, might a no deal still be avoided? The coming struggle pits history or, more precisely, the perception of it as a motor for a no-deal Brexit against history as a motor for compromise and de-escalation. The risk of fragmentation from a no deal must appear greater to continental Europeans than that of fragmentation under a compromise deal. Compromise must somehow be made to seem to the Brexiters currently running the show in Britain a better path to national redemption and self-realisation than a no deal. Remainers must be persuaded that history will look more kindly on them for stopping a no deal than for cleaving unbendingly to the immediate goal of stopping Brexit. And then? Who knows. New British elections and new leadership in Brussels both beckon. Change, in some form, can come. Brexit-era Britain is, in fact, the very opposite of a goldfish in its bowl. It is at once crippled and empowered by long memories. History is a force in itself, pushing mere mortals around. It can engender fatalism. But it is also an emotional, human creation. And like all human creations, ultimately, it is capable of being mastered. • Jeremy Cliffe is Brussels bureau chief and Charlemagne columnist at the Economist