All Blacks flanker Matt Todd is no stranger to the feeling of deja vu. Indeed, he could have been forgiven for fearing he would experience the same thing three times, before finally being named this week in a New Zealand Rugby World Cup squad. While the romance of players hearing their names read out live at announcements, as opposed to being tipped off earlier, is largely for public consumption in the modern era, Todd would have been understandably relieved when told he had won a first-class ticket to Japan, whichever way the message was delivered. His inclusion was arguably the feel-good story of the announcement. Having made his Crusaders debut four days before the tragic earthquake struck Christchurch in 2011 Todd found himself, just eight months later, on notice that he could be needed for the most important All Blacks game to that point of the 21st century. With captain Richie McCaw battling a foot injury, the then-uncapped 23-year-old was summoned to watch training before the World Cup semi-final against Australia. Officially an “observer”, as there was no way the All Blacks were going to rule the skipper out of their home tournament unless his broken foot had literally fallen off, Todd’s presence nonetheless hinted at a rapid rise among the ranks of New Zealand’s openside flankers. His subsequent achievements are all-the-more meritorious given he came out of McCaw’s local club, Christchurch, and understudied the All Black at the Crusaders, which should have limited his playing opportunities. Instead, Todd leaves this year, for both the World Cup and then a club career in Japan, having played just five less games for the Crusaders than McCaw’s 145, and having won just one less than the All Black great’s four Super Rugby titles. Yet despite his unofficial call-up in 2011, and the fact he played the opening Test of the 2015 season, Todd was missing when the team for that year’s World Cup assembled. Is it any wonder that he might have been feeling a bit jittery before this one was finalised, too? Part of the reason for the nerves would have been the pattern of the previous World Cup squads All Blacks coach Steve Hansen had been associated with. In 2007 and 2011, McCaw was the only specialist openside flanker in the group. In 2015, Hansen did take two openside flankers, but Sam Cane beat Todd to the second spot, and will head to Japan as New Zealand’s first choice openside player. So why three this time? A factor is the All Blacks’ intention to be accurate at the breakdown while playing at high speed, using twin opensides specialists Cane and Ardie Savea, in a similar alignment to that fielded by the Wallabies when Michael Hooper and David Pocock were paired in 2015. Todd provides excellent openside cover on the bench but can also shoulder a significant amount of the leadership and playing burden in the less threatening pool games, while one or other, or both, of Cane and Savea put their feet up. Another dynamic that should not be under-estimated are the qualities he brings to the team environment off the field, which are as significant as the excellence he supplies on it. Only 23 out of the 31 squad members can play on any given match night. For those on the outer, or limited to the bench in the big games, the six weeks of intensive training away from home can become hard yards, especially once the initial exhilaration subsides, and the reality of little or no game time sinks in. This is where the character of the players and their selflessness becomes so important. Coaches want players who will continue going flat out at training, while not being a distraction for the team when out and about, away from the rugby preparation. Todd undoubtedly ticks this box. Although more of a drummer than band conductor within the set-up, his tireless work ethic and the detailed analytical skills so obvious in his reading of the game endear him to teammates. So too does his humble nature, and preparedness to do whatever it takes. Such traits have seen him frequently lead the Crusaders when needed – he was skipper seven times this season alone – yet that is seldom documented or celebrated in public, and he would have it no other way. If he’s standing on the victory dais with his teammates in Yokohama on 2 November, you might need to look for him on the wide TV shot. Remarkable as his story has been, Todd will comfortably allow others centre stage amid the fanfare. To do otherwise, while richly deserved, would be to change the habit of a career.