What makes a town thrive? When people are choosing where to live in Britain in 2019, they are doing so at a time when many places are undergoing dramatic changes. With retail shifting online and traditional industries declining, many towns that once had thriving high streets and commercial centres are experiencing a loss of confidence and a changing sense of identity. The latest report commissioned by Arts Council England, based on independent research, shows that arts and culture are up there with good schools when people make their decisions about where to live. There is not only tangible value in investment in the arts, but also huge public demand for it. Of those surveyed, 44% said the local arts scene is an important factor, compared with 43% saying the same about schools. These are striking figures. The presence of a theatre, a gallery or a library – places where people gather to enjoy themselves and share an experience – can help to sustain towns through the transformations of our age. They can generate local pride and help to forge a new identity based on creativity, while still celebrating their past. As one Stoke-on-Trent resident interviewed for the report stated, having a strong cultural offer “gives the impression that an area respects itself and its historical and cultural heritage”. This kind of community self-esteem is crucial. Performances, exhibitions and festivals can arrest decline and help to make town centres attractive places to visit and socialise. The figures in the report support this, with 68% of people saying that arts and cultural events are very important for fostering community feeling. The most obvious example of the positive impact of art and culture in recent years is the experience of Hull, when it was City of Culture in 2017. The programme boosted the city’s economy, with £300m generated by the local tourism industry across the year. However, the benefits went far beyond that, helping to instil in local people a renewed pride in Hull’s history and confidence about its role in the world. By the end of the year, three-quarters of residents said they were proud to live in the city. Hull’s experience has been mirrored by that of smaller towns across the country, including a wide range of market, coastal and post-industrial towns. Since 2012, the Arts Council has invested £53m in Creative People and Places – a programme designed to bring cultural events to areas with low levels of arts engagement – with a further £17.5m announced earlier this month. By working with residents and local partners, the scheme allows people to shape the arts and cultural provision where they live. So far, the scheme has supported projects in 21 areas across England including Sunderland, St Helens, Barking and Luton. These projects can help to give residents a new perspective on where they live. One project, which saw Hanley Park in Stoke-on-Trent turned into a pyrotechnic circus, drew in many local people who were visiting for the first time, despite the park being on their doorstep. “People are seeing it as a beautiful space to be used for recreation purposes rather than just a shortcut,” said one person. As towns such as Margate and Folkestone show, a thriving cultural sector can also help to attract new businesses working in creative industries (this is the fastest growing sector of the UK economy, with the number of creative jobs increasing by 30% since 2011). Since opening its doors nearly a decade ago, Turner Contemporary art gallery has attracted 400,000 visitors a year, injecting over £68m into Kent’s economy, and leading to the opening of more than 150 businesses across Margate. In the summer of 2018, 35% of visitors stated they visited Margate specifically to visit the gallery. The establishment of Folkestone Triennial exhibition and the development of the “creative quarter” in the town has similarly shown that the arts can draw people to destinations they might not otherwise have considered, turning town centres into busy places to visit and generating increased footfall for local businesses. As well as considering the benefits to communities, people are also drawn to places with a strong artistic offering because they recognise the value of creativity to themselves as individuals. According to the report, nearly two-thirds of people think that arts and culture are good for wellbeing, and 36% think arts and culture are “essential to life”. People who attended a wide range of arts and cultural events reported higher levels of satisfaction with their lives than those who did not, even after accounting for other factors that influence life satisfaction. This is also borne out by the evaluation of the City of Culture programme in Hull, where over 90% of the residents took part in a cultural activity during the year, 80% of whom said that being part of the project made them feel happier. The hard evidence shows that the arts matter to people across the country, and makes clear the case for greater investment in culture. It was heartening to see Boris Johnson recognise this in one of his first speeches as prime minister, when he drew attention to the benefits that investment in the arts had brought to the reputation, the life and the economy of Manchester over the past 20 years. Whether it is in bringing communities together, promoting individual wellbeing, or helping towns to adapt to changing economic circumstances, the arts have an ever-increasing role to play in helping us all to live well. By supporting our cultural sector, we create happier, more vibrant communities that we can all be proud to be a part of. • Nicholas Serota is chair of Arts Council England