Australia’s greatest modern-day track and field athlete Sally Pearson has announced her retirement, acknowledging that her body can take no more punishment. The 32-year-old, who won gold in the 100m hurdles at the 2012 London Olympics and is a two-time world champion, had hoped to end her career in spectacular style next year at the Tokyo Olympics, only for her body to let her down once again. “I’m going to hang up my spikes,” the 32-year-old told the Seven Network on Tuesday morning. “It’s been 16 years on the Australian team and my body is just not up to it. When you count six injuries this year that no one knows about and another whole year to go of training for the Olympics to try and win gold, I have major doubts that my body will make it and I don’t know if want to put myself through that again.” She later told a media conference she had made the emotional decision a week ago, but was now relieved to have called time. “The first day I was deciding this with tears in my eyes and a lump in my throat,” she said. “That was really hard to take. I knew it was the right decision. Making a decision about something that has been a part of my life for 20 years was hard to understand in a way. “I would love to have been a three-time Olympian. That disappoints me a little as well. At the same time, I am happy now. I’m relieved now that my career is over and there will be no more injuries and no more vomit sessions. The last few days have been really sad because today has been coming quicker than I would have liked. There has been a few tears the last few evenings which have been hard but that’s just part of it.” Pearson missed the 2015 world championships and 2016 Rio Olympics due to injury before making one of Australian sport’s great comebacks in 2017 when she coached herself to gold at the world titles in London. But the injury curse struck again the following year, with a serious achilles problem forcing her to pull out of the Gold Coast Commonwealth Games. “2018 was horrible with my achilles and not being able to run at my hometown Commonwealth Games was devastating,” she said. “I just don’t think that’s fair to do that to myself and my body as well.” Pearson said she had suffered half a dozen injuries in 2019 alone; to her quad, calf, hamstring, knee and achilles as she tried desperately to make it to the start line for the world titles beginning in Doha in late September. “My right quad tore so that put me out for about 10 days of modified training,” she said. “Then on the 3 March I tore my calf and that put me out for probably six weeks. “I came back and ran really quite well in Japan [at the world relays] and then had a hamstring tendinopathy for another six weeks and then had my knee injected to help that recover to get over the hurdle because I couldn’t even hurdle with my knee. Then a week later I tore my hamstring the day I was supposed to go to Europe to start racing. And then probably a week to three weeks after that my achilles started to flare up again.” Although the Olympic title in London was Pearson’s career highlight, the Queenslander was at her absolute peak the year earlier at the world titles in Daegu. She smashed her personal best twice in the space of two hours in the semi-final and final, with her gold medal-winning time of 12.28 seconds lifting her to fourth on the all-time list. Her record of podium finishes at the major global championships just shades that of the great Cathy Freeman in the 400m. Freeman won gold and silver at the Olympics and two world titles, while Pearson claimed Olympic gold and silver, two world titles and was also runner-up at the 2013 world championships.