It turns out Killing Eve was not just a blip. Our appetite for watching women wreak violence on men has not yet been satisfied. Just as the TV series captured the nation’s imagination with the high-definition escapades of a female contract killer enacting merciless attacks on her male targets, so Meghan Tyler’s dark comedy meets with a roar of approval that feels like a release of feminist fury and anti-colonial rage. Or maybe they just like the jokes. You’ve seen plays set during the Troubles before, and this one, set over one night in a Catholic home in rural South Armagh, might easily have turned out just another domestic drama about life on the sectarian divide. Everything is in place: the devout sister, the returning gun runner, the paras on standby to raid any house on the slightest pretext. But where those pressures would normally produce a fraught drama with tragic leanings, here they lead to an explosive comedy. In Tyler’s hands, it’s as though the patriarchal forces represented by an abusive father and an equally unjust British army have become so extreme that the only rational response is an OTT comedy. The actor turned playwright co-opts Tarantino-esque violence and magical-realist fantasy for ferociously feminist ends. In Gareth Nicholls’s production, the anarchy begins as soon as Lisa Dwyer Hogg’s punkish Fianna crashes in through the kitchen window and, despite the initial protestations of Lucianne McEvoy’s germophobic Alannah, escalates into a raucous bloodbath in which long-standing injustices are redressed. If the actors are rather dwarfed by Grace Smart’s conventionally literal set – literal, that is, until the final, astonishing coup de theatre – they nonetheless come into their own as they drive home Tyler’s scabrous dialogue. What starts as everyday sisterly squabbling grows darker and considerably more wayward, an acknowledgement of the oppression of the reptile-like father that has left them so psychologically scarred. Played by Sean Kearns, he’s as much punchbag as character, taking the blows with a matter-of-fact acceptance that only adds to the mounting surrealism. This surely wasn’t what was meant by “truth and reconciliation”, but it feels like a boil that needed to be lanced. • At Traverse theatre, Edinburgh, until 25 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.