West Bromwich Albion teased glimpses of the style and swagger they are developing under Slaven Bilic after a summer facelift but in the end a flash of quality by the substitute Matheus Pereira to earn a penalty seven minutes from time was enough to earn a draw at Derby County. Kenneth Zohore rescued a point from 12 yards for the second time in four days to preserve Albion’s unbeaten record in the Championship under Slaven Bilic, while Derby, for whom Martyn Waghorn scored and had another spot-kick saved in a lively first half, remain without a league victory here under Phillip Cocu. West Brom were punished for a sluggish start when Waghorn won and then converted a spot-kick after a clumsy foul by Kieran Gibbs and Bilic was slapping his thighs in anger again when his team took an age to react after Kyle Edwards’s deflected shot earned a first-half corner. But then the Croat’s frustrations reached boiling point. When Lee Buchanan’s harmless cross eluded his Derby teammates, it bounced up on to the right shoulder of the West Brom midfielder Filip Krovinovic, who nudged the ball away from the 18-yard box, only for the assistant referee Mark Pottage to flag for a penalty. It was a decision that caused commotion in the Albion technical area, with an incensed and baffled Bilic booked by the referee Gavin Ward. Waghorn stepped up from 12 yards for a second time but justice was served as the West Brom goalkeeper Sam Johnstone dived low to his left to keep the ball out. The reality is Albion should have restored parity on the brink of the interval but Zohore failed to find the net after being slid through on goal by Matt Phillips, with Kelle Roos saving with his legs. That the cameras rushed to surround Pottage when the half-time whistle did blow said it all. Albion survived that decision but Derby should have been out of sight with a third of the game to play. One teenage debutant fed another on the hour mark as Buchanan cut the ball back for Jason Knight, who forced Johnstone into an instinctive stop before Jack Marriott skewed wide. It was carnage in the Albion defence and it was deja vu moments later when Richard Keogh recycled possession on the right flank before hooking the ball into Waghorn, whose angled strike tested Johnstone at his near post. Tom Lawrence also fired a low effort inches wide, while the Albion substitute Grady Diangana forced a save out of Roos up the other end. Only then did Albion truly begin to play, with the substitutes Grady Diangana and Pereira causing havoc for the Derby defence. Pereira played a neat give-and-go with Krovinovic and, on arriving the byline, the full-back Max Lowe wiped out the Brazilian winger. Zohore coolly sent Roos the wrong way and then both teams squandered chances to win it, as Buchanan superbly denied Jake Livermore after Mason Bennett dragged wide. Flabbergasted by a decision to not award Albion a corner late on led to Bilic being sent off.