A policy that ensures transgender and gender diverse people can play cricket at the highest level in Australia has been announced by the sport’s national governing body. Cricket Australia has developed an elite-level policy, as well as guidelines for community cricket, to support players competing in line with their gender identity. Cricket Australia CEO Kevin Roberts says as strength, stamina and physique are all relevant factors in sport, transgender and gender diverse players will be supported to participate in top flight cricket, subject to certain criteria. Transgender or gender-diverse players seeking to compete in the female-elite category must demonstrate a concentration of testosterone in serum less than 10 nanomoles per litre continuously for 12 months or more. “Discrimination of any sort has no place in the game,” Roberts said. “Our dedication to a fair and inclusive sport across international and domestic competitions sees the policy strike a balance between the opportunity to participate and ensuring fair competition.” He says the policy will align closely with the International Cricket Council’s Eligibility on the Basis of Gender Recognition, while a referral process to an expert panel had been established to ensure fair and meaningful competition. Today we take a major step to ensure inclusiveness is at the heart of Australian Cricket. Learn more about the inclusion of transgender and gender diverse people in the game: https://t.co/XbewXwazH4#ASportForAll pic.twitter.com/cRlM2TKx21 Roberts adds guidelines for grassroots level cricket will assist clubs, players, administrators, coaches and other volunteers deliver a “safe, welcoming and inclusive environment, free of harassment and discrimination for gender diverse players”. Australian cricketer Megan Schutt welcomed the policy announcement and said inclusion mattered “in every sense.” “Now that we know that anyone who is transgender or gender diverse has a chance to play cricket at the highest level – and rightfully so – I’m confident that the elite cricket policy will provide a fair process for transgender and gender diverse cricketers to embark on that pathway,” she said.