Community groups in Coggeshall, Chigwell, Harlow and Holland-on-Sea have withdrawn expressions of interest in taking over libraries in Essex, claiming that the council has publicly misrepresented their requests for more information as support for the controversial plans. In November, Essex county council announced plans to close 25 of the county’s 74 branch libraries, as well as handing a further 19 to volunteers and 15 to run in partnership schemes. After months of protests throughout the county, the council announced last month that all branches will remain open for the next five years. But the council said it would pursue plans to hand over certain branches to volunteers, with an £18,000 grant over three years, and claimed that 80 community groups had registered interest. Campaigners have condemned these as “stealth closures”, arguing that libraries run by volunteers will inevitably close without guaranteed funding for new stock and staff. On Monday, Tracey Vickers, who led a bid by Coggeshall residents to take over a branch, said they had felt pressured into submitting an expression of interest in order to secure a meeting with the council, which had “repeatedly refused on the grounds that they were ‘too busy and couldn’t meet every community group’”. “Each time they refused, they asked if we’d submitted an EoI [Expression of Interest]. Rightly or wrongly, Coggeshall felt pressurised into submitting one as a ‘requirement’ or a pre-qualification for a meeting,” Vickers said. “Further down the road, however, we realised that the EoIs were being misrepresented as support for the proposals when in reality nothing could be further from the truth. Coggeshall has withdrawn our EoI and we eagerly await clarity on what ‘open’ actually means.” Jacquie MacLeod, treasurer of Chigwell Residents Association, which also put in an expression of interest, said it was withdrawing it because the council had now promised no libraries will close. “We only made an offer to run our library under duress, as … Essex county council was going to close our library if nobody came forward. It was our only hope to save it,” she said. “We want to take Essex county council at their word and see them honour their new commitment. After all, it is their job to run a library. It’s their statutory responsibility.” Campaign group Save Our Libraries Essex said it was delighted that community groups were withdrawing their expressions of interest: “We are sure many others will follow this lead and withdraw their EoIs. In the end it’s not their job to house and run a library.” A spokesperson for Essex county council said: “We have been open and transparent throughout the work on our Future Libraries strategy and to date, have received 80 EoIs from local groups and organisations. Following approval of the strategy, we are in discussion with many of these groups who are keen to help us shape and further develop detailed plans … Groups are able to withdraw an EoI at any time and we are more than happy to address any queries or concerns about the process should they wish to get in touch with us directly.”