Mention of the music critic Ian Penman might elicit a bemused “Huh?” from the majority, yet to his devotees he still represents a sort of literary-cultural secret handshake, a tip the wink that here was a voice and a style like no other. Penman always understood the pitfalls of nomenclature, as here in a consideration of Prince: “Most boys grow up with some kind of childish ambition to be king of this or that world, but what happens when a child is baptised Prince before he’s said or done a thing? Right from the start of his career, names and naming, signs and alphabets, seemed to matter deeply to Prince. But what is a name, when you get down to it? It isn’t something you can hold squarely in your hand like a lump of gold. It’s wholly immaterial. It can make you feel like a god before your time – but equally, maybe, a ghost in your own life.” Penman came of age during the heyday of NME in the late 1970s, just as the enfant terrible double-act of Julie Burchill and Tony Parsons were putting a rocket beneath the paper’s old guard. Penman was their coeval, but even then stood apart, being less a cheerleader for punk than a magpie for soul and jazz, dub and reggae. A “shy and gawky” teenager from flattest Norfolk he came to London in 1977 and hung out for a while with Scritti Politti during their squat-dwelling, anarchist phase, even going on stage with the band and blowing freeform sax. But he was evidently more at home writing about music than playing it. And talk about formative. His was the first piece I ever read about Tom Waits, and I recall equally compelling accounts of Elvis Costello, Rickie Lee Jones, Dennis Bovell and Tim Buckley. He was also a pretty handy film reviewer, and composed a small epic on the mystique of Robert De Niro (in 1984, when he still had mystique). Burchill admitted to envying Penman’s “gorgeous” prose style in her foreword to his first collection of essays and reviews, Vital Signs (1998). Since then, he has been a more elusive presence in print. For a while he seemed to disappear altogether. But lo! a second collection of Penmania is here, bearing the sweet, James Taylor-ish title of It Gets Me Home, This Curving Track. What gets us home is Penman’s verve, and his eagerness to make us listen to the records as attentively as he does The eight pieces have a depth and expansiveness that transcend their origin as book reviews, several of them cannily commissioned by someone at the London Review of Books who saw his potential as a long-form essayist. They are linked in their search for “a vanished world”, in which black and white musicians intermingled and distilled a “cross-colour” alchemy of sound. Whether that idea holds up or not isn’t important. What gets us home, as it were, is Penman’s verve, and his eagerness to make us listen to the records as attentively as he does. Consider this, on the “unshowy” personality of Sinatra’s singing – “at times his song is closer to a resplendent anonymity; he never makes things too obvious, italicising what he thinks the listener ought to be feeling”. Or this on Elvis’s alleged rip-off of black music: “Presley’s early Sun-side rhythms are all train-whistle country and sickle-moon bluegrass. The black rhythm and blues originals of songs like ‘Hound Dog’ and ‘Mystery Train’ are taken far more slowly – they have an undulant, rough-tongued chug.” His piece on Donald Fagen of Steely Dan is a bracing and brilliant investigation of west coast cool, New York hip and perhaps the greatest songwriting duo since Lennon and McCartney. He keeps tossing out magical little trills and riffs that cut to the heart of Fagen’s swooning sound: “Drums skip and skim like speedboats leaving a summer jetty; the electric piano nudges you with a conspiratorial grin. The chorus rises and falls like sun motes on a holiday balcony.” He can be funny, too, in a feline way. Finding an audiobook of Pete Townshend’s autobiography – all 15 CDs’ worth – he balks: “I’m sorry, no one, not even a freelancer, has that much leisure time.” Elsewhere, his essays on James Brown, Charlie Parker and Prince aren’t definitive; they are only inimitable. Penman is one of a talented generation of male “rock scribes” – Paul Du Noyer, Richard Williams, Mark Ellen, Danny Baker, the late Ian MacDonald – whose constituency has more or less vanished. I heard a sad story recently of one old NME star who now flogs his record collection from a table outside a tube station. To quote Steely Dan: “Hard times befallen / The soul survivors …” This neat volume shows there is still life in the back pages of one survivor, and should be snapped up by anyone who loves genius phrasemaking. Frank Zappa’s famous quote will never die: “Rock journalism is people who can’t write interviewing people who can’t talk for people who can’t read.” But he plainly never encountered Ian Penman. • It Gets Me Home, This Curving Track is published by Fitzcarraldo (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.