It’s hard to overstate the significance of Toni Morrison in the pantheon of global black literature. For many of us she was the lodestar who inspired us to write from within our own cultures, often from female perspectives, and to dignify the heterogeneity of black experiences through literature we could call our own. As a young, aspiring writer I was enriched by her work and empowered by her words of wisdom. I read an interview with her in the seminal Black Women Writers at Work, edited by Claudia Tate, in 1984, which articulated exactly how it felt to be a young black British woman writer at that time. She and others galvanised my generation to write our stories and smash through the walls of the status quo. “There’s a notion out in the land,” Morrison said, “that there are human beings one writes about, and then there are black people or Indians or some other marginal group. If you write about the world from that point of view, somehow it is considered lesser.” Morrison, our elder stateswoman, spoke with authority on issues of race and literature, as she did for the rest of her life. We always knew she was on our side. She wrote uncompromisingly about African American society and history, and positioned her characters on the main stage as fully fledged humans with an extensive emotional range and intellectual scope. She showed the complexity of their lives through her formidably imaginative, storytelling powers. Her books were in the tradition of a literature that stretched back to the “slave narratives” of the 19th century and she was by no means the only writer filling in the cultural absences in an American literature that too often excluded, marginalised or stereotyped her people. Writers such as Audre Lorde, Gloria Naylor, Alice Walker and Ntozake Shange were also early inspirations for me. But Morrison reigned supreme, in no small part due to her extensive output of 11 novels and three books of critical thinking, as well as works for children, opera and theatre. Her legacy will live on through the writers whose imaginations she fed and whose craft she developed by example As a book editor for 20 years at Random House, Morrison would have developed her forensic critical eye in nurturing many black writers to publication, before producing her first novel, The Bluest Eye, in 1970, at the age of 39. In an arts culture where youth is too often elevated over maturity, Morrison also inspired hope in later-starters, emerging as she did as a middle-aged writer with her own distinctive style. In The Bluest Eye she was one of the first writers to explore the all-pervasive perniciousness of shadism within black communities, a byproduct of internalised racism. Pecola, a dark-skinned black girl is considered ugly and longs for the blue eyes she equates with whiteness and acceptability. Any mother of a dark-skinned girl will know that the subject remains as topical today as it was 50 years ago. Morrison was unflinching in exposing social iniquities and their impact on individual lives, while never creating idealised stereotypes. Her fictional figures embraced the spectrum of humanity, were capable of doing shocking things, and often embodied an ambiguous moral universe. Her great talent was to delve into the psyche of her characters and leave us to make up our own minds about them. Sula, in which a damaged woman from a dysfunctional family inadvertently unites her local community through their disapproval of her, is one of my favourite of her novels. Morrison knew how to write dramatic moments for maximum effect. Her novels are never boring or predictable. You never quite know what she’s going to throw at you.One of the most memorable scenes in her third novel, Song of Solomon (1977) is the mother of the protagonist, Milkman, continuing to breastfeed him when he’s too old to need it; and then there’s Sethe in Beloved, who, as an escaping slave, decides to kill her infant child rather than have her endure the horrors of slavery. Morrison wanted her books to be readable but they were never simple, easy, cosy reads. The reader had to put in the work, especially from Beloved onwards. Her prose was beautifully rich, imagistic and sensorially immersive. I always enjoyed sinking deep into the micro-universes of her imagination. Her writing could also be oblique, even impressionistic, especially with her later novels, A Mercy (2008), set in the 17th century, and the contemporary God Help the Child (2015), where she returned to the issue of shadism. The timespan of her oeuvre covered 400 years of American history. Her writing refracted politics and big issues through personal lives, whether it was the politics of race and gender, of success and ambition, of families and parenting, of friendship and community, of power and its abuses, and her interrogation of the often painful past, which she rememoried, a term she coined in Beloved for the act of remembering a memory. Morrison never stopped writing and was a consistently great writer.She was increasingly acknowledged as such as the years progressed, especially with the support of the powerfully influential African American critical and academic community and lobby, who cherished her greatness long before she crossed over into “mainstream” acceptance. She was garlanded with awards, including the Pulitzer in 1988 and in 1993, and at the age of 62, the Nobel prize in literature, the first and only black woman to have received it; an incredible honour for her, but also an indictment of the prize. I was once introduced to her, and could not think of a single word to say to the writer I most idolised. I still cringe at the memory. Another time I was asked to interview her by telephone for a magazine. She spoke softly and I asked her to speak up, which she did, briefly. I simply couldn’t ask her again. When I listened back to my recording, her words were no more than muffled sounds. I dashed to my computer and hammered out what I could remember from the conversation. I began reading Morrison in 1981 and never stopped. Earlier this year I was on panel of black British female writers of different generations, and when asked about our favourite author, all five of us said it was Toni Morrison. Many of us are sad at her passing but it’s time to reconnect to her work and to introduce a new generation of readers to it. She led a long, creative and celebrated life and her legacy will live on – through her literature, through her outspokenness in dignifying black experiences, and through the writers whose imaginations she fed and whose craft she developed by example. I remember hearing her advocate that writers imagine the unthinkable as a way to liberate the imagination. It struck a chord with me. Every time I start a new novel, I remember those words and ask myself: “What if?” • Girl, Woman, Other by Bernardine Evaristo is longlisted for the Booker prize.