At long last some experienced MPs from all the parliamentary parties are discussing how to construct a consensus behind a government of national unity. Such a government would reject in principle a no-deal Brexit, would seek an extension of the agenda agreed for negotiation with EU colleagues, and would review again our contribution to defence, foreign affairs and security. It is clear, for instance, that on some issues such as relations with Iran, China and President Trump’s administration, open and constructive discussion is important and badly needed. One essential element must surely be a recognition of the importance of the union. This union, the United Kingdom, has worked well over the past 40 years, including the devolution of power to Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, bringing with it a genuine partnership and cooperation. It has been one of the real achievements of recent years. There is encouraging evidence that the UK’s member countries are learning how to work together, not least in ensuring the absolute commitment to no border in Ireland of any kind. The willingness of politicians in parliament to reach agreement is encouraging, but time is very short.Shirley WilliamsLiberal Democrats, House of Lords • The would-be participants don’t seem to have fully grasped the provisions of the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act (Hopes fade for alliance against no-deal exit, 17 August). We are in uncharted and unprecedented territory. The act neither confers on nor refuses rights to the prime minister or leader of the opposition, or anyone, to try to form a new government after a no-confidence vote. It is, in effect, an open house for 14 days with no fixed rules. Somebody (for example, the father of the house) would need to get a grip. If, on the other hand, confidence is not at issue, the act restricts the prime minister’s right to call a “snap” election unless at least two-thirds of MPs assent. Labour is thus in a position to block such an election. It would be well advised to do so.Robin WendtChester • I recently saw Vanessa Redgrave’s play Vienna 34 – Munich 38, which ends with a long extract from a speech Thomas Mann made in New York in 1938. He castigated western European countries, especially Britain, for their feebleness in confronting Hitler because, as he saw it, they were more concerned about socialism in Russia. There are obvious parallels with our current situation, with so many seeing Jeremy Corbyn as more dangerous, even as a caretaker prime minister, than the current government and its rush to no deal. But we know it was a mistake in the 1930s and is, surely, equally a gross error of judgment now (Journal, 19 August).Judy StoberBruton, Somerset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition