Ah, ’Darkers. Here ’twas. The end of an era. And so ’tis only right that there be many fireworks. “I may have used a little too much powder,” grinned Zacky. “Proper job!” And so ended our life in Nampara. Not so much with a bang or a whimper but with a series of bangs that left us with a bit of a headache. (I wish. Let’s not dwell on that metaphor.) What a great deal of powder indeed was used for this episode! Was it too much powder? Or simply what was needed for a proper job? It’s hard to say. But I think a fair assessment is that there was enough going on here to last us another few years of Poldark, so it was kind of annoying that it had to end this way, wrapped up so abruptly, almost with the action on fast-forward to get through it all in time. In the end it was pretty great television. There was just too much of everything. “The agony of never just a moment’s peace! It’s my faith that’s broken. It can’t be remade.” Well, we know how you feel Demelza. The first 27 minutes of this were agony, us not entirely knowing whether Ross had gone bad or whether he was just doing his James Bond act. It became extremely confusing knowing who was on what side and extremely stressful worrying about whether Sir Evil George and the slave traders would foil everything. If the “Ross as double agent” storyline had one flaw, it was that they couldn’t decide whether to let the viewers in on the secret or not. They wanted it both ways. They wanted us to know that he wasn’t really cheating on Demelza and that it was all for the mission. But they also wanted us to think, “Has he really gone over to the dark side?” This is an incredibly ambitious effect to try to pull off and it didn’t quite work. There were times when as a viewer you just didn’t know whether you were coming or going. We were told at the beginning that this was all “five months later”, which was supposed to explain Ross’s personality transplant. “Your wife asks no questions?” “My wife knows her place.” Er, hello, have you met Demelza? And what on earth is this liaison with Tess? And the business about being a humble country squire? But of course it was all a ruse. “You ’ad all them Frenchies fooled and me besides.” Aside from this slightly messy masquerade, there were many exciting moments, some supremely joyous, some unbearably sad. We got to see some great scenes between Ross and Demelza, even if they were weighted with falsehood (because he was keeping his spying secret). “How needful would you say is honesty betwixt husband and wife?” Oh dear. We’ve been here before. We had poor, broken Demelza: “When did I lose you, Ross? When I look at your face, I see a stranger.” And then we had triumphant, wily Demelza: “I should like to see him humiliated before his dispatch.” How did her mind leap to such a plan! Because she is most excellent, that is why! It was irritating, of course, that so many people got caught in the crossfire of Ross’s patriotically well-intentioned lies. If it wasn’t bad enough that Demelza and Ross were at each other’s throats then here were Dr Enys and Sindy Doll doing the same thing. And Dr Enys was supposed to have been holding a candle for Kitty? Added to that the sadness of Sindy Doll holding the girl baby! Unbearable! (Morwenna’s baby!) But how very joyous to see their reconciliation and the opening of Caroline’s heart. “Without such opening, are we yet but half a life?” And finally we came to the weird reconciliation of Ross and Sir Evil George. It’s never a good thing when Sir Evil George gets his hands on one, let alone two, pistols. But for once it worked out. “Dispose of both bodies. Who would know?” He might make a revolutionary yet. I thought they could have gone farther emotionally in these scenes. “Might I suggest a brandy?” “No.” “Think I might poison you?” “I wouldn’t rule it out.” But we stayed close to reality and just as we thought Sir Evil George might asked Ross and Demelza to take in Valentine, he pulled back. Many thanks to all the ’Darkers who have followed this blog these many long years. And who have conjured up a below-the-line community that be joyfully affectionate and affectionately critical at same time. And congratulations to the writer, Debbie Horsfield, who created this great unwieldy anachronistic beast of a story for television and almost – almost – managed to tame it. I thought a flashback to Elizabeth was missing in this episode. And there definitely wasn’t enough Prudie. But still. “Where’s our faith? Where’s our gratitude?” It’s still here. “Two hearts. One beat. Can’t ask any more than that. There isn’t any more to ask.” Well, except for the utter destruction of Sir Evil George. But that, my friends, will have to wait for another day. This has to go to Demelza, of course. She had to go through approximately 197 emotional states in this episode from “woman scorned” and Mata Hari to Call the Midwife and Mr and Mrs. If it wasn’t enough that Demelza had survived (a) thinking that Ross was having it off with Tess (b) saving him by encouraging the nasty Frenchman to do the sword-fighting (c ) being a midwife two seconds later to Loveday Carne. (Silly name!) Obviously we can’t praise Aidan Turner enough for his portrayal of Ross (who is himself sometimes very silly indeed and not an easy role to imbue with verisimilitude). But without Eleanor Tomlinson as Demelza, I don’t think this show would have resonated in the way it has. The two of them excel as a couple. But they are also both able to carry individual scenes with incredible poignancy and weight. Demelza had to do this doubly in this episode: having to act out an eventuality that the viewer knew to be untrue but still make it look true to us. That is virtually impossible. Except for Demelza, of course, for whom nothing is impossible. Not even making the same green coat look fresh every time she wears it, despite owning it for 11 years. “Some days I almost forget her face for two hours at a time.” Oh Geoffrey Charles, you are as soppy as your father. “I got bigger fish to fry than ’e now, preacher.” Sure you have, girl. Tess was given a bit more nuance in her character in this episode and she did well with it, even making us feel a bit sorry for her. Beware hubris, ’Darkers! It don’t lead to marriage to a hot preacher. “Do ’e not think ’e deserve as much joy? For who in this world have never gone astray?” Who indeed, Rosena? Ah, it would be a hard-hearted viewer who wouldn’t weep at this. “My only thought was to protect you.” “Ross, I’ve always been indebted to you.” “My debt to you can never be repaid. But for the rest of my life, I will try.” I’m not crying. You’re crying. Well, he’s coming back to bring in the corn so there’s always hope. Only we won’t be seeing it. Except for in our dreams, ’Darkers. “I swear to you, my love, I will return.” But you won’t, will you? Thanks a lot, BBC. THANKS A LOT. Thank heaven for DVD boxsets is all I can say. And the “pause” button. Not that I’m permanently freeze-framing the scything on 65-inch plasma screen or anything like that. No, no, don’t be ridiculous.