The future of the proposed High Speed 2 rail project has been thrown into further doubt after a major critic of the scheme was appointed deputy chair of a review launched by the government on Wednesday. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the government needed “clear evidence” before deciding whether to go ahead. In an interview with Sky News, Shapps said he had told the review to “just give us the facts … really, genuinely what it would cost to complete this project. “Then we will know and we will be in a much better position to make the decision to go or no go by the end of the year.” The review will be chaired by Douglas Oakervee, a retired engineer and ally of the prime minister, Boris Johnson, in his time at City Hall. His deputy, Lord Berkeley, a railway expert and Labour peer, has repeatedly challenged the Department for Transport’s cost figures and warned that the budgets were spiralling out of control. Whitehall sources have been increasingly pessimistic about the project’s future, not least since the appointment of Berkeley was made known, following the appointment of another HS2 arch-critic, Andrew Gilligan, as a Downing Street transport adviser. The inquiry will examine whether the HS2 scheme linking London to Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds should be approved, amended or scrapped entirely. It is only expected to last a matter of weeks and will produce a final report by the autumn. High Speed Two Ltd is set up by the Labour government to examine possibilities for increasing high-speed rail capacity in the UK. The project is split into two phases – London to Birmingham forms phase one, with phase two extending the route to Manchester and Leeds. The transport secretary, Justine Greening, announces the decision to build HS2. A judicial review is called into the HS2 decision. Lord Justice Ouseley upholds one of the 10 grounds for complaint about HS2 in the judicial review – the claim that the government had acted unfairly and unlawfully when consulting on compensation for homeowners affected by the route. The prime minister, David Cameron, describes the project as "absolutely vital" as MPs approve funding. The high-speed rail (London-West Midlands) bill is formally introduced in parliament. After freedom of information requests, a 2012 Department for Transport viability report into HS2 is released, revealing the department considered it unaffordable. Allan Cook replaces Sir Terry Morgan as chair of HS2, after the latter fails to deliver the opening of the Crossrail project in London on schedule. A report from the New Economics Foundation suggests HS2 will deliver the most benefit to London, and exacerbate regional inequality. A fresh government review into HS2 is launched, expected to last a matter of weeks and produce a final report by the autumn into whether the scheme should be approved, amended or scrapped entirely. The proposed date for the start of the service. An advisory panel to the review has been established and it includes leading rail figures, most of whom are supportive, but also sceptics including the former Bank of England monetary committee member Andrew Sentance. The panel will have no right of veto on the final report. Berkeley has previously suggested halting the scheme at Old Oak Common in London, rather than Euston, and cancelling work north of Crewe. He has also warned that the budget would spiral to double the official £55.7bn figure. He told the Guardian on Wednesday: “One thing we’ve been promised is all the evidence and I don’t believe the DfT has given all the honest evidence. There is so much that they haven’t disclosed. This project is probably 50% over [budget] already and they haven’t hardly started yet.” He added: “I think [Boris Johnson] is keen that the DfT’s documentation is exposed. We’ve got look at the evidence of the costs and also the potential revenue and some cost-benefits. And then we have to look at alternatives if it gets cancelled – and the costs of doing that.” The review of the scheme was promised by Johnson in his campaign to become Conservative leader. The prime minister has said he is in favour of big infrastructure projects, although opposition to HS2 has been widespread in the grassroots Tory party. YouGov polling in May showed 49% of Conservative voters oppose building HS2, compared with 40% of the population as a whole. Soon after taking office, Johnson promised to prioritise the building of a high-speed connection between Manchester and Leeds, at the heart of the Northern Powerhouse Rail scheme. However, transport and rail planners have made clear that the scheme, as currently conceived, is dependent on, rather than separate to, HS2. The terms of reference say the review will inform the PM’s decision on “whether and how we proceed” with HS2, including phase one – the line to Birmingham, which has already been approved by parliament. Treasury funds for the major civil engineering contracts, agreed last year, have yet to be released under a “notice to proceed”. The review will also examine whether Northern Powerhouse Rail could be prioritised over building southern sections of HS2. However, the review’s terms of reference suggest most of the work will consider whether costs could be cut by modifying plans to build past Birmingham rather than jettisoning the whole project. That could mean cutting line speeds, or making Old Oak Common the London terminus, as Berkeley suggested. Berkeley said he believed more rail capacity was needed, but added: “I’m opposed to saying it’s a good thing for the country and we should do it regardless of the costs.” But, he added: ”I share the view with [Johnson] that the investment needs to be in the north.”