On 1 September 1939, Simone Weil sent a telegram to her brother André: “Recommend reading newspapers”. He was on holiday in Finland and she thought he might be too deeply involved in mathematical cogitations to notice Hitler invading Poland. There was a kind of family comedy being played out here, in which they both eagerly assumed their roles. André was the abstract thinker, by now a well-known mathematician, whose parents had taken away his writing materials as a small child, only for him to scratch equations into a cement pavement with a rock instead. Simone was the worldly one, devoted to alleviating the suffering of others. In the 1930s she’d burned her hands while working in a factory and offered her services in the Spanish civil war. Karen Olsson shows in her new book just how complex and deep-rooted the role-play between the siblings could be. Olsson is an American novelist. Her affinity with the Weils dates from her youthful obsession with maths; she took maths courses as an undergraduate at Harvard, “trekking through an abstract moonscape”, and now longs for those days, missing “a certain constellation of feelings” that came with maths. Asked by her young son: “Where are numbers?”, she thinks about the relationship between numbers and the world. This is a question that troubled André, and that troubled his sister, who was desperate from childhood to understand André’s work but was suspicious of algebra, finding it dangerously untethered from nature. Olsson explores the work of both Weils, hoping to understand their shared commitment to truth. Simone – whom TS Eliot described as “a kind of genius akin to that of a saint” – was devoted to a religious ideal of the good. In Olsson’s formulation, she used maths as something like a meditative practice, allowing it to “surpass the part of brain that does math”. This seems to sit oddly alongside her commitment to worldly involvement. But here again, working in the factory or, during the war, on a farm where she slept on a dirt floor, she was seeking some complicated mixture of charity and oblivion, this time through pure suffering. As the war progressed, she in effect starved herself to death, dying in 1943 aged 34. André, meanwhile, despite his otherworldly preoccupations, did better at worldly life. Arrested during the war first (falsely) as a Russian spy in Finland and then (correctly) for avoiding military service in France, he turned his prison cell into a professorial office, and was always busy with maths. Olsson suggests that his success came in some complicated, almost unconscious way at Simone’s expense: she wonders “whether his sanity somehow implicated his sister’s extremity, whether in the Weil family, the two roles were divided between them: he would be the great mathematician, and she would become unhinged.” It’s an attractive theory, though describing Simone as unhinged feels wrong: it loses sight of the intellectual sanity that she sustained even as she apparently went mad. After all, sane protest at a crazy world might well manifest as insanity. Uniquely among accounts of the Weils, Olsson creates a vivid sense of Simone grappling with the maths alongside us Olsson has taken on a complicated mix of subjects. The book is part memoir, part biography and part a general history of 20th-century maths. Its method is aphoristic and digressive: short sections are juxtaposed, sometimes with a kind of cumulative energy and sometimes more randomly. There were times when I longed for something more expansive, for the characters to break out of their small sections. Also I wanted to hear more about the Weils and less (or more intimately) about Olsson, whose own experiences as detailed here are rather less profound than those of her subjects. But this ordinariness does have the advantage of making her an everywoman guide, and what she does brilliantly is to explain the maths clearly and often fascinatingly. Also, and this must be unique among accounts of the Weils, she creates a vivid sense of Simone grappling with the maths alongside us. For Simone, this urgent need to understand came at a cost. She hated encountering the limits of her own brain, wanting to kill herself at the age of 13 when she discovered that she wasn’t as bright as her brother at certain subjects. Even after proving herself many times over, she never lost this sense of inferiority, and it may have been there in the background as she pushed herself, competing with her brother within the terrain she’d chosen. At one stage during the war, she dreamed that André was a tooth, stuck in her mouth and schooling her insistently. She tried to wrench him loose, wanting to feel the bloody gap where he used to be. • The Weil Conjectures is published by Bloomsbury (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99