What were you hoping for?A fun date with someone lively and interesting. First impressions?Tick. As in “yes”, not the blood‑sucking variety. What did you talk about?Everything, from gourmet cooking, how to eat a worm (quickly or not at all) to dodgy holiday apartments. Any awkward moments?Possibly for two seconds when we both realised that neither of us lives in London and I don’t even work in London. There was a slight “Are we on the right date, with the right person?” moment. But we carried on regardless, and I’m glad we did. Good table manners?Yes. Best thing about Jason?He has good banter, is interesting, likes food, cooking and Arsenal. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes, we could all do karaoke together and make cats cry. Describe Jason in three wordsFun and entertaining. What do you think he made of you?Something nice, I hope. Did you go on somewhere?No, I didn’t want my train to turn into a pumpkin and I had to work the next day. And… did you kiss?If the “mwah” type counts, then yes. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That my journey home didn’t take so long and I didn’t lose my glasses. Marks out of 10?8 (as a teacher it’s hard to be a generous marker). Would you meet again?Yes, as long as it’s not for one of his eight-hour bike rides – I’d be crying. What were you hoping for?To meet a stranger and make a friend. First impressions?Very pleased. What did you talk about?We didn’t stop nattering. From what we like to cook, to places we have visited and our mutual love of Africa and karaoke (I introduced Tanya to the Smule app). Any awkward moments?I was almost late when I got an update on the transfer situation. But Tanya supports the same team, so I got away with it. Good table manners?Excellent. Best thing about Tanya?Not too serious, and very easy to talk to. And she supports the right football team (deal breaker). Would you introduce her to your friends?Absolutely. Tanya is great company. Describe Tanya in three wordsRelaxed, cheeky, intelligent. What do you think she made of you?That I love bread and butter, especially butter, like to wear Lycra, and probably talk too much. Did you go on somewhere?No. But only due to trains – at least I hope so. And… did you kiss?Yes. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?The train timetable. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?We are looking to have another night out. • Jason and Tanya ate at Gezellig London WC1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com