Jimmy Anderson has been officially ruled out of next week’s second Ashes Test at Lord’s as fears grow over his chances of featuring again in the series. The 37-year-old went into the first Test following four weeks out with a torn muscle and pulled up lame on the opening morning of match as England, a bowler short thereafter, went on to suffer a 251-run defeat by Australia. Joe Root, the England captain, refused to point the finger in the aftermath of going 1-0 down in the series, claiming the decision to play Anderson was made “unanimously” after he passed all fitness tests during the buildup. But despite Anderson undergoing a second scan on the problem on Monday morning, England – due to name their squad for the second Test at the end of the week – are remaining vague about the severity of this apparent injury recurrence. A statement on Tuesday read: “England seam bowler Jimmy Anderson, who left the field during the first Specsavers Ashes Test match against Australia at Edgbaston on day one due to tightness to his right calf, underwent an MRI scan this week. “The MRI confirmed that Anderson has suffered a calf injury. As a result of the injury, he will commence a rehabilitation programme working with the England and Lancashire medical teams. “Anderson will miss the second Test match, which starts at Lord’s on Wednesday 14 August. He will be reassessed on an ongoing basis regarding his availability for the rest of Specsavers Ashes series.” Despite talk of taking it match by match, Anderson can effectively be ruled out of the third Test at Headingley that starts on 22 August. England are unlikely to take another risk on his fitness without it being proven in a match situation first but with the T20 Blast being played at present, opportunities are sparse. Lancashire have only one County Championship fixture before the start of the final Ashes Test, when they meet Glamorgan at Colwyn Bay from August 18, while there is a second XI friendly against Leicestershire in Liverpool that starts two days later. Should this prove too soon, another option would be for Anderson to make a loan appearance for Derbyshire when they host Australia for a three-day tour match that starts on 29 August and sits between the third and fourth Ashes Tests.