Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching The Handmaid’s Tale, series three, on Channel 4 in the UK. Please do not add spoilers for later episodes in the series. Season three of The Handmaid’s Tale has given us many excruciating sights, but at least we’ve had a bit of a respite from rape, until the Ceremony finally reared its ugly head again in this episode. We and June had always known that her relatively unmolested days as Ofjoseph couldn’t last forever. This was quite different from the clinical or cruel Ceremonies we’ve seen before on the show, and one in which June was far from the only victim. “Bearing witness”, June tells us, used to be common in the early days of Gilead when households were still resistant to monthly rapes, but that resistance, it’s implied, was swiftly eradicated. And no wonder – as June tells Commander and Mrs Lawrence, the entire household, Marthas included, will be executed if the Ceremony does not go ahead. June is put into the awful position of conducting her own rape, in a household that hasn’t got a clue about the rules of the Ceremony, all while two Commanders, an Aunt, a doctor, and a wife are breathing down her neck. But it isn’t all bad: “At least it wasn’t you,” June tells Fred afterwards, once again shattering the lie of their forbidden love that he repeatedly tells himself. The episode also offered us the clearest view of Commander Lawrence that we’ve yet had. Previously, his regular flits between rebellious rule-breaker and architect of Gilead made no sense, but this week we learned that it’s the Martha black market that gets Eleanor Lawrence her medication, which has now run out. He deals in the black market for his wife, and he doesn’t simply leave Gilead because he’s a war criminal, and would be jailed or executed as soon as he crossed the border. “And he would deserve it,” the newly-unmedicated Eleanor points out. He wants out, and he wants to live, and he wants to keep his wife safe – but he can’t have all three, hence his strange lifestyle, trying to cling on to his own little bubble of freedom on the edge of Gilead. “You helped create this world,” June tells him as he faces the horrific consequences of his own past actions. “How long did you think it would be before it came for you?” The double-punch of the Ceremony and his wife’s lack of medication are enough to finally push Lawrence towards action, and he agrees to June’s plan to get Eleanor, and as many children as she can, out of Gilead. “And be a hero,” he says, ambivalently. He’s no hero. Something tells us there’s no chance of Lawrence getting out of this alive. Bradley Whitford was brilliant in this episode, finally able to shine some light on Lawrence and expose who he really is underneath all that bitter snark. The Waterfords are still in deep with Commander Winslow, and Fred is clearly enjoying his time in Winslow’s reflected glory, strutting his way through an inspection of handmaids with all the confidence of power and mislead righteousness. He thinks himself untouchable enough to converse openly with June in front of dozens of handmaids, the ever-watching Aunt Lydia and his wife. The finale brought him back down to earth with a bump, with both June and Serena putting him back in his place. Serena is so desperate to get Nichole back that she is forcing Fred into a deal with Mark Tuello, the man who has been trying to bribe Serena into deflecting with promises of cigarettes and Honolulu. But will Fred risk his new standing, even for his own (stolen) daughter? None of the usual pop music this week reminding us of the world Gilead left behind only five years previously. Instead we were treated to some classical music instead. Beethoven’s Symphony No. 9 in D Minor played over the opening scene, as June hobbled with determined speed back to the Lawrence house. The episode then closes out with Vivaldi’s triumphant Gloria, as June gives us the first proper smile we’ve seen on this show for a long time: “We’re going to need a bigger boat.” Handmaids and Marthas can agree on few things, but children seem to be one of them, if the kitchenful of muffin baskets is anything to go by. June still refuses to leave Gilead without Hannah, but her new focus is on saving the children of her ‘friends’, and Alma and Janine are the first two handmaids to join her crusade. After their last encounter at Natalie’s bedside, it was kind of June to spare Janine further pain by lying to her about her son – although the lie will, we suspect, hurt Janine in the end. In the inspection scene, Winslow can be overheard talking to Aunt Lydia about rolling out the ‘veil’ slowly – it looks like, despite her reluctance, Lydia is going to be complicit in silencing the Boston handmaids, just like their DC counterparts. Winslow is a true misogynist, as seen in his look of confusion when June tells him that Lawrence treats her with respect, and in the curl of his lip whenever Serena speaks of political matters. What a repulsive character. The punishment for contraception is being torn apart by dogs. Of course it is.