A mystery bidder claims to have entered the fray to buy British Steel, days before a vehicle owned by the Turkish military pension fund was expected to enter exclusive talks with the government. Sources familiar with the potential buyer said it was a consortium of British and west African investors with ties to the construction industry. While the plant in Scunthorpe makes up the vast majority of British Steel, with about 4,000 employees, the government has so far expressed a preference for selling the company as a single entity, including satellite operations in areas such as Teesside. The unnamed buyer says it would not require any government assistance or grants, unlike some of the other bids. “The consortium is working on a long-term massive infrastructure project in west Africa,” said a source close to the company, which has masked its identity. “The successful purchase of the Scunthorpe site would mean an export opportunity of steel to this project – with immediate effect. “The project has an estimated 10-year delivery timescale and has multiple related additional export opportunities for British steel to the region.” The consortium, which includes a leading civil engineering company working in west Africa, said it had submitted its bid to the government’s official receiver and the accounting firm EY, which is managing the process, as well as the business secretary, Andrea Leadsom. When Greybull Capital bought British Steel in 2016 it promised great things. The private equity firm pledged to invest £400m and within months it was boasting of a return to profit and a bright future ahead. Two years later it appears to be on the brink of collapse unless it receives a government-funded bailout. In a letter to staff last week, the British Steel chief executive blamed weak market demand, high raw material prices, the weakness of sterling and uncertainty over the outcome of Brexit discussions. It is not the only factor in the crisis but it is very important. Steel contracts are typically agreed well in advance of the product being delivered. As things stand, the UK is due to leave the EU on 31 October and the terms of that separation are yet to be agreed, meaning British Steel’s overseas customers don’t know what tariffs will apply to steel they buy from the company. Sources close to the company say orders from customers in the EU and further afield have dried up as a result. The steelworks in Scunthorpe represents the bulk of the company and it is hard to see who would be an obvious buyer for the site, given that it has struggled under successive owners. The fundamental problems affecting it show no sign of solution any time soon. The UK steel industry has been in decline for some time due to a variety of factors such as overcapacity in EU steelmaking and Chinese state-subsidised firms flooding the global market with cheap product. An industry that employed 323,000 people in 1971 now employs less than a tenth of that, at 31,900. The closure of the Redcar steelworks in 2015 was a significant blow to the sector and left the UK with just two blast furnace steelworks: Scunthorpe and Tata Steel-owned Port Talbot in south Wales. Rob Davies It said: “The consortium is releasing the news of its interest at this time as it is important that the workforce and other stakeholders at Scunthorpe steelworks know there is a credible offer involved that puts the long-term future of the site at the heart of its plans. “The closing of the steel works would not only lose a century-old set of skills, but decimate the town and surrounding area, including all the businesses in the supply chain. The benefits to all concerned in this deal will be realised for many decades to come.” The Guardian has approached EY and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy for comment. The late bid comes as the government is close to entering exclusive talks with a subsidiary of the Turkish military pension fund Oyak. Two other bidders are still in the running should a deal with Oyak prove too difficult. Liberty House, led by the Indian-born metals tycoon Sanjeev Gupta, would prefer to convert the Scunthorpe works from a blast furnace plant, which makes steel from scratch. It seeks government loan guarantees to replace the blast furnaces with electric arc furnaces, which would be used to make products by recycling scrap steel. Greybull Capital, the investment group that owned British Steel when it collapsed into insolvency, is understood to remain interested in picking up parts of the business if the government’s preference for selling the whole business fails to materialise. In that scenario, the Scunthorpe steelworks would be likely to close for good.