If I’d been at the Waca in 1975 when Roy Fredericks thrashed 169 off Dennis Lillee and Jeff Thomson, or Headingley in 1991 when Graham Gooch made 154 against the West Indian quicks, or Bridgetown in 1999 when Brian Lara made 153 out of 311 and beat Australia single-handedly, one wicket left in the fourth innings, then maybe I’d feel differently. But yes, Stokes’s 135 probably is the greatest, and certainly the most preposterously improbable and wonderfully entertaining, innings I’ve ever seen live, ahead of Kevin Pietersen’s century at the Oval on the last day of 2005 series. Recency bias once saw Robbie Williams come sixth in a poll of 600,000 to decide the most influential musicians of the last millennium – one place above Mozart – so we should be wary of getting carried away in the moment. But given the shot played in England’s first innings meltdown, the near-unbroken 24 overs of toil/atonement with the ball that followed, the spadework put in second time around and yet the destiny of the Ashes looking settled when Jack Leach came to the crease, I’m struggling to think of a rival I have watched live. Kusal Perera against South Africa this year – which I didn’t – must come close. As someone who has not only failed to sit through all 2,358 Tests, but who was on an inconveniently delayed flight during Stokes’s firework finale, I wouldn’t dare make such a claim. But few Test innings have managed to span both the sheer stolidity of Atherton’s 185 not out in Johannesburg and the matchwinning biff of Botham’s 149 not out in 1981 while throwing in a switch-hitting dash of KP’s 2005 vintage. Combine that with the fact it was a lot more gripping to watch than any of Lara or Tendulkar’s epics – and unlike Bradman, it was in full colour – and I’m sold. The Stokes innings felt totally different to great hundreds I’ve seen. It was a modern beast, crossing Test match patience with the creative strokeplay and sustained aggression of T20. And it has a modern partner, in Kusal Perera’s unbeaten 153 to beat South Africa last February. Both were chasing over 300. Perera needed 78 for the last wicket, Stokes needed 74. Perera hit five sixes in the closing stages, Stokes hit eight overall. Both paced it perfectly. If anything, Perera had it even harder being away from home in the far weaker team. But both were astonishing. There’s no meaningful way to say that something is the best. You can say that nothing else could be better. It has some great competition. Among England cricketers there was Ian Botham in 1981 – his innings at Old Trafford was in many ways superior to the one at Headingley, even though the situation was not so dire. Consider Graham Gooch at Headingley in 1991 against West Indies, Mike Atherton in Johannesburg, Kevin Pietersen in Mumbai in 2012. Stokes’s innings had elements of all these knocks: the infinite patience of Atherton, the expert gleaning against the odds like Gooch and the smashing the ball to all parts like Botham and Pietersen. I’m pretty sure I’ll think the same in a few months’ time. I always thought Graham Gooch’s 154 not out against West Indies in 1991 was the best I would ever see. Now I have no idea. The nuclear assault at the end of Stokes’s innings, which belonged to a T20 match, makes it even harder to compare with Gooch’s unyielding classic. Stokes’s innings was played under the greatest pressure; Gooch’s was in tougher conditions against a better attack. Stokes’s had the most euphoric pay-off; Gooch’s was much less dependent on fortune. Which is the best? I don’t know. I just want to listen to Jonathan Agnew’s commentary of the final ball, and the roar of the crowd, forever.