The UK’s train operators are to pull out of the Interrail scheme, which has allowed unlimited train travel across Europe for a fixed price for almost 50 years. The Rail Delivery Group (RDG), which represents the industry, said it would withdraw on 1 January 2020. It will also pull out of the parallel Eurail scheme for non-EU visitors. The change will have little effect on UK travellers to Europe, who will still be able to travel across EU countries, but they will no longer have the option of starting their trip from their home station. Instead they will have to begin their journey on the Eurostar from London St Pancras. European travellers will not, however, be able to visit the UK as part of their Interrail adventures. Instead they will have the option of buying BritRail passes offering unlimited train travel across England, Scotland and Wales, but for roughly the same price as the current Interrail passes that cover the whole continent, including the UK. A one-month BritRail pass costs €605 (£557) for adults and €363 for those 25 and under. A one-month Interrail pass costs €603 for adults and €464 for those aged 12 to 27. The former Labour transport secretary Andrew Adonis said the decision to pull out of the Interrail scheme was “shocking”. This is shocking https://t.co/9Rd9Ir2yvR Luisa Porritt, the deputy leader of Liberal Democrat MEPs, said: “This is a desperately sad decision, which in particular could lead to fewer young Europeans enjoying Britain and more barriers to Brits enjoying the rest of Europe. This sends the message we are turning our backs on Europe and the fantastic opportunities it offers us. What a terrible advertisement for UK plc.“Travel across Europe is already set to become more difficult, cumbersome and expensive as a result of this Tory government’s disastrous Brexit policy.” Robert Nisbet, the RDG’s director of nations and regions, said British operators had pulled out because offering the Interrail schemes alongside BritRail was “confusing”. “The rail industry boosts British tourism and, working together, rail companies are offering the best option for tourists with BritRail, which is recommended by Visit Britain, offers two-for-one deals on 200 attractions across the country and includes the convenience of mobile tickets,” Nisbet said. “Although the Eurail Group has ended our decades-long membership of Interrail since we stopped trialling Eurail passes, British people will feel no difference. They can still buy an Interail pass, get the Eurostar and travel by train across Europe.” The Interrail scheme was launched in 1972, offering people up to the age of 21 the possibility of travelling to 21 countries for £27.50. More than 300,000 Interrail passes were sold last year, almost three times the figure for 2005. Mark Smith, a train travel expert and founder of the website The Man in Seat 61, said: “This is a decision of the British train operators, it’s on them. It’s as if they see the Flygskam [flight-shaming] grassroots movement [encouraging people to move] towards rail, and instead of welcoming it, deliberately go out of their way to stop it.” This is a decision of the British train operators, it's on them.  It's as if they see the Flygskam grass-roots movement towards rail, and instead of welcoming it, deliberately go out of their way to stop it. UK has been part of InterRail since 1973.