What were you hoping for?My friends would call my ideal man an “intellectual hunk”. First impressions?Smart, nice white shirt and friendly. He gave me a hug and a really warm welcome, so I felt comfortable immediately. What did you talk about?Our nephews, his favourite Persian dishes to cook, our flaws, mindfulness, strong women in our lives, and how glad we were neither of us were Tories. Any awkward moments?No, not really. Good table manners?Exemplary. He even shared his scallops with me. Best thing about Ryan?Confident but not cocky – a tricky combination to get right. Would you introduce him to your friends?I would: he’s a lovely guy. Describe him in three words?Smiley, charismatic, refreshing. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was quite direct. And he definitely thought I was mad for having asked him what his star sign was, five minutes into the meal. Did you go on somewhere?No, but we stayed at the restaurant till it closed. And... did you kiss?We did have a brief peck. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?I wouldn’t have admitted my slightly embarrassing penchant for star signs. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?He’s asked me out, so yes. We might go to a political protest this time. What were you hoping for?For the date to go well so I don’t get publicly ridiculed. First impressions?This girl is stunning, but I’m not sure why she’s brought the contents of her house with her (loads of bags). What did you talk about?How Trump barred me from the US last week because my dad is Iranian, Love Island, north London champagne socialism. Any awkward moments?We ended up being the last ones in the restaurant. The waiters were hanging around, trying to get us out. Good table manners?Impeccable. Although I gave her one of my king prawns, and she didn’t eat it. Unbelievable waste of a great prawn. RIP. Best thing about Maeve?She was really easy to talk to. Would you introduce her to your friends?She’s too smart for my friends. Describe Maeve in three words?Talented, funny, intelligent. What do you think she made of you?A man with terrible French skills but decent chat. Did you go on somewhere?We would have, but it was a bit late. And... did you kiss?Yes. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?We should have left the dessert and gone for more drinks somewhere else. Marks out of 10?High as first dates go, 8½. Deductions have to be made for the prawn. Would you meet again?We’re talking about meeting up. • Maeve and Ryan ate at Parrillan, Coal Drops Yard, London N1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded visit soulmates.theguardian.com