The K-League, South Korea’s domestic league, has said it feels “indignation and disappointment” after Juventus refused to apologise for leaving Cristiano Ronaldo out of a pre-season friendly in Seoul last week. Ronaldo was contracted to play for at least 45 minutes against the K-League All Stars according to event organisers, but did not play. The forward was advised to rest by Juve’s medical staff due to muscle fatigue from a match played 48 hours earlier in Nanjing. The league sent a letter of protest to Juve over the alleged contract violation and the club’s chairman, Andrea Agnelli, responded on Wednesday. He denied claims that the Italian club had acted irresponsibly, and did not apologise for Ronaldo’s absence. On Thursday the K-League said Juventus’s response was filled with “untruth and deception” and demanded an apology. “K League clearly registers our profound indignation and disappointment to Juventus’ irresponsible behaviour and manners, and we strongly urge Juventus to offer a sincere apology and explain the reason for Ronaldo’s no-show,” the league said. “The key point … is that Ronaldo did not play even for a minute, contrary to the contract guarantee that he would play for at least 45 minutes. However, Juventus’s reply did not offer any apology nor did it explain what exactly happened that day.” The league also rejected Juve’s claims that a delay at the airport and heavy traffic en route to the stadium had forced the match to kick off later than scheduled. “Juventus’s claim that it took roughly 1 hour 50 minutes to exit the airport proved to be a lie,” the K League added. “It took only 26 minutes to go through immigration for all 76 [members of the] Juventus delegation and it was verified by the Korea Immigration Service afterwards. “It is obvious to say that the club undervalued South Korea and neglected the current situation [which] originated from Juventus’s irresponsible behaviour and manners, including Ronaldo’s no-show.” On Tuesday, it was revealed that irate football fans in South Korea were planning to pursue legal action, seeking compensation for the cost of tickets and “mental anguish” after Ronaldo’s failure to appear in the game.