A comedian friend of mine told me that being on stage is the only place he feels completely in control. How incredibly lucky, I thought: I feel the opposite. Sure, I wrote the words I’m saying, and I’m in charge of my body, but aside from that it’s up to the gods. This feeling is part insecurity and partly because of a gross experience I had at last year’s Edinburgh fringe which, if it was a god’s fault, was definitely Zeus’s. An audience member had a wank in my show. I know, such a Zeus thing to do. I don’t want to scare anyone who is attending but, in the dark, humid caves that make up a large number of the festival’s venues, people can apparently get away with stuff like that. I was made aware of it afterwards by venue staff. They were informed by another comic who had seen it happening but, knowing what it means to perform at the festival, did not want to interrupt my show. So he sat through it all, occasionally nudging the man to try and get him to stop. Hearing about it afterwards, it affected both me and my show, as I was definitely more worried about doing all my dick jokes. It made me feel violated, and I worried that he’d come back. When I began doing comedy, the stage was a place where I could finally be myself. Whatever weird stuff was inside my head could come out and, instead of being judged for it, I could use it to make people laugh (sometimes). Amazing! Of course, to most people, I don’t look like your average comedian. In fact, due to the increasingly broad array of voices, audiences have a growing need for a quick definition. ‘What the hell are we looking at? And make it snappy!’ I usually get boiled down to this: I’m female and foreign. They’re not wrong: I am a Dutch girl. But to me this is just a boring formality, the stuff to get out of the way before I can get to what I really want to do, which is be a silly idiot and tell dick jokes. Being in control on stage helps to convey a clear sense of self, and that’s never been my strong suit. In school I only managed to be “kind of weird” and never quite fit in, even with the proper outsiders. You know, the ones who loved Morrissey, French cinema and cigarettes – they’re the same everywhere. Identity is shaped as much by what you think you are as by what other people project on to you. In my show this year, I talk about a couple of different guys who I thought were my friends but turned out only to be interested in sex, and would be surprised and sometimes angry when I didn’t return their interest. What about all the effort they put in? Surely, like in the movies, if they just kept trying I would fall for their charms – because we all know that being in love is the same as being tired. 'It affected both me and my show, as I was definitely more worried about doing all my dick jokes' Those guys saw me as a love interest and I worried this was my fault somehow. So I ended up adjusting my behaviour with other friends. How other people see and define you affects you. In the same way, kids who are bullied often gain victim complexes, become attention seekers or, worse, turn needlessly defiant. Since the incident last summer, I’ve heard of two other performers who’ve had the same happen to them. I’m sure there are more. It’s so ridiculous that this is something we have to worry about. It’s hard enough going to the fringe hoping people will take an interest in you as a comic, without having some literal wanker treat you like a sexual object. It really hasn’t helped me with my sense of self, and it certainly hasn’t helped me find my way back to thinking about comedy as a space where I can safely express myself. But I’m also done worrying about it. I love standup and he’s not allowed to take that from me. I’ve decided to accept the fact that some things will always be out of my control, and as a way of putting it to bed this year, I’m bluntly addressing it in my show. That way, if Mr Wankypants does come back, he might feel as much shame as I did. Micky Overman is at the Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 25 August.