Chelsea have taken legal action against 11 ticket touts, resulting in a six-month jail term for one, after catching them in the act thanks to an undercover sting operation. The club launched a concerted effort to pursue touts through the courts this year, a tactic first reported by the Guardian, after becoming frustrated by the ease with which they were operating around Stamford Bridge. It won high court injunctions against 11 touts, forcing them to pay the combined £170,000 cost incurred by the club in putting a stop to their activity. One of the touts was given a six-month jail sentence for contempt of court in relation to the injunction. “Ticket touting is known to have links to organised crime,” the club said. “The above action taken against touts operating around Stamford Bridge sends a strong message to others looking to engage in such criminal and anti-social behaviour.” The resale of football tickets has been illegal under English law since 1994, after it was listed among the recommendations of the Taylor report to improve safety in the wake of the Hillsborough disaster. But the practice is rife online and outside the grounds of popular clubs, with police resources usually diverted towards safety on matchdays, and has led to concerns about fan safety and the effect on prices paid by fans. Undercover filming by the Guardian last year revealed touts boasting that they could get hundreds of tickets for any game, frequently selling them at vast mark-ups via online resale platforms. With police apparently unable to stop the practice, Chelsea have responded by adopting a tactic of seeking high court injunctions against individuals demanding that they cease selling the club’s tickets. Securing an injunction allows them to pursue the touts for legal costs and means touts can be jailed if they breach its terms. Other Premier League clubs are understood to be monitoring Chelsea’s strategy with a view to following suit. Chelsea advised fans who have tickets but cannot attend a match to use the club’s official resale system instead. The club said: “This football club will not tolerate touting and will continue to identify offenders and take further legal action through the Courts to ensure that our club and the surrounding area are safe for our loyal supporters and visitors. “Individuals found in possession of unlawfully purchased tickets will be refused entry to the stadium or removed from it.”