Do you like jeopardy, excitement, explosions, sexual frissons, car chases, drama and gunfire? Well, hmm, OK – we might run into a problem here. Because Celebrity 5 Go Barging (Fri, 8pm, Channel 5) contains absolutely none of that. You know the Celebrity 5 Go … format by now, surely. Five celebrities – of the very “Jane McDonald said no: are you free tomorrow? Well you didn’t book any panto this year, Michael, so it’s that or back to the factory” variety – go somewhere and do something, often things reminiscent of a particular sub-niche of the classic old-fashioned British holiday: a heavy air of raincoats and squashed cheese sandwiches and your dad losing his rag at a blocked chemical toilet. So we’ve had 5 Go Caravanning and 5 Go Camping. This is the second series of 5 Go Barging, because the previous one was such a success. There is an extended sequence in the first episode where Amanda Barrie and Shaun Williamson do some very light banter in a provincial charity shop (“A pink karaoke machine!” Barry from EastEnders – Williamson’s canonical name – says, brightly. “Shall we?”). Stuff like that. You get the idea. And so to the new series, which has the aforementioned Barrie v Barry crossover event; Michael Buerk, who is apparently at the stage in his career and life where he booms into every room and goes: “Where’s the WINE?”; John “81 years old” Prescott; and Anita Harris, who really is stretching the very limit of the word “celebrity” there in the title. Together they all titter through the quiet canals of Staffordshire, cooing at grain storage buildings, bunking head-to-foot along the length of the barge before waking up for bacon sandwiches, steering their ships gracelessly into the banks. Every time a lock comes up, Barry from EastEnders (who – and I can’t be sure – very much seems as if he sleeps in a cagoule) is issued to move it, because he’s the youngest of the cast at 53. Halfway through episode one, he pumps a tank of John Prescott’s faeces out through a tube and into a waste facility. Nothing actually happens. But then that, I suppose, is the point: sometimes you need something exceptionally mild to fall asleep to, which is exactly what this is. Amanda and Barry have a serene squabble about whether butter belongs in a bacon sandwich. John Prescott and Michael Buerk quietly repair a paddlewheel. Someone says “muggins, here” and someone else says “blinking” instead of a swear word. And there, in the middle of every episode, they all stop for a drink at some weird canalside local – lots of adult ponytails among the people here, lots of all-weather fleeces, a near tangible air of outdoor smoking breath – while someone explains for slightly too long about how flint used to come through this mill until it didn’t any more. Nothing happens, obviously – there is slightly more of a risk of contestant death than other reality TV shows, but that’s only because John Prescott keeps threatening to shatter a hip by jumping between barges – but then why do things have to happen all the time anyway? Sometimes you just want to watch Barry from EastEnders, holding a pipe full of crap, quietly wondering what time the pubs shut.