That Ko Jin-young could enter illustrious company on Sunday feels like an understatement. Babe Zaharias, Mickey Wright, Pat Bradley, Inbee Park, Ben Hogan and Tiger Woods are the only players to win three majors in the same year. Should Ko prevail here, she will make this group a septet; with the added quirk of two major triumphs arriving in two weeks. Hogan, Woods et al did not manage that. There are, however, similarities between Ko and Brooks Koepka. The 24-year-old from Seoul has won three times in standard LPGA Tour events; like Koepka her obvious specialism is the majors. There is also a score to settle in this event, given Ko was beaten into second place by Park at Turnberry in 2015. Given 2019 form, Ko’s charge through the field was the most striking aspect of round three. Victories at the ANA Inspiration and Evian Championship mean this run would have been just as notable to other players in the British Open field. Ko reached the turn in 33 before chipping in from behind the 16th when en route to a 68. Her 10-under tally leaves her within striking distance of the lead. Ko watched a birdie putt at the last dance agonisingly past the cup. Ko’s leaderboard placing feels like a formality. Not so Hinako Shibuno, who chased down Ashleigh Buhai in stunning style on Saturday afternoon. Buhai led by five - and Shibuno by six - before a dramatic turnaround. The South African’s 72 means she now trails Shibuno’s 14 under par by two. The 20-year-old Shibuno is a major debutante, as not at all apparent during her 67. It is tribute to Carlota Ciganda that she was not in the least overwhelmed by the latest Ko major show; until the 18th. The 29-year-old Spaniard, playing alongside Ko, was five under for her round before encountering awful bother at the bottom of a hedge to the right of the last. The upshot was an ugly double bogey six, meaning a third 69 and a nine-under total. “If that drive was one metre to the left, I had a shot into the green,” said Ciganda. “But there were so many positives out there. I want to focus on them.” Morgan Pressel, hoping for a wildcard pick for the US Solheim Cup team, boosted her chances considerably with a third round of 66. Pressel’s back nine was of 32 shots. At 10-under par, she may yet have a strong say in the outcome of this major. The bigger picture relates to Pressel placing herself firmly at the forefront of Solheim permutations as some of her more illustrious compatriots struggle. Paula Creamer, Cristie Kerr and Stacy Lewis all missed the cut here. “It would be amazing,” said Pressel of a potential appearance at Gleneagles. “I’ve been fortunate enough to be on five teams. I missed it last time and that was difficult. I really am happy that I’m playing well, playing much better this year and obviously to have the opportunity to wear red, white and blue would be great. Maybe I’m giving [US captain] Juli [Inkster] something to think about.” Georgia Hall’s hopes of a successful title defence most likely ended within nine holes on Saturday. The champion from last year at Royal Lytham & St Annes reached the turn in 37, with a double bogey at the 9th emphasising Hall’s frustrations. Back-to-back bogeys from the 12th meant further damage. Hall’s 74 – her highest score of the week by five – slid her back to four under par and realistically aiming for a top-10 finish at best. Charley Hull looked to be heading in the same direction as Hall after playing the front half in two-over-par 38. The Woburn member, who has commanded massive support, responded defiantly, though, with birdies at the 11th, 12th, 13th and 15th. On the 14th Hull passed up a glorious opportunity. Hull’s 70 moved her to minus nine. She is still in the mix.