Jamie Chadwick is, at 21, quick, compelling to watch and no stranger to winning. She already boasts an impressive racing CV and on Sunday afternoon is in every position to add to it by becoming the inaugural winner of the all‑women W Series championship in the final round at Brands Hatch. For Chadwick, though, this is just a step towards her ultimate goal. “F1 is the dream of every young driver,” she says. Earlier this year Chadwick was taken on by the Williams F1 team as part of their junior driver programme, which she says is the first proper step in fulfilling her ambition. “Being in amongst the team, you learn how they operate, how an F1 team works … It hits home to me that, if I do a good job and get to be where I need to be and there is an opportunity down the line, it makes that dream feel a lot more like reality.” The W Series was created to promote women in motor sport. It does not require them to have any financial backing and the series meets all their costs. Its aim is to showcase and develop talent and ultimately, the organisers hope, to help enable a woman to race in F1. Chadwick is more than aware of some of the harsh realities of racing. “Motor sport is filled with false hope,” she says. “You might get a phone call from an F1 team. I had one and quite often they have massive price tags on them. The reason they want you involved is because they want the big cheque.” In contrast the Williams deputy team principal, Claire Williams, went to the first W Series race at Hockenheim to see Chadwick first hand, before discussing a programme at the team with her, without requiring backing. Chadwick duly impressed. She put her car on pole superbly in treacherous wet conditions in Germany and went on to win, taking a lead in the six‑meeting championship she has not relinquished. She has two wins and three other podium finishes and enters the finale 13 points ahead of Beitske Visser of the Netherlands. Visser has to finish in the top three to have any chance of catching her and whatever she does will not be enough if the British driver finishes on the podium again. Chadwick, from Bath, already holds some impressive records, despite not starting racing until she was 13, late by modern standards. In 2015 she became the first woman – and youngest driver – to win the British GT championship. In doing so she won the Britcar 24 Hours at Silverstone, becoming at 17 the youngest winner of a 24-hour race. She then entered single-seaters with two seasons in British F3 and last year at Brands Hatch was the first woman to win a British F3 race. This year she became the first woman to win the MRF Challenge Formula 2000 championship. The W Series, however, was an entirely new proposition. The 20 drivers, all racing the same, single‑seater F3 cars, swap vehicles and engineers at every race and share all their data. They all speak of the friendly, collegiate atmosphere and sense of purpose it brings. “It’s bizarre, like being back at boarding school,” says Chadwick. “It’s like nothing else I have experienced and a pleasant surprise. “Racing drivers are often isolated. You go about your junior career as an individual. You are never amongst other drivers 24-7. Here you are all together, you race each other, then you go to the hotel and have dinner together. When you have 20 like-minded female drivers, naturally you are going to get on. It is intense in a positive way, socially intense, mentally intense.” Chadwick has collected acclaim throughout her career. She drove for Aston Martin in British GT and their three-times Le Mans-winning works driver Darren Turner described her as having “a natural, smooth driving style and a good understanding of what makes a car work and how to make it go fast”. Williams recognised similar strengths. “Jamie was the obvious candidate,” she says. “She is doing a great job in W Series, great attitude, approach and drive. She is part of the academy, so we can support her path into the higher echelons of motor sport whatever that will be. It’s early days, she has a good pedigree behind her but she has a lot of work to do. F1 is a long way off. She has to put the work in to get there. I think she has some great talent.” The champion will take away $500,000 yet beyond the money and glory of taking the title there is a genuine sense that the W Series has already made a difference. Chadwick, who was initially sceptical of the concept, believes the selection process showed the right intent. Fifty-five drivers were evaluated at the Melk circuit in Austria, where they were tested not in F3 machinery but road cars. “They didn’t do it in an F3 car because that would be an advantage to those that had driven in F3,” she says. “They made it clear they were just trying to find natural talent. That stood out for me. They were just going for the right people.” Those selected included older drivers such as Britain’s Alice Powell, whose career had all but ended due to a lack of funding and who has described racing as “a billionaire boys’ club”. She proved she should be in a car, standing fourth in the championship. Others have prospered, too. “Fabienne Wohlwend is going full-time next season thanks to the attention she has received,” Chadwick says. “Marta García had already written off her career at 17 and she’s had a second chance. We are looking at a lot of girls that are coming into it after a few years out but hopefully also now, as it goes on, we will see more girls aspire to get into the sport because of this.” Formula One has not had a female driver in a championship race since Lella Lombardi at the Austrian Grand Prix in 1976. It seems hard to imagine that when one finally returns she will not have at some point been on the W Series grid. This may still be some way off but in the meantime Chadwick intends to keep her foot on the gas. “I just want to keep pushing as hard as I can,” she says. “At the moment, with support from Williams and W Series, I am in a good position. At Brands Hatch it would be nice to properly seal it off with a win.”