The title of Charley Miles’s play is somewhat misleading. Yes, its two female characters are each struggling with how best to be a daughter to their deteriorating father. Pauline – Paul for short – stays at home to care for him; Rachel, younger by almost a decade, channels her energy into campaigning for him and others with his condition. But really, Daughterhood is about what it means to be a sister. In a nonlinear sequence of scenes, Miles shows us snapshots from Paul and Rachel’s lives. We first see them in adulthood, strained and resentful: the one who left and the one who stayed. As we dart about in time, we get glimpses of their pasts as children, as teenagers, as young adults full of aspirations. Men (all played by Toyin Omari-Kinch) move in and out of their lives, but the sisters remain the focus. The restless movement back and forward forces us to piece things together for ourselves and question our initial impressions. Is Rachel really the selfish, attention-seeking younger sibling she seems to be? Did Paul have any option but to shoulder the burden of caring? We see the situation from multiple perspectives, avoiding simple conclusions. Miles sharply observes the complex, envy-laced relationship between siblings. To Rachel, Paul is the picture of perfection she can never live up to; in Paul’s eyes, Rachel’s life is flawless and carefree. As the two sisters, Charlotte Bate and Charlotte O’Leary subtly suggest the heavy weight of shared history. As they pace around the small circular space of the Roundabout, they keep being tugged back to one another, connected by an invisible but tangible bond. Daughterhood is a slender, tightly focused play, but its structure cleverly serves the material. Details are revealed at precisely the right moment, uncovering the reasons for long-buried resentment or flipping earlier assumptions on their heads. In some scenes, it feels as though Paul and Rachel fall all too easily into the roles they’ve been assigned, becoming defined by martyrdom and selfishness respectively. But then that’s the way with families: it’s hard to stray from the script they’ve written for you. • At the Roundabout at Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August.• Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews. 