Artichokes are wondrous things, full of a phenolic compound called cynarin, which momentarily inhibits our ability to taste sweetness, leaving the tastebuds insensible to it, then acutely aware soon after. Maybe that’s why they make me salivate so uncontrollably: they’re good for the senses, and even digestion, if not for making friends. Many recipes use only the heart, requiring a messy operation that involves removing the stalk, top and leaves, and discarding them. Few recipes give any guidance on how to use these up, which is odd, seeing as they’re so delicious, if a bit fiddly. The toughest outer leaves are inedible, but a few rows in, the cheek of flesh at the base of the leaf is very tender, while the innermost leaves are scoffable in their entirety. Raw artichoke is just as tasty as cooked. To make a “carpaccio” of the larger leaves, slice the cheek of flesh from the base of each leaf, dice, dress with lemon and good oil, season and turn with shards of aged pecorino, and serve on the rest of the leaf. Next time you make a recipe that calls for just the artichoke hearts, don’t discard the leaves – they can be frozen for later use or turned into a distinctive stock. Or, if you’d like to upcycle them into something a little more elaborate, this dish does just that. Burrata and artichokes are a match made in heaven, and the pesto seals the deal. The leaves and stalk from 1 artichoke – use the heart for another recipeExtra-virgin olive oil1 garlic clove, peeledSea salt and freshly ground black pepperWhite wine1 burrata1 stale flatbread, fried until crisp and broken into piecesPesto, to taste2 sprigs fresh mint, leaves picked and stalks finely chopped Heat a thick-based frying pan on a medium heat with a good glug of extra-virgin olive oil. Add the artichoke leaves and the whole garlic clove, and season with sea salt. Fry gently for a few minutes, then add a slosh of white wine and cover. Leave to steam for five minutes, or until the leaves become tender; add more wine, if need be. Remove the lid and cook to evaporate any remaining wine. Douse the artichoke leaves with a little more olive oil and fry gently until caramelised. Serve as they are as a side vegetable, or turn into a centrepiece by serving on a platter with pieces of torn burrata, mint and crisp bread, and drizzled with pesto. Eat the leaves just as you would a boiled globe artichoke, pulling the flesh off with your teeth.