I can’t deny it, I still have an enormous soft spot for the kind of American food that punctuated my 1990s childhood – shoestring fries, crunchy, golden hash browns, coleslaw with cream and milkshakes so thick, you could stand a spoon up in them – I loved them all. But my absolute favourite was barbecue beans, with their soft, sweet smokiness. Time has moved on, but my desire to eat those beans on any given day or night has not. Lucky for me, then, that they’re so easy to make at home ... These are two dishes in their own right, which I’ve brought together for a more satisfying meal, but you could make them separately, if you prefer – the corn cakes would be nice with srirachra mayo and the beans with rice and avocado. If you can’t find tinned pinto beans, use black beans or black-eyed beans instead. Prep 15 minCook 50 minServes 4 For the barbecue beans Rapeseed oil 1 large onion, peeled and chopped 3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 1 tsp chipotle powder (or hot paprika)1 ½ tbsp dark brown sugar 1 tsp salt1 ½ tsp dijon mustard 1 tbsp cider vinegar 1 x 400g tin tomatoes, chopped2 tins pinto beans, undrained For the corn fritters 75g quick polenta50g plain flour 1 tsp chipotle powder (or hot paprika) ½ tsp baking powder 100ml non-dairy milk 4 corn cobs, boiled and kernels shaved or 2 x 198g tins of corn, drained4 spring onions, finely sliced¾ tsp salt Avocado, lime and coriander, to serve Heat three tablespoons of oil in a deep-sided frying pan on a moderate heat and, when hot, add the onion. Cook for 10-12 minutes, until soft and golden, then mix in the garlic. Cook for two minutes, then add the chipotle, sugar, salt, dijon, cider vinegar and tomatoes. Cook for about eight minutes, until the mixture is a bit jammy, then add the beans and their cooking water. Cook for a final 10 minutes, then taste, adjust the seasoning if need be, and take off the heat. To make the corn fritters, mix all the ingredients together in a bowl. Heat a nonstick frying pan over a medium heat, add a tablespoon of oil and, when hot, scoop an eighth of the mixture into the pan, packing it down as much as you can. Do the same again with as many as you can comfortably fit in – you might need to do a couple of batches. Press the fritters down gently to flatten them. Cook for three minutes, or until golden and crisp, then flip and cook for three minutes on the other side. Repeat with the rest of the batter. To serve, put some beans on each plate, with a couple of corn cakes and some slices of avocado. Squeeze over some lime juice and scatter with fresh chopped coriander. Meera Sodha’s new book, East: 120 Vegetarian and Vegan Recipes from Bangalore to Beijing, is out now (Penguin, £20). To order a copy for just £15, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846.