If you followed Richard Gadd’s career up to his Edinburgh comedy award-winning Monkey See Monkey Do three years ago, you might think he’d had his lifetime’s fill of trauma and that happily, it had culminated in that cathartic triumph. Among its several startling achievements, Baby Reindeer leaves that notion in tatters. Gadd’s solo theatre debut recounts his horrifying – and apparently true – experiences with a stalker. He took pity on and flirted with Martha when she propped up the bar where he worked, six years ago. If that mistake didn’t quite prove fatal, it was the next worst thing. Baby Reindeer – his tormentor’s name for Gadd – narrates the relationship. We never see Martha: she’s represented by a bar-stool. But we hear her voicemail messages and her emails scroll across the venue’s ceiling. We’re played testimonies from the saga’s collaterally damaged: Gadd’s parents, partner, landlady. Perhaps it starts at too overheated a pitch – after all, we ain’t seen nothing yet – but Jon Brittain’s production tightens its grip with terrible inexorability, and Gadd performs it as if living the horror afresh. What elevates – or lowers – the story beyond the level of victim narrative is Gadd’s initial complicity in the abuse. With reference to the experiences described in Monkey See Monkey Do (sexual assault, sexual self-loathing), he presents himself as a disturbed soul, finding strange solace in Martha’s attraction to him. At every turn, he makes the wrong call on how to deal with the danger she poses. At points in this dance of desperate co-dependency, they seem (almost) as bad as each other. Until they’re not: Martha outstrips our worst expectations. She doorsteps him, comes to his gigs, abuses his partner. She sends 41,000 emails in three years. The police make things worse, forcing Gadd to trawl through hours of hateful voicemails in search of a criminal threat. The show, above all, is an appeal for better protection against harassment of this kind. Having robbed us of the closure Gadd’s award-win once supplied, Baby Reindeer offers none of its own, as the story is brought up-to-date and into the venue. It’s a haunted, haunting hour. • At Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews