After six years, two television series, several theatrical revivals (including a sold-out Off-Broadway run) and a shot-for-shot French remake, Fleabag is back in theatres for one final run: just Phoebe Waller-Bridge, alone on a spotlit stool, performing the one-woman show that made her the toast of Hollywood. Since it’s been widely perceived as a tract on millennial womanhood, we assembled three millennial critics for a discussion on the play’s relevance, cult status and sexual politics. Kate Wyver: After the TV show, the play felt like going to a gallery and looking at the artist’s sketchbooks. The show is just so much more developed, so the play can’t help but feel a little disappointing. Laura Snapes: I liked seeing the original source material. But the play was originally such a bolt from the blue. If you see it now, you’re always aware: that’s Phoebe Waller-Bridge. When it’s freighted with the phenomenon, it doesn’t work. Hannah J Davies: It was like MTV Unplugged – something you already know in a more intimate form. There was a sense that people weren’t getting gratification from connecting with the show, but from seeing someone famous in an intimate setting. People had an expectation that they wanted to see replicated and she did it. KW: Did she get a massive cheer as soon as she walked on? HJD: Yeah. People were taking photos. The woman next to me laughed at every single line. KW: The laughs were disproportionate to how funny the jokes actually were. The woman next to me paid £177 to be there and ran out when it finished to get a photo and an autograph. It felt like the cultural capital of being able to say, “I was there”. The crowd was mouthing along. LS: Really?! KW: Yeah – people pre-empting the laughs, knowing exactly what’s going to happen. HJD: I understand singing along to a band, but theatre is meant to be a quiet experience. KW: No! I wish people could interact with it more because that was the original idea. You’re in this tiny 60-seater and you feel as if she’s whispering just to you. It removes the intimacy – I did not feel any intimacy in that room. Did it feel intimate to you? LS: At first, she was looking into the middle distance, and I thought, that’s not going to work. But she started making eye contact. You could see men squirming. What did you think of the play on a technical level? KW: It’s a tough task to keep an audience engaged for an hour when you’re not moving. I couldn’t look away. LS: You saw a lot more of Waller-Bridge as a physical comedian – especially impersonating all the repressed men in her life. Her face had to do a lot more work than on TV, which was all about the aside. In the theatre, it was all aside, in a way. HJD: There was one aside where she’s talking about the sister’s husband, and she says, “He’s not even sexy enough to beat his wife.” And then she says, “Joking!” I couldn’t tell if that was an aside from Fleabag or Waller-Bridge? On TV it’s much more wink-wink. I needed it to feel different for it not to feel like a cash cow. LS: It’s symptomatic of our cultural inability to let anything end: the franchise of the franchise of the franchise. KW: As a play, you could tell it was six years old. The monologue is solid but nothing hugely special. And the staging is incredibly ordinary. I’ve just been at the Edinburgh fringe, where I saw 50 more exciting shows. And when you think how many plays are struggling for a stage, it feels slightly unfair when the same thing gets done again. But then, has there ever been a one-woman show in the West End that has been so financially viable? That in itself is incredible. HJD: Does it feel dated because people have tried to replicate it? KW: Possibly. In interviews from 2013, when they first staged it, Waller-Bridge says things like, “You don’t see these characters. Women don’t get to be hedonistic and vulgar and dirty and horny.” And now there’s a lot more of that. LS: Something I’ve found weird is the conflation of Waller-Bridge, who is aspirational because she’s a young woman who made a trailblazing TV show, and the character of Fleabag, into this broad “relatable” figure. Do you think the character is relatable? HJD: It comes back to the piece we published about class in Fleabag. The cultural product that Waller-Bridge has made is inherently part of her experiences and it’s only as relatable as the experiences she’s had. She would have made it anyway, whoever she was – but it would have been very different. LS: The play was interesting because the staging is so simple – obviously she’s a thin, quite posh white woman, but you don’t see her dad’s house, which is one of the big class tells in the TV show. So it doesn’t have the same baggage. I think the construct of Fleabag tries to reject the basics of relatability. It actively tries to resist people relating to the character in a superficial way. She doesn’t have any cultural signifiers, so you can’t relate to her because you both like the same bands or books, and she dresses plainly. It’s kind of a clean emotional slate – although obviously as a white woman she’s seen as a cultural “default”, so she eschews the baggage that a woman of colour would automatically have to carry. KW: There’s that line in Lady Bird where someone says, “love and attention, it’s basically the same thing”. Fleabag feeds off that. I can really understand that and also love how she covers her insecurities with cynicism and humour. LS: In the play, she’s surprisingly cruel compared to the show. There are several fat jokes. I was sitting next to a large guy, who was laughing, but I wondered how he felt. KW: There’s also a line about getting with a girl when Fleabag has a boyfriend, and how “that doesn’t count”. People would leap on that now. I think they made her less cruel for TV. HJD: I think producers know that people want characters to be “complicated”, but ultimately relatable. They’re part of a pile of things you’re meant to like – your Sally Rooney or whatever. How much you actually relate to those specific characters, I think, is by the by. It’s more how you relate to the group you’re meant to be in. LS: This reminds me of that great New Yorker essay about how the phenomenon of Sex and the City became bigger than the show, and so in turn SATC started to live up to those perceptions. With Fleabag, the phenomenon is almost separate to the thing. Nobody is even considering those cruel lines about weight and sexuality. Did seeing the play change your interpretation of it? I got a much stronger sense that it was about the effects of pornography on a generation of young women. That feels like something we were talking about six years ago. KW: That’s what Lyn Gardner says in her original review. Those issues are still massive for teenagers, although the impact of pornography feels like a less vital topic of conversation now. HJD: And we’re post-#MeToo. If she were to write it now, you might consider the job interview scene [in which she accidentally lifts her top up during an interview with someone accused of groping] differently. LS: And her lack of boundaries – the issue of a woman taking advantage. HJD: I wonder how much of a creative or commercial decision it was to do the play again? LS: What she’s getting out of this – I like interviewing musicians at the end of a tour, two years after they’ve released an album and they know the limitations of the work and it no longer feels like them. I want to hear her do a proper postmortem. Do you think Fleabag is feminist? KW: I think she is because she has been told that she can do what she wants and she follows that rule. And that does come from a place of privilege. And her attitude to sex is so honest. Actually, I’m not sure. LS: I don’t know. Her porn habits – gangbang, teens – probably aren’t ethical, and she’s relentlessly cruel. I think her moral and psychological compass exploded after her mum and best friend died. She’s not even at a point where she’s grasping for values. She’s fulfilling a more immediate need for physical and psychological succour. It’s not until series two that she contemplates what it means to be good. KW: The play is feminist. Six years ago, it was challenging. Her dad sending her to lectures about feminism, and the speaker asking if they would trade five years of their life for the perfect body – that tries to defy the ideas of what makes a good feminist. That was definitely exciting then. HJD: These conversations have moved on, but we still sometimes regress slightly – look at Jameela Jamil. LS: Also what complicates that moment is that Waller-Bridge has the perfect body! What happens to this play now? KW: I’m sure every drama student will do it as a monologue. Which is great, because it adds to the interesting ones for women. HJD: I wish it would inspire people to do their own thing rather than just doing what is on trend. It becomes a mould instead of a prompt to think, “Who am I and what are my experiences?” KW: The media is to blame – any play or show featuring a vaguely cynical woman who talks about sex becomes “the new Fleabag”. We need more inventive ways of writing about those people because I’m very happy to see 15 more plays that are about horny, angry women. Fleabag is at Wyndham’s Theatre, London, until 12 September. It will be broadcast in cinemas on 12 September