Chelsea have a striker who knows how to find the back of the net but there will be no end to their teething problems under Frank Lampard until they learn how to defend. They remain far too open at the back and at the moment they lack the experience to hold firm when opponents start to ask the kind of difficult questions that allowed Sheffield United to snatch a point with a thrilling comeback at a disgruntled Stamford Bridge. Slack defending and second-half collapses have become a recurring theme for Chelsea, who walked off to muted boos at the end of this ragged display. All the optimism sparked by Tammy Abraham bringing his tally to four goals in two games had faded away. Lampard’s callow young side seemed to be cruising towards their second consecutive victory when they led 2-0 at half-time but they lost their shape in the second half and received a harsh lesson when Kurt Zouma turned Callum Robinson’s awkward cross into his own net in the 89th minute. “It’s not defence, it’s conceding as a team,” Lampard said. “You defend as a team as much as you attack as a team. I was clear with the players that this can be either 3-0 or a potential 2-2 on our hands. We only had ourselves to look at.” Another argument was that Lampard had to look at himself after tweaking his midfield when Chelsea were clinging on to their 2-1 lead in the dying stages, replacing the Croatian international Mateo Kovacic with Billy Gilmour, an 18-year-old debutant. “It wasn’t bold,” Lampard said. “Kova was blatantly tired. Other people can make what they want of that.” Lampard also referenced Chelsea’s transfer ban when he explained why Gilmour was on the bench, a reminder that this squad remains light in too many positions. They badly missed the energy of N’Golo Kanté when the tide turned and were unable to respond when Chris Wilder’s determined side eventually started to play with more fire in midfield. Not that Lampard was convinced by his team’s performance in the first half. Chelsea laboured in the final third at times and the home fans could have been forgiven if they were pining for Eden Hazard’s creative genius before Abraham, who had scored twice at Norwich City the previous weekend, punctured the tension in the 19th minute. The 21-year-old forward’s opener owed much to the unlikely hustle of Christian Pulisic, though Wilder was annoyed with Dean Henderson’s part in the goal. The United goalkeeper was far too slow to collect a downward header from Abraham and allowed himself to be buffeted by Pulisic. Abraham fired the loose ball into the net and Henderson received a verbal rollocking from Wilder in the dressing room at the interval. United’s manager was just as irritated when Robinson headed wide from close range in the 39th minute. It looked easier to score and the Blades received a lesson in ruthlessness four minutes later. Their defending was poor again, Jack O’Connell and John Egan getting in each other’s way as they tried to deal with Jorginho’s lofted pass. Abraham stole in to become the first Englishman to score at least two goals in consecutive Premier League appearances for Chelsea since Lampard in January 2010. It was turning into a stroll for Chelsea but United halved the deficit a minute after the restart. Enda Stevens tore past César Azpilicueta, who has been out of sorts for a while, and the left wing-back’s cross found Robinson, whose clipped finish left the goalkeeper, Kepa Arrizabalaga, rooted to the spot. Henderson kept the game alive with a magnificent save from Abraham and Chelsea, who gave a debut to Fikayo Tomori in central defence, were already fearing the worst when Robinson, twisting away from Azpilicueta, whipped in a teasing cross that Zouma turned in under pressure from the French forward Lys Mousset. It may not be much consolation for Chelsea’s nervous supporters but at least Frankieball is turning out to be anything but dull.