The Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton has teamed up with a night club impresario and an early investor in a plant-based meat substitute to back a meat-free burger chain. Neat Burger, which willopen its first outlet just off London’s Regent Street on Monday, is currently raising up to £15m to fund expansion. It has lined up restaurants in Covent Garden and Kings Cross, is planning a US launch next year and aiming to open 14 outlets around Europe over the next two years. Hamilton’s co-investors are the Italian entrepreneur Tommaso Chiabra – one of the first backers of the US vegan burger maker Beyond Meat – and Ryan Bishti,who owns the Cirque le Soir nightclubs in London, Manchester, Barcelona and Mykonos, and is also redeveloping Soho’s iconic Windmill club. Bishti said: “We are not aiming for vegans or a plant-based niche, we are aiming to convert meat eaters. We are part of a movement happening when you look at the world today in the Amazon with deforestation for crops and agri-farming. This is a perfect way to make a change.” Bishti said Neat Burger’s chefs had spent 10 months working with the Los Angeles-based Beyond Meat to develop their own patty based on the US company’s plant-based burger mix. Beyond Meat, which makes burgers based on pea protein from yellow peas and uses beetroot juice to ooze or “bleed”, joined the US stock market in May and its shares have since climbed 150%, valuing the business at nearly $10bn. It has previously teamed up with the UK restaurant chain Honest Burgers on a vegan burger and is also working with KFC in the US, to produce a meat-free version of the fast food chain’s chicken nuggets and wings. With the number of UK vegans soaring from 150,000 in 2014 to 600,000 in 2018, according to the Vegan Society, and many more people opting to go meat-free a few times a week, manufacturers, supermarkets and restaurants are scrambling to cash in on the expanding market. The consumer goods giant Unilever bought the meat substitute company the Vegetarian Butcher, while Greggs is working on vegan versions of all its bestselling products, from steak bakes to pasties and doughnuts, after the success of a vegan sausage roll. Hamilton, who stopped eating meat in 2017, has a significant stake in Neat, according to Bishti, who is the majority owner of the business with Chiabra. The driver is the UK’s richest sportsperson with a fortune of some £187m, according to the Sunday Times Rich List.