Two hours of programming to celebrate the centenary of the radical German art school established in Weimar in 1919 begins with a comprehensive history of “the first true revolutionary design movement”, instituted by the visionary architect Walter Gropius. An intelligent look at its legacy and influence on modern design, it is followed by a unique experiment in which Jim Moir (AKA Vic Reeves) challenges six graduates at Central Saint Martins in London to create works inspired by the Bauhaus. Mike Bradley Can it really be 20 years since Jamie Oliver arrived on our screens with The Naked Chef? Here, Davina McCall invites him to describe his most memorable moments: being discovered at the River Café, his rise to fame as the Britpop chef, his campaigning ventures and the closure of his restaurant group. MB The Lake District’s answer to Big Little Lies has it all: class divisions, windswept landscapes and a mystery plot revolving round a pair of knickers (“the most hideously tarty thong”, to be exact). This week, Roz’s “discreet physical arrangement” gets complicated and Joanne searches for Kate’s missing daughter. Ellen E Jones The concluding part of this poignant, unfiltered series on Jade Goody and the changing face of British society. After the reality star’s racially charged return to Big Brother and subsequent fall from grace, this final episode sees a cancer diagnosis lead to an unexpected final chapter in her life. Hannah J Davies Once, the thought of Anna Richardson discussing the texture of a bare testicle on telly was shocking, but here comes Naked Attraction’s fifth series. In the opening episode, serial dater Stephanie and artist Bethany each pick a date from the clothing-free parade, none of whom know what to do with their hands. Hannah Verdier A feature-length documentary film about the successful musical, written, scored by and starring Lin-Manuel Miranda. This is worth watching for its astute analysis of the show that became the hottest ticket on Broadway and for the challenge Hamilton represents to the orthodoxy of the Great White Way. MB True Grit (Ethan and Joel Coen, 2010), 10.50pm, Film4The Coens’ remake is more complex and satisfying than the John Wayne original. Hailee Steinfeld’s teen, Mattie, is the hero, her intelligence and resolve driving drunken marshal Jeff Bridges and Texas Ranger Matt Damon to avenge her father’s murder. A sombre, wintry western full of gallows humour. Paul Howlett Horse racing: York Ebor meeting 1.30pm, ITV. Day one coverage, including the Juddmonte International Stakes. Cycling: Tour of Denmark 2pm, Eurosport 1. The tour gets under way with a route to and from Silkeborg. Championship football: Preston North End v Stoke City 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The rest of the night’s games are available on the red button.