Every four years, there’s the potential for a new broom to sweep through Ottawa and bring with it an entirely new government, with new policies and new people decamping to the nation’s capital. The city is much more than a political hotbed, though. While its status and stature as Canada’s capital city — and all the cultural cornerstones that come with such a designation — is what attracts so many of the visitors who flock here in greater numbers each year, there are so many strings to Ottawa’s bow. Canada’s capital is a city that offers something for just about everyone. There is culture in every corner and enough history (more recent and way, way back) to keep any buff engrossed. Indoor attractions give way to outdoor distractions in mere minutes, too, with national parks and the great Canadian wilderness on its doorstep. And now, Ottawa can truly say it has a foodie culture to match. On its plates, in the pint glasses of its bustling microbreweries, Ottawa’s energy and imagination shine. Hey, any city that boasts its own app to track the exact whereabouts – and daily specials – of its food trucks has clearly engaged its taste buds. ByWard Market So where to dive into this new wave? While there are some really great food tour operators in the city – C’est Bon Cooking the pick of them – exploring Ottawa’s foodie enclaves can easily be done all on your own. Just bring a comfortable pair of shoes and a sharp hunger. The view over ByWard Market from the Andaz hotel ‘I always bring my out-of-town visitors to the top of the Andaz hotel for a drink at sunset. It has the best view of Ottawa, where you can spot many of our iconic landmarks like the ByWard Market, Parliament Buildings and the National Art Gallery.’ Katie Hession, @yowcitystyle Track down a food truckYou could just download the aforementioned food truck app and zig-zag across the city from one to the next, at least burning a few calories between the stops. Angry Dragonz is the city’s four-wheeled favourite, an Asian fusion wagon that always draws a crowd as it churns out signature Dragonz Bowlz and Korean tacos. There are upwards of 50 food trucks parked across the city at any one time, so you’re bound to come across them on your travels. But if somewhere a little more permanent is more your thing, then there’s still plenty of opportunity to explore Ottawa through its food. Centretown and Little ItalyA clutch of recent arrivals have opened up in centretown. Corner Peach, an instantly homely red-brick room that morphs through the day from coffee shop to diner to casual fine dining, might just be the epitome of what Kourilina and her fellow millennial professionals are seeking out and finding more of in Ottawa. Opened in January in what used to be an Asian fruit and veg market, it dishes up high-end comfort food with twists on classics and touches of flair throughout. Nana Thai (top); Corner Peach A short stroll farther west and Ottawa’s cultural diversity shines brighter again. Nana Thai Cuisine, another newcomer to the scene, is a gem. Owner-chef Nana Thong-In serves up belly-pleasing bowls of north Thai staples like boat noodles and pork laab inside a cosy space but also on a very welcome patio where you can watch the world go by. Around the corner, it’s Mexican street food at El Dorado that attracts a crowd. You’ll know why once you sample their scallop ceviche. There are great Greek, Japanese and Mediterranean options nearby. All of this in what is officially Little Italy. ‘A must-see spot in Ottawa is the very Instagrammable La Terrasse that opened up at the Fairmont Château Laurier. The cocktails are incredible, the terrace itself is gorgeous and the views are some of the best in the city.’ Dominique Baker, @dominique.baker Hintonburg and beyondA venture farther west again to Hintonburg is worth it for many reasons, but the Latino fusion delights of The Soca Kitchen (don’t leave without trying the octopus carpaccio) make it particularly worthwhile. The Soca Kitchen In this town – and in this moment – it pays to leave room for something sweet though. Ottawa is going through an ice-cream arms race, with a surge of new openings vying for supremacy. Favourites – such as Moo Shu and Pascale’s – are being challenged by Merry Dairy in Hintonburg and Sundae School just north of downtown. The diplomatic route may be found in just trying them all. Politics will become an even hotter topic in Ottawa this autumn with the approach of another federal election. Canada’s political appetites may be up for debate … but those of its capital city are most definitely not. It’s time to dig in. Start planning your visit to Canada’s capital with Canadian Affair