Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. Let’s begin with a tribute to Ronald Blythe’s Akenfield by PatLux: I just spoke to my 88 year-old mother who is reading Akenfield, which is reminding her of her own rural childhood and the stories told to her by her parents. I had discovered it in a charity shop in Edinburgh and brought it back to Luxembourg to read and enjoy. I then passed it on to my sister in Spain who devoured it and discussed with me scenes that resonated with her. She then gave it to my mother in northern England and when she has finished it we will donate it to the bookstall in our family’s village church for someone else to discover. I wonder where it will go next and I trust that it will give as much joy to the next reader as it has done to three of us. Many thanks to whoever it was on Tips, Links and Suggestions who inspired me to add this title to the list which I take with me to charity shops. MereMortal has “finally got round to starting” Howard Zinn’s “legendary” The People’s History of the United States: I’ve known about it for a decade or more and have owned it for about three years. He’s the most marvellous and sympathetic writer and he brings out of obscurity a wealth of highly character-driven stories of African slaves, American Indians, indentured white European servants, and women. People he considers were always omitted by the founding fathers when they declaimed “we the people”. I’m loving it. Zinn was that rare thing, an American socialist and a superb academic and this book was a massive hit as a history book and has been widely translated around the world. LLCoolJ is in need of lighter reading after finishing one of this year’s Booker nominations, Lost Children Archive by Valeria Luiselli: Here we have a “No names, please” family of four – Ma, Pa, boy, girl – driving from NYC to Arizona. The parents are documentarians/documentarists (definitions and distinctions provided) who worked together on a sound-recording project that among other things recorded the over 800 languages spoken in NYC (I had no idea there are that many). Ma is now focused on a project about the “lost children” and detained migrants from Central America, and Pa is working on a project related to the Apaches. The marriage, it is announced early on, is ending, and it is projected that the parents will separate at the end of the trip, each taking one of the children. The first half of the book is narrated by ‘Ma’, and I was pulled in right away by the style of the writing. Much of it is muted, internal, Ma’s ruminations about her children and her marriage and her project ... I didn’t participate in the last two RG books because I didn’t feel I had the strength to take on Levi or Steinbeck. This book turned out to be just as harrowing. I expect it will haunt me for a long time, and I feel the need for something frothy next. So … Nina Stibbe, here I come. GELBuck has “just finished” The Frayed Atlantic Edge by David Gange: His series of kayak journeys down the Atlantic coasts of Scotland, Ireland and bits of Wales and England is the thread linking history, culture, geography and nature. A different perspective on our history and a book that makes me want to retire immediately and spend my time reading and kayaking on a west coast somewhere! Ubik by Phillip K Dick has been keeping Bacon78 guessing: The question of what is reality is explored here with a fun plot that keeps you guessing, and the philosophy never gets in the way of a good story. How do I know what I am experiencing is reality? How do I know that I’m not a simulation in an advanced computer, or that my reality is a product of my own imagination, and I’m actually in a coma somewhere on life support? Well, I don’t and neither do the characters in Ubik!! Richard Flanagan’s The Sound of One Hand Clapping has moved paulburns: A heart-wrenching story of a father-daughter relationship, set against the background of WW@ refugees living and working in Tasmania from 1954 to 1990. There are so many twists and turns in the story, most of them unexpected, that it would be unfair to other readers to give too many details. Suffice to say Flanagan writes with lyricism and passion of his beloved island, with his usual deep and sensitive understanding of the human condition. Finally, a eulogy in honour of Sebastian Barry from JayZed: Crikey, Sebastian Barry‘s a splendid writer, isn’t he? I was blown away a few weeks ago by Days Without End, and I’ve now been moved by The Secret Scripture. If I didn’t rate it quite as highly as Days Without End, that’s mostly because I loved DWE so much. A lot of similarities between the two books, despite the contrasting plots. In both Barry is masterful in creating compelling and distinctive narrative voices; and both books are ultimately stories which celebrate love and humanity within a context of brutal cruelty. He can certainly write them. An anthology of literary quotes illustrating every year of life from conception to death. (Now also an exhibition.) Where libraries are also tourist attractions. (Calgary Central Library has a train running through it!) Barack Obama’s summer reading list. Ian Buruma revisits the writing of Anne Frank. Enjoyably rude medieval Welsh poems. Seek and destroy! Metallica are releasing a kids’ book. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!