Soutine is a gigantic mood, as the kids might say. Skirting with modern parlance is an ugly game for anyone aged over 20, but still, of a Sunday lunchtime in this heaving, pretend-Parisian dining room in St John’s Wood, it’s all I can think about. Soutine fills the space of a former Carluccio’s, and it’s almost as affordable. A croque madame with frites is just over 13 quid, or roughly the same price as one at Café Rouge, but there the similarities end. At Soutine, taut-faced ladies share plates of confit de canard with tiny lapdogs, while well-upholstered octogenarian blokes wearing billowing chinos drown out the world with a second bottle of Mercurey Vieilles Vignes; the waiting staff pirouette between the back and front dining rooms, family parties squabble, happy birthday is sung in many different tongues. The menu’s in French-sounding English, while, judging from the decor, we’re on the southern bank of the Seine, maybe in Montparnasse, in about 1928. Restaurateurs Chris Corbin and Jeremy King, the owners of Soutine, among many others, are the archdukes of ambience, creating a genre of noisy tableaux vivants, rather than straightforward dining spots. People don’t flock to The Wolseley for life-changing eggs on toast; they go for a big plate of mood. With all this in mind, it’s worth noting that late last month Corbin and King recently admitted defeat with their north London restaurant Bellanger, stating that they couldn’t quite make the numbers work. And industry titans of their calibre saying they can’t get enough bums on seats in central Islington is a bit like Tower of London beefeaters saying, “Guys, we’ve not seen the ravens for a few weeks, but let’s not fret.” Still, as of now, St John’s Wood is not short of the louche, the elegant-but-indolent and the deadline-avoidant to keep Soutine afloat. For the non-Londoner, the area is that fragrant hinterland between Regent’s Park and Kilburn. If one was being chased roughly south-west by an escaped London Zoo lion, one could be in Soutine, under a table and drinking muscat, within about 12 minutes. “Do you mind my little dog?” asks a Swiss gentleman at the table beside me while hoisting up a panting, lap-bound bundle that, predictably, resembles something a child would use to store pyjamas. “Not at all,” I say, because I love dogs more than almost all people. In fact, my ideal pub would be that one in the painting with all the dogs playing snooker. Charles orders a plate of inky wild mushrooms on soft, buttery brioche as a pre-starter starter, because he’s ravenous, and French – ergo, pleases himself. I faff for much longer, transfixed by the Little Venice locals. One man chips away at a whole globe artichoke, steered off steak frites by his worrying wife. Youngsters show up for Sunday lunch with strained smiles and one eye on their inheritance. We order a large, crisp endive salad strewn with dandelion leaves and laced with a citrus dressing, plus a plate of thinly sliced, oak-smoked salmon served with finely diced shallots and good, punchy capers. Soutine isn’t using the very, very best ingredients, but it is using what they can be proud of while still keeping the lights on. The coq au riesling is a great bet here if one needs comfort food: it’s a silky, decadent pot of cream, booze et poulet. Eat it with a bowl of Soutine’s petit pois à la française, one of my very favourite things, where sweet peas meet parsley, garlic and onion. Charles also clears a nicely judged piece of lemon sole with muscat grapes and a vermouth sauce. For vegetarians, there is a special plats principaux menu featuring spinach pelmeni, spiced vegetable haché and beetroot terrine with horseradish. By the time we get to pudding, we start off squabbling over its necessity, and end up with three: a salted caramel eclair, a bowl of mousse aux deux chocolats – both passable – and, best of all, a tarte fine aux pommes with a large scoop of vanilla ice-cream. Recently, I have learned to stop kvetching and love TripAdvisor, having come round to the fact that I like reading what people dislike about fun restaurants. One “reviewer” complains that the tarte fine at Soutine is too “fine”, the pastry too delicate and, worse still, it comes swimming in ice-cream. Someone else moans that there’s no phone reception in the back room, and don’t they know she’s a very important businesswoman. She might miss a call. Others whinge that they walked in with no booking and the place was far too busy to seat them instantly. The way things are going in the restaurant world right now, I’ll excuse Soutine for not viewing this as a problem. Food 7/10Service 7/10Atmosphere 9/10 • Soutine, 60 St John’s Wood High Street, London NW8, 020-3926 8448. Open all week, 11.30am-10.30pm (10pm Sun). About £35-40 a head for three courses à la carte, plus drinks and service.