Boris Johnson has a woman problem. No, not the rascally lady-killer stuff he probably loves people talking about. This problem is that female voters don’t like him. A YouGov poll shows that, while men give him a net favourability of -17, with women he scores lower with -25. Even Tory female Leavers aren’t as keen on Johnson as the Conservative Leave men. This isn’t about women disapproving of Johnson’s personal life. A 2018 Survation poll revealed that people didn’t care that Johnson was getting divorced, but they would still be less likely to vote for the Conservatives if he were leader, debunking the myth that only prudes and killjoys object to him. Similarly, the new poll doesn’t mean that women are having a fit of the vapours over Johnson’s personal life, however revealing it is for a grown man to drunkenly shout and swear at his much younger partner. This is purely about women not trusting a character such as Johnson, maybe because most of us have already been there, so to speak. Many women would have spotted that Johnson is the original man-child. Yes, with his personal shit, but politically, where it counts, Johnson comes across as an irresponsible brat who needs constant monitoring. If he’s not showing off and playing up, he’s tipping up his toybox in a temper to get his own way. Now Boris-Baby-Bunting has brought in his Leave-pal, Dominic Cummings, another reckless, self-styled daredevil (unelected), who seems to think that no deal is just a bit of a larf, like mooning at the EU out of the back of the car on an old-style Calais booze cruise. Boris and Dom – they even sound like a double-act on CBeebies. While it’s true that using first names makes worrying people sound cuddly, maybe, just this once, it could be viewed as apposite for the “Double-dare ya!” infantilisation passing for Brexit policy in Westminster. Dom might be a key adolescent phase that Johnson has to go through, but most women (most people) want leaders to be grown-ups, not having to be monitored like feral schoolchildren who’ll run off to play with matches the moment your back is turned. While New Labour was mocked for nannying, with Johnson it’s the opposite – there’s the constant feeling of having to nanny him, neurotically checking what he’s getting up to with his weird, sneaky, inappropriate mates. Excruciating displays of political machismo are nothing new, from Vladimir Putin riding bareback, like a Slavic “Tom of Finland”, to Matteo Salvini strutting preposterously in Italy. Some (sad) men may be fooled, but to women it signals a toxic carnival of fragile male egos where a plan should be. This is Johnson’s true woman problem. Most women would have met and coped with a posturing man-child (or two) – in relationships, at work, in bars, on streets. However, if you think we’re going to vote for one, forget it. Who’s still fretting about female armpit hair? Two decades ago, Julia Roberts caused a furore by flashing tufts at the Notting Hill film premiere. Considering the fuss, you’d have thought that Roberts had nuclear missiles tucked in her pits. Now Emily Ratajkowski has appeared in Harper’s Bazaar magazine flashing her underarm hair in a portrait by Michael Avedon, leading to the model being criticised as unclean and disgusting. In the accompanying essay, Ratajkowski cites Roxane Gay’s book, Bad Feminist, and says that sometimes she shaves her armpits, sometimes she doesn’t and that’s her choice. Bravo, Ms Ratajkowski. Some may sneer at Ratajkowski’s brand of feminism. A lingerie model who appeared in the notorious Blurred Lines video, she was arrested for protesting against Brett Kavanaugh’s supreme court nomination. But since when did being a model make someone stupid or irrelevant? What Ratajkowski has to say about body hair is especially interesting: if anyone is in the frontline of the “male gaze” and idealised perceptions of beauty, it’s her. Moreover, for someone in her line of work, subverting her image is a huge commercial risk and therefore a statement. What’s astonishing is that, 20 years after Roberts’s flash, anyone cares. Women are human. Hair grows on women’s bodies. If they want to get rid of hair (leg, armpit, bikini, anywhere), then they do so. If they don’t wish to get rid of it (for aesthetic or socio-political reasons or they just forgot), they don’t have to. It is that simple. Young men are coming under similar pressure to get rid of body hair, although whether this is good or bad news is open to debate. Regarding female underarm hair, everyone might at least consider getting over the fact that it exists. Come 2039, will we still be having the same conversation? Wayne Rooney has been criticised by the Church of England for promoting gambling with his £7.8m player-coach signing with Derby County, where part of his salary will be paid by sponsors, the betting company 32Red, with him wearing the number 32 on his shirt. Dr Alan Smith, the bishop of St Albans, said it was harmful to impressionable young fans to see gambling promoted in this way. Rooney had his own gambling problems, so the decision is even odder. Still, why are people focusing on Rooney in particular? This is beyond one player – this is about the greed and irresponsibility of football clubs and English football generally. Half of the Premier League’s football shirts will feature a gambling company’s logo this season, while 17 out of 24 Championship shirts will sport a betting logo. Football is awash with advertising revenue, not just from gambling but also from alcohol and unaffordable designer labels. Advertising is as defining a feature of high-level football culture as the pitch itself, but what advertising should be permitted? Of course, Rooney could have turned down the Derby County deal. However, it seems unfair to concentrate on him when the problems run far deeper. In this case, the celebrity footballer is the symptom, not the cause. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist