Brutal but beautifully done, this emotionally raw and theatrically slick verbatim play lays blame on austerity for the agony and overwhelming loneliness young carers are exposed to. It is heartbreaking at every turn – I wish all our politicians would watch it. Jessica Temple, Lizzie Mounter and Luke Jurgen play teenagers forced to grow up too fast. No wonder young carers often play up at school – just getting through the gates requires a full day’s worth of effort. “I was eight and overnight I became a parent,” says one, as the trio trade stories on Jen McGinley’s school changing-room set. All give warm, powerful performances, but Temple is particularly strong as Jade, who constantly seems on the edge of crumbling. Matt Woodhead’s energetic direction has the cast sprinting and spinning across the stage as though someone has pressed fast-forward, as if the pressure they’re under means it hurts to stay still for too long. They address us directly as if answering our questions in an interview, but start to slow down and watch each other when they talk about the moment the parent-child roles in their family were reversed. They share their trauma delicately, and the stage becomes a place of support, not just anger or anguish. The script is adapted from interviews with carers and support staff in Salford, where thousands of young carers go unpaid and largely unsupported. Detailing how easy it is for young carers to slip through the net, Who Cares paints a picture of our government going round with scissors and cutting bigger gaps for them to fall through. Music becomes both a balm and an escape, as Owen Crouch’s sound design floods the stage with song every time one of the cast puts in an earphone. As the interwoven monologues reveal increasingly dark truths, the music gives some space to breathe. Who Cares demonstrates how simply being identified as a young carer can make a huge difference, at the same time as decreasing services are making it harder to be found. Young carers deserve attention, money and recognition. Supporting this humane, tear-jerker of a play is a start. • At Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.