I’m asked in summer for light coverage foundation recommendations and I always think a direct answer sells everyone short. Much better, I think, to get more bang for your buck with a tinted moisturiser (my own preference) or alphabet cream (BB, CC and so on). I take the view that during a season when there’s much more fun to be had than spending time in front of a mirror, one might as well have some sun protection, moisture and easy, smeary, fast application as well as a sheer, healthy tint. I’ve made some corking new discoveries this summer, all now sharing shelf space with my favourites from Nars and Origins. First up, Clinique continues its winning streak with new Moisture Surge Sheertint Hydrator SPF25 (1 £30, 30ml). I’m daft for this. An oil-free, hyaluronic acid-rich tinted moisturiser with a slightly gel-like consistency, it comes in a racially inclusive shade range, with each option spanning several tones (I’m wearing Light Medium while self-tanning in the name of research). The effect is sunny, dewy and very natural looking, but with enough coverage to even out tone and some redness. It’s suitable for everyone (including men). Similarly universal is Kiko’s terrific value Daily Protection BB Cream SPF 30 (2 £9.99 but frequently on offer, 30ml). This has good coverage and a soft, more matte finish than the Clinique. The shades are unusually numerous for a budget brand, starting from very pale. I’m impressed with this cream’s staying power, the fast application and the zero trace of chalkiness at such a high SPF. If you are looking for the merest whisper of healthy-looking colour and unglittery light reflection, resulting in the sort of outdoorsy glow the French call “bonne mine” (looking good), then look no further than Lumene’s vegan-friendly Invisible Illumination Instant Glow Fresh Skin Tint (3 £32.90, 30ml). This feels more like a classic moisturiser, but is tinted in skintone-true shades from pale to deep. It does a terrific job of evening out redness and patchiness, leaving skin feeling supple and looking ungreasily moist. It doesn’t contain sun protection, but layered well over the top of all the sunscreens I tried. Finally, if you just can’t be parted from foundation, rain or shine, the answer lies in IT Cosmetics’ CC+ Illumination SPF50 (£31, 32ml). Cruelty free, lots of glow, numerous shades, heaps of (mineral) sun protection – and coverage that just won’t quit, even on rosacea and acne. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.