Just six weeks out from the opening game of their Rugby World Cup campaign, the Wallabies restored pride to the gold jersey as they romped to a famous 47-26 victory against New Zealand in Perth and inflicted the highest points tally the All Blacks have conceded in a test match. The visitors played the second half with 14 men after Scott Barrett was dismissed for a shoulder charge to the head of Michael Cooper, with the Wallabies making the extra player count after the interval. The hosts impressed throughout the 80 minutes though to ensure that the Bledisloe Cup goes down to a decider in Auckland next weekend. The six-try showing was a clear vindication of Michael Cheika’s experimental team selection. The biggest joker in Cheika’s deck was James O’Connor, whose vision and ball playing ability saw him expertly combine with Reece Hodge to set up the winger for two tries. The 29-year-old never looked out of place in his first test start at 13, showing Australia what the Wallabies’ back-line could look like with a natural ball player in wide channels. While there were mitigating circumstances with Barrett’s red card, the Wallabies’ gameplan of keeping ball in hand rather than kicking for territory proved key. The half-back combination of Nic White and Christian Lealiifano started together for the first time and combined admirably. White was pivotal in the Wallabies’ performance, orchestrating the forwards while looking equally dangerous with regular breaks from the base of the ruck. Even with 14 men, the All Blacks did not give up hope, making the most of the their limited time in possession. Both their first-half tries came shortly after turning over the Wallabies, while the playmaking duo of Richie Mo’unga and Beauden Barrett linked up nicely after the break for a try. In the build-up, much was made of the All Blacks’ potentially lethal back row selection of Ardie Savea, Sam Cane and Kieran Read. However, the hosts were able to nullify their threat for the most part, with the Wallabies forwards deserving credit for limiting the opposition back row’s opportunities to attack the ball at the breakdown. The opening 20 minutes was fitting of the atmosphere inside the sell-out Optus Stadium in Perth, which ferociously embraced the national anthems of both sides following a minute’s silence for Sir Brian Lochore. The Wallabies kept ball in hand in the opening exchanges with Marika Koroibete and Lealiifano both offering promise after breaking through the All Blacks defensive line. Western Australia has been home to some of the lowest moments of O’Connor’s Wallabies career. It is now home to some of the finest after he set up Hodge for the first of two tries after running a lovely line on the right flank. The All Blacks’ response was instant as Anton Lienert-Brown touched down after Jack Goodhue’s kick caused calamity in the Wallabies’ in-goal area. Rieko Ioane added a second try just four minutes later as the visitors took the lead for the only time in the game. Scott Barrett’s red card in the 40th minute was undoubtedly a turning point – Jérôme Garcès left with little choice to dismiss New Zealand’s number 4 following World Rugby’s stricter laws on head contact in play. The Wallabies came firing out of the blocks after the break, crossing twice in the first 10 minutes of the second half as Lukhan Salakaia-Loto scored his first Test try before White dived over in the corner to cap a fine scrum-half display. Beauden Barret pulled a try back for the All Blacks following that link-up with Mo’unga, before Koroibete and then Hodge, again after good work from O’Connor, put the game beyond doubt. Mo’unga crossed straight from the restart, only for Kurtley Beale to get his name on the scoresheet to round off a resounding Wallabies’ victory and provide hope for Australia fans – and prove the All Blacks are indeed beatable.