Miriam Lexmann has everything to gain from Britain crashing out of the EU without a deal, even though she cannot help but believe it is a disaster in the making. “The Slovak media call it the Lexmann paradox,” she says. “I am a paradox.” Lexmann is one of a cadre of MEPs-in-waiting, taking no salary or expenses, standing by for the UK to finally leave the European Union so they may take up seats due to be relinquished by their British counterparts. In a post-Brexit world, the European parliament was to reduce in size from 751 to 705. Of the UK’s 73 seats, 27 were due to be redistributed among 14 under-represented countries. Slovakia was to take one of those, increasing the country’s share of MEPs to 14. Lexmann, a candidate for the Slovakian Christian Democratic Movement, emerged from the European elections in May as the person to take that place. But the Brits have not left – and Lexmann, like the others, has been left in limbo, watching on anxiously from across Europe as the Brexit debate in the UK decides their future. The unlucky 27 have been nicknamed Europe’s “ghost MEPs”. “It was a horrible feeling, and it still is,” Lexmann said. To campaign in the European elections, Lexmann went on unpaid leave from her job as director of the EU office of the International Republican Institute, a US NGO working in democratic development. But when she was elected, the Slovakian state formally named her as an MEP, a political status that prevents her from returning to work in her politically neutral organisation. She has had to move to Bratislava from her home in Brussels, and is still without a salary. The situation is all the more frustrating as Lexmann and lawyers argue that it is only due to a badly drafted constitutional amendment that her party was left with the unwanted Brexit MEP seat rather than a less well-supported rival. They are looking to take their case to the European court of human rights in Strasbourg. The remarkable fact is that, as with many of the reserve MEPs, Lexmann still cannot bring herself to want the British to go. “I was always against Brexit,” she said. “Everybody was saying now you pray for Brexit, and I say I hope that I can have justice without Brexit. Why am I supposed to wish for something I don’t want?” Lexmann’s reluctance to wish for an outcome that would provide her with salary and status highlights that the European debate on the continent can be misunderstood in the UK. Many see the loss of Britain as a ballast against the more federalist forces, centralising power in Brussels, as a devastating blow, Lexmann said. “I really fear for what is going to happen with Europe if there is no-deal Brexit,” she said. “I don’t want in my own head to prioritise my own interests because I kind of feel this will be disaster. And also as a possible future European parliamentarian, I don’t like the EU pushing too much for federalism and too much Europe. “For me the Brits were balancing it out. And I am afraid how it will go without the Brits and that the French and Germans will take over.” Elsewhere in Europe, Barry Andrews, a Fianna Fáil MEP who is one of two Irish reserves, said he has found it a very difficult situation but would prefer Brexit to be stopped than to take his seat. Spanish MEP-in-reserve Adrian Vazquez Lazara is of a like mind, believing a better outcome for Europe should take precedence over his situation. Lexmann is closely watching events in the UK from Bratislava for clues as to what will happen next. “It is very much going to influence my life,” she said. “Many people told me when Boris Johnson was kind of elected – elected by the party to be prime minister – that now Brexit is certain. But then you see what the Scots are saying about independence. “Maybe Johnson is also realising that he is risking too much, that he is risking the United Kingdom as a union? So there is a general election, a renegotiation? So that is another nine months or whatever without a job. I kind of think: how can this kind of thing happen?”