As an Aboriginal man and a socialist, I live for debate and political discussion – anyone that knows me can attest to my inability to shut up on political issues. So when IndigenousX gave me the opportunity to host for a week, I wasn’t going to let the opportunity pass me by! I want to add a revolutionary perspective to a broader debate taking place in the black activist community and the left internationally. It’s capitalism that’s responsible for the suffering of my people, the environmental crisis and so much more. In a world where the Arctic and the Amazon are burning, where the rulers of our world resort to vicious racism and scapegoating to explain the economic, political and social crisis of their system, now more than ever we need to scream “revolution” from the rooftops, and fight for it. The multi-racial international working class is the key to crippling the entire system, and bringing about the structural change we need to build a better society. The world will not fix itself: it’s up to us. Workers have power. I remember as a kid not going to school because, “the teachers are on strike”. I didn’t understand what that meant – that these teachers could shut down an entire state school system by withdrawing their labour. In hindsight it’s clear they weren’t just fighting for their own wages and conditions; they were fighting for better classroom resources, more teachers and appropriate learning environments – they were fighting for my future. Workers have an interest in fighting together. A struggle for even the most basic demands in a workplace requires unity. Anyone challenging stolen wages – or a sexist boss – as an individual would be sacked in a heartbeat. But when McDonald’s workers in the US stood together a year ago, they felt the confidence to stick up for themselves, and they went on strike. The boss can’t make profits if there’s no workers to flip their burgers. We have a lot to learn in Australia from the movement for democracy in Hong Kong which has brought millions to the streets Workers already cooperate on a global scale to make the economy run, and it’s not hard to see how through this cooperation, if organised, workers can strike to bring the entire system to a grinding halt. As Marx said, “capitalism creates its own gravediggers”. If we want to fight for a better world, politics matter. I’m an anti-capitalist, and it’s clear to me who is on our side and who is firmly opposed. Any politics arguing that a Labor government is the road forward is a dead end in my opinion. Labor is wedded to helping big business make a buck, particularly in the mining sector. Witness their support for the Carmichael coalmine, and Senator Penny Wong’s statement on ABC’s Insiders when asked if Labor supported shutting coal down – her response: “Of course not”. Labor sat by Adani bankrupting Adrian Burragubba, Wangan and Jagalingou Traditional Owners Council Spokesperson, for daring to speak out and challenge the mine. The Victorian Andrews Labor government is digging its feet in to ensure the destruction of the Djap Wurrung ceremonial trees. Signals to Aboriginal sovereignty and culture are no more than hypocrisy while they send in police to intimidate Aboriginal resistance protecting Djap Wurrung heritage. We need to smash this system. There will be no saviours from on high. For that, we need the politics of solidarity: understanding that the oppression of all is tied to the inequality of capitalism, and that if we unite, we can radically transform society in our interests. That starts with recognising the working class is black, female, immigrant, LGBTQI and much more. Racism, sexism and homophobia are all issues that impact the working class. Oppression is purposely created and weaponised to divide us. We will never be able to unite unless we fight these oppressive divisions head on. There’s a long history of far left solidarity and militant defence of Black rights in Australia’s history. Black communists such as Kevin Cook and Chicka Dixon are legends of our movement – and they had an entire communist workers movement standing with them. The history of solidarity between communists and our people runs deep. The solidarity from the Illawarra Trades Labour Council of the 60s is the best that history has to offer. The communist wharfies ran the show from the docks of Wollongong to the hinterland. In solidarity with the local Aborigines Progressive Association, the communists organised black bans of products going to stores that enforced segregation. The system did not naturally concede rights to our people, they were fought for and won, all across the Illawarra, by the actions of militant trade unionists, black and white. The history is enough to show that the parliamentary game is a distraction and won’t create change for our people. We need to hit the streets, armed with the ideas necessary to change the world – and we need to fight. Our inspiration need not stop at history – we have a lot to learn in Australia from the 11-week-strong movement for democracy in Hong Kong which has brought millions to the streets. Mass protest can build towards revolutionary change that can liberate us all. We don’t have much time - but we have a world to win. • Gavin Stanbrook is an socialist activist and campaigner for #JusticeforBowraville. He is from Gumbanyggirr country on the mid-north coast • Guardian Australia is proud to partner with IndigenousX to showcase the diversity of Indigenous peoples and opinions from around the country