On April Fools’ Day 1977 Richard Booth, who has died aged 80, strode down the high street of Hay-on-Wye, Powys, dressed in a home-made crown and fake ermine robe. His intent – to declare the small market town an independent sovereign state – was as visionary as it was bonkers. Today Hay-on-Wye, a pretty but otherwise unremarkable border town, thrives thanks to the remarkable legacy of its self-appointed monarch, who helped to establish it as a centre for the secondhand book trade and to create the environment in which the annual Hay festival of literature and arts was founded in 1988. The narrow streets of the UK’s so-called Town of Books now buzz with tourists and incomers throughout the year. Richard established his first bookshop in Hay, called The Old Fire Station, in 1962. With his gregarious manner and aristocratic bluster he succeeded in picking up for a song the household libraries of many landed families, and went on to set up half-a-dozen more bookshops in the town. To fill his shelves he also bought books by the ton from American universities and other public institutions. It was during his buying trips to the US in the 1960s and 70s that his vision for an independent, localised economy really took shape. He saw in America’s faceless shopping malls a taste of what was to come and was determined to battle against it. Secondhand books, in this sense, represented one-in-the-eye for corporate capitalism. Others followed his lead and by the late 80s Hay-on-Wye, with its population of less than 2,000, boasted more than 30 secondhand bookshops. His flagship store, Richard Booth’s Bookshop, did a roaring trade during the 80s and 90s, but he was never much of a businessman. By his own confession he inherited one fortune, made two, and lost four. By 2007 he no longer owned any bookshops, but his main store, which was sold to Elizabeth Haycox, an American investor, remains in operation. He also owned another shop on the high street until his death – called The King of Hay, it sold regal paraphernalia, journals, and some books. There are now slightly fewer bookshops in Hay than in the late 90s, but still a large number. Born in Plymouth, Devon, to Philip Booth, an army officer, and Elizabeth (nee Pitt), an heir to the fortune of the soap-making Yardley family, Richard attended Rugby school, Warwickshire, and first dabbled in bookselling while studying history at Oxford University in the late 50s, before setting up The Old Fire Station in Hay. He had moved to the town as a child, when his family had inherited the nearby Brynmelyn estate, which was eventually passed on to him. Early in his career he also purchased the town’s castle, which was in a state of disrepair but just about habitable. He loved throwing parties there for his friends, but the property was badly damaged by fire in 1977. Having been asleep inside at the time, he liked to claim that he mistook the sound of crackling flames for the cheering of his subjects. After the blaze he moved back to Brynmelyn, which had the feel of a massive, disorganised library. As a bookseller and King of Hay, Richard was always alive to the power of publicity. A British eccentric of the best kind, he never reined in his passion for the eye-catching and entertaining, the wacky and the wonderful. Quite the opposite: he revelled in it. Not only did Richard proclaim himself King of Hay; he appointed his horse as prime minister and proclaimed his close friend the model April Ashley a duchess. Other colourful flourishes included the issuance of passports, the printing of rice-paper money and the investiture of friends to his cabinet. His cabinet meetings would be held once a month, invariably in a pub; the passage of meetings was decided by the turn of a board game-style wheel. Options included “have a drink”, “defer to next session” and “chop off her head”. He also ran a not-so-secret local intelligence agency, known as C.I.Hay. Alongside his embrace of the absurd, Richard was a man of political conviction. Not party politics: despite standing in the Welsh Assembly and European Parliament elections as a Socialist Labour party candidate, his leftist credentials were always suspect (he decried the minimum wage, for instance). Instead his politics were of a more straightforward, honest kind. With the centralisation of power, he argued, came corruption, incompetence, and, worst of all, bureaucracy. He loathed bureaucrats, a sentiment that expressed itself in myriad campaigns over the years – against the Welsh Development Board, the Welsh Tourist Board, and, latterly, the Welsh Assembly. Declaring Hay-on-Wye independent was not just about shooing off the pen-pushers. It was about forging a viable economic future for the quiet market town he loved so much. Long before terms such as “localism” and “diversification” were used in common parlance, he understood the imperative to step out of the mould and stake a claim for being different and distinctive. In the International Organisation of Booktowns, of which he was honorary life president, he found common cause with other book-besotted towns around the world, from Òbidos in Portugal to Paju in South Korea. In 2004 he was appointed MBE for his contribution to tourism in Wales. He is survived by his third wife, Hope Barrie, whom he married in 1988, and by two of his three sisters, Joanna and Anne. • Richard George William Pitt Booth, bookseller, born 12 September 1938; died 19 August 2019