CollapsibleBreffni Holahan gives a searing performance as Essie in Margaret Perry’s corrosive play about a woman’s disintegration. Essie is trapped atop a stone plinth dusted in dirt. Gigantic spikes of rock splinter the air around her. Her feet dangle. Having lost her job and broken up with her girlfriend, she is in every way ungrounded. This is where Perry’s play is rooted: in the queasy gap between her feet and the floor. KWAt HighTide festival, Aldeburgh, 10-15 September.Read our four-star review All of MeThis used to be a lighter, more hopeful kind of show about depression, Caroline Horton explains. But she became ill again, so now All of Me is unashamedly bleak. Her depression is interwoven with myth, switching abruptly from ancient narrative to everyday hopelessness. One moment, Horton is approaching the guardians of the underworld; the next, she’s lying on the floor in unwashed clothes. Through layers of storytelling, song and looped sound we hear the overwhelming noise of despair – as well as its occasional absurdity. CLAt the Yard, London, 10-28 September.Read our four-star review Hard to Be Soft: A Belfast PrayerDancer and choreographer Oona Doherty’s Hard to be Soft: A Belfast Prayer is about the toughness of her home-town; the carapace of swagger and sass, rage and resilience built up by men and women in a place where the conflict seems intractable and horizons are limited by constrictions of class and religion. AWAt the Southbank Centre, London, on 11 October.Read our five-star review Jonny and the Baptists‘As of right now, we’re no longer political.” That’s the conceit of this new show from Jonny and the Baptists, AKA musical comics Jonny Donahoe and Paddy Gervers. They have made their name setting-up (and sending up) leftwing causes to Gervers’ emphatic guitar-playing and Donahoe’s big bluesy voice – and where has it got them? Or any of us? So instead, they are making a show about love. That’s the pitch, although you can’t take it entirely seriously after an opener that loudly choruses “you’re either against capitalism or for the end of the world.” BLAt Tom Thumb theatre, Margate, on 12 September. Then touring until 18 December.Read our four-star review Since U Been GoneThe ache of lost time is contained in this delicate monologue grappling with grief and gender. With simple stagecraft and raw storytelling, Teddy Lamb’s Since U Been Gone is about the people who make us, and how they continue to do so long after they’re gone. However tough its subject matter, Since U Been Gone is buoyant, as theatre becomes a place of exploration, distraction and safety. Lamb bursts with charisma and generosity. KWAt HighTide festival, Aldeburgh, on 19 September.Read our four-star review Lucy McCormick: Post PopularUtterly indelicate and completely unpredictable, Post Popular is a wild ride. Lucy McCormick’s ludicrous performance-lecture-cum-cabaret-cum-rage-room is built with so many layers of irony and mockery that its core would be rotten by the time you dug down to it. If only more history lessons were like this. Within minutes she’s intimately licking one of her backing dancers. But far more than a gratuitous joke, this singalong search for a hero is a sabre-toothed comedy about women’s place in the limelight. KWAt Soho theatre, London, 3-14 December.Read our four-star review Baby ReindeerIf you followed Richard Gadd’s career up to his Edinburgh comedy award-winning Monkey See Monkey Do three years ago, you might think he’d had his lifetime’s fill of trauma and that happily, it had culminated in that cathartic triumph. Among its startling achievements, Baby Reindeer leaves that notion in tatters. Gadd’s solo theatre debut recounts his horrifying experiences with a stalker. He took pity on and flirted with Martha when she propped up the bar where he worked, six years ago. If that mistake didn’t quite prove fatal, it was the next worst thing. BLAt the Bush theatre, London, 9 October-9 November.Read our four-star review Sexy LampThe words from Seth MacFarlane’s opening number at the 2013 Oscars – in which the host name-checked the nude scenes of female actors in the audience – are heard at the start of Katie Arnstein’s smart solo show. That sort of routine wouldn’t happen now, we might think, but by the end of Arnstein’s show it is uncomfortably clear how much the #MeToo momentum must be maintained. Sexy Lamp is full of sharp insights into the ways actors are exploited – groomed, even – by the machinations of an entire industry. CWAt Upstairs at the Western, Leicester, 12-13 September.Read our four-star review Total Immediate Collective Imminent Terrestrial SalvationAnd, lo, as it was foretold, Tim Crouch came to work with the National Theatre of Scotland. As it is written in the scriptures, he arrived empty-handed, with neither set nor props, to present a show about a messianic cult leader at the end of days. As the prophets set down, he required the audience to gather, congregation-like, in a big circle, as if we too were readying ourselves for the apocalypse. It was called Total Immediate Collective Imminent Terrestrial Salvation and we saw that it was good. MFAt the Royal Court, London, 3–21 September. Then touring.Read our four-star review Ahir Shah: DotsAhir Shah has long joked about the contrast between what he looks like and how he sounds: his brown skin and posh accent. Now a new faultline has appeared between his substance and style, as the ardent polemicist of his early work gives way to a more conflicted thinker. But the emphatic tones remain. Dots describes the collapse of the certainties Shah felt in his youth, in the voice of a man who thinks he is right about everything. BLAt Soho theatre, London, 16-28 September.Read our four-star review Life Is No Laughing MatterDemi Nandhra’s solo show focuses on her experience of depression and the inadequate care she was offered when she sought help. One doctor prescribes exercise and bananas; another suggests that Nandhra might feel better if she got married. The internet, meanwhile, tells her that getting a dog could be the answer. Nandhra sends up each of these suggestions in turn, star-jumping while stuffing bananas into her mouth or chasing her gleefully disobedient pup around the stage. CLAt Arena theatre, Wolverhampton, on 14 October. At Camden People’s theatre, London, 21-22 November.Read our four-star review PopsTies of love and betrayal bind the father and daughter in Pops. But in Charlotte Josephine’s play, the real drama lives and breathes in what’s not said. Josephine and director Ali Pidsley are unafraid of silence, painting as much with pauses as with words. These wordless sequences are bold, lasting for longer than is comfortable. And when the characters do speak, their repeated banalities – “hi love”, “sit down” – break all the rules that writers are taught. Plays are not meant to look like this. CLAt HighTide festival, Aldeburgh, 14-15 September.Read our four-star review Until the FloodDael Orlandersmith’s play both is and isn’t about the 2014 shooting of black teenager Michael Brown by white police officer Darren Wilson. This event is the catalyst for Until the Flood, which digs into the aftermath of the shooting and unearths ugly truths about race in the United States. In front of a candle-filled, flickering memorial to Brown, each speaker is fully inhabited and dispassionately held up for inspection. With a single item of clothing and a subtle shifting of her limbs, Orlandersmith transforms into her characters one by one. CLAt the Arcola theatre, London, 4-28 September.Read our four-star review Jordan Brookes: I’ve Got Nothing‘In all sincerity …” says Jordan Brookes at the beginning of the heartfelt audience address that closes his Edinburgh Comedy award-winning show. But sincerity is a devalued currency in Brookes’s shows, and he knows it. The point of I’ve Got Nothing is that nothing he does can be trusted or taken for granted. He drills deep into the constituent parts of a comedy show, looking for cogs to disable or sprockets to twist into new, destabilising shapes. It’s always gripping. You seldom know what he’s up to, or what he’ll do next. BLAt Soho theatre, London, 10-15 February.Read our four-star review BurgerzThe impetus for Travis Alabanza’s show, and the reason they call an audience member on stage to help them make a burger, was an incident in 2016 when an unknown assailant threw a burger at them in a transphobic attack. Alabanza tries to reconcile themselves with this random (yet commonplace) act of violence, by taking control of the offending weapon. Alabanza generates roars of laughter, but the angry and intelligent script is also underscored with the real pain of being trapped in a world where sexual and racial violence is prevalent and, too often, tolerated. MFAt Dublin Theatre Festival, 9-12 October. Then touring from 11 November-1 December.Read our four-star review