9pm, ITV2 What came around, went around, just as Yewande predicted, and now Caroline is getting the old gang back together again. Will any of the couples “work on the outside”? Are they doomed to split before they hit the green room? And who cares, when all this is just prelude to Maura’s sparkling standup career? Ellen E Jones 6pm, Dave The clanking ghost of Scrapheap Challenge haunts this fun new gearhead show, as Boyzone man Shane Lynch challenges two squads of mechanics to bodge together a Mad Max motor capable of matching a deluxe supercar. The opening episode sees the teams up against a Bentley Bentayga, the fanciest of 4x4s. Graeme Virtue 9pm, BBC One Rat-like slaver Ralph Hanson is turning into a watchable baddie as he proceeds to hatch various dastardly plots. On his return to Truro he sets about enlisting two-faced Tess in a scheme intended to sunder both the Despards and the Poldarks. Elsewhere, George raves on; Ross gets a mortgage; and an elopement is on the cards. Mike Bradley 9pm, BBC Two Thanks to assorted eagle-hunting docs, Mongolia is now a less obscure destination than you might think. Capital Ulaanbaatar proves woefully polluted, but this film is worth watching for the host’s attempt to wrestle in a pair of red budgie-smugglers, plus eagle-hunting – vegan-style! MB 10pm, BBC Two To say that writer/star Spencer Jones is a maverick who follows the beat of a different drum is almost an insult to the gentle eccentricity of the man behind this supremely chaotic series of comedy shorts. Watch Clunkerdunk (Jones) stumble through life under constant bombardment from his own bizarre imagination. Who would have thought struggling to invent a jingle for a cab company or recording an audition tape for a role in a musical could be so funny? MB E!, 9pm Helmed by Mark L Walberg, a man who has presumably spent most of his life being mistaken for Mark Wahlberg, this rebooted US reality show sees singles try to break up existing couples. Will their relationships survive? And, with so many other dating shows around, will anyone care? Hannah J Davies About a Boy 1.30pm, ITV Hugh Grant’s north London slacker Will is determined to live in splendid, self-centred isolation, but his defences are eroded by an unhappy teenager (Nicholas Hoult), his depressed mother (Toni Collette), and the single mum he fancies (Rachel Weisz). A genuinely funny and moving Nick Hornby adaptation. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: England v Australia, 10am, Sky Sports Ashes The penultimate day from Edgbaston. Community Shield Football: Liverpool v Manchester City, 2.30pm, BT Sport 1 Wembley season curtain-raiser. Championship Football: Bristol City v Leeds United, 4.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event Bielsa’s lads begin this year’s inevitably cursed campaign.