Winston Churchill believed that scientists should be “on tap, not on top”. During the second world war, he fretted that the ones he had on tap were incorrigible leakers, though he was confident that the Russians knew nothing about the top-secret Anglo-American project to build the first nuclear weapons, as he and President Roosevelt intended. He had no inkling that virtually all the classified reports about these plans were being scrutinised by officials in the Kremlin often days after they had been written, courtesy of well-placed spies, the most important of whom was the physicist Klaus Fuchs. An unprepossessing introvert who would not say boo to a goose, Fuchs seemed to his colleagues to be entirely absorbed in his science. Yet he was also the most cunning of traitors, as we know from the many accounts of his life and work. The physicist Frank Close has outdone them all in Trinity, a well-researched account of the man often called “the spy of the century”, his relationships with his colleagues and the fumbling attempts of the British security services to unmask him. Fuchs arrived in the UK in September 1933 aged 21, having fled his native Germany a few months after Hitler rose to power. In Fuchs’s youth, he was an active communist – as the Gestapo well knew – and he did not hide these views during his first months in England. MI5 gave him security clearance in 1941, soon after fellow refugee scientist Rudolf Peierls recruited him to work at Birmingham University on the nascent nuclear project. Peierls and his colleague Otto Frisch had hit on an ingenious way of making a nuclear explosive, by smashing together a sufficient quantity of a rare isotope of uranium. It seemed that it might be possible to develop a nuclear weapon before hostilities ended, and Peierls was terrified that the Nazis might build one before the allies. Fuchs was one of the experts who helped develop the first nuclear bomb and early plans for more advanced weapons. He proved himself to be an able researcher and was a popular lodger in the Peierls household, especially with the children. Meanwhile, he was supplying the Soviets with high-quality information about the nuclear project. After the Americans initiated the gargantuan Manhattan Project, Fuchs was one of some two dozen British scientists who joined the team. In a disastrous lapse, the British security officials chose not disclose Fuchs’s communist proclivities to their US counterparts – if the British had been more candid, Fuchs would never have been allowed anywhere near the project. The American authorities were by no means blameless, however. When Fuchs was working at the Los Alamos laboratory, he was allowed to visit nearby Santa Fe at weekends, enabling him to pass on priceless information to the Russians through intermediaries. As Close notes, during Fuchs’s two years at this site, he carried out “the most extensive and far-reaching feat of espionage in history”. Fuchs was privy to several crucial pieces of information about the first nuclear weapons, and was present when one was detonated, in the Trinity test carried out in a New Mexico desert. A few days later, he heard the first lectures given by the great Italian physicist Enrico Fermi about the next generation of nuclear weapons – hydrogen bombs – which promised to be much more destructive than their predecessors. By mid-September 1945, Fuchs had channelled this information to the Soviets, who could probably not believe their luck at having so much extremely costly research and development done for them, at American expense. Close’s book begins its climax four years after the war, when Fuchs was the key theoretician at the UK’s new nuclear energy research establishment at Harwell in Oxfordshire. He spied for the Soviets until the spring of 1949, when he abruptly ceased to live a double life, perhaps considering his job done. Some in MI5 had suspected for more than two years that he might be a spy, and it was decrypters at GCHQ who supplied clear proof of his guilt, Close reveals, not the crack American team that is normally given all the credit. Close’s narrative is clear and fluent though some of it reads like a chronicle, burdened by inessential detail. However, his account of how an admission of guilt was gradually prised from Fuchs is a masterclass in thriller writing, and bears comparison with the most gripping spy sagas of Ben Macintyre. Fuchs was grilled by MI5’s Jim Skardon, whom the official history of MI5 described as the agency’s “foremost interrogator”. Yet it appears from transcripts and reports of Skardon’s encounters with Fuchs that the celebrated MI5 operative might be better characterised as a forerunner to Inspector Clouseau. After two long interviews, Skardon believed that he was blameless, and even told a colleague: “You’re barking up the wrong tree. Fuchs is innocent.” Fuchs finally cracked at the end of January 1950. Even before the news of his arrest was made public, the blame game was under way. American lawmakers and British politicians pointed to one another’s lax security. MI5 and FBI predictably accused each other of being mainly culpable, until they agreed to cut their losses and cover each other’s backs. Prime minister Clement Attlee, having had a quiet word with opposition leader Churchill, made an official statement to a silent House of Commons exonerating not only his own government but also the wartime administration. Off the hook, Churchill did not seem much interested. Within three years, the Americans detonated the first H-bomb and, sooner than anyone expected, the Russians began testing their own version of the weapon. Close asserts that it was primarily Fuchs who enabled the Soviets to catch up with Americans. Fuchs had achieved his goal and would probably have argued that he had merely hastened this precarious state of superpower balance, Mutually Assured Destruction, in which we still live, with a complacency that may well puzzle future generations. Fuchs knew that he had betrayed not only the country that welcomed him as a refugee from nazism but also many of his friends and colleagues. In a moving coda, Close turns the spotlight on to the tragedy of Peierls and his wife, who could scarcely believe that their trust had been so callously betrayed. Parts of the British press rubbed salt into the wound, hounding the disillusioned Peierls, baselessly implying that he too was a traitor. Fuchs was superficially contrite but, for him, political fealty was evidently more important than personal loyalty. • Graham Farmelo is author of The Universe Speaks in Numbers (Faber). Trinity: The Treachery and Pursuit of the Most Dangerous Spy in History by Frank Close is published by Allen Lane (RRP £25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.