A plastic shoe, scuffed around the edges, sits atop a white plinth. A figure stands back and regards it, chin in hand. It could be a familiar scene in a gallery. Instead, it’s one of many sequences in Poltergeist’s new show that prod mischievously at the concept of art. Does something count as art if you call it art? At first, Art Heist looks like a slight but entertaining crime caper. Borrowing playfully from films like Mission: Impossible, its opening minutes present us with three would-be art thieves, each on a quest to steal the same famous painting. One is a slick professional robber; another is an art heist aficionado who’s been waiting his whole life for this moment; the third has fallen desperately in love with the artwork in question. Immediately, the comic possibilities are ample. But as in Poltergeist’s previous show, Lights Over Tesco Car Park, which flirted with conspiracy theories as it slyly hoodwinked audiences, Art Heist smuggles in tricky ideas under the guise of silliness. Its concerns, like its characters, come dressed in fake moustaches and goofy costumes. Beneath its (often hilarious) gags and comic chaos, the show worries away at questions of value, meaning and expression. How do we decide the worth of any piece of art? Does all art need to mean something? Where is the line between art and not-art? And we the audience are also part of the picture. Through gentle participation, Poltergeist’s charming performers – Alice Boyd, Serena Yagoub, Will Spence and Rosa Garland – coax spectators into the frame, further complicating the status of their own art. Who is the subject here, and who the artist? Everything about Jack Bradfield’s production tangles these already knotty ideas, from the cameras and screens that multiply the images on stage to the microphone that gets snatched from hand to hand, changing who is in control of the narrative. Occasionally, the show’s accumulating layers feel like they might collapse in on themselves, dragging the performers down with them. At its best, though, it leaves you grinning and scratching your head at the same time. Just don’t expect answers. Like all the best artists, Poltergeist are too clever to restrict interpretations. At the Underbelly, Cowgate, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Then at the New Diorama, London, 15-26 October.