The future of Bury FC has been plunged back into grave doubt after an 11th-hour takeover bid by C&N Sporting Risk collapsed. The League One side had been given until 5pm BST on Tuesday to complete a sale that would prevent them from being expelled from the English Football League (EFL), ending their 134-year history. But a C&N Sporting Risk statement confirmed the news little more than an hour before that deadline. “We are grateful to the EFL for the short extension they granted to us so that we could continue with due diligence, and for their acceptance of our proof of funds capable of mounting a credible takeover,” read a statement from the data analytics company. “This has been worked on around the clock by our team and advisors for the past 72 hours. “As part of our due diligence, we set ourselves a list of key criteria regarding the CVA, the ground and the overall financial state of the club that had to be met in order for us to be satisfied that we have enough knowledge to proceed with the takeover. The complexities involved in each of these matters escalated and continue to do so. “It is therefore with regret that we have decided not to proceed with the takeover of Bury FC. This decision has not been taken lightly. We fully understand the importance of the club to the community and it is with this in mind that we have informed the EFL of our decision at the earliest possible opportunity.” A Football League statement added: “The EFL board has been informed that C&N Sporting Risk will no longer be pursuing their interest in Bury FC. The League announced at the weekend that it was working exclusively with the club and C&N in an attempt to finalise a change of control at the club. However, following a period of due diligence, C&N have opted not to progress matters. The League continues to be in discussions with Bury FC in advance of today’s 5pm deadline and will provide a further update as appropriate.” The news was met with disbelief and despair among fans gathered outside Gigg Lane stadium. “My legs are shaking – I just feel like I’m going to cry to be honest,” said Stephen Farrar, 26, one of hundreds who had earlier spent hours cleaning stands in anticipation of Bury’s first game of the season going ahead on Saturday. “I’m just gutted, quite emotional. When I first got here today there was optimism but from Friday it’s been a rollercoaster. I spent most of Friday quite upset thinking that was it – you get that news at 11pm and it lifted again. “I came down here on Saturday and everyone was optimistic, talking about cleaning the stands. Everyone felt we were on the right path. This morning was overwhelming seeing all the fans of different clubs helping out.” Farrar said he was told the news while cleaning the stadium, when someone told him to “get out because the deal was off”. “I know people are saying still believe but I don’t know how it can [survive]. I’m devastated.” One emotional fan screamed “We want him out” outside the stadium about owner Steve Dale before being calmed down by others, while another man said there were plans for a demonstration outside the stadium later on Tuesday if the club were expelled from the Football League. Angry scenes now outside Gigg Lane where growing number of fans are gathering, some chanting “We want Dale out” pic.twitter.com/Bnheey7epG Another fan, Andy Moore, 62, was hopeful the club might still be saved, telling his grown-up son who had phoned him when the news broke: “It’s not over yet. Bury fans are positive – you have to be positive.” “It’s a kick in the teeth but the EFL are not blameless in this,” said Moore, who has followed the club home and away since 1985. “Why would you set a deadline over the bank holiday?”