Polly Toynbee’s column (Only a government of national unity can deliver us all from no deal, 6 August) was a joy to read, bringing clarity to the obfuscation surrounding whether or not there can be an election in time to prevent a no-deal Brexit following a vote of no confidence in this arrogant, undemocratic government. I particularly enjoyed the war cry at the end to “bring it on” should the UK crash out of the EU implying, as it did, that the Tories would be made to pay for their ideologically driven incompetence. It is urgent that something be done to prevent no deal. But Polly’s route, like other similar routes, asks an enormous amount of character and steel from a small number of MPs. Some will feel that voting no confidence equals voting no Brexit which, in turn, equals voting no career. For many this will be an agonising dilemma. Politicians and the public have had to cope with, in some cases, irretrievably damaged relationships, both personal and professional, since the referendum. The tension between this personal dimension and the need to put the country first should not be underestimated. On the whole these are honourable, well-meaning democrats and, individual politics aside, those who wish avert the disaster that is Brexit should consider how best their elected representatives can be supported to do the right thing at this critical time for our children’s future.David LowndesSouthampton • Polly Toynbee concludes that a no-deal disaster “would see the Tories render themselves unelectable for a generation”, but if this is all part of Labour’s long-term objective, it is likely to go horribly wrong. Jeremy Corbyn’s plan appears now to be to win a vote of no confidence in Johnson, and force a general election. His campaign would be based on promising to “reopen talks with the EU”, presumably with the forlorn hope of a softer Brexit being arranged, with jobs, investment and trade all hunky-dory! The rightwing media will have a field day. If the election takes place after 31 October, as Dominic Cummings plans, Labour will face the wrath of the electorate for not standing up for remain earlier; consequently the anti-Tory vote will be divided, and Johnson could well stay in power. Has no one in Corbyn’s top team studied Germany’s history between 1930 and 1933?Bernie EvansLiverpool • You report that in its efforts to force through a no-deal departure, Downing Street regards the 2016 Brexit referendum as overruling parliament (Gove accuses ‘wrong and sad’ EU of refusing to negotiate new Brexit deal, 7 August). However, The European Union Referendum Act 2015 says “because of the sovereignty of parliament referendums cannot be legally binding in the UK and are therefore advisory”. While the Cameron government said they would implement the referendum result, they were not legally bound by the referendum to do so. Nor was the May government, and neither is the Johnson government. Parliament is still sovereign.Philippa CowlingIlkley, West Yorkshire • Any leader of a short-lived government of national unity to see off a no-deal Brexit needs to be non-partisan. Step forward Caroline Lucas? She has integrity and is respected across the house. And she’d have to work in a cross-party way – no risk of her favouring her fellow party MPs.Jane MardellWoodbridge, Suffolk • Thank you, Polly, you have lifted my spirits to think that there is hope out there. Will Jeremy Corbyn read your column?Helen EvansRuthin, Denbighshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition