The rise of podcasts and streaming has led to a wide variety of real-crime stories getting an airing. This one feels particularly worthwhile as a parable of the interaction between black America and the country’s criminal justice system. The enraging series documents Meek Mill’s ongoing travails after his conviction for a firearms offence at the age of 18.From Friday 9 August, Amazon Prime Video If you’ve been waiting for an American Skins, your moment might finally have arrived. This teen drama has made a splash in the States for its rawness, honesty and unflinching explorations of difficult subjects ranging from addiction to sex work.Tuesday 6 August, 10pm, Sky Atlantic Funny, big-hearted new comedy-drama from Aisling Bea. Bea plays Aine, a woman putting her life back together after a breakdown with the help of her sister Shona (Sharon Horgan). The show manages to mine sensitive material for comic effect while capturing the warmth and occasional tension of sibling relationships under duress.Thursday 8 August, 10pm, Channel 4 The Panthers weren’t exclusively an American phenomenon. This fascinating doc explores the life and times of the British chapter, which was established in London in 1968. The likes of Benjamin Zephaniah and Mykaell Riley tell the story.Saturday 3 August, 8pm, Radio 4 Super-cheesy and not really any the worse for it, this new Netflix series stars Iko Uwais as Kai Jin, a young chef in San Francisco’s Chinatown who uses mysteriously acquired and super-human martial arts skills to prevent deadly ancient powers from falling into the wrong hands. Those hands belong, inevitably, to a ruthless triad gang. Who can be expected to put up a fight. CGI martial hi-jinks ensue.From Thursday 8 August, Netflix Comedian Lloyd Griffith – who starred in a series of mildly infuriating adverts for a bookmaker a few years ago – helms this surprisingly fascinating exploration of gambling’s illusory highs and considerable lows.From Sunday 4 August, BBC Three As far as wild and eventually tragic parables of post-millennial British life go, the story of Jade Goody takes some beating. Relive it in this three-part documentary, which explores the impact of Jade’s life on the thankless celebrity treadmill.Wednesday 7 August, 9pm, Channel 4 More fine Euro-detecting from More4’s apparently inexhaustible secret supply. This time we’re in Turin, where, as is so often the way, the body of a missing 15-year-old girl has been discovered. Sounds like a job for fearless but troubled Inspector Valeria Ferro.Friday 9 August, 9pm, More4 The 1945 film that made Margaret Lockwood a screen icon in postwar Britain: it was something to do with the sexy highway-woman gear and heaving bosom. She plays a married 17th-century lady who takes to dallying with highwayman James Mason, and ambushing unwary rich folk. It’s a triumphantly trashy treat in austere times.Sunday 4 August, 7pm, Talking Pictures TV A third season for the engaging 1980s-set wrestling yarn. The transformation of Alison Brie’s Ruth appears to be complete. She’s successful, she’s in love and she’s finally solvent – and she’s also getting bored. Fortunately, the ladies are now based in Las Vegas, so Sin City should have plenty to keep them occupied …From Friday 9 August, Netflix