Born in Bolton, Sara Cox, 44, worked as a model before becoming a presenter on Channel 4’s The Girlie Show in 1996. By 2000, she was presenting the breakfast show on Radio 1, where she spent three and a half years. In 2013 she moved to Radio 2, and in January 2019 took over the teatime show. In September she will present a new series of Love In The Countryside for BBC2. She is married with three children and lives in London. When were you happiest?Getting a daily show on Radio 2, because that was an ambition for so long. What is your greatest fear?Finding unannounced dill in a meal. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?I catastrophise. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?My half-electric Volvo. What is your most treasured possession?A little silver ring that was my nana’s. It’s worth nowt, but we were really close. She was the most formidable but glamorous woman – immaculate nails, blond bouffant, and the only woman to ever make smoking look glamorous. What is your wallpaper?I feel bad because I’ve got three gorgeous kids and it’s the cat, Watson, our Russian Blue. Who would play you in the film of your life?Letitia Dean. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?I was very nervous interviewing Genesis on Radio 2. I felt out of my depth and somebody tweeted afterwards: Sara Cox interviewing Genesis – what a waste. I was crushed, because I kind of knew it was true. What is your most unappealing habit?Picking at the dogs’ crusty faces in bed. Eating unroasted monkey nuts in bed. What is your favourite word?Cavort. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Cockles in vinegar: I’ve always got a jar in the fridge. What does love feel like?A full belly and a nice nap. Which living person do you most despise, and why?Ann Widdecombe: a waddling, embarrassing dinosaur. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Beyoncé and Jay Z, George Michael, Whitney Houston – and Annie Mac and her husband Toddla T, so we could keep running into the kitchen going: “Oh my God! Jay Z and George are here!” What has been your biggest disappointment?As an adult, not having my own horse yet. What is the closest you’ve come to death?Modelling in South Korea, aged 19. After a party, I flopped into bed, lit a big candle and balanced it on top of a massive box of matches. I created my own firework display when the candle burnt down and set fire to it. It made the biggest noise ever which, luckily, woke me from my slightly boozy slumber. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?The ability to walk in high heels. What song would you like played at your funeral?The Hovis ad music. How would you like to be remembered?For making people’s journeys on the M6 a bit easier.