If you’re John Robins, there’s always something to be anxious about. In his new show, Hot Shame, it’s dating, and damp. In its predecessor, it was a relationship breakup. Even when that show won the Edinburgh comedy award in 2017, Robins had cause to fret, as his triumph was overshadowed by ex-girlfriend Sara Pascoe performing her own set on the subject, and by co-winner Hannah Gadsby, whose show Nanette became a global phenomenon. What Robins’ fall-guy shtick mustn’t obscure, though, is that he is a top dog at standup. Hot Shame is the title of a book he displays stage right, mordant readings from which punctuate the hour. Each story details a mortifying incident in our host’s life – like the time he cancelled a gig because he was addicted to online golf, or when, aged 15, he mistook flirting for saying the word “knickers” over and over. The show’s first half relates a grownup version of that experience, as Robins meets a woman in a New York bar. They discuss Times Up and Aziz Ansari – after which, Robins feels powerless to make any further moves. It’s a lovely routine about an awkward “millennium man” in the age of #MeToo, as Robins labours to demonstrate both his sympathy with the cause (“I have veered on the cool side of honest”) and his sexual confidence. It works because we know his highly strung character so well: Robins has only to pitch himself into the scenario and let appalling foot-in-mouth comedy take its course. His second set piece isn’t quite as inevitable, but reaps even bigger laughs, as he buys a humidifier to help his “crispy towels” dry. In a manner recalling Rhod Gilbert’s great routine about tog ratings, he then embarks on a neurotic odyssey into online review sites and emasculating encounters with tradesmen, ending with Robins threatening in a text message to a rising damp consultant to kill himself. It is a masterclass in tempo, tone and character, as apoplexy ebbs to stunned disbelief, before terminating in Robins’ wordless horror at how badly he’s failed at home improvement. Another winning show from a man who can’t stop losing for our entertainment. • At Pleasance Courtyard, Edinbugh, until 25 August. Then touring. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews