It must be something to do with being at the back all the time, but give a drummer their moment in the spotlight and there’s no holding them back. At least three one-man shows on the Edinburgh fringe put the drums centre stage and none of the performers misses the chance to demonstrate their mastery of the backbeat, the jazz shuffle or the military snare roll. “It was the drums that chose me,” says Daniel Bellus’s Alfie as he gets behind his red Yamaha kit in Beat (★★★★☆), a Molière award-nominated monologue by Cédric Chapuis and the cream of this drum-driven crop. Dressed all in white, Bellus is nervy, wide-eyed and eager to please. It’s never stated, but you assume his character is somewhere on the autistic spectrum, a teenage boy who is perplexed by human interactions but blissfully content when counting out a rhythm. He’s held back at school, frequently in trouble over misunderstandings, but comes into his own when finally he gets behind a drum kit. By the end, it becomes his way of connecting to the world. From his discovery of Buddy Rich and Art Blakey in his grandmother’s record collection, he graduates to a rap rendition of I Wandered Lonely As a Cloud and a four-to-the-floor cover of Highway to Hell. The play ends clunkily, but for as long as Alfie is struggling against uncomprehending parents, classmates and teachers, we’re with him every beat of the way. “This isn’t a musical instrument, it’s a beating heart,” says Bellus and, in Stéphane Batlle’s production, he has the charm and musical dexterity to make us feel it. It’s been a while since Charlie Chuck saw the potential of drums in standup comedy, so perhaps there’s a gap in the market for comedian Alexander Fox (“slave to the rhythm, intern to the boogie”). There again, there’s little of the rock’n’roll animal in the smartly dressed 26-year-old, whose field of reference is more classical history than classic rock. Proficient though he is on his Roland electronic drum kit, you can’t imagine him throwing it out of a hotel window. Oddly, in Snare (★★★☆☆) he gets almost no comic mileage from the drums themselves, preferring to give a beat-by-beat breakdown of the work of Keith Moon on Who Are You, Stewart Copeland on Walking on the Moon and Jeff Porcaro on Rosanna – drummer favourites all. The comedy comes when he leaves the drum stool to tell an almost certainly fictional tale of his seduction by a drum teacher, a story he embellishes with prerecorded voiceovers and a keen ear for a gag. It sounds odd on paper, but he makes a pleasingly offbeat hour of it. No prizes for guessing why writer and actor Mick Berry was attracted to Keith Moon. As the author of The Drummer’s Bible, he can only have been drawn to the drummer’s fun-filled technique. So drawn, indeed, that the major part of Keith Moon: The Real Me (★★☆☆☆) consists of him drumming along to classic Who tracks in their entirety. Lest we think him indulgent, he occasionally comes forward to skip through Moon’s sex and drugs and rock’n’roll story in something approximating a London accent. Some men in Who T-shirts gave it a standing ovation – this one’s for the fan club only. Beat is at Pleasance Dome; Alexander Fox: Snare is at Pleasance Courtyard; Keith Moon: The Real Me is at Gilded Balloon Teviot; all until 26 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.