The votes have been cast. They have been counted. We have whittled down our very long longlist and now have a very short shortlist of three books: • The Unauthorised Biography of Ezra Maas by Daniel James (Dead Ink Books)• Please Read This Leaflet Carefully by Karen Havelin (Dead Ink Books)• Skin by Liam Brown (Legend) Those novels received 118, 89 and 73 valid votes respectively – which makes for a very creditable effort. That’s already hundreds of readers who have taken the time to write about these books and they’ve come from all over the internet. (Ezra Maas in particular seems to have benefited from some enthusiastic support on Goodreads, as well as the fans of Dead Ink Books, which seems a very positive kind of participation.) I hope those enthusiastic supporters stay with us for the rest of the competition – alongside the nearly 1,400 other voters who had their say this year. Thank you to everyone for who has participated so far – and to all authors who had books on the list. Thanks also, and as ever, to the incomparable Lisa Jones for her spreadsheet skills and for validating every single vote – and the comment moderators here at the Guardian for keeping things honest. Meanwhile, commiserations to the other authors. There were many books getting high numbers of votes and I hope the writers can take consolation from all the reader energy. Meanwhile, if you are one of the latter, I hope you aren’t feeling too disappointed. The good news from here is that you can still have a significant stake in this competition as it develops. The next stage is to lengthen our shortlist to a more conventional six books by announcing the final three choices: one from last year’s judges and one from each of our two nominated book champions for this year, Storyhouse library in Chester and Golden Hare Books in Edinburgh. We’ll announce their choices next week to give you the complete six-book shortlist. Please also watch this space if you’re interested in becoming a judge for this year’s competition and having your opinion counted alongside the public vote in the final round. For now, anyone keen to take part should review this section from our sweet and fitting terms and conditions: 12. Three readers will be selected by the Guardian to form a panel of judges from those readers who have made substantial contributions to the discussion of the shortlisted books. The process by which these readers are chosen is also left studiously vague and at the Guardian’s discretion. These judges undertake to read at least three of the six-book shortlist before the final judging meeting. I’ll be reading the books on the shortlist at the rate of approximately one a week, going in alphabetical order by author and publishing my thoughts here. I hope you’ll join me. It looks like we’ve got some fantastic books on our very short shortlist and I’m hoping the next set of finalists will make things even more interesting … More soon!