Like most brilliant ideas, the concept behind Bands FC is disarmingly simple: “Bands as football teams, football teams as bands.” One of the project’s co-founders, Nick Fraser, who has worked with the Charlatans for over a decade on merchandising, came up with the germ of Bands FC in the build-up to the World Cup last summer as he chatted with graphic designer Mark Liptrott and the band’s lead singer Tim Burgess. “We realised that all the attention of the next month would be centred on football,” Fraser says. “Music would be pushed into the background and forgotten about, so it dawned on us that bands would need to ‘footballsise’ themselves.” The confluence of popular music and football is nothing new, as Fraser points out. “Tony Wilson made the connection back in the 1990s and, for a certain generation, the football/music cross-pollination was kicked off by Italia 90 and New Order’s World in Motion, which was a game changer.” So last summer Fraser, Burgess and Liptrott devised a few designs that merged football club badges with band logos and it worked so well that the concept snowballed into something of a social media phenomenon. “The very first was the Liverpool FC/Echo and the Bunnymen one,” says Fraser. “It just worked so well, especially as Ian McCulloch is a massive Liverpool fan.” Within a couple of weeks, there were more than 100 designs. The National Football Museum were quick to recognise Bands FC and an exhibition was arranged hastily, opening in early September and running until late November. It has proven to be one of the museum’s popular exhibitions since it moved to the Urbis centre in Manchester. A few months later, Fraser and Liptrott were approached by a much older venue, with the connection being on the musical side of the equation this time. “We thought, having started at the highest point, the National Football Museum, it would all go downhill until it fizzled out and we would just give up,” Fraser says. “But when the Royal Albert Hall comes to you, you know you are on to something special.” And so, between April and May this year, anybody attending a concert at the Royal Albert Hall saw some of Bands FC’s finest designs. “We only ever waited until it was upon us, you don’t apply to the Royal Albert Hall to do an exhibition.” Even before the Royal Albert Hall, word had travelled across the Atlantic. They were invited to host an exhibition in New York and football clubs from around the world started getting in on the act. Barcelona tweeted their approval of the idea of a Periodic Table based on La Liga clubs. “There was quite a big band from Ecuador who got in touch,” Fraser says. “And so we found a suitably big team in Ecuador, Liga de Quito, who were founded in 1918, to link with.” There was never any intention of making a profit, so revenue generated from merchandise has been directed towards good causes. Initially they sponsored local football clubs such as Brinscall Juniors, a youth team based in Chorley. But it soon mushroomed. They teamed up with Sheffield Wednesday fan and artist Pete McKee to design a football shirt that paired the club with Pulp. In just 24 hours, they sold 1,000 of the shirts and raised £33,000 for Sheffield’s Children Hospital. They have raised £75,000 for a variety of causes, which are often selected by band members. “The Charlatans chose the brain tumour charity as they had lost Jon [Brookes], their drummer, who died in 2013 aged 44,” Fraser says. When Frightened Rabbit singer Scott Hutchison died last year, they produced a badge that paired the band with Hearts. All of the money raised was donated to a charity chosen by the band. If this all seems too good to be true, Fraser admits there has been the odd stumbling block. “Probably the most intimidating was when Arsenal got in touch,” Fraser says. “It was a letter from their legal counsel inviting us to a meeting at the Emirates. My reply was ‘Shall I bring a shovel?’ But in the end they were fine about it.” Bands FC have now been commissioned to create a special series of badges for War Child FC, an initiative that uses football as a way of helping children in countries that have been damaged by war. Last year the charity reached 123,000 children in nine countries. Linking up with War Child was a logical step for Bands FC. The charity was formed in the mid-1990s and has been associated with music from the start. In 1995, they released The Help Album, which featured contributions from Paul McCartney, Paul Weller, Radiohead, Oasis, Blur and the Manic Street Preachers. The artists recorded their tracks on one day, had them mixed the next day and the album was in shops a few days later. Over the last 18 months, War Child have used football to reach vulnerable children. “We have seen first-hand the positive impact of the beautiful game,” says Dan Collison of War Child UK. “In the Central African Republic, we’ve seen evidence of how football can rebuild trust, helping former child soldiers open up about their experiences and begin to reintegrate back into their former communities. This is the generation who will rebuild what others have destroyed. They need education to survive, they need emotional strength to look forward with hope and they need opportunities to play and once again, be children.” The War Child FC badges will hopefully raise £15,000 for the charity. In just over a year, a whimsical idea about drawing attention towards musicians and away from football has become a way of helping some of the most vulnerable children across the globe. Bands FC has succeeded in setting the world in motion. Richard Foster’s book From An Acute Angle is out now and you can follow him on Twitter