About one hour into Holiday, the writing-directing debut of Swedish film-maker Isabella Eklöf, there’s a scene in which a young woman who has joined her drug dealing boyfriend and his entourage in a Turkish resort on the Aegean is subjected to harrowing sexual abuse. Another young woman is raped, twice, in the opening scenes of The Nightingale, second film from Australian writer-director Jennifer Kent, of The Babadook (2014) fame. In the last few years we’ve also seen the heroine of Coralie Fargeat’s Revenge (2017), violated and left for dead by her lover and his buddies, an art student sexually abused in Natalia Leite’s M.F.A. (2017), and a medical student raped in Jen and Sylvia Soska’s American Mary (2012). What these films have in common is not just the sexual violence against female characters, but that they’re directed by women. What’s going on? Why can’t women make nice films about cookery, kittens, or quilting? Surely they’re not trying to beat men at their own game, by showing they can abuse their female characters just as horribly as any misogynistic male auteur? Are these scenes really necessary? “In this instance I felt it was absolutely necessary,” says Eklöf, “because I haven’t seen it portrayed from the female perspective.” Holiday is indeed something this writer hadn’t seen before - a gangster movie from the point of view of the gangster’s moll, who finds there’s a price to pay for the life of luxury she wants to lead, though it’s not necessarily the price we’re expecting. “We all weigh up the pros and cons of being in an abusive relationship,” says Eklöf. “If the alternative is to be all alone in the world, to her it’s preferable to have the clan, the family, and I think a lot of people, men and women, make that choice.” Young women in one of Ireland’s notorious Magdalene laundries are abused by nuns in Aislinn Clarke’s debut feature, the found-footage horror movie The Devil’s Doorway (2019). “Watching a scene of rape, humiliation, or other brutality against a female character is generally a different experience for a woman than for a man,” Clarke says, “and because every director started out as a viewer this means we tend to direct such scenes differently, too.” Her film also features a pregnant teenager whose wellbeing the Catholic church deems secondary to that of her unborn child. It’s telling that when she goes into labour, chained to the bed, the camera lingers on her face and encourages us to empathise with her ordeal, rather than share the horrified viewpoint of the priest who is the film’s protagonist. “The problem is not that brutal events are presented in films,” says Clarke. “It’s how the events are presented and where the director has chosen to place the audience’s focus that matters. Directors are curators of what the audience sees, hears and feels.” Women naturally have an intimate relationship with blood, pain and physical transformation … Violent thrillers provide ideal frameworks for female film-makers to address these themes There’s still a persistent belief that violence and gore are the province of male film-makers and audiences, and Eklöf points out that, statistically, more men than women have been involved in or subjected to violence. “I think it’s a very important part of the feminist movement, to speak about men’s rights, not in that alt right sense, but men’s liberation from toxic masculinity as well.” But women naturally have an intimate relationship with blood, pain and physical transformation, which go into overdrive when menstruation leads to pregnancy and childbirth. Horror or violent thrillers provide ideal frameworks for female film-makers to address these themes and other issues related to women’s place in society that risk being dreary turn-offs in more earnest, earthbound dramas. Couched in a genre format, though, they can operate at a visceral rather than intellectual level. And women’s experiences can inject new blood – literally – into tired old tropes. In Prevenge (2016), Alice Lowe, directing herself in her own directorial debut while heavily pregnant, slices her way through the cast; but the horror is underpinned by physical and psychological aspects of pregnancy that no male director could ever have dreamt up on his own. Nicole Kidman is kicked in the ribs until she’s black and blue in Karyn Kusama’s Destroyer (2018), but her own violent behaviour is guided by her character’s maternal instincts, even if she is a contender for the world’s worst mother. Raw (2016), French film-maker Julia Ducournau’s writing-directing debut about a vegetarian veterinary student who develops a taste for cannibalism, is awash with severed fingers and chewed-up body parts, but beneath the gore is a story about sisterhood and family ties. Sometimes, the empathy can backfire. In Brian De Palma’s Carrie (1976), Sissy Spacek’s poignant performance allows us to empathise with a character who might otherwise have been freakish and horrifying, and it’s her mother (played by Piper Laurie) who is one of cinema’s great monsters. But where one might have expected more of a feminine twist from Kimberly Peirce’s 2013 remake, additional character motivation muddies the waters. Carrie’s mother gets a backstory and sympathetic performance from Julianne Moore that dilute her monstrousness. And whereas Spacek lashed out indiscriminately after being traumatised by the prom-night prank, Chloë Grace Moretz coolly murders her bullies while sparing people who have been nice to her, making the character less sympathetic, more like a telekinetic variation on a high-school shooter. In effect, the 2013 Carrie really is the monster her mother accused her of being. Other films definitely benefit from a female touch. The Woman (2011) directed by Lucky McKee (who also co-wrote it with Jack Ketchum, of The Girl Next Door notoriety), is essentially a movie about a feral woman being chained up, raped and tortured in a basement, and is every bit as harrowing and unpleasant as that summary implies, despite a vivid performance by Pollyanna McIntosh in the central role. But in the sequel, Darlin’ (2019), it’s McIntosh herself who not only reprises her role, but writes and directs, adding humanity, warmth and humour that were lacking in its predecessor. The feral woman’s surrogate daughter is whisked away to a Catholic care home where the wild child is taught the ways of “civilisation” in a coming-of-age story alternating with some traditional stalk and slash, as her “mother” tracks her down, dispatching a variety of disagreeable men along the way. It’s a lot more fun than The Woman. If cinema is to survive and flourish, it must keep on presenting the world through fresh sets of eyes. The female gaze is just one way of looking at things differently. “I’ve made a bit of effort to consciously objectify men,” says Eklöf, who for the two leading male characters in Holiday chose actors who are “attractive in a kind of conventional way. I’ve taken the role of femme fatale versus the good girl, and reversed that dynamic.” Meanwhile, horror fans are looking forward to seeing what effect the female gaze will have on David Cronenberg’s body horror classic Rabid (1977), in which a motorbike accident leaves its anti-heroine with a phallic implant in her armpit and an uncontrollable bloodthirst allied to a virus that turns her victims into zombie-like berserkers. The Soska sisters’ remake is on its way. •Holiday is released on 2 August in the UK, with a Q&A with Isabella Eklöf at the ICA, London, on 6 August