Mercedes have re-signed Valtteri Bottas to partner Lewis Hamilton for next season. They had been considering promoting their young reserve driver Esteban Ocon but chose to continue with the stability of Bottas. Soon afterwards, as had been widely expected, Renault revealed they had taken on Ocon to replace Nico Hülkenberg. Bottas, in his third season driving for Mercedes, has had his contract extended for a further year. The 30-year-old opened strongly with two victories in the opening four F1 races. However his challenge has faded and he trails Hamilton by 62 points going into Sunday’s Belgian Grand Prix. His teammate has comprehensively outraced the Finn. Over their 53 races together Bottas has accrued only five wins to Hamilton’s 28. Bottas was aware his position had been under threat. “In this sport you know if you are not signed anything can happen,” he said. “There are many different things the teams look at and obviously the situation between me and Esteban was openly spoken about. So I had to wait. I had to think about other options and investigate. I was making a plan for something else but then things started to go the right way. Now I can focus on the job and I really want to have a strong result at the Belgian Grand Prix and a strong end to the year.” Bottas’s failure to continue his season-opening form led to speculation that Ocon would replace him. Mercedes were keen to ensure Ocon had a drive next year and they have great faith in the 22-year-old Frenchman’s abilities. However Hamilton has been clear he enjoys a harmonious and respectful relationship with Bottas. He is also a proven quantity in the car, returning points solid enough to all but ensure Mercedes will equal Ferrari’s record of six consecutive constructors’ championships this season. “Continuity is always a good thing,” Hamilton said. “We have a great environment, a great relationship. I think it was a smart decision by the team.” The five-times world champion was clearly happy, relaxed and refreshed after the summer break. “Valtteri makes me look good, as he looks older than me, even though he is younger,” he quipped. Of his relationship with Hamilton Bottas said: “We have made a good team and I am sure we will make a good team in the future”. Ocon, who completed two full seasons for Force India in 2017 and 2018 has signed a two-year deal with Renault, leaving Hülkenberg as a potential target for Haas to replace Romain Grosjean. Speaking at Spa, Max Verstappen who won two of the four races before F1’s summer break and is in third place, seven points behind Bottas, believed Hamilton’s lead was all but insurmountable with nine races remaining. 15 March Australia, Melbourne; 22 March Bahrain, Sakhir; 5 April Vietnam, Hanoi; 19 April China, Shanghai; 3 May Netherlands, Zandvoort; 10 May Spain, Barcelona; 24 May Monaco, Monte Carlo; 7 June Azerbaijan, Baku; 14 June Canada, Montreal; 28 June France, Le Castellet; 5 July Austria, Spielberg; 19 July Great Britain, Silverstone; 2 August Hungary, Budapest; 30 August Belgium, Spa; 6 September Italy, Monza (subject to contract signature); 20 September Singapore, Singapore; 27 September Russia, Sochi; 11 October Japan, Suzuka; 25 October United States, Austin; 1 November Mexico City, Mexico City; 15 November Brazil, São Paulo; 29 November Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi. “I always try to do the best I can but I think it will be track dependent for us,” he said. “I am expecting this track to be a bit more tricky. In recent years we have been quite strong in developing the car throughout the year, we will have a few tracks where I think we can have a good go, but for the championship? I don’t think so.” F1 has also revealed its calendar for next year with 22 grands prix making it the longest season in the history of the sport. With a new race in Vietnam and a return to the Netherlands confirmed, Germany will not be hosting a race in 2019. The British Grand Prix is scheduled to take place on 19 July, a week later than this year to avoid a clash with the Euro 2020 final and Wimbledon. The calendar is subject to ratification by the World Motor Sport Council on 4 October.