Ole Gunnar Solskjær is convinced Paul Pogba wants to stay at Manchester United and is hopeful the midfielder will feature in their Premier League opener against Chelsea at Old Traffford next Sunday, providing the Frenchman returns to training problem-free. Solskjær also confirmed he spoke to Romelu Lukaku about his conduct after the striker divulged confidential details of a training sprint session on social media. The striker has since removed a tweet he posted on Friday, of which Solskjær took a dim view, but the United manager now considers the “case closed”. Pogba and Lukaku, both of whom have been heavily linked with moves away from the club, were absent as United rounded off pre-season in style in Cardiff, beating Milan on 5-4 penalties to maintain their 100% record this summer. Pogba said “it could be a good time for a new challenge” in June, while Lukaku is keen on a move to Serie A, with Juventus and Internazionale interested. Solskjær said he had “no doubts at all” over Pogba’s commitment to the club and clarified that the midfielder felt discomfort in his back but is not injured and could return to training on Monday. Asked if Pogba will feature on the opening day, Solskjær replied: “He should be OK. I hope so, anyway.” Harry Maguire could also feature for United next weekend, with the Leicester defender’s £85m move edging closer. Solskjær said “the last little details” of the transfer are being completed after the England defender underwent a medical at Carrington, United’s training ground, on Saturday morning. Solskjær also confirmed Ashley Young will replace the departed Antonio Valencia as club captain this season. David de Gea wore the armband here but Solskjær said Young will lead the team when he begins matches. “David is obviously in contention,” Solskjær said: “Ash when he is on the pitch will carry the armband. When Ash starts, he will be the captain.” United capped preparations for the new campaign by maintaining their 100% pre-season record this summer with Daniel James, the Wales winger, scoring the winning penalty in a 5-4 shootout victory over Milan before a crowd of more than 65,000 in the Welsh capital. Daniel Maldini, the 17-year-old son of the former Italy and Milan defender Paolo, missed the only penalty. The United teenager Mason Greenwood scored for United from 12 yards and James, the former Swansea winger, scored the winning spot-kick after Jesse Lingard equalised in normal time following a fine Marcus Rashford opener. Of James, Solskjær said: “Dan is ready to go, he’s had a great pre-season. He’s fitted straight into the group, both as a player and a personality.” It was a carnival atmosphere in Cardiff whereby Fred the Red posed for photos and Zombie Nation’s thumping Kernkraft 400 greeted all four goals but the match itself will have also whet supporters’ appetite, with summer signings Aaron Wan-Bissaka and James both on show. Wan-Bissaka, a £45m arrival from Crystal Palace, impressed at right-back and a trademark sliding challenge on Ricardo Rodriguez garnered a hearty ovation from fans. James was given an inevitably warm reception when Solskjær opted to make five second-half changes, with Axel Tuanzebe also among those introduced. “It has been a very good five weeks and now we have another week to prepare,” Solskjær added. “I think we have shown our intentions and hopefully we can carry that on to the league when the points are handed out. These five weeks have given the boys good confidence. I think it was a great experience for the kids coming on at the end, taking a penalty helped them. Some parts of the game we were not happy with and we will have to eradicate when it comes to the league but we are ready for next weekend.”