Ben Stokes: 135*. His euphoric rampage at Headingley will forever be accompanied by an asterisk. In Wisden it will simply demonstrate that he was not out, having completed a second miracle in six weeks off his own bat. But to a few, particularly in Australia, the asterisk will be an annotation. The Australian newspaper captured the mood of a sour minority with the headline: “Ben Stokes was out, so third Test heroics should not have counted.” In case you have been at a digital detox retreat for the last day and a half England needed two runs to win when Stokes survived a huge lbw appeal from Nathan Lyon. Australia could not query the decision because they had wasted both reviews – the second, egregiously, in the previous over. With grim inevitability, a TV graphic soon appeared to show that Stokes would have been given out on review. There are some who feel Stokes’s life-defining innings is forever compromised by that moment; that, in absolute terms, he was lbw b Lyon 131 and Australia won the match by one run. There are many others who would see that as a joyless, narrow-minded view, a reflection of a world that has an increasingly ruinous obsession with accountability and data to the exclusion of soul and human experience. In other sports, including football and rugby, the TV official is able to intervene in such circumstances. In cricket, however, the third umpire must speak only when signalled to. As with tennis, there are a limited number of challenges on each side. Those different protocols can raise philosophical questions and seem arbitrary after such an extraordinary incident. But the rhythms of cricket make it difficult to imagine a practical solution that would allow the third umpire to intervene. The International Cricket Council is trying to increase the over rate, not reduce it. If they had to stop the game to wait for clearance from above after every appeal it would be a struggle to bowl 10 overs an hour, never mind 15. Stokes did not think it was out anyway. “DRS has got that completely wrong,” he said after the game. “It flicked my front pad first and didn’t spin. I thought as soon as it hit me it was sliding down. I still can’t believe it was three reds.” They were three red herrings, diverting attention from the preceding mistakes from Tim Paine and Nathan Lyon respectively. Paine tried a speculative lbw review when it was obvious to the naked eye that Pat Cummins’s delivery to Jack Leach had pitched outside leg; Lyon fumbled when he had the chance to run out Leach off the previous delivery. It’s significant that, for all the external grumbling, the Australian players made no excuses. Stokes’s argument becomes more persuasive with each look at the replay. It seems, at least to this untrained eye, that the ball-tracking technology missed the deflection off Stokes’s front pad and thus followed an incorrect trajectory from when the ball hit his back pad. The correct trajectory may have been hitting the stumps anyway, although it looks more likely that it would at most have been umpire’s call or even missing leg stump, in which case Stokes would have survived. The sense of confusion was compounded by the fact the graphic wrongly said “Original decision: out”. So much for there being no grey areas with technology. Cricket, and sport in general, sold their souls to technology on the promise that it was infallible. If that is not the case it is far more alarming than the perceived human error of Joel Wilson. Had Stokes been given out, and Australia won the Ashes because of a technological error, England would have had every right to go mad. Wilson, in fact, had a largely excellent game which showed considerable moxie after his hideous performance in the first Test at Edgbaston. He deserves better than to become English cricket’s equivalent of the Russian linesman in the 1966 World Cup final. Unless Hawk-Eye produces a graphic that tracks the path of the ball from when it hit Stokes’ front pad, we will never know for certain whether Wilson got the decision right or not. It was certainly not, as most of us thought when we saw it live, a howler. If there really is going to be a judgmental asterisk against Stokes’s innings, there also needs to be an asterisk against the asterisk.