Liverpool Adrián Shootout hero despite giving away a second-half penalty. Saved well from Kovacic, Abraham and Mount. 7 Joe Gomez Started well but struggled as Pulisic’s influence grew. Switched to left-back in extra-time. 6 Joël Matip Remarkably sloppy in possession and did not look comfortable against Giroud throughout. 5 Virgil van Dijk Not at his dominant best and was unusually caught out of position on a few occasions. 6 Andy Robertson Made an impressive interception when Pedro was on his way through but did not offer much offensively. 6 Jordan Henderson Was initially able to maraud forward and, after a quiet period, his influence grew again. Booked. 6 Fabinho Unable to dictate play in first half but improved and started the move that led to his team’s first goal. 6 James Milner His usual combative self but one of his quieter games and he was replaced in the second half. 5 Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain First competitive start since April 2018 but was anonymous and Klopp took him off at half-time. 5 Mohamed Salah Shot weakly with outside of foot when in a good position. Worked hard defensively. 7 Sadio Mané Grew in importance after moving out to the left. Alert to score his first goal and the second was sublime. 8 Substitutes: Roberto Firmino 8 (for Oxlade-Chamberlain, h-t) Completely transformed Liverpool when he came on and set up both goals. Georginio Wijnaldum 6 (for Milner 64) Unable to make a huge difference after coming on for Milner.; Trent Alexander-Arnold 6 (for Robertson 90) Pushed forward and was left exposed against Mount at times. Booked.; Divock Origi 6 (for Mané 103) Tried to cut inside from the left on a few occasions but did not trouble Azpilicueta. Chelsea Kepa Arrizabalaga Astonishing double save when denying Salah and Van Dijk. Nearly kept out two penalties. 7 César Azpilicueta Not troubled in the first half but found it tougher against Mané. Rarely ventured forward. Booked. 6 Andreas Christensen Strong in the air and there were signs that his partnership with Zouma can be an effective one. 6 Kurt Zouma Complemented Christensen and positioned well. Dangerous on set pieces going forward. 7 Emerson Palmieri Held his own against Salah and was able to support Pulisic pushing forward at times. 6 Jorginho Reassured with crisp passing and much more comfortable than at Old Trafford. Scored penalty in normal time. 7 N’Golo Kanté A superb, bustling presence in midfield, he set the tone for Chelsea. Lovely nutmeg on Milner. 8 Mateo Kovacic Another player who benefited from having Kanté next to him and nearly scored in the first half. 6 Pedro Started deep against Robertson but grew in stature and hit the bar. Lively throughout. 7 Olivier Giroud Good movement up front and created several chances. Decisive finish for the goal. 7 Christian Pulisic Set up Giroud’s goal superbly by drifting inside and supplying a perfect, defence-splitting pass. 7 Substitutes: Tammy Abraham 6 (for Giroud 74) Missed the decisive penalty but impressed when he came on and won the spot kick for the equaliser; Mason Mount 7 (for Pulisic, 74) Thought he had scored but was deemed offside. Tested Adrián from outside area; Fikayo Tomori 6 (for Christensen, 86) Looked comfortable after coming on at centre-back for Christensen; Ross Barkley 6 (for Kovacic 101) Entered the fray in extra time and did well against tiring opponents.