It’s long been a sly trick performed by governments who don’t want you to know what’s going on: slip out some bad news on a day when something big is occupying hearts and minds. It’s classic misdirection. So as football fans everywhere obsess about the transfer window, which slams shut on Thursday evening, and prepare to either belly-laugh at or suddenly get very worried about Spurs and/or Everton and/or Manchester United, the FA of Wales today confessed that they’ve needlessly wasted tons of cash on a pointless second brand revamp in less than a decade. O Cymdeithas Bêl-droed Cymru! Sut allech chi! At least that’s what The Fiver assumes the idea is, because otherwise there’s no rational explanation for the short marketing film released online today which insisted that “to be Welsh is to feel the blood pound in your veins”. The blood did indeed start pounding in The Fiver’s veins, specifically the temples, as our hackles began to rise. Wales has been by all accounts “built on centuries of grit, resilience and determination”, which is faintly ironic given the replacement badge they’ve unveiled gives off an extremely strong whiff of “Right, I’m off for lunch, see you tomorrow.” The expensive new design nobody asked for? A red dragon. It’s a creature that’s featured on the Welsh shirt since 1880, if you want to gauge exactly how much deep thought has gone into this particular creative endeavour. To be scrupulously fair to top branding consultancy Will This Do?, they’ve tweaked him a little bit, just in case anybody asks what the hell they’ve been up to. In heraldic terms, the beast was traditionally salient and facing the dexter side - i.e. looking to our left with its forelegs in the air - but now it looks the other way in startled fashion, like a child rumbled as it reaches for the cookie jar, or a farmer performing a double-take as someone tells him none of the money the EU used to invest in the country will be matched by the Tories when we’re out. It’s all a bit of a mess, truth told, although let the record state that some good has come out of the process. Members of the public were asked what words sprang to mind whenever they saw the FAW crest. A cool 75% said “Wales” while a further 25% gave the second most popular answer, which was “football”. “This reaffirms that this new brand represents Football in Wales,” trumpet the consultants proudly. So that’s useful to know going forward. “After the photo people wrote and said how much we’d helped” – Sweden’s Magda Eriksson and Denmark’s Pernille Harder chat with Nick Ames about their kiss in Paris that went viral, what it was like coming out and joining Common Goal. “I am fully expecting Wayne Rooney’s Derby County to draw Frank Lampard’s Chelsea in the FA Cup third round” – Matthew Keeler. “Everybody’s talking (Tuesday’s Fiver letters) about Liverpool and Klopp on a Beautiful South-influenced transfer policy. Give it a little time and he may have a perfect 10 and be good as gold” – Paul Dunlop. “I was amused to see a passing reference to Hootie and the Blowfish in Monday’s Fiver, not least because they are currently on tour supported by one of my favourite bands, the difficult to Google B@ren@ked Ladies. While they were on hiatus, Darius Rucker made a name for himself as a country singer. The title of his second single (about parenthood), It Won’t Be Like This For Long, seems the ideal mantra for fans of most football teams, whether as a message to enjoy the good times while they last, or hope that the bad times will soon go away. Probably not something Manchester United can get involved in mind” – Ed Taylor. “Re: Tony Crawford’s letter about Tony Warner at Liverpool. Almost exactly the same as his career at Hull City. Apart from the win bonuses” – Keith Webb. “All this talk about the alleged golden age of The Fiver has made me think about how long I’ve been reading it (and quite often looking forward to it). Where did my life go wrong?” – Dan Taylor. “As someone who spent three years living and working in Washington DC and cycling to work past the Lincoln Memorial I know you can’t do donuts there in a Humvee (yesterday’s Fiver) or anything else. But the imagery was fun” – John Stainton. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day prize is … Keith Webb, who gets a copy of Football Leaks. Send us your address and we may even get in the post to you. We have more to give away, so get scribbling. Schalke have been heavily criticised in Germany for only suspending chief suit Clemens Tönnies for three months over comments linking climate change with overpopulation in Africa. Diego Forlán has brought the curtain down on his 978-year playing career. “It is much, much, much more than what I dreamed as a child,” sniffed the straggly-haired former Uruguay goal-guzzler. Crystal Palace have told Everton to stop casting lewd glances in the direction of Wilfried Zaha unless they have £100m to hand. Manchester United have dropped their interest in Christian Eriksen after it became clear Christian Eriksen had dropped his interest in Manchester United. Like many a retired London taxi-driver, he wants to go to Spain. Meanwhile, Pip Coutinho is not going to Spurs but Paulo Dybala might be if the club can find £64.4m. In a request that will go down about as well as a Sunderland chant in the Gallowgate End, Matt Ritchie wants people to lay off Mike Ashley. “I don’t understand the unrest … the club’s gone out, spent money,” he blathered. “We’re pushing, trying to compete with the teams we can compete with. To compete at the top of the Premier League now is mega money – I think the owner has been honest in his interviews.” There may be trouble ahead news: Bolton have halted ticket sales for their first home game of the season, against Coventry on Saturday, but claim it will still go ahead. And Leicester are set to sign Top Gun’s Dennis Praet for €20m from Sampdoria. “S” is for super-duper Premier League previews: No 15: Sheffield United and No 16: Southampton. “People get stuck in their American ways of thinking.” Alejandro Bedoya talks to Matthew De George about US gun violence. How will Derby and Phillip Cocu manage the world of Wayne Rooney, wonders Paul MacInnes. Marcelo Bielsa and Nasty Leeds quickly show they will take some stopping in the Championship, writes Ben Fisher. Which football teams have the longest opening-day unbeaten runs? The Knowledge cruelly overlooks Fiver Towers’ five-a-side team in this week’s column. Joelinton isn’t the first Brazilian striker to play for Newcastle. That man’s Mirandinha – and here’s an interview with him. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!