Perhaps we should not be sniffy about the new CEO of the English National Opera, Stuart Murphy, drawing a parallel between opera and Love Island, urging those missing the dating show to visit the Coliseum. “As my teenagers sat glued to the final of Love Island last week,” he writes in the Evening Standard, “it struck me how closely it echoes the drama we see on stage at English National Opera: passion, lust, betrayal, glamour, love, friendship, silliness. Opera has that in spades, just with the world’s most beautiful music.” He’s right. The parallels with reality TV are plain. There’s certainly plenty of buff dimwits in opera. Think of Siegfried, barrel-chested and brainless, tasked with forging a sword, breaking a spear, killing a dragon and walking through a ring of fire to awaken a sleeping goddess before the curtain falls, as if he were in some ancient Norse prototype for a particularly sadistic bush-tucker challenge in I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here. Or, in Götterdämmerung, we find him tricked by a rival into betraying the love of his life. Siegfried is so deranged by Hagen’s drug that he becomes enraptured of another woman and tries to win his own wife Brünnhilde for her brother, Gunther. They don’t allow drugs on the set of Love Island, but otherwise this kind of storyline would keep the twitterati and op-ed commentators seething for weeks about the commodification of women’s bodies and the structural misogyny of heteronormative dating rites – just as they did with ITV’s reality show. Whenever Radio 3 cuts to New York for a live opera broadcast from the Met, the serious laying out of the plot is one of the funniest things on radio. At such moments opera makes The Only Way Is Essex seem like Proust. A bird pecks a king to death (Rimsky Korsakov’s The Golden Cockerel). Women dude it up in unconvincing moustaches and terrible trousers (Il Trovatore or The Marriage of Figaro). Young man change clothes, add hats and facial hair and their devoted girlfriends fail to recognise them (Cosi fan Tutte). Death-bed arias that require more puff than anyone truly expiring from consumption could muster (La Traviata or La Bohème). And then there’s Weber’s Der Freischütz in which a man shoots an eagle with golden bullets to win his bride (based, amusingly enough, on my marriage). Let’s not forget my favourite opera storyline: the man who gives birth to 40,049 babies in one day. It just sounds like an instalment of Channel 4’s Embarrassing Bodies but it’s actually the plot twist of Poulenc’s Les Mamelles de Tirésias after women revolt against bearing babies for reasons too barmy to get into. If ITV had a show called Opera’s Stupidest Storylines to fill the hole in schedules left by Love Island (and it really should), it could run from now until Christmas. What made critics such as Norman Lebrecht set up a harrumphing chorus, though, was Murphy’s suggestion that it would be “healthy” for his as-yet-unappointed new artistic director to be “aware of the pull” of popular culture such as Love Island, Fleabag and superhero films in order to win over audiences to the opera. What Murphy didn’t suggest, but which may be even more healthy, is that popular culture should be aware of the pull of opera, and consider plundering it for material rather than miring itself in franchise remakes of the same old rubbish (Fast and Furious 9 – really?). In particular, I suggest that creatively drained Hollywood should do a reverse takeover of opera. Instead of ENO making Love Island: The Opera, what the world is crying out for is Der Ring Des Niebelungen, the movie franchise. It has three built-in sequels for starters and could be readily cast with Russell Crowe as Wotan, Margot Robbie as Brunnhilde, Tom Hiddleston as Loge and someone who really knows how to play dumb (Channing Tatum?) as Siegfried. Hollywood more than ENO needs to be creatively revived. Murphy is at his most rhetorically feeble when he argues that opera needs to broaden out to survive and to draw in young people. Opera, or any art form, is at its most hopeless and cynical when it strives to second-guess the supposed zeitgeist, when it tries to woo new demographics by retooling what’s worked elsewhere. Opera is at its most biting when we get plunged beneath its sometimes silly surface and exposed to something unexpectedly profound. Take Berg’s Lulu. For all that many productions attempt to lure audiences with promises and posters of a sexpot who can’t keep her clothes on and who is ultimately (spoiler alert!) murdered by Jack the Ripper, it is as heartbreaking and instructive about the patriarchy as any work of art. But here’s the curious thing: something similar can be said of the ostensibly vacuous dramas that play out on Love Island. “Love Island’s capacity to spark wider discussions around consent, relationships and gender is part of what makes it such a fascinating show,” wrote Stephanie Boland in the Guardian. Critics of the show focused on the practice of gaslighting. Love Island, it has been suggested, was holding up a magnifying glass to many women’s reality. Which is to say that even what’s regarded as the basest mass culture is rarely as stupid or worthless as detractors might suggest. Just like opera. Opera, what’s more, has dealt effectively with pop culture icons before. It has stooped to conquer. Richard Thomas and Stewart Lee’s Jerry Springer: The Opera was a disgusting but brilliant skewering of the TV host’s working methods, among other things. If there was a problem with Mark-Anthony Turnage’s Anna Nicole, about the tragic life of the eponymous Playboy playmate turned TV personality, it was that the music ran out before the wrenching biographical material. Equally, John Adams’ Doctor Atomic (about J Robert Oppenheimer, Project Manhattan and the ethics of the bomb) or The Death of Klinghoffer (in which Arab terrorists take Jewish holidaymakers hostage on a cruise ship) show that opera need not be all gender swapping and bird-interfering silliness. Maybe Stormzy and Skepta should be invited to do a knife-crime grime opera loosely adapted from Romeo and Juliet at the Coliseum. But, probably, ENO should think of other ways to stave off obsolescence. What works creatively is happily unpredictable; what generally doesn’t work, by contrast, is when artistic directors second-guess audiences and commission what they think will get them down with the kids but invariably only makes them look sillier than a Poulenc opera plot.