Ryan Christie struck a long-range hat-trick as Celtic began their latest Scottish Premiership title defence with a 7-0 demolition of St Johnstone. The Scotland international took his tally for the season to six goals in five matches with a brilliant performance as the champions ensured they topped the table on the opening day. Christie also set up the ninth-minute opener for Mikey Johnston and goals from Odsonne Édouard and the substitutes Olivier Ntcham and Leigh Griffiths completed the rout. The only down side to Celtic’s day was a thigh injury for Hatem Abd Elhamed, whose debut lasted 50 minutes before he limped off for Anthony Ralston. The right-back will now be a major doubt for the first leg of Celtic’s third Champions League qualifier against Cluj on Wednesday. The widows of Billy McNeill and Stevie Chalmers unfurled the Premiership flag before kick-off and Celtic started their quest for a ninth consecutive title in determined fashion. Elhamed started in a back four that was missing the suspended centre-backs Jozo Simunovic and Christopher Jullien and the Israel international twice got forward to good effect in the opening stages. His low crosses provided chances for Édouard and Christie, the Frenchman well blocked by Wallace Duffy and the latter firing over. The breakthrough came when Christie sent Johnston away with a brilliant first-time ball over the top. The winger turned Duffy one way and the other before finding the bottom corner. James Forrest and Édouard threatened before Christie doubled the lead in the 26th minute. Saints had 10 men behind the ball but Forrest’s inside pass found Christie in space 22 yards out and he stroked the ball into the top corner of the net. Zander Clark saved from Édouard before he was fooled by the swerve on Christie’s first-time shot from 25 yards on the half-hour after Forrest had again teed up the former Inverness man. The goalkeeper appeared to take his eye off the ball and it slipped away from his grasp. The performance was giving the home fans the confidence to embark on an extended rendition of their ‘Here we go, 10 in a row’ chant and Celtic continued to create chances before the break. Forrest shot wide after Elhamed’s cutback before forcing a good stop from Clark, and Édouard shot into the side netting after some good footwork. The tempo dropped after half-time but Christie again lit the game up in the 67th minute. There appeared to be little danger as he exchanged passes with Johnston on the edge of the D before he fired a powerful strike in off the crossbar. The playmaker soon went off for Ntcham but there was no respite for the visitors as the Frenchman struck in the 72nd minute. The Saints defender Madis Vihmann misjudged the bounce of the ball and Édouard released Ntcham to fire high into the net. Griffiths then set up Édouard to round a hesitant Clark and slot the sixth in the 80th minute and the Scotland striker drilled a 20-yard effort into the bottom corner six minutes later. Christie, the stand-out player, told BBC Scotland after the match: “I think we were bang on it. The sun comes out, the pitch is phenomenal and the atmosphere was phenomenal - and I’m happy to top it off with a hat-trick and victory. “I need to help get us on the scoresheet by assists or scoring them. The gaffer has given me that opportunity to step in and make that impact. “He wanted us to make a big statement to everybody. “I set my own goals target at the start of the season but I’ll keep that to myself.” Celtic’s manger, Neil Lennon, was naturally pleased too. “It’s just been a great day,” Lennon said. “Not getting carried away but it was an outstanding team performance. “Ryan Christie is playing really well right now. His first and third goals were sublime finishes. “It is a really good marker to put down for the rest of the season.” St Johnstone’s manager, Tommy Wright, was blunt in his summary. “There were two teams on the pitch. One was absolutely brilliant and the other was poor,” he said.