I am struggling to think of a colder piece of film-making than this stunning debut feature from Isabella Eklöf, the Swedish co-writer of last year’s Border. A pitiless study of a trophy girlfriend joining the “family” of her drug kingpin boyfriend at his villa on the Turkish Riviera, Holiday makes the worlds of Michael Haneke look cuddly and inviting, the work of Ulrich Seidl seem positively jolly. Captured by a cautious camera that maintains a dispassionate distance, Eklöf’s characters are observed in the same way that a nature documentary studies the jostling for status in a particularly savage group of pack animals. Violence – sexual, physical and psychological – is a fact of life in this ecosystem. It’s the film’s unflinching approach to its steely core of violence and power-play, in particular a harrowing, nearly unwatchable rape scene, which makes it such gruelling viewing at times. In a director’s statement, Eklöf, who co-wrote the film with actress and screenwriter Johanne Algren, said: “I always aim to be ruthless in telling a story... to not look away from the rawest, most vulnerable parts.” I have watched Holiday three times now, and while I admired it more with each viewing, it doesn’t get any easier. Is Sascha complicit in her own commodification? She’s canny enough to be tallying a continual cost-benefit analysis In the role of Sascha, Victoria Carmen Sonne aims for honesty in the performance over engendering empathy. She’s a difficult character to warm to: shallow, venal, watchful, Sascha is mindful of her precarious status as the “new girl” of gangster Michael (Lai Yde). We get the sense that there have been many before her. She drifts on the periphery of his circle of hangers-on: the dumb muscle, the crowing yes men and the brash blond molls. The only time she becomes fully engaged and animated is when she locks eyes with herself in the mirror, trying out come-hither pouts on her reflection. Her boyfriend is a capricious ruler over a fiefdom of clowns and jesters; his moods dictate the atmosphere in the villa. Woe betide anyone who misreads them. Sascha quickly learns to sense the warning signs. But hers is a world in which everything has a price tag. And Sascha’s self-worth is measured in male appreciation. When Michael withdraws his attention, she drapes herself hopefully over his turned back, then temporarily transfers her focus and basks in a flirtation with Thomas (Thijs Römer), a Dutch man with a boat in the nearby harbour. Michael, however, is the kind of boy who would rather break his toys than share them. There’s no question that Michael views Sascha as one of his many possessions, an object that can be replaced if it no longer pleases. A detail that is almost as chilling as the sexual attack that follows is the way he carefully removes his expensive watch beforehand. Priorities. What’s more complicated is the question of how Sascha sees herself. Is she complicit in her own commodification? Certainly she’s canny enough to be tallying a continual cost-benefit analysis; the unwitting Thomas is her escape route if the price of her lifestyle gets too high. One of the strongest elements of a film that represents a fiercely uncompromising directorial vision throughout is Eklöf’s choice of locations. The airport arrivals hall, the interior of Michael’s holiday pad, the brash resort clubs: all have the veneer of glossy luxury that evokes the kind of boutique where the ultra-wealthy flex their money. Particularly effective is the film’s main backdrop: the hollow-eyed villa, painted the ominous white of a sun-bleached skull. It’s open plan, the better to let the sounds out of frame bleed through the space. In one scene, Sascha sits with the gangsters’ semi-feral kids watching cartoons, barely registering the howls from the basement where Musse, a low-level thug, takes punishment for a transgression. Later, Musse, his teeth bared in a craven grin of appeasement, offers gifts to buy himself back into favour. Head bowed, he proffers a bottle of Turkish brandy to a man whose knuckles are still scabbed from beating him. There’s a sickly inevitability in the build of violent tension. But what’s more unexpected is how, having chosen her path in the most savage way imaginable, Sascha’s status within the gang subtly shifts. She has clawed herself a slice of power and found it every bit as addictive as Michael’s drugs. Meanwhile, Eklöf establishes herself as a ferocious talent. I await her next film with as much trepidation as anticipation.