Puerto Rico faces a potential threat to life and property as Tropical Storm Dorian was bearing down on the island on Wednesday, with a warning of wind gusts of up to 90mph in place until early evening. As the storm approached, Donald Trump insulted and taunted the island and its residents, who are US citizens, on Twitter. “Puerto Rico is one of the most corrupt places on earth” he wrote in part. “Their political system is broken and their politicians are either Incompetent or Corrupt. And by the way, I’m the best thing that’s ever happened to Puerto Rico!” The wind threat in Puerto Rico had increased on Wednesday morning from a previous assessment, according to a tropical storm warning issued by the National Weather Service. Authorities warned of potentially life-threatening conditions including landslides, downed power lines and damaged buildings. “Now is the time to shelter from dangerous wind,” the warning advised. There was also potential for storm surge flooding up to 2ft above ground. A flash flood watch from anticipated rain was also in effect. Roberto García, the director of US National Weather Service San Juan, said on Tuesday: “Practically the entire island will be under sustained tropical storm-force winds.” From Puerto Rico, the storm was expected to turn north and sweep to the north-east of the Bahamas through Saturday, and then approach the east coast of Florida as a hurricane on Sunday, where it could potentially arrive as a Category 3 storm. A hurricane watch was also in effect for the US Virgin Islands. Trump declared an emergency on Tuesday night and ordered federal assistance for local authorities in Puerto Rico. But in a tweet Wednesday morning, Trump, a climate crisis denier, seemed to complain about Puerto Rico’s exposure to storms, and escalated a long-running feud with Carmen Yulín Cruz, the mayor of San Juan, Puerto Rico’s capital. The two established a combative relationship after the island was devastated by Hurricane Maria almost two years ago, when US aid was slow to arrive and the president offended many during a visit. We are tracking closely tropical storm Dorian as it heads, as usual, to Puerto Rico. FEMA and all others are ready, and will do a great job. When they do, let them know it, and give them a big Thank You - Not like last time. That includes from the incompetent Mayor of San Juan! On Tuesday night, Cruz said that Trump should “get out of the way”. “Three thousand Puerto Ricans did not open their eyes this morning because this racist man did not have it within him to do his job,” Cruz said on CNN. “So get out of the way, President Trump.” Cruz was referring to the death toll from Hurricane Maria, which hit Puerto Rico in September 2017. An official report criticized the Trump administration’s slow response to the devastation from the storm, which destroyed the island’s power grid and decimated its agriculture and tourism industries. On Tuesday morning, Trump had tweeted about Dorian, and seemed to complain about the cost of hurricane recovery efforts in Puerto Rico, which have fallen far short of restoring the island. “Wow! Yet another big storm heading to Puerto Rico,” Trump wrote. “Will it ever end? Congress approved 92 Billion Dollars for Puerto Rico last year, an all time record of its kind for ‘anywhere’.” Trump’s tweet contained multiple falsehoods. While Congress has allocated $42.5bn for disaster relief for Puerto Rico, the island had received less than $14bn through May, according to federal data. And in any case Trump’s headline amount of $92bn would not qualify the Maria relief package as “an all-time record” for the costliest tropical cyclones, according to the federal government’s own figures. Spending on recovery for Hurricane Harvey, which hit Texas and Louisiana in the same storm season as Maria, has so far cost $125bn. Since Maria, Puerto Rico has struggled with political turbulence leading to the recent departure of the governor, Ricardo Rosselló. Earlier this month, the territory’s supreme court overturned the swearing-in of Rosselló’s successor, Pedro Pierluisi, and the former justice secretary, Wanda Vázquez, became governor.