 What were you hoping for?An evening of good company with someone on the same wavelength. First impressions?Down to earth and easy to talk to. What did you talk about?Our best (worst) vomit stories, the fact that Stephanie claims not to get hangovers, making sure your actions support what you want to get out of life, and the danger of wearing white to a burger joint. Any awkward moments?Perhaps when I mistook her Canadian accent for American, which she was very polite about. Good table manners?She deftly handled an egg-based keto burger bun. Best thing about Stephanie?She put me at ease, was unpretentious and talkative. I like a good conversation and while Stephanie said she can be self-conscious about being chatty, I think it’s a real asset. Would you introduce her to your friends?Certainly. Describe Stephanie in three wordsCalm, brave (for her solo travelling), friendly. What do you think she made of you?Perhaps a little loud, but hopefully interesting. Did you go on somewhere?We just walked each other back to the station, dodging some fairly stealthy pavement cyclists. And... did you kiss?We did not. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I think there was a lack of romantic spark. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?I would be very happy to as friends. What were you hoping for?A connection and a unique experience. First impressions?Chris has striking eyes, gave a welcoming smile and a solid, hearty hug. What did you talk about?Our favourite podcasts, cognitive behavioural therapy and mental resilience, drug use, and having a growth mindset. Any awkward moments?None that I recall; though at one point he did say his latest favourite podcast discussed random subjects, one of which was, “What if wizards had two buttholes?” Good table manners?Nothing incriminating. Best thing about Chris?He seems like a man of integrity. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. He is easy to get on with. He has colourful stories to share and is a good listener. Describe Chris in three wordsFriendly, driven, respectful. What do you think he made of you?Perhaps a bit distracted (I was so hungry that I really just wanted to order some food and eat before I could speak at length). Did you go on somewhere?No, though I think we were the last people at the restaurant. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?The servers providing a little less narration about how the evening was going. It was mostly good fun, but a tad over the top. Marks out of 10?A solid 8. Would you meet again?Politely, no. There was no romantic connection for me. • Chris and Stephanie ate at Cut + Grind, London N1C. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com