My wife is going to the country for the day without me, because I have some work to do. But she can’t decide about the dog. “Do I take the dog, do I leave the dog?” she asks, nodding her head from side to side while the dog looks up at her in anxious expectation. “Up to you,” I say, thinking: take the dog. “No,” she says to the dog, “I think I’m going to leave you here with him.” “That’s fine,” I say. “I’ll be back in time for whatever you’re making for supper,” she says. After she leaves, the dog stares at the back of the front door for a long time. I work for two hours, and then decide to combine the dog’s walk and food shopping into one stressful errand, so I can spend the rest of the day relaxing. I make a list on an envelope. The dog strains at the lead all the way to the park, running out of enthusiasm just as we arrive. We get three-quarters of the way round before the dog sits down on the path 20ft away from me and refuses to move, or even make eye contact. “Come on,” I say. “Let’s go.” The dog looks away, as if to indicate to passersby that the two of us are not together. I reattach the lead, and it reluctantly follows me to the high street. The dog and I share an ambivalence about public spaces that makes us less than ideal shopping companions. The first shop I go to is all out of the bread I like. The second shop has a huge queue – too long to leave the dog tied to a bollard. At the third shop, I realise I haven’t got my bank card with me, and return home empty-handed. Half an hour later the oldest one turns up with three of his friends. “We’re going away for the weekend, and we’re taking the dog,” he says. “Thank God,” I say. “If only you’d come sooner.” They fill a bag with stuff from the fridge, and leave. Ten minutes later I find the youngest one staring into the empty fridge. “I was thinking,” I say. “Yeeeesss,” he says. “That if I gave you money you could get us two sandwiches from that nice place for lunch.” “Uh-huh,” he says. “And that while you were out there you could also get all the stuff on this list,” I say, showing him the envelope. He sighs deeply. “Fine,” he says. “Lemme find my shoes.” I think: things are beginning to turn my way. At the last minute I suffer some indecision about the type of sandwich I might like. “Maybe I should come with you,” I say. Accompanying the youngest one to the shops is an eye-opening experience. People nod and wave and shout out as he passes. A middle-aged man yells his name from across the road, raising a walking stick in the air. “How’s it going?” the youngest one shouts back. “Who’s that?” I say. “That’s Alan’s uncle Alan,” he says. “OK,” I say. At the sandwich shop he greets the woman behind the counter by name, and she beams. I’ve only ever been in here once before, and no one smiled at me that time. The owner walks by, clapping the youngest one on the back as he passes. Our order is prioritised. I’m aware that my son is known in this neighbourhood because he’s worked at the pub for two years. Where I see strangers, he sees co-workers, customers, fellow service-industry professionals and friends. But I never fully understood his status before – he appears to be a legend. It’s not like going to the shops with the dog at all. It’s like going to the shops with the mayor. “Thank you,” he says, gathering up our order. Every single person in the place looks up to say goodbye to him. “This is weird,” I say. “So what else do we need to get?” he asks, pausing to acknowledge someone on a passing scooter. “Nothing,” I say. “I’ve had enough for one day.” I think: I just need to come down here with him a dozen more times, until everyone knows I’m his dad.