What is signified by a woman cooking? Is she a domestic goddess, a spinster pursuing her hobby, a witch performing a bacchanalian rite? Roberta learns to cook at university in a northern English city, lonely in a shared flat where she’s failed to make friends, missing her mother. She had thought that scattered beneath her bed would be “a combination of Kafka, coffee grounds and a lover’s old boxer shorts”. When her intimate surroundings turn out to be tidier – “in lieu of a life, I settled on an existence” – she creates mess in the kitchen instead, conjuring elaborate meals, learning to make perfect soufflés that she gives to her flatmates or sometimes just throws away. She’s attempting to assuage the “bottomless, yearning hunger” that has assailed her all her life. Supper Club is Lara Williams’s first novel, following a much-praised short-story collection called Treats. The generation described here is millennial, and the voice feels akin to Sally Rooney’s: colloquial, precise, at once uneasy about its place in the world and determined to stand up for itself. The supper club of the title could be read as a feminist take on the anarchic men’s group in Chuck Palahniuk’s Fight Club. It begins when, after university, Roberta gets an entry-level job folding clothes at a fashion website and makes friends with a new colleague, Stevie. “We discussed our menstrual cycles and our favourite films and our most hated male writers.” This is the intimacy she’s always craved. The two young women move in together and Roberta has an appreciative audience for her cooking at last, creating elaborate feasts every night. Then together they dream up the idea of making this more communal and more subversive: “What could violate social convention more than women coming together to indulge their hunger and taking up space?” They want to expand and to be nourished, “to be full up, instead of hungry and wanting, all the time”. The writing becomes most moving when we sense her pushing against her bounds, while not quite knowing how to do so At first these are fairly safe, albeit joyfully debauched occasions involving a small group of women. They hire restaurants and forage food from supermarket bins. Each evening has a theme, so they dress up as literary heroines, brides or sea creatures. They throw food, take drugs and tear at chunks of meat with their hands. They talk, they shout, they dance, they vomit and then the next day Roberta cleans up. She and Stevie are now so close that they share a bed. Most of their friends are lesbians, and so is Stevie’s mother, but they don’t name theirs as a sexual relationship and Roberta is easily seduced by Adnan, a good-looking flatmate from university who pulls her into a “normal” heterosexual life, persuading her to move in with him. She keeps the supper club a secret, not knowing how to explain it. But Stevie raises the stakes, insisting they must start breaking the law. The central theme here is women’s oppression by men, and Williams’s take on it is powerful and original. These are women who are prepared to change bodily, putting on hefty amounts of weight as they commit to the principle of being more characterful and less likable than they believe men want them to be. “Not everything is nice,” Roberta tells Adnan at one point. “I’m sorry I’m never nice enough for you.” The joy of food – its capacity to be so pleasurable that it can subvert niceness – is well described, as is the complexity of cooking. There are some lengthy digressions on the kitchen that maintain enough obsessive verve to be engaging, allowing Williams to take the material of the domestic novel and turn it into something more explosive. She suggests convincingly that cooking is as rigorous and complex as any art form and that Roberta is using food to live a full creative life, albeit one necessarily blighted by anticlimax, as the creations disappear into stomachs or bins. Throughout, there’s helpful nuance provided by Roberta’s uncertainty and self-questioning. She’s open to the possibilities that some men aren’t oppressing them after all, that Adnan is reasonable to want a girlfriend who doesn’t break into department stores or vomit on her return from dinner, that it’s Stevie who’s manipulative and overdemanding. I sometimes found their preoccupations and mental states a little overdeterminedly millennial. All these young women are lost in the world of work, anxious and inadequate; Roberta regularly self-harms. But the point here may be that she and her friends feel trapped by their generation and its stereotypes as well. Certainly the writing becomes most insightful and moving when we sense her pushing against her bounds, while not quite knowing how to do so. “I was still so afraid and yet so desirous of everything. Fear and freedom, occupying opposite ends of the spectrum, though inexorably tied.” • Lara Feigel is the author of Free Woman: Life, Liberation and Doris Lessing (Bloomsbury). Supper Club by Lara Williams is published by Hamish Hamilton (RRP £12.99) To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.