Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching The Handmaid’s Tale, series three, on Channel 4 in the UK. Please do not add spoilers for later episodes in the series. Over the years, The Handmaid’s Tale has battered us down with disappointment after disappointment, to the point that an episode can be seen as light relief if it doesn’t include any rapes or beatings. So when an episode like this comes along that contains not one but two genuine wins for the heroes, we’re left blinking in shock. Two Commanders down, how many more to go? It’s not many, but it’s a start. We hit the ground running with June talking Eleanor out of shooting Commander Lawrence, in a scene in which Eleanor becomes one of the first Gilead characters ever to vocalise the awful things done to June: “You were raped because of him. You were brutalised.” Eleanor’s not just talking about last week’s Ceremony, but about everything Gilead has done to June and countless other victims. But, as June says, all of this has to add up to something. June must believe her suffering can bring about some good, in order to give some meaning to it all. And for that to happen, she needs Lawrence. Lawrence, however, isn’t so much a reluctant hero as actively avoiding heroism, doing a runner in the night even after June has got the Martha mafia on side for her plan to rescue 52 children. He claims his priority is to protect Eleanor, but there’s a hefty streak of cowardice and self-preservation in this petty and shallow man who robbed museums to turn his house into what June brilliantly terms “the attic of MOMA”. He only agreed to June’s plan because his own fails, and his only other option is death for both himself and Eleanor. Luckily, June has balls enough for both of them. She re-enters Jezebel’s to do a deal with bartender/smuggler Billy to get the kids out, and, unsurprisingly, runs into trouble in the form of indiscriminate letch Commander Winslow. She mentally repeats her season one mantras for distancing herself from rape – “Not me. Not my flesh” – but it’s clear from her face that she’s had enough this time. Who didn’t cheer when she kicked Winslow in the face, and stabbed him again and again with a pen before finally bludgeoning him to death? Sure, it won’t change anything in the grand scheme of Gilead, but damn that felt good to watch. Luckily for June, Jezebel’s Marthas are hardcore, and even though Lawrence warns June that “they’ll be coming for us,” we wouldn’t be so sure – it looks like the Marthas have destroyed the evidence. Season three has done a good job of shining a light on the Marthas – the true bad-asses of Gilead. The Waterfords A far bigger blow to Gilead than Winslow’s seedy murder is what happens to the Waterfords. On their way to a clandestine meeting with Mark Tuello, the American representative, they reassess their relationship, longing for a return to the good old days of being able to read and write and not having to rape people. Fred claims to want to raise their daughter in solitude, free from politics. “I don’t need all the pomp and circumstance,” he swears, but we would beg to differ. Fred likes to play at being a ‘nice guy’, but always reverts back to the grubby, power-hungry little man he truly is. He might joke about being “the man behind the woman”, had Gilead not taken over, but we know Fred could never have tolerated being surpassed by a mere woman. But his days of having his power fantasies backed up by Gilead are over, as Tuello leads them into comically Canadian-looking territory and springs the trap, arresting Fred as a war criminal. The big question now is whether this was Serena’s plan all along – to earn her freedom, and custody of Nicole, by bringing Fred to the US government-in-exile – or whether Tuello was playing both of them. Yvonne Strahovski plays the scene ambiguously enough to keep us guessing. Fred and Serena listen to Radio Free America on their roadtrip, tuning out for the talky bits but taking advantage of the illicit radio station’s quality tracklist. Hey, a jam’s a jam, right? They listen to Doin’ Me Right by The Classmen and Let’s Twist Again by Chubby Checker. Portishead’s Only You plays in Jezebel’s, while the episode closes, in true Handmaid’s Tale form, with yet another big track by an iconic female artist, this time Kate Bush’s Cloudbusting. “I just know that something good is going to happen,” Bush sings, speaking for all of our hopes after this episode. The speed and calmness with which the Marthas at Jezebel’s disposed of a body and cleaned up a crime scene makes you wonder just how regularly this sort of thing happens there. Lawrence admits that they “overlooked” mental health and maternal love when he and his cronies founded Gilead. The place truly is run by a bunch of sociopaths. The ‘econodaughter’ living peacefully with her family in the middle of nowhere likes the colour of Serena’s dress. Does she understand the meaning of it? Do even small-town econodaughters dream of being wives one day? Where did June get her Jezebel’s outfit from? They don’t seem like the sort of thing Eleanor would ever have worn, or Lawrence would ‘collect’. Maybe the Martha network helped with the Louboutins too.