Is Labour really prepared for government? I ask not because the party seems more concerned about grouse hunting and the glorious 12th than a no-deal Brexit and an impending election. No, what really disturbs me is that the shadow cabinet is not showing sufficient animosity towards Boris Johnson. Shadow home secretary Diane Abbott was interviewed this morning on the Today programme. It may be the silly season, but she was there talking about serious issues – Johnson’s promised 20,000 extra police officers and the effect increased stop-and-search would have on community relations. When asked by Sarah Smith about Johnson’s latest populist policing stunt, she replied: “Boris doesn’t quite explain how he will pay for it.” Was I the only one who did a double take? I had to replay it to make sure I’d heard right. Twice. Not the prime minister, not Mr Johnson, not Johnson, but Boris. This is possibly the most dangerous prime minister this country has ever had, and one with no democratic mandate (voted in by 0.13% of the population). This is a man who has lied his way through journalism and politics, and about his private life, a man who has appointed arguably the most rightwing Tory cabinet in history and who is threatening to ignore the will of parliament and no-deal us out of Europe. And the shadow home secretary is referring to him affectionately as “Boris”. Could you imagine the Labour shadow cabinet of the late 1970s and 80s being asked about Margaret Thatcher’s scorched-earth industrial policy and talking about “Maggie”? Or Michael Howard being asked about the legality of war in Iraq and referring to Blair chummily as “Tony”? Let’s remember that not even Johnson’s family and friends refer to him as Boris. Boris is his middle name (well, one of them); his stage name, if you will. To those close to him he is “Al”, short for Alexander. Boris is actually the “character” of Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson. As for his estranged wife, Marina Wheeler, she doesn’t seem to refer to him at all nowadays. Writing in the Sunday Times about being diagnosed with cancer soon after filing for divorce from her philandering husband, she thanks her sister and children for their support in her recovery, but does not mention him by name once. So what does it say about Abbott that she sees him simply as “Boris”? Perhaps she is part of that very same elite her party claims to so despise. (When Michael Portillo was at Harrow county school for boys, she was at the girls’ school and he cast her as Lady Macbeth in a film he never quite made.) As for the Labour party in general, it suggests that those at the top lack the visceral hatred the rest of us have for this dangerous clown. A golden rule of politics: if you truly loathe what somebody stands for, never refer to them playfully by their first name – not least when it isn’t actually their real name. Even the Radio Times (not known for its political militancy) ran a story in July when Johnson was campaigning for the leadership of the Conservative party, suggesting that the media should stop referring to him as “Boris”. As one below-the-line contributor suggested: “We should call him Johnson, which is a euphemism for what he really is.” Better still, we should apply the Stephen Yaxley-Lennon rule. Yaxley-Lennon may not like his weird name and may think he sounds infinitely cooler as Tommy Robinson, but the press now always adds the humiliating caveat “Tommy Robinson – real name Stephen Yaxley-Lennon”. Likewise, with Johnson we should honour his full name. If Labour MPs such as Abbott started referring to him as Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson or “Boris – real name Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson” rather than snuggly-buggly Boris, it might show they mean business. • Simon Hattenstone is a Guardian features writer