Two fairytales about economic management continue to hold far too great a sway over our public debate and the government’s economic policy. The first is the myth of household budget comparison and the second is what I call the grasshopper fable of government budgets. The belief that the government should run its budget like a household really needs to die a quick death. We hear it all the time – and it underlies the whole “surplus is better than deficit” line that is practically considered a statement of scientific fact by too many otherwise sensible people in politics and the media (and by extension the voting public). Your household’s expenditure needs are nothing like a government’s and your budgetary limitation completely opposite. Households don’t get the opportunity to print money should they be a bit short when it comes to pay the bills. They also don’t get to borrow money at interest rates lower than inflation. This week the interest rate for Australian government 10-year bonds went below 1%. Show me a household that can take out a 10-year loan at a 0.96% rate, despite the fact that their level of debt has risen over the past six years from $257bn to $549bn, and I’ll start listening to you saying the government needs to budget like a household. The second budgetary fairytale is based on the grasshopper and ant fable – that the government needs to build up its budgetary surplus when times are good for when winter hits and we need to have savings to rely on. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In essence this suggests that, should fiscal stimulus be needed, the economy reacts better to a government reducing a surplus than increasing a deficit. But there is no evidence this is the case. The economy responds to when – and how effectively – that stimulus is deployed. Spend government money on infrastructure that produces no economic benefit, then it doesn’t matter whether it reduces a surplus or increases a deficit, it is still wasted money. This doesn’t mean you can always run ever-larger deficits and not have to worry, but it does mean we worry far too much about the size of our deficit and we worry about it mostly for reasons that are based on political folktale spin rather than any economic rationale. I note this because on Wednesday, the treasurer Josh Frydenberg responded to questions on ABC’s 7:30 about whether the government would “reset” policy should international trends require it, by stating that “we’re committed to a surplus”. Earlier that day he told the ABC’s Peter Ryan when asked if the trade ructions between China and the US could “end up hurting your projections for a budget surplus” that “we will still deliver a surplus next year. Absolutely determined to do that”. But why? It is clear that delivering a budget surplus is all about government revenue and little else. In the final six years of the Howard government, which saw budget surpluses, revenue was never lower than 25% of GDP. The first time since then that revenue has reached that level was 2018-19. Had revenue stayed at that 25% of GDP level, given how much governments spent each year, we would have had a budget surplus in six of the past nine years. For the current financial year the government predicts revenue of 25.2% of GDP and, lo and behold, it is also predicting a surplus. But if revenue falls because company tax revenue is lower than expected because iron ore prices fall – as has happened since the China-US trade war has fired up, with prices falling from a five-year high of US$125.77 a tonne in July to now around US$96 a tonne. Then the chances of a budget surplus fall as well. And it also comes at a time when the Reserve Bank continues to cry out for help stimulating the economy. On Friday the governor of the RBA, Philip Lowe, told the House economics committee that “monetary policy is not the country’s only option. Monetary policy certainly can help, and it is helping, but there are certain downsides from relying too much on monetary policy”. He noted that “one option is for fiscal support, including through spending on infrastructure” and that “there is no shortage of finance to do this, with interest rates the lowest they have ever been”. The grasshopper fable of saving for the cold months might have some validity but not if the weather is already cold and yet you are telling everyone it is not time to consume your stores. When the economy turns poor and revenue falls you don’t chase a surplus – even Peter Costello knew this. In 2000-01, the economy was hit by the Asian financial crisis and so the budget went from a surplus of $5.8bn to a deficit of $1bn because revenue fell from 26% of GDP to 24.9% while expenditure barely changed. And right now the cold economic winds are blowing. The US government this week is able to borrow money for 20 years at a lower rate than were it to borrow for a month. This is not normal. The last time that happened was in 2007 before the GFC hit. Here in Australia consumers are not spending and as a result the RBA has revised down its prediction for GDP growth for this year from 2.75% to 2.5%. It is time to end the surplus mania, and for everyone to realise that there are many things more important for a government to be doing for our economy than telling fairy stories about the importance of a budget surplus. • Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian Australia