With the good and the great of Europe’s elite clubs convening in Monaco for this evening’s Champions League draw, there ought to be no shortage of opportunities for late-doors horse-trading ahead of the closure of the European transfer window on Monday. Unwanted by Chelsea, midfielder Tiémoué Bakayoko has bought a one-way ticket to the principality and has apparently already agreed terms to rejoin Monaco on loan, with a view to making the switch permanent for £32m at the end of the season. Also surplus to requirements at Chelsea, Brazilian winger Kenedy could be off to Serie A side Sassuolo. One of several players Juventus are desperate to get off their payroll in a bid to trim their squad, Mario Mandzukic is wanted by Paris Saint-Germain, but is ready to hang fire in Turin and weigh up his options in January. The 33-year-old Croatian striker was linked with a move to Manchester United which never materialised this summer, but Roma remain hopeful of luring him to the Italian capital. The Italian side are also still in hot pursuit of Liverpool central defender Dejan Lovren. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels That grunting sound you can hear is Real Madrid reserve goalkeeper Keylor Navas “pushing” for a move to Paris Saint-Germain, where Ousmane Dembélé is causing no end of stress. The French champions want the striker in a well-documented cash-plus-swap deal for Neymar, but the 22-year-old is standing his ground and refusing to leave the Camp Nou. And finally, Real Sociedad want Nacho Monreal and his Arsenal boss Unai Emery will not stand in his way if the left-back decides to join the Spanish side. In the final year of his contract at the Emirates, Monreal has been offered a two-year deal by the Basque team with an option for a further 12 months. Arsenal’s longest serving player, Monreal has also been told he is welcome to stay in London and leave on a free transfer come season’s end.