Rugby’s players’ union has called for urgent action to be taken to protect players’ mental wellbeing following stark warnings from Kearnan Myall, the former Wasps and England Saxons forward. Myall’s compelling interview in the Guardian has set off alarm bells across the game and Damian Hopley, the chief executive of the Rugby Players’ Association, is increasingly concerned about the strain on modern players. Myall’s bravery and honesty have been universally applauded but his searing account of being driven to the brink of suicide and feeling unable to seek help for fear of being dropped has prompted questions about pastoral care standards in rugby. Hopley says around 10% of Premiership players each year phone the RPA’s confidential helpline to discuss mental problems. “I think it’s really important from a game-wide perspective that we address it in a more urgent way and do not wait for something terrible to happen,” Hopley said. “This is not going to go away. We’re seeing mounting pressure on players on a seasonal basis. We all recognise the huge strain they’re being put under in terms of performance and backing it up week in week out.” The RPA’s most recent survey of past players found 62% experienced some kind of mental health problem within two years of retiring. More than half did not feel in control of their lives two years after they retired and 50% have had financial difficulties in the first five years after retiring. In addition 99% of retired pros believe players should be given more assistance when they finish playing. Myall believes current players also need more support and Hopley agrees. “We know concussion is the game’s No 1 injury concern but this is possibly even greater in terms of how it affects players,” said the former Wasps and England centre. “We need to collaborate throughout the game to get more investment into this area and support for the players. When you talk to players there are those who will just get on with it because that’s their DNA. There are others who feel differently. We can’t afford to second-guess that. We’ve got to look at the entire picture.” The RPA has successfully raised awareness via its “Lift the Weight” campaign and is also awaiting figures from research co-funded by the Rugby Football Union and Premiership Rugby into the psychological load on players currently being conducted at Cardiff Metropolitan University. Hopley said: “Every four years around the World Cup the game ramps up on and off the field in terms of what is demanded. Test players talk to us about being ribbed at their clubs for being well-paid internationals. The response is often: ‘Well you come and spend a week with us and see how hard we work.’” Among Myall’s revelations was that several current England squad members dreaded going to training camp because of the heavy workload and constant scrutiny. The England assistant coach, Scott Wisemantel, denied Eddie Jones’s regime is too intense, insisting the management have received no formal adverse feedback. “In the current environment there have been no complaints,” Wisemantel said. “The programme Eddie runs is intense but it’s well-structured. There is time for players to refresh, to get their heads right and to recover. I think it’s a very well-balanced programme.” The growth of social media and increased training demands and data analysis have contributed to a relentless 24/7 working environment. Simon Kemp, the RFU’s medical services director, says “mental health and wellbeing … is something we take seriously” but Wisemantel admits there is no easy fix. “Look at sport in general: the stakes are high, the pressure is high at the pointy end of the stick,” said the attack coach, confirming several players are choosing to practise yoga and meditation on their days off as a coping mechanism. Meetings have also been held on the subject of social media criticism. “If a player is under pressure or something has been said, it is important to address it rather than leave it as an elephant in the room,” Wisemantel said. Myall’s former club Wasps said they were “shocked” by the player’s revelations that he came close to taking his own life while on a mid-season break with teammates in Dubai. Myall has since been deluged with supportive messages and hopes his story will prove a force for change. “Our understanding of mental health is lagging far behind in my opinion,” said the 32-year-old. “I saw a quote saying ‘Mental health affects one in four of us.’ What it meant to say was: ‘Mental illness affects one in four of us.’ The language we use needs to be more precise.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org