Is it really any wonder that there is so much consternation in Europe at the negotiating tactics employed by the prime minister over Brexit and the blasted backstop? His full linguistic prowess was on display before his meetings last week with Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron: “We can’t get it through parliament as it is. So I’m going to go at it... with a lot of oomph.” For good measure, he added that there needed to be a “total backstop-ectomy” if there is to be any chance of a Brexit deal. I know that Johnson thinks himself a latter-day Churchill but I’m equally certain that the great man would have mustered something more magisterial than “oomph” at such a parlous time and, if M Macron had responded with a de Gaulle-esque “non” in the face of such language, I wouldn’t have been the slightest bit surprised. Meanwhile, Jean-Marc Puissesseau, the Boulogne-Calais port chief, seems, happily, to take a more bracing and optimistic attitude to Brexit. He has dismissed warning of chaos on the Dover to Calais trade route, saying: “There are certain people in the UK who are whipping up this catastrophism for their own reasons. C’est la bullshit.” I do fear, though, that he might face the full wrath of the Académie française for that last word. As I’ve written before, its members are such frightful sticklers. Living in a somewhat somnolent market town where nothing much of note happens, I love a good local scandal. So last week, when a large load of manure was dumped outside a pub, topped with a notice saying “The landlord is fucking my wife”, my heart soared. (The landlord has since said the allegation is untrue.) Not so that of the constabulary, which responded with a full regulation sour-pussedness: “We can confirm we are investigating an allegation of malicious communications following an incident in which offensive signage was placed outside a pub in Liss.” Oh come on, Plod, grow a sense of humour, for heaven’s sake, and kindly go at it with a bit – or even a lot – of oomph. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnist