The locals – experts the lot of them – were packing anoraks, hats and brollies on Thursday morning, a bad sign for all those out-of-towners who had been foolish enough to trust the weather forecast. “It’s looking a bit black over Bill’s mother’s,” one of them said to another on the short walk up from Burley Park station. It was, too, if you only knew which way Bill’s mother’s was. Somewhere beyond the Western Terrace, you guess, where the horizon was beginning to turn blurry, as though Jack Russell, who was here working on a picture of the grand new stand, had just smudged the paint with his finger. “Good toss to lose, I reckon.” A little local knowledge goes a long way here in Leeds. Joe Root, who has been playing at Headingley for 12 years, knew exactly what he wanted to do. “We’re going to have a bowl,” he said, after they had finally found the coin, which had bounced off one of the TV cameras. Tim Paine insisted that he would have batted anyway. Paine is the only player in the Australian team who has played a Test here before, against Pakistan in a series on neutral ground back in 2010. Maybe he had forgotten that Ricky Ponting chose to bat first in that match too, and that Australia then got turned over for 88. Paine might have had a few flashbacks to it when Stuart Broad started from the Kirkstall Lane End. It was one of those ominous overs that must have left the Australian batsmen feeling pretty queasy about the day ahead. Broad’s fourth ball was the first in a string of unplayable deliveries he bowled from around the wicket to David Warner. It slid in towards him, pitched just outside his off stump and then broke away off the pitch and whizzed past his dangling bat. Warner smiled, shrugged and set himself ready for the next one. There wasn’t a whole lot else he could do. It is turning into an interesting summer for Broad. At the beginning, it wasn’t even clear whether or not he would play every Test since he was competing, all of a sudden, with a couple of younger and quicker bowlers in Jofra Archer and Olly Stone. But that injury to Jimmy Anderson at Edgbaston has left Broad as the senior member of the team, the old hand of the bowling attack. And he seems to be enjoying himself almost as much as Archer is. Archer had bowled just 10 overs here before, during the match against Sri Lanka in the World Cup, but he still cleaned up six wickets. But then Archer is at the point of his career where it all seems to come easy. Broad has had more than his share of doing hard days in the field. Some of them here. It took him a long time to figure out how to bowl at Headingley. For years he and Anderson didn’t much care for the place. Then they finally realised that they’d both been working from the wrong ends. He has got used to it now, though, and fell immediately into precisely the right length: fuller than usual. Broad’s second over was even better. He beat Warner, once, twice, three times more. Then it started raining. That black stuff from Bill’s mother’s way had finally arrived. It was two o’clock before they got back on again, when Broad immediately beat Warner a fourth time. It was all getting a bit frustrating and then, in the end, he got a wicket with the worst ball he had bowled all day, a half volley down the leg side that Usman Khawaja sliced through behind. By the time the rain returned, Broad was five balls into his eighth over, had bowled three maidens, and taken one for 12. Root had to bring him back into the attack soon enough. Ben Stokes and Chris Woakes bowled some poor stuff in the overs they shared between them either side of tea. You would think they were both naturally well suited to bowling here, but Stokes has taken only five wickets in four Tests, here, and they have cost 57 runs each, and Woakes seven at 35 in three. Warner and Marnus Labuschagne had just settled in when Broad returned to the attack. He beat Warner again in his very first over back, with another ball that nipped away from him. It was a good enough delivery to convince the umpire Chris Gaffeney, who gave it out, but Warner reviewed it and it turned out that the ball had been a hair’s breadth away from his edge. He took it out on Travis Head, who he bowled for a six-ball duck with another of those wicked away-seamers. It was one for his career highlights reel. Then he beat up Labuschagne, too, with a ball that hit him plumb in the box. Head was Broad’s 44th wicket here, which meant he had pulled level with Fred Trueman as the leading wicket-taker at the ground, although we had best mention that Trueman took his in one fewer Tests, nine rather than 10, and at a lower average, 18 rather than 26, unless all his spinning in the grave triggers an earthquake in the Dales.