The paths we have chosen in the past three years are ones no one would have anticipated. Neither, quite frankly, are they ones anyone would have wished for. Mistakes were made. But let’s be clear about one thing: the voters’ decision to leave the European Union and how politicians have gone about implementing the result are two distinct issues. Criticising the process of leaving is not the same as questioning the referendum outcome. Leave had a clear majority on a high turnout. Whichever way anyone voted, we can probably agree that the paralysis of indecision of this period has been corrosive and damaging. It has entrenched divisions and undermined confidence. Liberal democracies need political structures that are capable of governing. It is not sustainable for political parties to have their frontbenchers in disagreement with the backbenchers. In the same way, MPs being out of step with their voters on a major issue rarely ends well. Restoring trust and confidence won’t be easy and it will take time. But we don’t have much time, so clarity of purpose and seeing beyond narrow party politics must be the starting point. The government has a clear and unequivocal commitment to implementing the referendum. The prime minister and his cabinet have not framed their work as being a case of making the best of a bad decision, but as one of looking ahead with optimism and determination. Column inches are being filled with speculation about the personalities involved, but what matters is the fact that a team has come together to make things happen in a relatively short time. At long last we are doing what we should have done after the 2016 vote: saying we are leaving as a statement of fact and doing all that is necessary. For some things we need transition arrangements. But for others, we can start to change rules now. We do want to leave with a deal, but if that is not possible then we must prepare to leave without one. As we’ve seen in the past, statements that are not underpinned by actions don’t mean very much. Parliament has been clear about all the things it doesn’t like, but vague about alternatives. There is no logic in MPs saying that they respect the result of the referendum, voting for implementing article 50 and then going on to defeat all options put in front of them in the expectation that this would somehow overturn the referendum. It was wrong to label as “extremist” anyone who suggested that if the UK and the EU could not reach an agreement we should leave in any case. Just as it is wrong now to imply that the only way of avoiding “no deal” is for the UK to not leave the EU after all. There is little consistent evidence that voters have changed their minds This isn’t just a debate among politicians. There is little consistent evidence that voters have changed their minds and they do expect some clarity. They showed their frustration in the European elections. The greatest gains were made by the Brexit party and the Liberal Democrats, who had clear and unambiguous policies. Labour and the Conservatives opted in varying degrees for “creative ambiguity” and were punished at the ballot box. The Brexit party emerged with the largest number of MEPs, and this can’t be dismissed as a one-off protest vote. In 2014, two years before the referendum, Ukip’s 24 MEPs were also the largest UK grouping. The UK is leaving the union, but it is and remains European. In years to come it will be seen as more remarkable that we decided to join the political project of the core European countries in 1973, rather than prioritising a trading-based relationship by remaining within the European Free Trade Association. The 2016 referendum asked voters for a generational decision about the future direction of this country. They were driven less by economic considerations than by a sense of belonging, community and place. Divisions that had been in the making for a long time were suddenly exposed. These divisions run deep and will take a long time to heal. The most significant conclusion to draw from the past three years is that, despite best efforts, this process can’t even begin until the promise to implement the referendum and leave the EU has been delivered. Now is our last chance to deliver on that promise, and begin the process of restoring trust in our institutions. • Gisela Stuart is chair of Change Britain. She is a former Labour MP and chair of the Vote Leave campaign