George Fouracres was one third of the sketch group Daphne but he supplied half of the laughs. Phil Wang and Jason Forbes did light touch; Fouracres’ demented character acting stole the shows. There are trace elements of that in his standup debut Gentlemon: the narrative is broken up by blink-and-you-miss-them character skits. But mainly this is an autobiographical set about Fouracres’ upbringing in the post-industrial Black Country. It’s a hymn to a world he thinks is disappearing, a rumination on class identity and social mobility – and a distinctive maiden solo show. It ends more strongly than it begins. At one point, Fouracres tells us he’s an actor rather than a comic: “I’m only doing this because I’ve got nothing else on.” It rings uncomfortably true, given that, narrating his journey from working-class childhood to “posh, but not proper posh” early adulthood, he doesn’t always seem happy to be here. There is something stiff about him, and it’s not just the houndstooth suit. But he loosens up. Or maybe it’s that his account of class alienation puts the illness-at-ease in context. We find young George spellbound by that icon of glamour, the local dry cleaners, and mugging up on military history while his peers scrap in the playground. They’re lovingly drawn with poetic flourishes, these impressions of an age that seems more distant than Fouracres’ youth (he’s only 29). He emerges as much pen-portraitist as either actor or standup. Proceedings only occasionally shade into working-class cliche – and when your grandad is both a brickie and pigeon fancier, how can you avoid it? More often Gentlemon is marked by the intensity of Fouracres’ thought, as when, in a considered conclusion, he frets over the intersections between class and culture. (Amazingly for a standup operating in this territory, he doesn’t mention hummus once.) The show is elevated by its off-message but energetic set pieces, like the one about primary school hymns (on which Fouracres shares amusingly trenchant opinions) or the startling act-out of Dad’s Army gone gritty. It’s a tender-hearted paean to The Way We Lived Then, with jokes that are by turns joyous, barbed and unresolved. • At Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh, until 26 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.