During the summer holidays, you may be heading into the British countryside for a leisurely walk. However, the idea of the rural idyll is not what you may think. Country paths are often strewn with dog poo left by irresponsible owners, litter blown into ditches or piles of flytipped rubbish. Most people who access the countryside respect it and want to look after it. After all, many of us enjoy exploring it and some of us still make our living within it. Yet, social media is awash with farmers and landowners venting their frustration at the way some people act, with gates left open and dogs allowed to run off the lead near cows and sheep. On my 300-hectare coastal farm in Essex I’m lucky that there are quite a few regular walkers who act as our unofficial farm neighbourhood watch. They want to see the land looking good as much as I do and are the first to air their grievances to me if they find someone hasn’t picked up their dog’s mess or if they have come across flytipping. These people stick to public footpaths and permissive paths, leave gates as they found them and respect others. Unfortunately, there are people who do the opposite, but it seems impossible to catch them in the act. How often have you actually seen someone leaving their dog’s mess on the ground? Last week, I missed a flytipper by just 10 minutes. We need to collectively shame people, but finding them is not easy. Since 2013, we have had sheep on the farm as well as Hereford and Angus cattle during the summer. Most people aren’t aware of the risks dogs pose to livestock, as well as the work created by people who leave gates open (or those who close gates that have been deliberately left open). However, we do have the Countryside Code: a set of guidelines to ensure that we can all respect and enjoy the countryside. First drawn up in the 1950s, the code is regularly updated by Natural England. A lot of the code seems common sense: respect other people, leave gates and property as you find them, follow paths unless other wider access is available, take your litter home, plan ahead and keep dogs under effective control. In almost all situations, the latter means “keep your dog on a lead”. Yet dozens of farmers have told me that they have suffered as a result of dog owners believing that their pet won’t act aggressively towards livestock. The risk is always there. Even if no contact is made a dog can have an impact. The problem seems to be that the consequences of ignoring the code’s principles aren’t taken seriously enough by people, or that they don’t even know about the code. What is obvious to some people might not be clear to others, especially if you live in a town or city and have no interaction with rural dwellers and little understanding of farming practices and stewardship of the countryside. Not everyone, for instance, might know that leaving gates as you found them is vital for farmers and that any dog has the capacity to worry cows and sheep. So public education needs to greatly improve. This could involve posters highlighting the code near public footpaths, or given to farmers to place on their land. In the past there have been television adverts but perhaps targeted social media posts would have greater impact today. Car parks, bus stops and country pubs might also be other places where the code, and other advice on how to act appropriately in the countryside, could be publicised. Often, the farmer or landowner, as well as livestock and wildlife, suffer most when people break the code. The person who throws litter into a hedge doesn’t have to collect it later; the person who lets their dog run with sheep doesn’t have the prospect of dealing with mauled carcasses and face a loss of income; the person walking through a field margin left for wildlife doesn’t think about the impact this might have on, for example, ground-nesting birds. Farming, and the farmed landscape, is likely to be transformed in the coming years as farmers are encouraged by government agencies to provide “public goods” by planting trees on land unsuitable for agriculture, or by creating habitats for wildlife. Public access is another public good, but for greater and better access to the countryside to work it needs all of us to be on the lookout for people who abuse their right of access by littering or letting dogs run off the lead. The countryside is an asset for us all, but we also have a shared responsibility to ensure that it looks good and works effectively. For me, this means supporting those who work and own the land to maintain it as best they can. Breaking the code has real consequences for those who run our countryside. We need to respect this far more if we are all to enjoy it. • Ben Eagle is a farmer and environmental/agricultural writer from the Essex coast. He produces the Meet the Farmers podcast and blogs at thinkingcountry.com