Moeen Ali is down to play in Worcestershire’s four-day County Championship fixture at Northamptonshire this Sunday amid encouraging words from Joe Root over his potential return during the Ashes this summer. Moeen, 32, missed out on selection for the second Test against Australia at Lord’s starting on Wednesday – his place going to Jack Leach – after a disappointing outing in the series-opening defeat at Edgbaston last week and losing his spot towards the end of England’s World Cup-winning campaign. Despite Worcestershire sparking talk of burnout by stating that the spin‑bowling all‑rounder was taking “a short break from action” – the head coach, Alex Gidman, spoke of “a little time away from the middle recharging his batteries” – he is simply sitting out the T20 Blast fixtures against Derbyshire and Durham this week. Moeen has been netting with the red ball this week before a return to four-day cricket and is also technically on standby for England in the unlikely event of Leach requiring a concussion substitute during the second Test. As regards his place in the pecking order, Joe Root also appears in no mood to dispense of a cricketer with 60 Test caps, five centuries and 181 wickets either, citing the example of Moeen’s match-winning return against India last summer that followed a spell back in county cricket. Asked about the decision to drop Moeen, Root said: “I spent a good while chatting to Mo, making sure he understood where he’s at, and where we’re at in terms of getting him back to his best. We felt it was best for him to play some county cricket, and perform well for Worcestershire. Now, as he proved last summer, coming into that India series having a massive influence on it, there’s no reason why he can’t go back and do the same again, and try and force his way back into the squad. “You know, he’s been a big part of English cricket and he’s done some fantastic things in a Test shirt. And it’s certainly not the last we’ll see of him, he’s a fine character, a great man and gives so much to this team. I’m sure that it won’t be long until you see him back involved.” In order to do this before the Ashes series is over, Moeen essentially must play for Worcestershire this weekend. There is one full round of Division Two games in the fixture schedule before the fifth Test starts at the Oval on 12 September.