Along with those very first sun‑warmed strawberries, and the increased opportunities for ice-cream consumption, chilled soup is for me one of the culinary pleasures of the summer – so ridiculously light and refreshing, it’s halfway between a square meal and a quick snifter. None, perhaps, is better for this purpose than gazpacho: the salad you can swallow in gallons. Prep 20 minSoak 20 minChill 30 minServes 4 100g slightly stale, crusty and preferably white bread1kg very ripe tomatoes1 ripe red pepper and 1 green pepper1 medium cucumber2 garlic cloves150ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus a little extra to serve2 tbsp sherry vinegarSalt and black pepper, to taste To garnish (all optional)2 eggs8 black or green olives¼ cucumber½ red, yellow or green pepper1 mild chilli2 sprigs mint or parsley, picked2 slices cured ham The single most important step of this recipe is sourcing the ingredients. If your tomatoes and peppers aren’t really ripe, there’s no point making it, because they have nothing to hide behind here. Along with the serving temperature, that’s why this is a dish to save for high summer, and then gorge yourself on for a few short weeks. Put the bread in a shallow bowl, cover with cold water, then leave to soak for 20 minutes – very fresh or soft bread will just dissolve to mush, so if you haven’t managed to find any stale or particularly crusty stuff, give it a quick toast beforehand, to dry it out a bit. Roughly dice the tomatoes – don’t worry about seeding or skinning them, because everything will be sieved out later – and deseed and dice the peppers. (Note: I like its herbaceous bitterness, but if you’re one of those people who hates green pepper, use two red ones instead.) Peel and dice the cucumber, and put it in a blender or food processor with the tomatoes and peppers. Peel and crush the garlic, and add that, too, then squeeze out and tear in the bread. Finish with the olive oil and whizz smooth. (Alternatively, use a large bowl and a stick blender to do the same thing.) Pass the soup through a fine sieve, discard the solids, then stir in the vinegar and season to taste with salt. Cover and refrigerate until well chilled – I think it’s much nicer cold than at room temperature, but you can eat it immediately, if you prefer. You can serve the soup just as it is, with perhaps a swirl of olive oil and a little black pepper to finish, but if you want to make a whole meal out of it, add some more substantial garnishes. Pick a couple from the following options, or add them all if you want to show off. Put two eggs in a pan of cold water and bring to a boil. Turn the heat down to a simmer, then cook for seven and a half minutes. Dunk in cold water until cool enough to handle, then peel. Finely dice the egg, mixing together the whites and yolks, and season lightly. Stone and finely chop eight black or green olives. Peel a quarter-cucumber, cut in half lengthways, discard the seeds and watery core, then finely dice the flesh. Deseed and dice half a red, yellow or green pepper, or even a mild chilli. Roughly chop the leaves from two sprigs of mint or parsley. Thinly slice two spring onions. Cut two slices of cured ham into thin strips. Divide the chilled soup between four bowls, scatter all or some of these toppings artistically across the top (bearing in mind that some of them will sink fairly quickly), and finish with a dash of olive oil and a little freshly ground black pepper. Alternatively, put all the garnishes on the table for people to help themselves as they wish.