Ivanka Trump shared a series of pictures on social media over the weekend of herself, husband Jared Kushner and their children availing themselves of the natural wonders of Wyoming. “Love. Wonder. Wander. Repeat,” the president’s daughter and adviser captioned in one photo, in front of a painterly backdrop. The response to the photos, on the other hand, was not quite as generous of spirit, as various social media users piled on with a mix of attacks on her father’s poor environmental record in office and other policies. Love. Wonder. Wander. Repeat. A post shared by  Ivanka Trump (@ivankatrump) on Aug 18, 2019 at 5:21pm PDT In another photo posted to Twitter, Ivanka showed a lovely hike through the mountains. “Where the wild things are…” she captioned it, referencing the book about a spoiled child who lives in a fantasy land. Critics on Twitter and Instagram were quick to point out the hypocrisy at work, as just last week her father’s administration moved to weaken protections for endangered animals. Ivanka is, after all, a top White House adviser to the president. Oh, how nice that Ivanka got to hike some public lands before her dad destroys them. https://t.co/0JzM3diWSD Seriously? Her brothers kill wild things for fun, & her father rapes & pillages our wild places to turn a profit for his rich buddies. Don't buy whatever this vapid person is selling. https://t.co/268UDFiUVd Ivanka’s brothers, Donald Jr and Eric Trump, are well known for their love of killing exotic big game animals. just off camera: her brothers killing all the wild things for sport https://t.co/b0pvkABRLD Her father has gone on record multiple times sharing his belief that climate change is a hoax, among numerous other damaging policies for the environment, such as rolling back the clean power plan, making cuts to water protections, leaving the Paris climate agreement and promoting fossil fuels. Wow, look at that beautiful sky, those amazing trees, and lovely plants... all being destroyed because your administration refuses to care about the earth or believe in climate change. The flowers on the mountain do look pretty, though. Don’t worry, your father and this administration are working hard to sell all our “wild things” off to the highest bidder.... that spot you’re standing should be some sort of pipeline by lunch. If only there were some sort of Agency to Protect the Environment. An Environmental Protection Agency, if you will. So happy you get to enjoy nature. Future generations won’t get that opportunity after your father destroys any and all environmental protections. But wow!! Great insta!! Are you scouting new places for your father to despoil with tacky buildings and coal mines? https://t.co/VWKNldiV3Q The president himself, who just yesterday joked about spoiling the natural beauty of Greenland with one of his monstrous buildings, shared a photo of the lovely couple this morning, writing “Two incredible people. I can’t believe they’re not working (few work harder)!” That post did not go well either. pic.twitter.com/EnuKsUyLXv Another picture Ivanka posted of her two young children in bed was seized upon by critics, many of who pointed out how lucky they were to be together, unlike many of the thousands of families separated by her father’s immigration policies. Amazing what kids look like when they wake up with their mum on a Sunday morning, imagine what it's like for the children on concrete floors locked in a cages not knowing if they will ever see their mums again. You must be so proud to be a trump https://t.co/KGqv5B6fIi This week @ICEgov ripped a breastfeeding baby from its mother. https://t.co/8jL7FYVtCJ