Before you start on any of these jams, sterilise jars and lids. Wash them in hot, soapy water and rinse well. Drip-dry upside down, then put in an oven heated to 100C (90C fan)/gas ¼ for at least 20 minutes. Meanwhile, put a few small plates in the freezer in preparation for the “wrinkle test.” Sealed, the jam will keep for up to 12 months. Once opened, keep refrigerated and eat within three months. Prep 15 minCook 25 minMakes 8 x 228ml jars 2 tbsp loose camomile tea or flowers1.5kg gooseberries60ml lemon juice700g sugar Sterilise the jars and lids, and put a few small plates in the freezer, as described above. Brew the camomile tea or flowers in 250ml just-boiled water for five minutes. Wash the gooseberries and cut off the little brown tops. In a large, wide-rimmed, stainless-steel saucepan or jam pan, soften the gooseberries on a medium-high heat with the lemon juice and brewed tea (flowers and all, if using). Simmer for five to 10 minutes, stirring frequently so that the mixture doesn’t stick to the bottom of the pan and burn. Slowly pour in the sugar, stirring until it dissolves completely. Increase the heat and boil over a high heat for about 10-15 minutes, until it reaches 104C on a thermometer, or the rolling boil turns into heavier, ploppy bubbles. When you think it’s ready, take off the heat and do the wrinkle test: put a quarter-teaspoon of jam on to a pre-frozen plate and put in the fridge for a minute. Remove from the fridge and push the jam with your finger; it should have a slight wrinkle on the surface, similar to when boiled milk forms a skin. If there’s no wrinkle, put the pan back on a high heat, keep cooking and test again every few minutes until the wrinkle has been achieved. When the jam is ready, skim off and discard any froth that has formed on the surface, then ladle into hot, sterilised jars. Clean the rim of the jar and seal immediately. Prep 10 minCook 20 minMakes 6 x 228ml jars 1.8kg raspberries60ml lemon juice700g sugar¼ tsp vanilla essence or vanilla bean paste1 tbsp cacao nibs Sterilise the jars and lids as described above, and put a few small plates in the freezer. Gently wash the raspberries, if needed, and pick out any leaves or twigs. Put the raspberries in a large, wide-rimmed, stainless-steel saucepan or jam pan, add 50ml water and the lemon juice, and soften the fruit over a medium-high heat for about five to seven minutes, stirring frequently so it doesn’t stick to the bottom of the pan and burn. Slowly pour in the sugar, stirring until it dissolves completely, then add the vanilla and cacao nibs. Increase the heat and boil over a high heat for about 10-15 minutes, until it reaches 104C on a thermometer, or the rolling boil turns into heavier, ploppy bubbles. When you think it’s ready, take off the heat and do the wrinkle test: put a quarter-teaspoon of jam on to a pre-frozen plate and put in the fridge for a minute. Remove from the fridge and push the jam with your finger; it should have a slight wrinkle on the surface, similar to when boiled milk forms a skin. If there’s no wrinkle, put the pan back on a high heat, keep cooking and test again every few minutes until the wrinkle has been achieved. When the jam is ready, skim off and discard any froth on the surface, ladle the jam into hot, sterilised jars. Clean the rim of the jar and seal immediately. Prep 15 minCook 30 minMakes 8 x 228ml jars 5 large unwaxed lemons 2kg strawberries, washed and hulled250ml lemon juice900g sugar Sterilise the jars and lids as described above, and put a few small plates in the freezer. Zest the lemons into long strips. If you don’t have the type of zester that can do this, use a vegetable peeler to pare the lemon skin into strips, scrape off any pith with a small, sharp knife, then finely slice into even thinner strips. Set aside 10-12 of the smaller strawberries, then chop the rest into quarters. Put in a large, wide-rimmed, stainless-steel saucepan or jam pan, add 70ml water, the lemon zest and juice, then soften the quartered fruit over a medium-high heat for about 10-15 minutes, stirring frequently so the mixture doesn’t stick to the bottom of the pan and burn. Slowly pour in the sugar, stirring until it dissolves completely, then add the remaining whole strawberries. Increase the heat and boil over a high heat for about 10-15 minutes, until it reaches 104C on a thermometer, or the rolling boil turns into heavier, ploppy bubbles. When you think it’s ready, take off the heat and do the wrinkle test: put a quarter-teaspoon of jam on to a pre-frozen plate and put in the fridge for a minute. Remove from the fridge and push the jam with your finger; it should have a slight wrinkle on the surface, similar to when boiled milk forms a skin. If there’s no wrinkle, put the pan back on a high heat, keep cooking and test again every few minutes until the wrinkle has been achieved. When the jam is ready, skim off and discard any froth that has formed on the surface, then ladle into hot, sterilised jars. Clean the rim of the jar and seal immediately. Prep 25 minCook 30 minMakes 8 x 228ml jars 2.5kg peaches 100ml lemon juice6 sprigs lemon thyme900g sugar Sterilise the jars and lids as described above, and put a few small plates in the freezer. Cut a small cross in the bottom of each peach and blanch in a large bowl of just-boiled water for five minutes. Drain, peel off the skins, cut the flesh off around the stone, then chop into 1cm pieces. Put the fruit in a large, wide-rimmed, stainless-steel saucepan or jam pan, add the lemon juice and lemon thyme sprigs, and soften the peaches over a medium-high heat for about 10-15 minutes. Stir frequently so they don’t stick to the bottom of the pan and burn. Slowly pour in the sugar, stirring until it dissolves completely. Increase the heat and boil over a high heat for about 10-15 minutes, until it reaches 104C on a thermometer, or the rolling boil turns into heavier, ploppy bubbles. When you think it’s ready, take off the heat and do a wrinkle test for a soft-set jam: put a quarter-teaspoon of jam on to a pre-frozen plate and put in the fridge for one minute. Remove from the fridge and push the jam with your finger; the jam should be heavy and congealed, and when picked up with your finger, it should very slowly drip. If there’s no wrinkle, put the jam back on a high heat, keep cooking and test again every few minutes, until you get that telltale wrinkle. When the jam is ready, skim off and discard any froth from the surface, pick out the lemon thyme stalks, then ladle the jam into the hot, sterilised jars. Clean the rim of the jar and seal immediately. Kylee Newton is owner of Newton and Pott preserves and author of The Modern Preserver (Square Peg, £25). To order a copy for £22, go to guardianbookshop.com