George Baker, a trainer whose stable is a most frequent raider of prizes at French tracks, is waiting to learn how his operations could be affected after 31 October. Baker, who trains at Chiddingfold, Surrey, regularly sends runners to Continental tracks, where he has consistently earned valuable prize money for his owners. “The main concern would be if a barrier to the free movement of racehorses were introduced,” Baker told the Guardian on Monday. “At present, it is easier from our Sussex base to get to many French racecourses than it is to travel to ‘Points North’ in the UK. And both the ferry companies and Eurotunnel ensure easy and safe passage for our horse boxes. There is a certain amount of required paperwork, and this can be quite time consuming, but it is not beyond the wit of man …” The stable’s horses travel to France by ferry or, certainly if the weather is poor, through Eurotunnel. Over the past five years, Baker’s Robins Farm yard has had 17 winners in France. His miler Belgian Bill, the 2013 Royal Hunt Cup winner, was often away on trips. Only last week, at Vichy, the yard won a race with Victochop. Dieppe has also been a recent profitable venue. Baker says: “The place money makes even the trips when horses don’t win very viable. The fact that French-bred racehorses qualify for a 60% premium on top of prize money is the prime reason for our horses and owners heading over the Channel. The prize money at regular meetings is much higher than we race for here. And the restaurant menus and wine lists can be more alluring!” His favourite tracks in France are Deauville, Clairefontaine and St Cloud. “Maisons-Laffitte is a very fair track, but sadly due for closure later this year,” added Baker (who saddled a 14-1 winner, Culture, at Windsor on Monday night). A filly named Majestic Charm won Wolverhampton’s 7.50 on Monday night. The race carried the title of “Celebrating 22 Years Without David Chillery Novice Stakes”. The sponsorship was reported to be a retaliation against a race at Newton Abbot on 25 June, named “David Chillery Continues Celebrating His Divorce Novices’ Handicap Chase”. Racing enthusiast David Chillery, 75, has sponsored the race at Newton Abbot, his local track, for the last six years. It was reported earlier this week that David’s former wife Madeline had this year hit back with her own sponsorship, at Wolverhampton. However, a Wolverhampton course spokesperson said the sponsorship had in fact been initiated by a “social media organisation”. Henry Candy’s hopes of success on Tuesday with Goscote (4.45) at Ffos Las have received a late boost. Goscote won at Nottingham last month, beating a progressive stayer named Maid In Manhattan. Defying a 3lb rise in the weights as a result of that form, Maid In Manhattan powered ahead to win well on Carlisle’s card on Monday. As Ffos Las on Tuesday, Goscote carries a 4lb rise for that victory. Candy’s four-year-old has been beaten in the meantime (at Salisbury on good to firm ground) but can now bounce back at decent odds. Nottingham 2.00 Stars In The Night (nb) 2.30 Cloud Drift 3.00 Road To Paris 3.30 Strike Acclaim 4.00 Afandem 4.30 Ugo Gregory 5.00 Deinonychus Ffos Las 2.15 Sincerity 2.45 Ventura Bounty 3.15 Royal Council 3.45 Chinese Alphabet 4.15 Cape Cavalli 4.45 Goscote (nap) 5.15 Flying Dragon Lingfield 4.55 Carraigin Aonair 5.30 Cool Sphere 6.00 Come On Dave  6.30 Ahfad 7.00 Kitcarina 7.30 Vincenzo Coccotti 8.00 Caesonia Carlisle 5.10 Manolith 5.45 Bedtime Bella 6.15 Noble Music 6.45 Frankel’s Storm 7.15 Move In Faster 7.45 Make Me 8.15 Trinity Star