It’s rare a sporting moment makes you shake. Last Sunday, while Ben Stokes was carving Australia to all parts of Headingley, I was in a park watching on my phone. As Nathan Lyon failed to collect the ball cleanly as Jack Leach wandered about in no man’s land I realised I had lost control of my body. The screen was all over the place. It might have happened before – but I’m rarely holding both sides of my TV at those critical moments. My scream of terror was too loud for the sunbathers. I think everyone just thought I was that park’s weird guy on the bench. There’s always one. Leach’s explanation of becoming an instant cult hero is pretty perfect. “It’s probably because I look like a village cricketer out there in my glasses, the bald head and maybe people think: ‘That could be me!’ All the others look pretty professional.” You can imagine his spectacles and grubby cloth being valued at thousands by a big-haired expert on the 2119 series of the Antiques Roadshow standing next to the cryogenically thawed head of Fiona Bruce. “So lucky you’ve got both! Yes these belonged to a man called Jack Leach, who played something called Test cricket – an old version of the 10-ball challenge we have today. Unbelievably he managed to achieve something sporting despite the fact that he wore these things called glasses. You’ll remember they were phased out late in the 21st century.” Since Leach’s exploits, there have been interviews with his optometrist and various lists have done the rounds of bespectacled sports stars – always featuring the hapless ones that fit the narrative, with Eddie the Eagle at the top. One man who rarely reaches the top 10 of that list is Hughie Teape. Yet for some unknown reason the British high hurdler is etched in my sporting memory. Big glasses, and an Eric Young sized headband – he always seemed to be in lane one while Colin Jackson and Tony Jarrett fought it out in the middle for the medals. My 10-year-old brain couldn’t quite compute that coming last in an Olympic final is an extraordinary achievement. He was just the slow guy on the end who couldn’t see very well. From birth we are conditioned to see glasses as the preserve of the brainy but physically weak. In film it’s always a lensed asthmatic who is the first to get picked off by the enemy – whether it’s the first world war, or an alien invasion. He’s the bumbling evil hacker in Jurassic Park who loses his specs in the storm and can’t see the sweet little dinosaur turning into a devastatingly colourful killer. They even tried to soften Arnold Schwarzenegger with them – off for Predator, on for Junior – you’re having a baby – off again, you’re an Expendable. And the nerdy bit might actually be true. A study by Edinburgh University showed participants who wore glasses were approximately 30% more likely to be intelligent – a point perhaps proved by my perfect eyesight’s complete inability to understand any of the report. The alternative study into the correlation between sporting weakness and shortsightedness doesn’t seem to have been done. And with good reason. Edwin Moses hurdled passed everyone for years. Martina Navratilova and Billie Jean King dominated tennis. Daniel Vettori is one of New Zealand’s greatest ever cricketers. And it’s not about glasses, either. Your contact-lens six-a‑side team is pretty good. De Gea in goal, with Schweinsteiger in front of Thuram and Boateng – Kaká and Cristiano Ronaldo up front. And I am not here waving a flag for slight visual impairment. As a BBC local radio reporter I once had an eye test as part of a story I can only presume was about eye tests. After identifying the tiny mix of consonants and vowels from a quarter of a mile away, the optician announced I had “better than 20-20 vision” and that I could be a fighter pilot if I so wished. No lover of flying or war, it wasn’t the path for me, but being able to see things clearly was not the thing that stopped me becoming a professional sportsman. Apparently 20/10 vision is better than 20/20. Either way, Jack Leach has neither, and bizarrely that is partly why his partnership with Stokes was so glorious. In Stokes and Leach you have the two ends of the sporting spectrum – the super-human and the human. The biological optimum and the guy who looks like a competition winner. Clearly this does Leach a huge disservice but if we analyse why we love sport, appreciating both of these figures is a huge part of it. No amount of net sessions, press‑ups or protein shakes would give any of us the ability of Stokes. He is a sports star for us to observe in awe. He is Michael Johnson or Serena Williams. He is Steve Smith. Combining that eye, that strength and that indefatigable will to carry on, even when he’s so obviously shattered, takes him beyond normal comparisons. Meanwhile the narrative for Leach – however incorrect – is that he is you and me, trudging about in ill-fitting gear he’s borrowed from a mate, cleaning his steamed-up glasses. He joins that list of unlikely looking spin bowlers – Panesar, Tufnell, Such. We’ve all had that debate about how good we could have become at spin bowling if that’s all we’d done since we were 10 – forget clarinet lessons and GCSE geography, I’m perfecting the arm ball. Chances are most of us would be nowhere nearer a central contract and considerably further away from any other achievement. But Leach gives us that ludicrous fake spark of hope that at some point in another life we too could have flicked that single off our hips. The truth for all these athletes is far less interesting. The most natural, mercurial talents work hard, and the most “normal” have natural talent. But Leach is a sports star who doesn’t look like a sports star. How glorious that in between the Ireland game and his recall at Lord’s he went back and played for his local side, Taunton Deane – and came on as third change. Every interview and every quote makes him more likable. It will be someone else’s time at Old Trafford. But for now – in a week when there has been lots to mourn as a sports lover – let’s revel in one of us taking almost centre stage, however poor their eyesight, and however much better than us they really are.