A body found in the jungle in Malaysia is that of Nora Quoirin, who had been missing for 10 days. The 15-year-old’s body was identified on Tuesday, hours after it was discovered following a large-scale search operation. “The family confirmed that the body found is indeed missing Nora Anne,” the police chief for Negeri Sembilan state, Datuk Mohamad Mat Yusof, said. “Both parents, the mother and father, both confirmed it.” He said a postmortem would be carried out at 10am on Wednesday and the police would determine whether any further investigations were needed once it is completed. A statement from the Lucie Blackman Trust, which is representing the family, said: “The Lucie Blackman Trust can confirm with great sadness that the body found today is that of missing teenager Nora Quoirin. Local police have confirmed identification. “The charity will update as soon as possible. Please respect the family and do not approach them at this difficult time. All at The Lucie Blackman Trust are thinking of the family and continue to support them as they come to terms with this news.” Malaysia’s deputy inspector-general of police, Datuk Mazlan Mansor, had earlier told reporters they had “reasonable suspicion that the body of the “Caucasian female” found 1.2 miles from the Dusan resort where Nora had disappeared was that of the 15-year-old. An official told reporters at an earlier press conference that a body had been found which “resembles Nora”. He said: “The body was winched by helicopter to the hospital.” It was uncovered at around 2pm near to a waterfall by a team of hikers who had volunteered to join to search effort. Quoirin, who was born with the neurological disorder holoprosencephaly and needs help with many aspects of everyday life, had been missing for 10 days, after she disappeared overnight from the hotel room where she was staying with her younger brother and sister. A large window in the hotel room was found open and while her family insisted she had been abducted, the police continued to treat the incident as a missing person case. Nora’s mother, Meabh Quoirin, made an emotional appeal for help in finding her on Monday, and a £10,000 reward was offered by an anonymous Belfast-based business for information leading to her safe return. Meabh and Sebastien Quoirin thanked those looking for her as fundraising pages set up by the teenager’s aunt and uncle raised more than £100,000. Appearing before cameras on Monday, her mother said: “Nora is our first child. She has been vulnerable since the day she was born. She is so precious to us and our hearts are breaking.” Police leading the investigation have not ruled out a “criminal element” in the teenager’s disappearance.