Bury have been given a two-week deadline to save their EFL status after the suspension on their notice of withdrawal of membership was lifted by the organisation on Thursday. The EFL has suspended next week’s Carabao Cup match against Sheffield Wednesday and indicated it would tolerate no further delays in its demand the club provides reassurances over its financial position. Bury have already had their opening matches of the League One season against MK Dons and Accrington Stanley postponed. The EFL executive chair, Debbie Jevans, said: “Despite continued efforts, regular communication and dialogue with [Bury’s owner Steve] Dale and his team, the required evidence has not been forthcoming. Albeit regretfully, the board has been left with no choice but to take the action it has.” Bury’s League Cup game was called off after the EFL said the club had failed to meet Wednesday’s deadline to provide further satisfactory information regarding creditor debts. The EFL said: “Following extensive discussions and correspondence between the club’s ownership and the league, the additional information provided lacks the clarity required and as a result of the league not being able to defer the decision any later than today, the club’s Carabao Cup tie on Tuesday 13 August 2019 will not take place as scheduled in accordance with Carabao Cup rules. “The EFL will continue to concentrate its efforts on working constructively with the club and Mr Dale to obtain the detail required to avoid any further suspensions. However, the EFL board is of the strong opinion that it cannot continue to suspend fixtures indefinitely and, after Wednesday’s deadline for information was passed without a successful resolution, it will now lift the suspension on the notice of withdrawal of membership of the EFL. “Bury were served the notice of withdrawal of membership on 25 July 2019 and it has remained suspended until today. As per the league’s articles of association, this will give the club 14 days to meet all outstanding requirements of the league’s insolvency policy or its membership of the EFL will be withdrawn.” No one at the club was immediately available for comment. Bury have made no statement since 3 August, when they said through a lawyer the EFL’s stance was causing “immeasurable damage” to the club.