If Georgia Hall needed the British Open to kickstart a slow year, her contemporaries also remember the form that shone brightly 12 months ago. Hall’s triumph at Royal Lytham & St Annes, the first in this major by an English player since 2004, had a stark impact on Bronte Law and Charley Hull. After Hull used day one to blast herself into contention here, Hall and Law joined the party in the second round. The prospect of a three-pronged home assault on the trophy is a live one. “We motivate each other by playing well,” said Hall after a 69 moved her to six under par. “We also want each other to do well. It’s great for English golf, really young players all doing well. The three of us were always in the England team, we’ve played alongside each other, so we’ve known each other for a long time. “Charley and I in particular; I used to go round to her house, we’d play golf together, when we were 12 or 13. Bronte was living farther north so it was harder for her to join us but we’ve always been good friends. “When we started out playing matches, we knew we had to be feisty if we were to survive and you’re seeing that come out now. We each show it differently but we all dig deep for those par saves.” Hall’s form leading into this defence did not suggest she would compete again. Instead, she has summoned the spirit of 2018. “Four rounds is a very long time, especially mentally and this being kind of your home tournament,” she said. “But I’ve got that experience, and the pressure I dealt with very well last year, so hopefully tomorrow when I go on the tee, I won’t be that nervous.” Law entered this event as the highest ranked British player in the world, at No 22. She has also won this season on the LPGA Tour. To her credit, the 24-year-old openly welcomed the prospect of strong attention over the closing 36 holes. Law’s Friday 67 continued a bogey-free tournament run and lifted her to minus seven. “The more Brits at the top, the better,” Law said. “It just shows the strength of golf in the UK and hopefully it can increase the publicity in the UK of women’s golf. With where we are all ranked in the world, we deserve to get more publicity. “Doing it on home soil, if you’re going to get the publicity, now is the time. The excuse wouldn’t be ‘Oh, well, it’s in the States.’ We’re doing it here in front of a home crowd. So hopefully we can keep playing well and put on a show for the fans out here.” Hull’s 70 meant she matched Law’s midway score. The South African Ashleigh Buhai is firmly of a mind to spoil the home party; an inward half of 32 contributed to a 67 and formidable leading position at 12 under. A Solheim Cup quirk means Law cannot qualify automatically for the European team who will face the United States next month because of not playing the requisite number of events. She is, though, virtually certain to be handed one of four captain’s picks by Catriona Matthew. The Scot played alongside Law over the opening two rounds and was understandably impressed. “It’s like when you’re younger at school and you’re in front of the teacher so they can keep an eye on you,” said Law with a smile. She need not have worried. “I haven’t played a lot with her but she’s been really consistent off the tee and a really good putter,” Matthew said. “And she’s a really good fighter, you can see that from her amateur match-play record. In certain situations she seems to hole a putt at the right moment to keep it all together. She’s got the right personality too. “You can sense she wants it [the pick]. There are a lot wanting a spot but she’s up for it. She produced, it’s very good to see. It’s looking great with the Brits on the leaderboard just now.” Céline Boutier, another on the Solheim chase, boosted her case with a 66 for a seven-under aggregate. Lydia Ko, once the golden child of women’s golf, endured a disastrous time after adding an 80 to Thursday’s 76, but stood for 20 minutes signing autographs and chatting to children rather than stomping off stage left. Maybe the golfing gods will look kindly upon her again soon.