HS2 has long been a masterpiece of fake news, courtesy of the British state. Since at least 2015, no one privy to its blossoming extravagance has believed for one moment in its “budget” of £56bn. The National Audit Office and the Treasury did not believe it; commons committees did not believe it; thinktanks did not believe it. When I reported in June 2016 that Treasury advisers were already citing more than £70bn, I was accused by HS2’s publicists of lying. Last month the transport minister Nusrat Ghani told the Commons £56bn was still the budget – when the Department for Transport knew it would come in short. Parliament was misled. Today yet more revelations from the BBC illustrate the scale of four years of mendacity. The project has been the subject of alarming documents and warning letters galore – the fiction sustained only by having no new budget, so £56bn could qualify as “the only budget”. Now the serious question is not over HS2’s cost or value for money, but whether Boris Johnson has the guts to kill it. Johnson, a past opponent of the project, has ordered a review starting this week. But though it includes other opponents, its chairman is a past HS2 head, Douglas Oakervee. This looks a recipe for yet more fudge. Candidates for fudge include halting the track at Birmingham – now regarded as near inevitable – and/or bringing it south only to Acton, to avoid the cost of crashing through west London to Euston. Or the project could be started only north from Birmingham to Manchester and Leeds, though there are many saner ways of boosting connectivity northwards. More plausibly, HS2 could be frozen indefinitely, and northern cities asked what they would do with the money instead. So far, the chief champions of the line have been its happy contractors and northern city leaders defying all evidence that these railways always benefit the richer end of their route – that is London. Manchester’s gullible mayor, Andy Burnham, and his “northern powerhouse” remain dazzled by the project, careless of the starvation it will bring to less glamorous projects in the north. In truth, HS2 was always old-fashioned, emanating from the “big train” lobby of Jim Steer and Andrew Adonis, and thus over-engineered to handle power-guzzling high speeds. HS2’s chief utility would be to ease the toil of commuters into London, albeit along one of the less congested routes. It only survived as a vanity project of George Osborne thanks to two spineless transport secretaries, Patrick McLoughlin and Philip Hammond. Johnson can be the champion of prudent public finance and common sense The politics of cancellation may seem more vexed. Taxpayers have been defrauded of billions of pounds through fake promises and claims. There should be an early inquiry into this. Johnson at least opposed HS2 and can plead consistency. He could now promise a diversion of billions to new infrastructure in the north, a vote of post-Brexit confidence in Lancashire and Yorkshire. Railways in these regions are appalling. More to the point for Johnson, HS2 offers a high-speed opportunity for this most waffling of politicians to grasp a tough decision and take it. As with power stations, airport runways, jet fighters and “garden cities”, central government’s handling of big schemes has been whimsical and deplorable. Someone, some day, must put HS2 out of its misery. Johnson can be the champion of prudent public finance and common sense. He can display optimism in the northern economy and its hard-pressed travellers. He can return sanity to Euston and a large slice of Birmingham to lucrative urban renewal. But he must get on with it. The only case for an HS2 review is ominous, as cover for further retreat. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist