Our baby’s nursery contains everything that you would expect to see, plus a small box that contains his ashes. Next to it are the first clothes he wore, some other items from hospital and a mound of cards that we received when he died. We had many cards. We had cards with no words, just a name. We had cards with many words and a name. We had one card where a friend wrote: “I don’t know what to write, but I know that if you were writing this for me, you would write something very wise.” There are no words, they say, for stillbirth – but it turned out there are many. During my pregnancy, I was full of confidence, optimism and a sense that all would be well. I was fully prepared, well-read, baby-mooned, prewashed. We named our son Reuben. Then we lost him for no known cause. It was Father’s Day when our baby’s heart stopped beating. The first words were: “I’m sorry.” The sonographer quietly left the room, as did each medic, one at a time. In the months that followed, verbal and written words directed our navigation of death: words between ourselves; words from others; words from the world as it continued to turn. “Don’t look for answers – you will only find questions,” wrote a friend who had known stillbirth for 19 years since losing his daughter, Sofka. “There was no prior warning, no cause for concern… Nothing prepares you for what happens in those moments when everything changes,” he wrote, echoing our own thoughts. On the back of an image of Francesca Woodman’s Self-Portrait Talking To Vince, a colleague wrote: “I often wonder what Francesca Woodman is saying in this photograph… it seemed appropriate, as I cannot find the right words to console you.” “I cannot imagine a pain deeper than losing a child,” one card read. “Thank you for your honesty,” I thought to myself as I sat next to an empty moses basket in the silence of our lounge. Friends who would have visited to meet our baby sent letters instead. “It’s 9pm and I’m sitting outside in the garden. It’s so peaceful and still: all I can hear is next door preparing their tea, a few birds twittering and distant church bells on the breeze. I’m thinking of you and your little boy.” He was with us all, after all, just not as we had planned. On the day of his funeral, a single poppy flowered in our garden. He was there A friend kindly texted to ask about the caesarean: “Is your scar healing OK?” I had very little recollection with which to respond. You could have dealt me 10 caesareans that week and the cumulative pain would not have compared to the distress in my heart. My body lay scarred, yes, but it healed itself as I fought the trauma mentally. I often felt him moving inside my womb. I avoided making loud noises, so as not to startle him, as I had done before he died. I wanted to feed him – my breasts were full of milk and excruciatingly painful. I looked for him everywhere – desperate for comfort. I drew the stars from our bedroom window. I studied the freckles on my chest, hoping for a map of my future. On the day of his funeral, a single poppy flowered in our garden. He was there. In the physical presence of others, the pressure to find the right words was challenging. Often silent tears took the place of words, but no one suggested we do anything other than what we felt was right to do – we appreciated that. Some hugged us, some listened to us, some cried with us, some sat with us. Everyone waited patiently until we were ready to see them – sometimes several cancellations later. This was incredibly helpful, for it was not possible to rescue us. We sank or swam, but we had to do it on our own. I wrote many words to myself, some of which were also to Reuben. “I have always loved to write letters. I never imagined I would be writing to you without you here, so soon. I’d have put notes in your lunchbox at school and in your bag when you went away on trips. When you passed your driving test, I’d have left you a note on the dashboard to remind you to be careful. But now you are gone, so I will write to you wherever you are – maybe in the sky somewhere, or in the earth, or just here, by our side.” Reuben was not the only baby who died that week. My new friend Caroline’s daughter, Bethany, was stillborn, too. We met through the online forum of the charity Sands, which supports those affected by stillbirth and neonatal death. Close to 100,000 words rest between us now, via email. We write often, but also stay in touch via WhatsApp and meet in person. “We are not alone,” we say to each other, “wrestling with motherhood, as it turned out to be.” Our neighbours, writing from the experience of the stillbirth of two of their four children, suggested we shut the world out until we were ready to join in again. It was sound advice, for around every corner sat some form of death-related challenge. First, there was the doctor. “You’d like to make your six-week postnatal appointment? Ooo, how old is baby now?” My soul fell out of my mouth and I told her he had died. Second, there was the dentist. “Would you mind just filling out this form, including the date that your baby was born.” The form didn’t ask me when my baby had died. Third, there was the pharmacy. “I saw that you read the disclaimer, but could I check you are not pregnant?” he said, looking cautiously at my empty, raised womb. I felt worse for him than for me, for the sincere regret I saw in his eyes as I cried uncontrollably at his till. He apologised. I forgave him. The word-focused algorithms of the internet that dictated the advertising on my social media feeds seemed to be interested only in a living baby. My earlier search terms such as “What do you need in your hospital bag?” and “Skin-to-skin after birth” fed me a stream of products for our pending birth, but when I began to search “Why did my baby die?” nothing changed. Months of baby clothes, equipment and weaning tips followed. No amount of clicking “This isn’t relevant to me” stemmed the flow. “You will be for ever changed by this,” wrote one friend, followed by tears over our wedding photos – a time free from pain. “You will find a new normal,” she continued, followed by tears at the thought of Christmas in 20 years’ time. Some of the hardest words I have faced have been those that were absent. We were warned in hospital that this may happen I met a lady in the park one day as our dogs chatted incessantly. She said: “I’m off work for six weeks because I broke my wrist.” I replied: “I’m off work, too. I’m on maternity leave, actually, but our baby died, so here I am, walking.” I was not afraid to tell her the truth. *** Some of the hardest words I have faced have been those that were absent. We were warned in hospital that this may happen on occasion. To make eye contact with someone you know relatively well, who knows what happened and last saw you heavily pregnant – to then see them look to the floor and proceed to walk past you or cross over the road – is hard: it just adds to the depth of loneliness and isolation you already feel. Not everyone knows what to say, or they may feel their presence in your space is insignificant relative to your trauma – but they are wrong. Their presence is essential within my space. Everyone’s is. Please find some words for me. Simply: “Hello – how are you?” meant fully, or: “I’m sorry about what happened,” even if weeks, months or years have passed since you saw me. Before we knew stillbirth, we too had no words for it. We knew it was possible. It had happened to people we knew. We were afraid of it. How could we find the right words? But as we took the weight of our baby into our arms, his beauty overwhelmed us and the fear that we felt fell silent. They say there are no words for stillbirth, because your baby has died, but there are many words for stillbirth, because your baby was here. We will always speak of Reuben. We will always write his name. He will always be ours, but he will always be gone. For further information about baby loss, visit sands.org.uk. • If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).