Ole Gunnar Solskjær said he was “lost for words” regarding the racial abuse directed at Marcus Rashford on Twitter after the Manchester United forward missed a 70th-minute penalty. This was the second spot-kick United had spurned in five days after Paul Pogba had one saved at Wolves on Monday, for which he was also targeted in a similar manner on the social media platform. Rashford failed to convert with the score 1-0 to the visitors. Though United did equalise, a late Patrick van Aanholt strike grabbed Crystal Palace a first league win at Old Trafford since 1989. Solskjær said of the abuse his No 10 received: “It’s the same as we spoke about before the weekend. It’s unheard of, it needs to stop and I’m just lost for the words. If it keeps going, keep having all these campaigns, ‘no to racism’ and they keep hiding behind fake IDs … and it’s crazy we talk about this in 2019.” United dominated throughout but, as at Molineux, lacked a killer touch in front of goal. At half-time they trailed to a Jordan Ayew goal yet, when Daniel James curled home in the 89th minute, Solskjær’s men seemed to have earned a draw. But Pogba then ceded possession and Palace drove upfield, setting up Van Aanholt to beat David de Gea from close range in added time. Here the price was paid for United’s laxity, though they might have had at least one more penalty when Anthony Martial appeared to be brought down by Martin Kelly in the second half and Rashford, in a separate incident, was also felled inside the area. “I think we were unlucky with Martial’s clear and obvious penalty. It’s a nailed-on one and, when the ref sees the game, he’ll know he’s not had his best,” Solskjær said of Paul Tierney. “It’s a nailed-on pen, he won’t slip if he doesn’t have a 100-kilo centre-back on his shoulders. “I think [regarding] VAR – they let the ref decision be a subjective one [yet] it’s a clear and obvious penalty with Anthony and for Marcus.” The manager also believed Gary Cahill should have been sent off when Martial, this time just outside the penalty area, was fouled by the Palace debutant as the interval neared. Instead the defender was given a yellow card. Solskjær said: “I don’t want to go on about referee decisions [but] clear through, one on one, stopping a goal-scoring opportunity, no doubt either.” As at Wolves James was booked when beating a player despite contact seeming to have been made. Again, the Norwegian was unhappy. “He runs and gets pulled down a little bit and I’m 100% sure there’s contact between Daniel and the defender,” the Norwegian said. “Now he’s got two yellow cards and he’s been unlucky as both yellows are undeserved. “I raise it here because he’s not that type of player. He keeps running and there’s contact now and in the Wolves game. He gets up and he runs and sometimes he gets kicked and with that pace [will go down].” For Roy Hodgson there was only enjoyment at being the first Palace manager in the Premier League era to mastermind victory at United. “I was unaware of that nugget,” he said. “We showed a lot of ability in desire, concentration and performance. We are very happy with our victory. It was hard work. The players showed incredible concentration. I was hoping the ball would break on the counter. It was a long, hot afternoon. We always try to go for a winner.” “I thought it was the right [team who got the] victory. I think the players worked so hard for us. They got the equaliser but then we fought back. They had a lot of the ball but we knew that was going to be the case. We made sure that they found it difficult to find the passes they wanted to find. It was great to come back.” Palace’s goals were their first of the season and they had gone into the game with only one point from their two matches. Hodgson added: “If you judge games on possession or corners then people would say we did not deserve it but we are Crystal Palace and, looking at our team and our performance, of course we deserved to win.”