I have seen wheelchair user fans at below pitch level at Stamford Bridge (Let disabled fans enjoy the camaraderie of football too, 6 August). Senior executives of football clubs should visit Trent Bridge cricket ground. On the middle tier of the Radcliffe Road stand are eight wheelchair bays with a chair for a carer. A lift dedicated to disabled users takes them to the bays. I understand there are more wheelchair bays in the New Stand. It can be done.Philip WardleLondon • In 1975 my father, Ron Foyle, retired to Hereford and began walking endangered footpaths (Ramble on, G2, 7 August). He wrote to the local paper inviting people to join him. The result was a pensioners’ rambling club, the Amblers, that met weekly in a pub car park for a ramble that took them back to the pub for lunch.Rosa DavisStroud, Gloucestershire • Christine Crossley (Letters, 7 August) refers to “the fact that …all of America’s mass shooters … are male”. While males are hugely overrepresented among the 114 incidents listed in Mother Jones’ database of mass shootings in the US since 1982, four of the killers are in fact female.Peter McKennaLiverpool So, losing Interrail travel within the country “will have little effect on UK travellers” (UK train operators to pull out of Interrail, 7 August). A return journey to London, probably at peak hours in order to get as much travel done in a day as possible, is a huge part of the current benefit of an Interrail pass, and having to fork out separately for it could almost double the total cost for travellers from Scotland or Cornwall. Britain has some of the most expensive trains in Europe, after all.Kasper LurcockMalmö, Sweden • The top baked potato recipe (Jacket required, G2, 6 August) is butter, Marmite and grated cheddar. Another favourite of ours is butter, cherry tomatoes and balsamic vinegar.Colin EvansBristol • On the railway, spad stands for, “signal passed at danger” (All the PM’s spads, 6 August).Dave CrookBirmingham • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition