My first memory of you is my three siblings and I cramming into your tiny rear seat, which I am certain was never made for passengers – let alone four children with school bags. You are a family legacy, a cherished conversation starter, a memorabilia of my father’s time in England. He got you while he was studying in London in the 1970s. I remember seeing a picture of you and my dad in his bell-bottoms and a butterfly-collar shirt, with a proud smile on his face. You were yellow back then. After graduating from college, he brought you home to Thailand. He came by plane, you on a boat trip that lasted months. You were repainted white, which complemented the red leather interior – my favourite thing about you. You’ve got a long front nose, heavy curved chrome trims and a front grille that looks almost like an egg crate. You were one of the few sports models Volvo built, and you were a television star, driven by Roger Moore in The Saint – a fact my dad never failed to mention. You were a beauty – and an alien object in our small town. I’ve lost count of the number of times passersby excitedly waved at us, or the number of tourists with an incredulous look on their faces at the sight of a Swedish-made car on the streets of Chiang Mai. The number of times people took pictures of you parked on the street, or that my school friends yelled, “Your Batman car is here!” when you came to pick me up. I will also never forget the countless times you broke down: that time when my brother had to stop in the middle of Bangkok traffic during rush hour; that time when your wheel came off and spun into a football field while my mum was driving. She spent the entire evening with a football team looking for the wheel. One time, I tried to drive you and I couldn’t even manage to get you out of the gate. As chance would have it, I now live in Sweden. The sight of a P1800 at vintage car rallies never fails to bring back memories. We adore you. But, as my dad is too old to maintain you, he decided to pass you on. You’re now sitting in the garage waiting to be picked up by your new owner. A piece of family history goes with you. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.