9pm, Channel 5 Scurrilous rumour or right royal humdinger? Will their highnesses Cambridge and Sussex be putting up their dukes any time soon? This doc analyses how William and Harry’s relationship has altered over the years, from the bond formed by their mother’s death to meeting Kate and Meghan. Mike Bradley 5pm, Channel 5 Episode focusing on the Battle of Britain, the pressure on Germany to take England quickly (to get on with conquering Russia) and the US entry into the war. “Your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign wars,” President Roosevelt had promised voters during his 1940 re-election campaign. Oops. Ali Catterall 5.40pm, BBC One It does indeed take a daring person to enter Nick Knowles’s quiz pods with a teammate they’ve only just met, but there is £50,000 at stake so it’s got to be worth a gamble. Knowles is an affable host, milking the small talk until it’s time to dim the lights and prod the duos to list stuff while under intense pressure. Hannah Verdier 9pm, BBC Four If you thought cocksure terrorist Rami was a loose cannon after last week’s histrionics in Jesper Bernt’s high-octane Danish hostage drama, just wait until you see what he’s got in store in a double bill that ratchets up the tension to new heights. Six of the hostages are dead along with one terrorist; June al-Baqee and Philip Nørgaard are being held prisoner in a freezer; and chief hijacker Yusuf scents insubordination in the ranks. On land, the counter-terrorism unit obtains key information that might just defuse this timebomb of a drama. MB 9pm, Sky Arts The best of a rash of 50th-anniversary documentaries, Todd Austin’s film looks past the logistics of 1969’s Woodstock music and art fair to communicate the free spirit of the festival through a mix of superb footage. Plus interviews with attendees such as The Wire’s Clarke Peters. MB 11pm, Quest Red Back in 1997, Chris Tapp was jailed for life for his part in the murder of an Idaho woman, Angie Dodge. But, as even Dodge’s family later believed, was Tapp innocent? This by-the-numbers doc – aired here as a double bill – at least centres on Dodge’s family in its search for answers. Hannah J Davies Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children, 9pm, Channel 4 Sensitive Jake (Asa Butterfield) heads to Wales to investigate the gothic heap of a school for special children that grandad Abe (Terence Stamp) once attended. It’s run by Eva Green’s pipe-smoking Miss P, and menaced by Samuel L Jackson’s eyeball-eating Barron, in Tim Burton’s stylish and funny fantasy. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: England v Australia, 10am, Sky Sports The Ashes Day four of the second Ashes Test. International Rugby Union: Wales v England, 1.30pm, Channel 4 The hosts seek revenge for last week’s Twickenham defeat. Premier League Football: Manchester City v Spurs, 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event Arsenal v Burnley airs at 12noon on BT Sport 1.