Too much rain, too much sun, too much rain again and everything flops. Lank growth is not good at standing upright – petals turn into dirty hankies and everything rots. This results in all sorts of leaning on neighbours or just plain flouncing on the floor, which in turn makes for a perfect hiding place for slugs. The truth is, once something has flopped, the best option is often some careful pruning and accepting that there is little else to be done. Retroactive staking rarely works; it looks forced and too much string is involved. Sometimes you can belt a plant together rather than stake it – tying string around its middle to hold it in – but often cutting back is the best option. Overcrowded or sprawling plants carefully nipped in here and there, so that any pruning marks aren’t so noticeable, may mean the loss of some flowers, but it will restore order and result in new growth. Likewise, having the patience to go through and remove any dead, dying or slugged leaves will do wonders for a tired-looking garden. If you do stake late in the game, try to use material that will blend in. Rusted steel rebar or iron stakes will disappear into the background a hell of a lot more successfully than brand new bamboo canes that stand out a mile. If you can get hold of steel rebar, you can fairly easily bend it into loops – a minimum of, say, 45cm wide and 70mm high. These rust quickly but will last a lifetime, and are invaluable for picking up flopping plants in both the veg and flower garden. Look for them in skips, or go to a builder’s merchant and ask for them to be cut in 1.5m-long lengths; then, holding each end, bend them round a big pot to create the loop. Deadheading also works wonders in sprucing up the garden. Plants that benefit from it, to encourage further blooms, include roses – though not those with good hips for autumn – bedding plants, sweet peas, pelargoniums, lavateras, knautia buddleias, cosmos, lavender, heucheras, dahlias, lupins, delphiniums and hydrangeas. Delphiniums, if you cut them back hard now to just the basal foliage, will sometimes rebloom in September. Lady’s mantle (Alchemilla mollis), astrantias, oriental poppies (such as Patty’s Plum), sweet cicely (Myrrhis odorata) and Brunnera can be sheared right back to ground level if the foliage is looking tired and the flowers are long gone. Give them a good water and perhaps a little compost as mulch, and they will reflush with fresh foliage – and, with luck, perhaps a smattering of flowers.