The governor of Puerto Rico, Ricardo Rosselló, resigned on Friday and swore in a veteran politician as his replacement. But at his first news conference as governor, Pedro Pierluisi indicated his term as governor might be short-lived because the Puerto Rico senate still must approve his appointment. “If I am not ratified then the second in line, the secretary of justice of Puerto Rico, will take over the governorship,” Pierluisi told reporters. Rosselló announced his resignation following weeks of mass demonstrations on the island in the wake of a leaked text message scandal involving the governor and 11 members of his inner circle. The messages contained a slew of homophobic and misogynistic language directed at political rivals and cultural figures. They also contained a joke about dead bodies after Hurricane Maria, which tore through the island in September 2017 and killed thousands of island residents. Initially, there was jubilation over the success of the popular movement to force Rosselló out of office. But on Friday, Puerto Ricans bemoaned the succession process and Pierluisi’s ties to a federal control board that has promoted cutbacks on the island. “People are disgusted with the government in general, not just Ricardo Rosselló, everyone,” said Janeline Avila, 24, who recently received her degree in biotechnology. Pierluisi served as Puerto Rico’s resident commissioner in Washington between 2009 and 2017 and before that was the US territory’s justice secretary. He is a member of Rosselló’s pro-statehood New Progressive party (PNP) and served as justice secretary under the administration of Pedro Rosselló, the current governor’s father. Several legislators have accused Pierluisi of a conflict of interest because he worked for a law firm that represents the federal control board overseeing the restructuring of more than $70bn in public debt after Puerto Rico declared a form of bankruptcy. The body has repeatedly clashed with local officials over demands for austerity measures. Pierluisi, whose brother-in-law is the board’s chairman, tried to dispel those concerns earlier this week. “Who better than me to advocate for our people before the board? Who better than me to facilitate the process that will force the board to leave? That is what we all want,” he said. Pierluisi told lawmakers he was against several austerity measures demanded by the board, including laying off public employees and eliminating a Christmas bonus. He said he supported public-private partnerships and the privatization of the island’s public power company. “The people want a change, and I don’t blame them,” he said. In addition to concerns over Pierluisi’s past, Puerto Ricans appeared confused and exhausted by the succession process. Rosselló has argued that Pierluisi doesn’t need confirmation from both the house and the senate because he was named secretary of state last week. But several lawmakers and experts argued that Pierluisi did need senate confirmation. On Friday, Pierluisi gave in to that demand. A key obstacle for Pierluisi remains the senate president, Thomas Rivera Schatz, who has said he would not vote for Rosselló’s nominee and wants to run for governor himself next year. Several legislators have said they prefer Rivera Schatz over Pierluisi, but the senate leader is a powerful figure deeply associated with Puerto Rico’s political and business elite, and his elevation to the governorship could re-ignite popular outrage. On Friday, hundreds of protesters marched to the governor’s residence, the Fortaleza, banging pots and drums and singing the national anthem. Bryan Carhu Castro Vega, a 21-year-old university student, was one of hundreds of protesters who had marched to the governor’s residence, the Fortaleza, on Friday/ “It’s obvious that the constitutional setup that we have isn’t working for the people,” he said. “None of the options is one the people chose or want or deserve.” Rosa Cifrian, a 47-year-old professor of nursing, said Pierluisi would not be a good governor “for the people.” “He’ll keep promoting policies of austerity, cutbacks, everything that the board says,” she said.