The England and Wales Cricket Board is reviewing its transgender policy before its £20m semi-professional women’s competition starts next year. Under ECB rules the eligibility of players in women’s domestic cricket is determined by a player’s own self-identified gender, with no medical requirement for those who have transitioned from male to female to lower their testosterone levels. However, Claire Connor, the managing director of women’s cricket, hinted that the policy could be tweaked at the elite level so that any trans woman playing in the ECB’s new eight-team competition would have to bring her testosterone down in line with International Olympic Committee guidelines. “The ECB’s currently isn’t a medically driven policy. It’s a more socially inclusive policy and we will be reviewing that over the coming months,” said Connor, who hinted one option could be to mirror Cricket Australia’s transgender policy which has different rules for elite and grassroots players. Under that policy, announced last week, Australian cricket’s governing body allows male-to-female players to compete in the female-elite category as long as their testosterone levels have been below 10 nanomoles a litre for at least a year – in line with the IOC guidelines – while permitting cricketers at the community level to self-identify their gender. “We are reviewing our policy,” said Connor. “Cricket Australia released its last week and it is pretty much in line with the International Cricket Council’s policy, which is a medically driven policy. Cricket Australia has a specific policy for elite cricketers and a different policy for community cricketers. At the moment we don’t and I think we will be looking at that.” An ECB spokesperson confirmed that, as things stand, only those selected for England had to abide by ICC rules, which state all women players must have testosterone levels lower than 10nmol/L. “ECB is committed to the principles of diversity and inclusion in cricket,” the spokesperson said. “Across recreational and domestic cricket managed by ECB, the eligibility of players is based on one’s own self-identified gender, with no medical requirement.“The eligibility of players to represent their country at international level is determined by ICC rules; the question pertaining to transgender people’s eligibility is covered by the 2018 ICC Player Eligibility Regulations. “Upon meeting the requirements of the 2018 ICC player eligibility regulations transgender women would be eligible to represent their country at international level.”