It probably seems daft to suggest Jonathan Creek could actually reach a point of no return, given that it was always preposterous. In the first episode, a bound, gagged and blindfolded woman shot someone by pulling the trigger with her toe. Later stories included an alarm clock rigged to electrocute a snoozing judge, a poisoned envelope that made a scientist hallucinate and impale himself on a sword, and a fax that had its meaning fatally altered when a fly landed on it and was mistaken for a comma. So far, so batshit, but that’s what made the detective series such fun when it first aired in 1997, with its surreal twist on Arthur Conan Doyle’s old chestnut that “once you eliminate the possible, whatever remains, no matter how improbable, must be the truth”. Creek (Alan Davies), a sardonic oddball who devised illusions for a sleazy stage magician, became a reluctant foil to boisterous crime journalist Maddy (Caroline Quentin). She would present him with impossible mysteries that seemed as if they could only be explained by sorcery or supernatural forces, and he’d tease out the truth with his uniquely lateral thinking, as the two of them bickered and bantered along the way. The cases were brilliantly bonkers, but Creek and Maddy’s odd-couple chemistry was equally crucial, which is why the show dipped when Quentin left and was replaced by new partners in crime-solving (first Julia Sawalha, then Sheridan Smith). Yet those more uneven episodes feel like masterpieces compared to the bilge served up after its revival in 2013. Creek was no longer the geek in a duffel coat who lived in a windmill filled with strange magic tricks, but a besuited businessman who worked in an office. He lived in a dull country village and had run-ins with vicars and local busybodies about parish newsletters, while his wife, Polly, thought his lifelong passion was childish nonsense. Creek choosing the life more ordinary made as much sense as Willy Wonka becoming a lettings agent, or the Great Gatsby starting a pyramid scheme. He muttered something about needing to grow up and becoming disillusioned with people’s muted reactions when he solved their cases, but there was never a truly convincing reason for his drastic personality change: the show could explain how a dead man climbed a flight of cellar stairs after being shot in the head, or a killer in a skeleton costume escaped from a locked garage, but not why its leading man would jack in his old life for a job in advertising. And if Creek had grown tired, the show looked equally old hat in a slick, post-Sherlock world. The plots were laboured and the humour dated, while the mechanics and motivations behind each mystery became so nonsensical that you stopped asking how they pulled it off and instead wondered why they went to these ludicrous lengths for such laughably flimsy reasons. “A bit of a reboot was required,” insisted Polly when talking about her husband’s life makeover, but messing with the formula meant the magic was gone for good.