Behind Travis Alabanza is a container full of cardboard boxes, each lined with pink tape. In front of them, a box to put a burger in. “Do you feel boxed in?” they ask. By the end of this humane and heart-rending show, they will have forced their way through the roof of the container – literally thinking outside the box. “To be unregulated is to be dangerous,” they say. The impetus for the show, and the reason they have called an audience member on stage to help them make a burger, was an incident in 2016 when an unknown assailant threw a burger at them in a transphobic attack. Like Lydia Higginson in Dressed, who turned to making her own wardrobe in response to being sexually assaulted, Alabanza tries to reconcile themselves with this random (yet commonplace) act of violence, by taking control of the offending weapon. Like claiming a term of abuse and making it a badge of pride, there could, perhaps, be something empowering about learning the thickness of the bap, the spiciness of the meat and the size of the container. They think it’s worth a try if only to dispel the memory of a meaningless attack. Much of this is very funny. Although fragile, Alabanza is sassy and witty, feeding off the audience like a seasoned cabaret star and riding the unpredictability of the interactive format. They generate roars of laughter, but the angry and intelligent script is also underscored with the real pain of exclusion, of being boxed in, of being trapped in a world where sexual and racial violence is prevalent and, too often, tolerated. For all the fun and games of early morning drinks and hamfisted onion chopping, there is little to be gained from mastering the burger. The threat of being pointed at, heckled and assaulted remains. So they go from fast-food poetry to Crackerjack cookery and on to great tirades of confrontational fury, pleading for a society in which marginalised people don’t have to go on stage to let their voices be heard and where passersby do not simply pass by when someone’s human dignity is denied. • At Traverse, Edinburgh, until 25 August. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews