Lucy Vine Fri 30 Aug 2019 10.06 BST


Last modified on Sat 31 Aug 2019 21.20 BST At the risk of alienating any weather-grumps out there, I’m going to start by saying this in caps: GOD I LOVE SUMMER. I love the sun and the paddling pools and the noise from literally everyone in the world standing outside my local pub. I love people at work turning up in shorts and moaning happily about back sweat. I love constantly losing my sunglasses and looking blank when my mum tells me the names of the blooming flowers in my garden. Summer is clearly the very best of seasons. Full of joyful socialising and people actually smiling at each other. What I don’t love, however, is this thing we all seem to do whenever the end of August arrives – that oddly British tradition where we all look at each other and go: “Well then, that’s summer done for another year.” The reason this irritates me is simple: because it’s not true! The season isn’t over just because August is over. In fact – to paraphrase Frank Sinatra – the best month is yet to come. September should always, categorically, be included when we think of our summer months. September is, almost without exception, lovely. It brings its own kind of magic to the season, with glorious sunshine, but also red-golden falling leaves and long, bright, breezy days. You can still sit outside, still go barefoot in flip-flops, still enjoy a tasty early evening Grey Goose vodka cocktail. My favourite drink for those sunny September weekends was recommended to me by a bartender last year. It’s the Grey Goose le Grand Fizz – a delightful, heady mix of Grey Goose vodka, St-Germain elderflower liqueur, fresh lime and soda water, with ice. It’s everything September-y in a glass; cool, refreshing, delicious joy. And there is nothing more perfect than sitting on a roof terrace somewhere with friends, the sound of clinking ice around you. I will admit, sometimes I get accused by loved ones of being cynical. A determined pessimist, one might say. But not in September. There is something about this month that draws out the optimist in me. Something new and exciting in the air that creeps in – I am happier, more inspired, and I see it in others around me, too. People are wider-eyed, refreshed, ready to take on new projects and plan new adventures. It’s the time of year to begin again, to achieve, to try. It’s an opportunity to elevate every occasion. September is when I plan my trips, it’s when I arrange to see friends, it’s when I date. September energises me. I feel magnetic, sociable and playful in September, I feel brave and bold. It makes me restless in a good way; twitchy for parties and spontaneous fun. September is a dreamy month, as well, if you prefer cosy evenings in. You’re no longer under pressure to get outside for the sake of making the most of the sun. Cardigans can make a comeback from that distant, forgotten shelf in your wardrobe. The new season of telly begins, and with it all the 60-minute dramas starring Richard Madden you can handle. Plus, after months of picking at smoothies and salads, you can eat proper meals again. Pasta! Roast dinners! Potatoes! And there’s nothing like an after-dinner cocktail in your garden of an early evening to top off your day. My favourite post-dinner drink is the Grey Goose Espresso Martini; with Grey Goose vodka, a single original finest quality espresso, coffee liqueur and a pinch of salted dark chocolate powder to garnish. And so, the campaign starts here; join me in giving September the credit it deserves. It’s time to stop treating the ninth month like summer’s ugly stepchild. It’s time to stop drawing the blinds down on the season before we should. It’s time to embrace our inner optimist and this wonderful, joyful, neverending summer. Check out some more cocktail recipes at greygoose.com #LiveVictoriously