The sting in this game’s tail left Aston Villa numb. A contest their depleted number appeared to have surrendered sparked back into life deep into stoppage time, with Jack Grealish scuttling away, via a touch from Wilfried Zaha, to tear into the penalty area at a backtracking Gary Cahill. The visitors’ captain was stumbling but still shifted the ball to his right as he fell beyond the crumpling defender, his eyes darting to Henri Lansbury at his side as the substitute converted a low shot into the far corner. Villa’s delight would be choked almost immediately. Kevin Friend, subsequently described as “card happy” by a simmering Dean Smith after booking four visiting players in the first half and sending off Trézéguet for a second offence, had blown his whistle for simulation as the substitute connected with his effort. Grealish never appealed for a penalty, for all that two of his teammates did call for the award, but the perceived dive still provoked another flash of yellow and a sense of outrage among players and travelling fans alike. Their protests would extend well after the final whistle, with ugly clashes with stewards and police at the front of the Arthur Wait stand. “He got a nudge from Zaha in the back and, as he offloads it, Cahill comes into the tackle as well,” said Smith. “Simulation? No chance. Someone just put to me that his reputation may precede him. Well, he was the most fouled played in the Championship last season for a reason. He may be in this league as well. “If you’re Jack Grealish, you’d be raging. He’s made a great run, laid it off for Henri Lansbury to score, and now he’s had his integrity questioned not only by the officials here, but in Stockley Park as well. It was a perfectly good goal for me.” The Premier League later confirmed the VAR, Andrew Madley, has reviewed the “potential penalty situation”, but had been unable to check the “goal” “because the whistle went before the ball went into the net”. It was no consolation for Villa that an equaliser would have been out of context in a one-sided game. A bright start aside, Smith said their display had lacked intensity until that frantic finale and once their number had been depleted they had rather clung to the contest until prised apart by a player they once counted their own. Jordan Ayew remains an unlikely hero. The Ghanaian had spent 18 months at Villa, with whom he was relegated back in 2016, and had cost £2.5m when secured from Swansea over the summer having spent last season on loan in these parts. Yet, having scored at Old Trafford the previous weekend, he has already scored twice as many league goals this season as last to ensure Crystal Palace, a team who had failed to win a home game until December last season, have broken their duck at the second attempt this time. His winner summed up his industrious style. Villa, further blunted in Trézéguet’s absence, had actually been mustering a rare attack which broke down as Vicente Guaita collected. The goalkeeper’s throw was collected by Luka Milivojević and the ball ushered on down the flank by Jeffrey Schlupp for the Ghanaian to collect. He benefited from some fortune to retain possession as he twisted back inside and between Tyrone Mings and Grealish, but the finish was converted accurately across Tom Heaton and into the far corner. Roy Hodgson, frustrated at his side’s familiar profligacy, had considered introducing Christian Benteke for Ayew moments before the goal. “The amount of work Jordan puts in for us, not just attacking but defending too... when he puts icing on that cake by scoring last week and then this, then it’s happy days,” said the Palace manager. “They’re happy days he deserves. He didn’t get as many opportunities as he would have liked last year and found himself on the bench quite often but never once did he stop working hard in training. For players like that, when their moment arrives, you feel really happy for them.”