It should be the start of the holiday but for too many travellers the airport marks the start of a nightmare. The recent heatwave across Europe brought thunderstorms which left thousands stranded in UK airports having to endure cancellations and delays with many sleeping on the floor as hotels ran out of space. And the coming weeks could see a series of further disruptions with the possibility of strikes looming. This week, the results of a ballot of members of Ryanair’s pilot union will emerge after a vote on strike action in a dispute over working conditions. Meanwhile, possible strikes by British Airways pilots could also cause disruption after the airline lost a second legal attempt to block industrial action last week. So what consumer rights do travellers need to be aware of? European Union law kicks in for passengers on flights which originate in the EU or arrive there and are operated by an EU airline. The next question is how long was the delay. If more than two hours for short-haul (less than 1,500km), three hours for a medium-haul (1,500-3,500km) and more than four hours for long-haul (over 3,500km), then passengers are entitled to food, drink and access to communications such as a phone, as well as accommodation if the delay is overnight. If it is for more than five hours, passengers are entitled to a refund if they don’t want to travel any more. Compensation may be due if the fault was the airline’s. “For instance, you can probably claim if the delay was caused by poor aircraft maintenance or flight crew being unavailable,” says the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). “However, delays caused by things like extreme weather, air traffic control or airport employee strikes, situations where the entire airport was closed or other ‘extraordinary circumstances’ are not eligible for compensation.” Levels of compensation are again dictated by distance and time and range from €250 for a three-hour delay on a short-haul flight to €600 for delays of more than four hours on a long-haul journey. If a flight is cancelled, passengers can’t be left stranded. Under EU laws, they can get their money back for the parts of the ticket which have not been used, such as a leg of a return ticket. If they still want to fly, then the airline is obliged to find another flight, whether it be as soon as possible or at a later date. If flights are extremely heavily booked, travellers may find that the next flight available is several days away. Compensation may be available if less than 14 days notice of the cancellation is given, but this again depends on the cause, with the “extraordinary circumstances” get-out a possibility. If compensation is available, it again depends on distance and time, going from €125 for a flight that arrives two hours later than an original short-haul flight was expected, to the €600 for a long-haul replacement flight that arrives four hours later than the original was expected. With the prospect of strikes looming, it is good practice for travellers to know where they stand if they face delays or have their flights cancelled. Airlines are not normally obliged to offer compensation as strikes are deemed extraordinary circumstances. This is not always the case, however. “Under EU rules, strikes may be considered as ‘extraordinary circumstances’, which means the airline does not have to pay compensation. To be exempted from paying compensation, the airline must prove that: A, there is a link between the extraordinary circumstances and the delay or the cancellation; and B, the delay or cancellation could not have been avoided, even if all reasonable measures had been taken,” according to the European Commission’s Europa.eu. If passengers are unhappy with the explanation, they should contact the CAA. Naomi Leach of Which? says that in the case of strikes by BA and Ryanair staff, there may be compensation due. “If delays or cancellations are a result of the airline’s own staff striking, passengers may be entitled to fixed compensation under EU law as this won’t usually be considered an extraordinary circumstance,” she adds. The first port of call when seeking redress for delays or cancellation should be the airline, not the travel insurer, which is unlikely to be of much help, according to Which? “It is worth checking what travel insurance you already have – many bank accounts, for example, may include holiday cover. But even if your travel insurance policy does offer compensation for a delay, in most cases this will only cover extra expenses such as food and drink at the airport,” says Leach. In the case of holidays having to be abandoned as a result of severe delays or cancellations at a busy time, such as during the calamitous drone incident at Gatwick last year, a decent travel insurance policy should cover the cost of travellers having to abandon their plans – including hotel and car hire cancellation at their destination. The devil is in the detail, however. Research from GoCompare.com shows that 90% of policies offer some cover for abandoning a holiday after an extended delay (typically 12 to 24 hours) with maximum payouts ranging from £250 to £12,500, with most bunched around £3,000 to £5,000. A number of sites, such as Martin Lewis’s MoneySavingExpert and Which?, have helpful tools and generic letters. You can claim from an airline direct free of charge but that, of course, has not stopped a mini industry of “claims management firms” charging heavy fees. Some pocket more than 40% of any payout, although they have no special powers to pursue claims.