Tez Ilyas’s new show has been described as – to quote Channel 4’s publicity – “TRULY anti-establishment”. I’ve seen the 36-year-old’s standup: it’s cheeky, it’s deceptively subversive, it loudly advertises his light-ent credentials. But “TRULY anti-establishment” feels like a stretch. And yet, TV satire is different from standup, and has a different establishment to be anti. “I’m a working-class northern British-Asian Muslim,” says Ilyas. “We’ve got other working-class northern people on the show. I don’t think you see a lot of that on our TVs, particularly in satire. “The people we’ve trusted to do that [in the past] are brilliant voices,” he says, of the Oxbridge/Radio 4 nexus that tends to define topical UK comedy. “But there is space for something different.” A police siren sounds loudly outside our cafe. “I must have said ‘northern’ too many times,” he deadpans. We meet a week before the first of three episodes of The Tez O’Clock Show is aired, and the comic cannot hide his excitement. He knows Britain has never quite nailed late-night TV satire, and he is undaunted. Of course, the budgets are smaller than those his American counterparts enjoy (“Trevor Noah is paid an eye-watering fee to not think about anything other than The Daily Show”). Is it the same for Tez? “Well, some of the digits are the same – but the zeroes are in all the wrong places.” He cites Noah’s Daily Show as an inspiration, alongside Hasan Minhaj’s Patriot Act and The Mash Report. “We’ll take elements of all those [and] sprinkle my comedic personality over it.” The show is made up of sketches, a “shisha cafe” where Ilyas and comic Sindhu Vee interview guests, and a Briefing Room – drawing on Ilyas’s previous life as a Home Office civil servant – where (northern, working-class) comics Adam Rowe and Sophie Willan offer up takes on the big political questions of the day. There are also “provocative topical monologues”, including a pro-Brexit tirade (even though Ilyas is a Remainer) and a rant against animals. That’s partly for provocation’s sake and also because – as with the accents, so with the ideas – he wants to reach out beyond the liberal Channel 4 bubble. “The people I most want to reach may not tune into this show – because I am the face of it, maybe. But I’m hoping they’ll see clips online and enjoy what we’re doing.” He believes in the power of funny to bridge political divides. “The Book of Mormon musical is so offensive to what I believe in – because Mormons and Muslims believe in the same God,” he says. “But when I saw that show, I could put all that aside because the funny trumps how offended I am. That’s what I’m aiming for.” Islam is important to Ilyas: his standup shows demystified British Islam for a wider audience; his Channel 4 sitcom pilot, Bounty, trod a similar line. In our interview, he talks as much about class as race – but it’s still a big deal that Channel 4’s new late-night satire is fronted by a British Pakistani. “When I was growing up, I had Lenny Henry, The Real McCoy, then Goodness Gracious Me. Then there was nothing for a long time.” It’s only recently – Ilyas credits Henry’s drive for more diversity on telly – that the floodgates have opened, with breakthroughs for Romesh Ranganathan, Nish Kumar, and the success of Guz Khan’s sitcom (co-starring Ilyas) Man Like Mobeen. “For the longest time, after 9/11 and after 7/7, people were talking about us. Now there’s the chance to see things from our perspective.” Until recently, you wouldn’t have bet on Ilyas leading the charge. He was a civil servant, working on the London Olympics, then in the modern slavery unit. He’d never been to a comedy club. Feeling lonely in London, he signed up to an evening standup course – “without which, there is 0% chance I would be doing what I’m doing. If you’d told me when I was 16 that this was the career I’d end up with, I’d have had you sectioned.” He went on to juggle the two careers for six years, only quitting politics in 2016, when “as compensation for my family, who thought I was mad, I left London to live back in Blackburn”. He lives there still, close to his parents who are just about on board with the new career. “My mum still worries what God will think about me standing onstage taking the mick out of people. But now that she’s seen that I’m making money, she’s coming round.” We’re not talking Trevor Noah sums yet – but if The Tez O’Clock Show makes it to a full series, who knows? “I’m not deluded,” he says. “I don’t think this is going to be the greatest show of all time in three episodes. But I hope people will look at it and go: ‘That’s a show we want to see more of.’ I’d love that.” The Tez O’Clock Show is on Thursday 8 August, 11.35pm, Channel 4