Thanks to Ben Stokes, there is still an Ashes series to savour. Thanks to Stokes, this may even be a summer to rival the epics of 1981 and 2005. Thanks to Stokes, Jason Roy and Jos Buttler keep their places in the Test team. Currently everyone, except a vibrant band of visiting Australians, is indebted to him. This cricketing summer is still alive after more miracles at Headingley, a melodrama that all those watching or listening to found captivating, and they all understood what was going on as well, whatever their age or gender (and please no more complaints about references to women and children needing something easier to comprehend on a cricket field – that notion came from the upper echelons of the ECB). Headingley ’19 was a once-in-a-generation contest (newcomers better realise this) but what a contest it was. How to put this delicately? Next season’s Hundred may have some difficulty in matching this despite all the money being spent to promote the new tournament, all those fireworks (in August) and the advent of a raft of galáctico overseas coaches, who will provide excellent camera fodder in the dug-outs. While this Test series has been gripping the nation there has been a trickle of releases from the ECB, all saying how figures such as Shane Warne, Darren Lehmann and Mahela Jayawardene have been rapidly converted to the concept of the Hundred, though these missives do not mention their surprise at the amount that they are all going to be paid for five or six weeks’ work at the height of the English summer. Somehow this conjures up preposterous images of Benedict Cumberbatch and Stephen Fry being enlisted for Love Island. The sleepwalk to 2020 is nearly over, though it is still a source of misery to many; for the few it is a gravy train that cannot possibly be resisted. Returning to the glorious summer of 2019, Ed Smith, the national selector, has kept faith with the Headingley 12 while adding Craig Overton of Somerset to the squad. The victory in Leeds may well have saved the places of Roy and, just possibly, Buttler, neither of whom has managed a significant contribution in the series. There is a problem for Smith and his fellow selectors, which will be greatly exacerbated next summer, since there is a paucity of red-ball cricket going on at the moment, so that in-form replacements for the Test team are hard to find. On Friday morning Surrey’s Ollie Pope might have been keeping his phone close to hand but there was no good news for him. If England leave Old Trafford defeated and therefore with the Ashes unretrievable, Pope may well get a game at the Oval. The saddest news concerned Jimmy Anderson, who has been ruled out of the last two Tests. Who knows what his plans are? Winning the Ashes at the Oval would have been a great finale to a great career but Anderson has never been one to seek a grand stage for its own sake. He just likes playing cricket. It is probably safe to conclude that he has played his last Test against Australia. He might take a while – and he should do – to decide whether he is available for any of the winter tours. If fit he would still be a force in New Zealand and South Africa, though there might be a case for giving Sri Lanka a miss. He might even fancy a season with his beloved Lancashire, who are about to be promoted; the prospect of Anderson running in to bowl at Alastair Cook at Chelmsford or Old Trafford next summer has a certain allure. The likelihood at Old Trafford on Wednesday is that England will retain the XI that played at Headingley. They may consider Chris Woakes’s position. He seems to be sparingly used with the ball in this series amid protestations that he is fully fit and there were signs at Headingley that the bouncer barrage he receives from Australia’s bowlers is undermining him. However, he is a strong enough character to find a solution to that. There may well be a change to the order that the England batsmen come out. Some recent alterations have worked quite well. Moving Stokes to No 5 now looks worthwhile. In Manchester Joe Denly could be invited to open with Rory Burns, while Roy drops to No 4. In essence that is a complement to Denly, who fought so hard at Leeds, and it is worth a try. Playing a specialist batsman at 7 is surely unsustainable in the long term so there is a case for having Buttler at 6 and Bairstow, the wicketkeeper, at 7, even though the latter has been scoring more runs recently. Whoever plays in whatever order, the prospect of Old Trafford is exciting. Who knows? The contest might even touch the heights of 1981 and 2005 at this old venue. There are suddenly a lot of people out there anxious to find out.