Q I live in Jersey in the Channel Islands and am looking at selling a house in the UK that I have been renting out for more than 15 years. I have been told that if I were to live in my house in the UK for a year and then sell it, I would not be liable to capital gains tax. Or is it not that simple?RW A It’s not that simple. And even if you did move in – and you made it genuinely your main home rather than a temporary residence for the purpose of avoiding tax – doing so would only reduce the capital gains tax (CGT) bill by a bit rather than eradicating it entirely. Making an ex-rental property genuinely your home – and HM Revenue & Customs won’t just take your word for it – means that part of any gain you make when you come to sell will qualify for what’s called “private residence relief” which means that the gain that relates to the period of time that it was your home (or 18 months if this is longer) is tax free. To work out how much of the gain would be tax free, you take the number of months you used the property as your home (or 18 if greater) and divide this by the number of months you owned the property which gives you the fraction of the gain that is tax free. So in your case, assuming you sell after 16 years’ of owning and one year of living in the property, the fraction would be 18/192 or, to put it another way, less than 10%. It will be even less than that when the rules change on 6 April 2020, when 18 goes down to nine. You use a slightly different calculation to work out the tax-free part of any gain on a property which started out as your home but was subsequently let to tenants. In this case you take the number of months you lived there and add 18 (nine after 6 April 2020) before dividing by the number of months you owned the property. There’s no need to move back in to qualify for private residence relief. But all that supposes that you are resident for the purposes of paying UK tax. If you’re not, you get to reduce your potential CGT bill without the disruption of a house move. Since 6 April 2015 non-residents are liable for CGT on gains made from disposing of residential property in the UK. However, what works in your favour is that when working out how much to deduct from the sale proceeds – to find out your gain – you use its value on 6 April 2015 rather than its value when you bought the property 15 years’ ago. You can find out what this means for you by using the UK government’s non-resident capital gains tax calculator Muddled about mortgages? Concerned about conveyancing? Email your homebuying and borrowing worries to Virginia Wallis at virginia.wallis.freelance@theguardian.com  