Lemn Sissay, poet, performer and chancellor at the University of Manchester, was born in Billings Hospital near St Margaret’s House for pregnant unmarried girls and women in Wigan, Greater Manchester, to an Ethiopian student on 21 May 1967. His mother refused to sign the adoption papers. She wanted her child to be fostered while she studied. The social worker handed Lemn to foster parents and declared his name “Norman”. The foster parents, Catherine and David Greenwood, went on to have three children of their own. At 12, Norman was sent away to children’s homes. After a succession of institutions, he left the care system, alone, and requested his files via “customer services”. They refused. After a 31-year campaign he received them in 2015. The last entry is his letter requesting to see them, at 18. His shattering, light-searching memoir, My Name Is Why, is the result. Here is an extract from the book… Mum smelled like mums smell; there must be a smell a child is attuned to from being a baby, a cross between baby powder and witch hazel. I don’t believe an adopted baby gets any less love from their parents than a child naturally born to them. For ever, for ages, until the end came, no matter how volatile the day had been, I’d pray she’d open the bedroom door before I slept, I’d pray she’d sit on the edge of my bed and sing me to sleep as she did when I was younger. “You are my sunshine, my only sunshine, you make me happy, when skies are grey.” I believed her. Mum and Dad said I was like Macavity. It felt affectionate then, but later I realised something wasn’t right. Macavity was dark, quick and a thief. Macavity was such a contrast to my blond, blue-eyed brother Christopher. His affectionate nickname was Bunty. Raise me with sunshineBathe me in lightWash all the shadowsThat fell from the night 11 December 1974: “There are no problems with Norman. Mrs Greenwood does not think of the boy as a foster child. He has been with this family since he was a couple of months old and Mrs Greenwood considers him as theirs. The foster parents have spoken of adoption, but they are afraid that investigations may lead to his mother.” Social worker’s report I was a questioner. In the Baptist church, our church, we were taught to question why. The answer was often “because we are sinners”. At school I was subject to all kinds of questions about my race, which I couldn’t answer. I brought all these questions home. “She left you… She didn’t want you… If I find her, I will scratch her eyes out… How could she…” My mum’s love was elevated by how much she hated my birth mother for leaving me. That’s all I knew. All I knew was that my birth mother, the woman who had my face and my blood, was from Africa and Africa was where poor people were. April 1974: I’m seven. “Mr and Mrs Greenwood realise there may be many problems ahead with Norman.” The skies are grey. “He thrives on praise and affection, in fact he cannot do without it.” Social worker’s report I hadn’t realised I wasn’t a happy child. I was a deceitful one. I was causing problems for everyone. It must be true. These are the words of “Mr Graves, the headteacher” in my files, in January 1976, from the social worker’s report: “Spoke to Mr Graves several times on the phone and eventually visited the school. He felt that Norman’s successes were too many for [his brother] Christopher to cope with. Went on to talk about another placement for Norman – without any consideration of how the boy might feel. I put it to him that it was the only home the boy had known.” I loved life. I was nine. My brother Christopher was eight. I loved school. I loved him. I showed my love for him by punching him. We had the same rivalry most brothers have. We fought with unbridled determination the way brothers do. We wrestled. We sweated until one of us, invariably Christopher, would burst into tears. Catherine and David had no children when they took me. Christopher was their first-born, but I was their first. I was the eldest. I loved my town. I loved my family. I loved the sibling rivalry. I loved the Market, the Flower Park, the Big Park, the books. The church. My friends. Secrets are the stonesThat sink the boatTake them out, look at themThrow them out and float 19 April 1978: “There is a letter on file from Norman’s mother, written in 1968, requesting he be returned to her in Ethiopia – perhaps Norman should be made aware of this?” Social worker’s report, on which someone has written in block capitals, NOT YET I THINK. 4 October 1979: “The Greenwoods are seen by Norman as his parents, and they and their natural children meet his needs in every way.” Social worker’s report Why would the social worker, Jean Jones, say that my mum and dad “are seen by Norman as his parents”? They told me they were my parents forever. Why would I think anything else? Why would she make that comment now? In two months’ time they would send me away forever as if I were a stranger. As with most brothers, Christopher and I fought like snakes on each other’s territory. He was an introvert. I had no idea Mum thought it was my fault. We raced each other home from school every day and every day I got there first. I waited in the kitchen by my mum. He dived into Mum’s arms and said: “Mum, I beat Norman, didn’t I?” She stroked his head and said: “Yes, you did.” And then she looked at me. “Yes, you did.” Over the past few years I sensed I had done something wrong and yet didn’t know what it was. There were times when Dad was charged with punishing me in the front room with the cane. He asked me to yelp so it sounded like I was being punished. Other weird things started to happen. I was 10 and we were off to a wedding in our new clothes. Christopher, Sarah and I were on top of the world. Sarah looked pretty as a picture in her blue floral dress. Just before leaving the house, Mum looked at me. Something pinched her features. She said: “Take them off and give them to him.” I didn’t understand. I took off my trousers and gave them to my brother. These moments stuck in my memory. It was the sense of an underlining unkindness that stayed with me. He lost touch at nightTheir fingertips withdrewNobody touched him, light,Except you It was the end of December 1979 and I was excited when I entered the front room for the family meeting. I was excited because the family meeting was just me and Mum and Dad. Just me. No brothers and sisters. I felt important. I sat at the table and my mum looked at me intensely. “You don’t love us, do you?” I said, “Yeees, I do love you.” “We want you to spend the next day thinking about love and what it is. Read the scriptures and give us your most honest and truthful answer tomorrow.” That was it! It was a clear instruction from Mum and Dad. I studied the question for a day and a night, I prayed to God, and I read the Bible to see if a passage would answer the question. It was a question to which I already had the answer. Of course I loved them. Mum had always said that love was never in question. I started thinking all over again. If they were asking me whether I loved them or not, and if they were the ones who taught me about love, then maybe I didn’t love them, otherwise they wouldn’t ask. This led me to the answer I thought they wanted me to get to. They wanted me to ask God for forgiveness and through him I will learn to love them. His love will shine through me and them. And in the Baptist faith a sinner must ask forgiveness for his sins. The theology was perfect, the timing unquestionable and the answer as honest as a sinner could get. Tomorrow came and I said it with pride because I thought I had found the answer they wanted me to find: “I mustn’t love you,” I said. I looked at their faces to see if I had said the right thing. “But I will ask God for forgiveness… and learn to love you.” This was the perfect answer. “Seek and ye shall find.” This is what they wanted to seek. And this is what I found. She looked at me as if I had wounded her. “You don’t love us, you don’t want to be with us?” All of this happened the day after they had made this call to the social worker. 31 December 1979: “Message left after Christmas saying that the Greenwoods wanted Norman removed without further notice.” Social worker’s report 31 December 1979: “Spoke to foster parents on telephone. Both almost insisted Norman had to leave today.” Social worker’s report 2 January 1980: “Attitudes seemed hardened and therefore I arranged to take Norman to Woodfields.” Social worker’s report 3 January 1980: My mum wouldn’t hug me as I left, so I hugged her. Norman Mills, my new social worker, waited at the gate. He put me gently in the car. I looked back, but they were turning to go indoors, mindful of the neighbours. The car filled with quiet loss. Mum told me they will never visit me because it is my choice to leave them because I didn’t love them. We passed the butcher’s and the chemist’s and Wigan Road and passed the Flower Park and the main park, the junior school and Byrchall High School, and then unfamiliar territory unfolded before me: the East Lancashire Road. One dual carriageway, with a single destination: Woodfields. This was the beginning of the end of open arms and warm hugs. This was the beginning of empty Christmas time and hollow birthdays. This was the beginning of not being touched. I’m 12. And it is my fault. This is what I have chosen. The journey took about 45 minutes, or 45 seconds. Or 45 years. I said to Norman Mills in the car: “I know this is my fault and I will ask God for forgiveness.” He kept his eyes on the road, but his hands gripped tighter on the wheel. He tapped the indicator and pulled quietly into a lay-by and turned the engine off. “None of this is your fault. None of it.” I had no idea what he meant. Night can’t drive out nightOnly the light aboveFear can’t drive out fearOnly love There’d be many times in the future that I would play table tennis with myself by pushing the table against the wall. Backhand and forehand smash, defend and attack, spin, cut, lob and slice. My body will skip around the table like a sprite on the solid stone floor. I would narrate the game against Christopher, my invisible brother – and I’d let him win. Mum and Dad must have told everyone in my family to stay away from me. I hadn’t realised then but none of them would contact me ever again for the rest of my life. All my personal belongings went in the locker by the bed. I asked when my clothes and toys would be arriving. They were in the trunk back at home. But nothing was coming from there. Not even a Bible. I had nothing to put in the locker by my bed. Over the next few weeks the children’s home filled up with mainly teenagers. Most children in care have someone they can call family. I had no one. Postscript: After Woodfields, Lemn Sissay was sent to two more children’s homes. In 1984, at 17, he was sent to Wood End Assessment Centre, a remand home in Wigan. He then secured himself a flat on Poets’ Corner, a housing estate near Wigan. A year later, the local authority released his birth certificate revealing the name his birth mother had given him, Lemn Sissay, and the letter requesting her son’s return. This is an edited extract from My Name Is Why: a Memoir by Lemn Sissay, published by Canongate on 29 August at £16.99. Buy a copy for £11.99 at guardianbookshop.com Lemn Sissay will be at Southbank Centre on 18 October as part of the London Literature Festival 