The biggest victories do not always come on pitch. Moments after Dina Asher-Smith finished second to Shaunae Miller-Uibo in a world-class 200m at the Birmingham Diamond League she received some golden news – the brilliant Miller-Uibo, who has not lost since 2017, would be running only the 400m at next month’s world championships rather than doubling up over 200m and 400m. It means that Asher-Smith, along with Jamaica’s Elaine Thompson, will surely be the one to beat over 200m in Doha. However, the 23-year-old Briton is keen to play down expectations. “My coach always says we don’t run on paper – which obviously isn’t funny, it’s a dad joke, but it is very true,” she said. “I ran well here, great, but where does that put me for the world champs? It doesn’t really mean anything with the greatest respect because at the end of the day it is what happens in Qatar that matters.” That is certainly true. But Asher-Smith knows she is both a major championship performer, having won three gold medals at the Europeans last year, and in good form having gone beneath 11 seconds in all four of her races over 100m and won two of her four 200m races in the Diamond League this year. This time, however, she had to play second fiddle to Miller-Uibo. It probably did not help that conditions were far from ideal in Birmingham. The wind swirled, the rain spat and the temperatures were more mid-May than mid-August. But Asher-Smith ran a storming bend only to be reeled in over the last 20 metres by the impressive Miller-Uibo, who thundered home in 22.24 to win by 0.12sec. Behind them were an impressive roll call of stars – including Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, the Jamaican winner of two Olympic 100m gold medals in third and Dafne Schippers of the Netherlands, the double world champion at 200m, in fourth. “This was like an Olympic or world final, so it would have been a silver,” said Asher-Smith. “It was fantastic to be able to run against this class at home.” Certainly Miller-Uibo believes the Briton is the one to beat over 200m in Doha now she is no longer part of the picture. “She’s doing extremely well,” she said. “I think it’s going to be her time. I’m really excited for her. She’s definitely stepping it up.” However, the brilliant Bahamian admitted she was frustrated not to be able to double up in Doha after the IAAF refused her request to shape the schedule in a way that would let her do both events – something they have done in the past for Michael Johnson and Wayde van Niekerk, among others. “We’ve decided I’ll do only the 400m in Doha,” she said. “The schedule just wouldn’t allow both. The semis are on the same day. That made it impossible. I asked the IAAF two years ago but things didn’t change. We just had to live with it and move on. We’re asking for Tokyo now.” Katarina Johnson-Thompson, another major British medal chance at the world championships, also showed impressive form with a long jump of 6.85m – her best for four years – as she finished third. However, her great heptathlon rival, Nafi Thiam, the Olympic and world champion, once again proved her superiority as she smashed her personal best by 20cm with a jump of 6.86m to win the event by one centimetre from Serbia’s Ivana Spanovic and Johnson-Thompson. “I haven’t jumped that far in a long time so I’m really happy with that showing,” said Johnson-Thompson. “I felt like there was more in there as well. It spurs me on going up against her in an individual format like today. “I’m so happy because I’ve been saying for the past two years that my long jump needs to get back to what it was. Obviously Nafi’s stepped her game up as well, so I’m going to have to step up the javelin or something now. I was a bit worried I might be a little bit burnt out but I feel so much more confident now about being in a good place come Doha.” Adam Gemili, whose career has been stop-start-stop in recent years due to a succession of injuries, hinted that the good times could be again around the corner as he finished second behind Yohan Blake in the 100m after both men clocked 10.07sec. “It wasn’t my best start but I’m just so happy to be healthy and back up running,” said Gemili. “It’s good to be in the mix with some of the best sprinters in the world.” Lynsey Sharp, another athlete who has struggled to find her best form in recent seasons, also showed promise to finish second behind Ajeé Wilson in the women’s 800m in 2.01.09 – 0.3sec behind the American. “The last couple of years I’ve not been as close to Wilson and the other girls and I felt good coming off the last bend and being able to pick people off rather than being picked off,” she admitted.