Janey Godley prods her chin lovingly, as she talks about ageing. “I love putting up pictures on Twitter of me with no makeup. See every wrinkle,” says the Glaswegian comedian, who is 58. For a glancing moment, she sounds a little awestruck. “I survived rape, I survived my Ma being murdered, this is my face. If it offends you, don’t look at it. I think other people should have that attitude.” Godley is sitting in the kitchen of the elegant Edinburgh tenement flat she has rented for the duration of the fringe with her daughter Ashley Storrie, a successful comic too, of whom her mum is glowingly proud. It is a biblically rainy day, and Godley has erected a shoe-changing station of plastic bags and a small stool at the front door, anxious to keep the carpets clean. With years of five-star reviews and sold-out gigs behind her, recent months have brought her a huge new audience as a result of the political voiceovers she posts online. Within hours of Boris Johnson visiting Nicola Sturgeon at her official residence last month, for instance, Godley had posted a video that articulated the first minister’s imagined interior monologue in an irritable Glaswegian accent. The prime minister had extended his arm to escort Sturgeon into her own home – in what many saw as a gesture of male entitlement – and Godley as Sturgeon is blunt: “Put your arm down, ya arsehole, get in.” The clip lasts for only a few seconds, and has been viewed hundreds of thousands of times. This month, Godley has brought the format to the Edinburgh fringe, where her shows are packed out in advance of a UK-wide tour. “I can’t believe that people like them so much,” she says. “But then we don’t have many satirical shows, and the ones we do have are like Have I Got News for You. I was the first working-class Scottish female comic ever to do it.” She pauses. “Last year. So even when we have satire, it’s not relatable to everybody.” Godley has strong opinions about Johnson and Trump. She came to the pro-independence cause during the 2014 referendum campaign, and is pragmatic about the prospects of an independent Scotland: “I don’t think its going to be a utopia, I think we’re going to fuck up a lot of things, there will be mistakes. But what can be worse than Boris Johnson, who is a Poundland Donald Trump?” She believes that Johnson’s premiership and the “shambles” of Brexit is causing many of those who voted against independence in 2014 to reassess: “People are like: ‘This is tribal, this is the flag, this is the Queen, we love the union.’ Then they see their benefits affected, their taxes, that they can’t get insulin, and then people change their minds.” As Godley rattles through the details of her “dodgy background”, there are elements of slapstick, and she is not coy about a pitch-black punchline. When she tells me that the uncle who raped her as a child was found dead in his bed last year, she fixes me with an even gaze. “All the men that fuck me about die alone. Weird, eh?” She is unsentimental about experiences that must have been painful, brutal and frightening. But she is also scrupulously clear about where responsibility lies: it’s not her shame, she reiterates several times. The youngest of four, Godley was raised by an alcoholic father and a chaotic, debt-prone mother in the East End of Glasgow. She was systematically abused by an uncle throughout her childhood, left school without any qualifications and was married at 19 to the son of a local gangster. Her mother died in 1982, when Godley was 21, murdered, her daughter believes, by her violent boyfriend, who was never charged by the police despite her family’s protestations. “I had nits, scabies, we were poor,” she says bluntly of her childhood. “I remember eating out of bins and being a teenager with dirty clothes. But I was bright and I loved reading, so I had the chance to escape. And I’m not ashamed of it, because it wasn’t my fault.” That is one of the reasons she does the free fringe (her gigs have an honesty bucket at the exit). “I love the fact that people who are pure skint can come through from Glasgow and see a free show, because it’s a very elite business.” What is blazingly obvious, listening to her life story, is the way Godley has taken direct action, with great courage, often in the face of male power. Aged 12, she threatened her uncle with a red-hot poker: “He backed off because he’d never been confronted before.” As an adult, she took him to court, along with her sister, whom he had similarly abused, and secured a conviction. After years of bullying, she walked out on her gangster in-laws and forged a successful international career “doing something I’d never seen anyone like me doing”. Godley is never lost for words, but she pauses here for a millisecond when I ask her about this. “When Ashley meets members of my extended family, she’s like: ‘HOW?’ I don’t know what made me different and I know there is something different.” Of the sexual abuse, she says: “When I was a teenager and [my husband and I] were first having sex – no, he’s not getting to take that off me either. I made a concerted decision to never let it affect me. I don’t know if that’s psychotic or wrong, but it’s what I did. That cunt doesn’t get to decide how my life is – and that’s been my mantra.” To describe Godley’s route to comedy as unusual is an understatement. Critics who describe her standup material – which embraces child abuse and murder – as “unique” do so for good reason. Godley spent her 20s running a pub in Calton, an area regularly cited as having the lowest life expectancy for men in the whole of the UK, with her husband. The pub belonged to George Storrie, a notorious criminal patriarch with seven sons, six of whom deeply resented Godley and her steadfast refusal to keep quiet. The young couple surprised even themselves in their ability to run a business well: “We were proper young grafters,” she says fondly. “We didn’t smoke or drink, we paid tax, put our daughter through a private school. I wanted her to get an education because I never got one.” But after her father-in-law’s death, the police raided his property – “they wouldn’t come when George was alive” – where Godley’s family and several other brothers were living. They found guns and weapons secreted about the place: Godley and her husband were put in prison for the night, but let out, “because we could prove the guns weren’t ours”. Then a dispute over the running of the family pub, combined with already toxic fraternal relations, pushed Godley and her husband to walk out of their home one night, with their daughter, the cat and some schoolbooks, never to return. While the brothers’ mutual chaos has continued across the decades, the couple have not had further contact with them for 27 years. Godley remembers her eldest brother-in-law telling her as she left: ‘You’re fuck all but a barmaid.’ “I turned round and said: ‘I’m not your barmaid.’ Her eyes glitter with delight. “I played a barmaid in the film Wild Rose [released last year], so yes, I am a barmaid, but I’m a Hollywood barmaid!” The family moved into temporary accommodation. It was terrifying, she says: “We had no transferable skills.” But that wasn’t entirely true: as a barmaid in one of Glasgow’s roughest pubs, Godley had honed the comic timing and expert crowd control essential for a stand-up career. Having already excelled at open-mic nights, she progressed quickly on the comedy circuit. It was the mid-90s, she reminds me, when “alternative” comedy was very much the domain of “student boys in nice jeans and funny haircuts”. She rolls her eyes: “I saw a lot of cock back then.” At one show, a couple of male comedians came out naked, carrying a plank of wood, “and the promoters were like: ‘This is genius.’ And I was like: ‘This is NOT genius, I don’t understand any of this.’ And the audience weren’t laughing, they were bemused. I realised in that moment there were two types of comedy: comedians who people called ‘genius’, who only the promoters laughed at, and comedians the audience loved, and the promoters didn’t. I went on after them, did straight standup, and the audience laughed. “It was quite a shock to have a working-class, older woman – I was 35 and a mum – do this, and it got a few backs up.” But promoters were also suspicious because she was talking about subjects that people didn’t normally make jokes about. “I spoke about my Ma being murdered, child abuse, gangsters. Back then, even comics were saying: ‘You shouldn’t talk about that.’ But I’m so glad I did. The amount of people that came up to me and said: ‘I was abused and I’ve never laughed before.’ One of the most important things about comedy is nobody gets to tell you what you can joke about, as long as you’re punching up and not punching down.” The voiceovers aren’t her first brush with online fame. The day after the UK voted to leave the EU, the presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump flew in to visit his golf course at Turnberry, on the south-west coast of Scotland. Fuelled by righteous anger at the referendum result, and at Trump himself – “We’ve all met that man in the pub, that checks a woman out as he talks and then moves on if he’s not interested, then tells you that women’s issues don’t matter” – Godley hand-wrote a succinct protest slogan and headed for the coast. The photograph of a small but defiant woman, holding an A3 sign reading “Trump is a cunt”, surrounded by police, went viral. “I think half the world was shocked I used that word,” she says, “but there are worse words. Food bank is worse.” When Godley returned to Turnberry to protest against Trump’s visit as US president in 2018, she adapted the sign to read “Trump is a runt” with a strategically placed hand. The voiceovers were not a big career plan, she insists, but she enjoys the comedy potential of the cameraphone: “I’m the opposite of what everybody says about older women: I’m a tech whiz. I [voiced] Theresa May’s resignation speech in a Virgin trains toilet.” She has depicted May trying to persuade Jeremy Corbyn to join a minoge (a Scottish savings club), and begging Sturgeon for her Netflix sign-in, before heading over for the summer to her Spanish caravan with Isa MacNamee and all the Sandras. Arlene Foster is not impressed: “Big Theresa’s pure steaming over in Torremolinos. She’s just joined the Snapchat group, Face-timed me at two in the morning singing Abba, as if I don’t have enough to do!” The references in the voiceovers – the savings club, Pippa Dee clothing parties, which auntie last borrowed the soup pot – are emphatically local to the west of Scotland, but Godley has a theory about why they travel so well: “These are really troubling times, and folk want to hark back to something with a sense of community. The soup pot is the very definition of that. People in America, Venezuela, Australia have all written to me and said it doesn’t matter what culture you belong to, whenever there’s a death, a birth, a homecoming, people get out the big soup pot. So that is a global icon of community.” She is bullish about requests to subtitle her broad Scots delivery: “I say, no, learn my accent. If you can learn to read Shakespeare and there’s a Burns club in every country, you can understand my accent.” Has she ever been confronted by one of her voiceover subjects? Politicians have written to her privately and asked “Can you do me?”, she twinkles, but refuses to disclose any further. Yes, she has been told that Sturgeon has seen them. “Apparently she finds them funny,” she says with the deliberate vagueness of someone who knows all too well that she does. But Godley insists they have never met, or spoken. “I wouldn’t want to be photographed with her because I’ve got such a dodgy background that I don’t want to infect her with it. I don’t want to be pals with any politician.” Godley has received death threats for her opposition to Trump, and so is well aware of the poison welling online. But the great thing about social media, she says, “is that people speak out. Before, if you stood in a pub and spoke about domestic violence, you’d be shut down in a minute.” For her mother’s generation, it was normal to see a woman walking down the road with two black eyes. “There’s laws that have changed. In Scotland, you can’t even gaslight a woman and rightly so – there’s refuges, places women can go.” There is a strong impression that Godley – who suffers fools gladly only to the extent that they provide her with another laugh line – has found her playground on Twitter. “Has Twitter changed my life? It has. I make a joke about it on stage: ‘My husband loves it because I used to argue with him …’ I treat it like daily life – if one person says you’re not funny, you don’t have to find me funny. My tour sells out.” For details of Janey Godley’s upcoming tour, go to janeygodley.com