As a battalion of Sky Sports reporters set up at stadiums and training grounds around the UK, their minders keeping eyes peeled for mischievous fans bearing merchandise from Ann Summers, Deadline Day begins and it promises to be a doozy. David Luiz to form a central defensive dream team with Shkodran Mustafi at Arsenal? It’s looking likely. A disgruntled Wilf Zaha to Everton for not a penny less than £100m? Hmmm, only time will tell. Tottenham to finally get their mitts on Giovani Lo Celso? The thrashing out of personal terms permitting, it’s a done deal. Elsewhere, agents and club chairmen are preparing for one final day of unedifying horse-trading as assorted players pack their designer washbags and wait on standby ahead of last-minute dashes hither and yon. Following Manchester United’s failure to tempt Paulo Dybala to Old Trafford as a replacement for the Inter-bound Romelu Lukaku, reports from Spains suggest the club are ready to trigger the £81m release clause of Athletic Bilbao speedster Iñaki Williams instead. A striker who has always looked to the Premier League born, Juve’s Mario Mandzukic also remains an option. Still hopeful of offloading Philippe Coutinho in order to boost their chances of re-signing Neymar from Paris Saint-Germain, Barcelona have offered the former Liverpool playmaker to Tottenham and Manchester United, while Juventus have emerged as potential late suitors for his high-maintenance compatriot. Dybala and a large sum of money could go the other way, although Tottenham are believed to be in the box-seat to sign the Argentinian striker if they can thrash out a deal over the complicated issue of his image rights. Following a long summer of speculation, the future of Tottenham midfielder Christian Eriksen remains up in the air. Not interested in joining Manchester United, Atlético Madrid may rescue him from his current purgatory although their city rivals Real remain interested in the great Dane. Eriksen’s team-mate Kyle Walker-Peters is eager to secure more playing time and may get the minutes he craves at Southampton or Crystal Palace, who are both in the market for a right-back. Despite being actively discouraged by Frank Lampard, who says he has big plans for Chelsea winger Callum Hudson-Odoi, Bayern Munich are preparing a last-ditch offer of around £50m for the 18-year-old, who has only one year left on his contract and his current employers over a barrel. In need of a central defender to round off their summer trolley dash, Everton are the latest club to be linked with Nathan Aké; still in need of a replacement for Harry Maguire, Leicester has also been spoken of as a potential destination for the Dutchman. Everton, meanwhile, are interested in signing Chelsea’s Fikayo Tomori on a season-long loan. Meanwhile in Newcastle, the Chronicle say Steve Bruce is hopeful of signing Amiens right-back Emil Krafth ahead of stumps this Deadline Day. Norwich are in for Lorient striker Alexis Claude-Maurice, while at Molineux the Wolves recruitment department are poring over the CV of Juventus central defender Daniele Rugani. Further south, the Mirror reports that Brighton are weighing up a club record £28m bid for Genk midfielder Sander Berge. On a Thursday soundtracked by the whirring of fax machines (ask your parents) and the ticking of the clock as it counts down to that all important deadline, we’ll be bringing you all the news that’s fit to print - and plenty that isn’t - in our rolling blog o’transfer news. Stay tuned to see what eventually transpires.