Winston Churchill, the Queen’s first prime minister, died in early 1965. The Conservative party was changing and a key beneficiary was a Grantham schoolgirl and Oxford graduate turned ice-cream chemist turned barrister. After Edward Heath led the Conservatives to a surprise victory in the election of 1970 (the first election in which 18-year-olds could vote), Margaret Thatcher was appointed education secretary. In 1975, as series three draws to a close, Thatcher – played by Gillian Anderson – became leader of the opposition. Expect fireworks. The Queen was a passionate devotee of the Commonwealth as a union of nations. But this unity was severely strained in Rhodesia. By 1965, Britain was pushing the white government of Rhodesia to embrace black majority rule and an end to racial discrimination. When Ian Smith, of the Rhodesian Front party, issued a unilateral declaration of independence, declaring Elizabeth II Queen of Rhodesia, Britain instituted sanctions and the UN declared it a racist and illegal regime. Zimbabwean liberation parties and key leaders such as Robert Mugabe supported armed resistance. South Africa, Zambia and the US pressured the white government to back down. In 1976, Smith agreed to accept black majority rule in two years – but it was not until 1980 that the Republic of Zimbabwe became an independent country. In 1969, Neil Armstrong stepped on to the moon. In series three, the moon landings will prompt a career crisis for Prince Philip. The moon landings were a giant step for mankind, but most of all for the US. Not only had Russia lost the race, but Britain had lost its empire and America had become the great leader, cemented by the moon landings as the great adventurer, the winner of the science race – and the world’s policeman. On 1 January 1973, Britain, Ireland and Denmark joined the six other countries in the European Economic Community. In a referendum called in 1975, 67 per cent voted to stay in the EEC. Britain became more connected to Europe, with the rise of the package holiday and greater interest in European food and culture (the first Pizza Express opened in 1965). In 1964, the British and French governments agreed on a Channel tunnel between France and England by the end of the decade (it opened in 1994). The British and French collaborated on the supersonic jet Concorde, seen as the glamorous future of air travel, which took off in 1976. In 1969, a march in Derry calling to end discrimination against Irish Catholics was attacked by loyalists and off-duty police officers. Violence continued against Catholic areas into the night, but it was Republican activists who were arrested. The British army was deployed; pitched battles erupted between republicans and loyalists, there was brutal repression by the army, and soldiers were killed. In January 1972, the army fired on demonstrators in Derry; 13 people people were killed and one fatally wounded in what became known as Bloody Sunday. The Race Relations Act was passed in 1965, making discrimination on the grounds of colour, race or origin illegal, a year after a similar act had been passed in the United States. But racism did not go away. In 1967 Norwell Roberts became the first black officer in the Metropolitan Police and Tony O’Connor became the first non-white head of a UK school. Roberts got all the attention, written about in newspapers across the world and snapped by photographers at every turn. In 1968 Martin Luther King was assassinated in Memphis – and just a fortnight later, MP Enoch Powell gave his infamous and terrible Rivers of Blood speech in Birmingham. In 1966, a landslide of a colliery waste tip hit the small village of Aberfan in south Wales, engulfing the school and killing 116 children, as well as 28 adults. The Queen said not visiting the village until eight days later was her “greatest regret”. Throughout the 60s there were calls for Welsh liberation and the privileging of the Welsh language. In 1969, in an attempt to quell nationalism and encourage enthusiasm for the monarchy, the royal family staged an almost medieval investiture of Charles as Prince of Wales at Caenarfon Castle. The slightly nervous prince, replying in Welsh and English after intensive language immersion, was broadcast to millions. The Beatles were on the radio, skirts were getting shorter, stylish shops on Carnaby Street were flourishing – and, although some parts of British society were still stuck in the 50s, sexual liberation was well on its way. In 1967, at the height of Beatlemania,, a raft of key acts appeared. Homosexuality was made legal between men over 21, and abortion was legalised under certain conditions. The Family Planning Act allowed health authorities to give advice on contraception, whether a woman was married or not. In 1969, the Divorce Reform Act was passed, allowing couples to divorce after two years of separation and ending the farce of couples staging adultery in seaside hotels. ,In February 1976, pictures of Princess Margaret and Roddy Llewellyn in swimsuits were splashed across the front of a newspaper. Within a month, she and her husband, Lord Snowdon, announced their marriage was over; they divorced two years later. Some called for her to be taken off the civil list. Watch out for Helena Bonham Carter giving her all as Margaret under pressure in the final episode. Kate Williams is author of Young Elizabeth and professor of history at Reading University. The third series of The Crown starts on Netflix on 17 November