When it comes to fruit, these are the best days of the year: peaches, nectarines, cherries, late apricots and raspberries, currants in black, red and white. Picking a favourite is almost impossible, like choosing a favourite child. I’ve been giving it a lot of thought and my top five goes like this; cherries, nectarines, peaches, apricots, strawberries. Controversial I am sure, especially the inclusion of both nectarines and peaches. Fruit is so good at this time of year that it needs nothing more than a napkin to catch the juices, but if you fancy making a little more of your summer stone fruit, try these. Some cute-as-a-button cakes with the last of the apricots and the first (or frozen) blackcurrants, just the right side of sweet and perfect with a scoop of ice-cream or a spoonful of mascarpone, and a simple roast peach compote that’s as good for breakfast as it is for pudding, like a low-sugar jam that keeps for a week in the fridge. Peachy. These are the perfect summer cakes: light almondy crumb, custardy sweetness from the apricots and some sharp little hits of blackcurrant. Prep 20 minCook 25 minMakes 12 200g unsalted butter, softened, plus extra for greasing50g demerara sugar, for lining, plus a bit extra for sprinkling125g light brown sugar 4 medium eggs 1 pinch flaky sea salt1 unwaxed lemon, zested 150g plain flour180g ground almonds 1 tsp baking powder4 tbsp milk 200g blackcurrants, stalks and tails removed6 apricots, stoned and halved To serve250g mascarpone or coconut yoghurt50g pistachios, roughly chopped Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6. Butter a 12-hole muffin tin or 12 dariole moulds, then sprinkle the demerara sugar into each one, so that it sticks to the sides and bottom. This will leave you with a crunchy edge once the cakes are baked and stops them from sticking. Beat the butter and brown sugar until light and fluffy, then add the eggs one by one, beating after each addition. Add the salt, lemon zest, flour, almonds and baking powder, mix until you have a thick batter, then add the milk and give it a final mix. Fold in the blackcurrants, then divide the mixture evenly between the moulds. Top each one with an apricot half, sprinkle with a little more demerara sugar and bake for 25 minutes, until risen and golden brown. Serve warm or cold with some mascarpone and chopped pistachios sprinkled over the top. The compote will last for up to two weeks in a jar in the fridge. Serve over yoghurt for breakfast or ripple through whipped cream for a quick dessert. Prep 10 minCook 25 minServes 4 4 large peaches, stone in, halved2 tbsp honey1 tbsp vanilla paste6 tbsp water4 sprigs thyme, leaves picked Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Arrange the peach halves cut side up on a large roasting tray. In a small bowl, mix the honey, vanilla and water, then pour evenly over the peaches. Sprinkle over the thyme and roast for 20-25 minutes, until the peaches are soft, syrupy and golden. Squish the peaches in the tray with all the juices to make a compote, remove the stones, then spoon into jars.