Eight years ago this month, when Boris Johnson was mayor of London, the worst rioting Britain had seen in decades broke out in the capital, before spreading across the country. An estimated 20,000 people were drawn in, and 4,000 arrested. A subsequent study by the Guardian and the London School of Economics found that “humiliating” stop and search was a key factor in anger towards the police. An independent panel appointed by the government to examine the unrest urged immediate attention to the issue, noting that it was cited as a major source of discontent by young black and Asian men. Now, stop and search is on the rise again. In eight of England’s largest forces, its use doubled in the two years to March 2019. Sajid Javid, then home secretary, nonetheless eased the use of section 60 powers – allowing officers to stop and search anyone in defined areas without reasonable suspicion – for several forces. The prime minister’s announcement on Sunday extends that pilot scheme across all forces in England and Wales. This is accompanied by other promises reflecting the public’s very real concerns about violence, and especially knife crime. In the year to March 2019, forces in England and Wales recorded more than 47,000 offences involving knives: an 8% increase year on year and the highest total since records began. But if his approach speaks to concerns, it cannot answer them. Mr Johnson has reverted to a familiar and failed Conservative playbook of “hard on crime, hard on criminals” rhetoric. (His home secretary, Priti Patel, wants offenders to feel not just fear but terror). Like his pledge to create 10,000 more prison places, or his earlier promise to recruit 20,000 more police officers, his announcement reeks of electioneering. Unlike those, this handily comes without a price tag for the Treasury. So even if the government’s “fiscal headroom” disappears thanks to a no-deal Brexit, this policy will stand. Mr Johnson has glibly dismissed the criticism he expects from “leftwing criminologists”. Several police chiefs see stop and search as an essential tool. But plenty of others will question both the fairness and effectiveness of this strategy. An analysis of the Home Office’s own data found that black people in England and Wales were 40 times more likely to be searched under section 60 powers than white people – exacerbating the disproportion seen with regular stop and search. The damage to police relations with communities is evident and the policy counterproductive. The College of Policing notes that while some studies suggest an impact on crime, it is likely to be “small, highly localised and short-lived”, and that stop and search tends to be less productive the more that it is used. Last month, the outgoing chief of Bedfordshire police, Jon Boutcher, said extra officers were essential, but could not make up for austerity-driven cuts that had left disadvantaged children vulnerable to gangs, damaged the social fabric and must be reversed to reduce crime. He noted in particular those hitting mental health and youth services. Since 2011, when the riots broke out, the number of youth centres in London has fallen from 234 to 130; the number supported by local authorities across England has halved. Extending stop and search powers, while paying only lip service to tackling the causes of crime, is “a tried-and-tested recipe for unrest, not violence reduction”, as the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, warned – and as Mr Johnson’s own experience should tell him.