Cricket teams are all about balance. Right-handers with left-handers, leg-spinners with off‑spinners, the range of personality and style and temperament and approach that make a team a complex and evolving creation, reflecting light from its varied facets. After the fourth day of the Edgbaston Ashes Test, my colleagues in these pages have doubtless described Steve Smith in terms of a computer or machine, having calculated Australia’s course through the match. At the same time he was accompanied by two players who are extremely human. The balance was just right: one-part organism to one-part mechanism. No one looks more human at the batting crease than Travis Head. The minute he walks in one is waiting for him to get out. His strategy in any format is to go at the ball: hit early, hit often. His approach to seam bowling is to attack with a diagonal bat, trying to force it square on the off side. If there is width, then this takes the form of a carving cut backward of point, but even cramped for room he still tries these little back‑cuts from close to his body away to the field on the bounce. The batting coach Trent Woodhill advocates this as Head’s best method, saying that, when he approaches the ball with a straight bat, his hands are further from his body and he has less control. But his normal way still looks as ropey as ship rigging. Time and again the ball soars over the top edge or squirts somewhere in alarming fashion. Head holds the rare lack of distinction of being dismissed twice in a Test match caught at third man, after he could not stop carving away outside off stump against India in Perth late last year. And yet, it works. Or at least it works for long enough because time and again Head comes in to bat, looks as if he will not last, then racks up runs before there is time to notice. After resuming the fourth morning with Smith, with Australia in trouble should a wicket fall, Head stuttered through the opening overs, sliced a few runs around, then clipped a couple of boundaries from a tiring Stuart Broad through the leg side and suddenly had 35. That was the score he had made in the first innings, where his partnership with Smith after an early clatter gave the senior batsman some breathing space to get set for the epic century that would come. Second time around Head went on to 51, even finally getting his pet cut shot away for a boundary. When he was out, it was inevitably to that shot: too close to his body, the thick top edge. But by that stage Australia’s lead was 115. This is what Head has done in his brief career. After a debut innings ended with a duck against Bilal Asif’s off-spin in Dubai Head has never failed to reach double figures. Only three of those 15 innings have been scores in the teens. His 20s, 30s or 50s have been invaluable in putting team scores together. So it went again in Birmingham. Once Head departed, in came another free-swinging left-hander in Matthew Wade after two years out of the side. Wade has a different approach, favouring drives through cover and midwicket against anything full and the hook shot when short. But he similarly got on with the game, slotting in alongside Smith as another exercise in contrast. There were hairy moments as England tried a spin-heavy attack: an early sweep that nearly dragged on to leg stump, another that took a top edge and landed safely, then a top-edged reverse over the wicketkeeper. But Wade kept chancing his arm, while Smith kept his own routine of stepping across his stumps and finding a run wherever he cared to take one. With Wade as his partner, Smith never had to worry about the run rate. And as Wade ploughed on through the afternoon – raising his fifty with a bottom edge through the keeper’s legs, his century with a reverse sweep against Joe Root’s off-spin out of the rough – the way he went about it drove England to distraction. When Wade finally fell for 110 he had scripted a personal comeback nearly as audacious as Smith’s on the first day. He had taken Australia’s lead past 300 and set things up for Tim Paine, Pat Cummins and especially James Pattinson to come in swinging. While Smith had compiled his 142 with clinical precision to take Australia from danger, it was his colleagues’ willingness to be fallible that set up a 397-run lead. As the Wizard of Oz taught us years ago, even the machine man needs a beating heart.