A valuable fund of literary knowledge and teaching expertise will be lost when the British Library “streamlines” its team of educators, many of whom have clocked up dedicated service in the schools programme. This is the claim of campaigners hoping to prevent “upsetting” changes at the country’s national library, based in King’s Cross, London. The growing row, which bears strong similarities to a successful battle recently waged by a group of 27 former National Gallery educators, started this spring when the regular “freelance” British Library team were told they had to apply for a smaller number of permanent jobs. More than 20 educators are thought to be affected by the effort to put the library’s staff on a more official footing. The move is partly designed to avoid accusations that the institution is part of an exploitative “gig economy” operating in the cultural sector. But the new jobs, full- or part-time, are not suited to many of the former team, due to other academic commitments and domestic responsibilities. Labour MP Helen Hayes, a supporter of the National Gallery 27, believes the role of all freelance experts across Britain’s cultural sector should be protected, and she is calling this weekend for a parliamentary response. She told the Observer: “I am pleased that the NG27 educators have been successful in their campaign and have now reached a resolution with the National Gallery. However, this case has highlighted the precarious working conditions of many in the culture sector. I have written separately to the chair of the public account committee and the chair of the DCMS select committee calling for an inquiry into the wider employment practices across the culture sector and the use of public funds to protect the corrupt gig economy.” A spokesperson for the British Library told the Observer that recruitment of a team for its national schools programme was “ongoing”. “The team providing the learning sessions has been restructured, from the previous zero-hour, casual-worker arrangement to a smaller number of full-time salaried positions,” the spokesperson added. “The new roles were ringfenced to the existing team of workshop leaders, who were then invited to apply, after which the remaining roles were opened up to external applicants.” A new schools programme, to continue the library’s work with children across Britain, is to be relaunched this autumn, set up in parallel with an expansion of its building at St Pancras. The extension is to house business and exhibition spaces and a new headquarters for the Alan Turing Institute. The library already has a centre near Leeds, a storage facility at Boston Spa, housing a 300-year-old newspaper archive. There are early plans to establish a British Library North, according to recent board meeting minutes. Hayes’s request for information on the cost to the National Gallery of fighting the tribunal with its former educators reveals that £464,000 was spent. But this figure is not thought to include consultancy advice on handling the high-profile case, or the undisclosed settlement made in June, four months after the judgment that found the educators were already working as gallery employees. Contracts are being drawn up for those in NG27 not previously offered a new role. Hayes, MP for Dulwich and West Norwood, said she is concerned about the use of taxpayers’ money to challenge workers’ rights. “This is money... which could have been used to provide full rights and a decent wage for the gallery’s workers which has instead been wasted defending illegal and indefensible employment practices.”