A huge collection of movie posters given to a London Underground electrician regarded by cinema staff as the capital’s “greatest film fan” is to be sold at a series of auctions for up to £100,000. Anthony Duggan started going to the cinema up to 200 times a year from the age of 16. On Thursdays, when films changed over, he would leave the house at 10am and return at midnight having seen three or four. He became such a familiar and well-liked figure among cinema staff that they would put aside posters of outgoing films for him. When Duggan died two years ago the Everyman cinema chain placed a replica Oscar with his name on it in every one of its foyers to celebrate his life. This week the Surrey auction house Ewbanks will hold the first in what will be a number of sales to disperse the 2,000 or so posters Duggan acquired, many of them rarities such as one promoting Revenge of the Jedi before it was retitled Return of the Jedi. Duggan’s wife Helen recalled first meeting him in 1980 and seeing the wall of his bedroom, in his parents’ house, covered in film posters. It was a sign of things to come. “We were married for 35 years and his passion for film never abated for a moment,” she said. “He was a very outgoing and engaging personality and became very well known among cinema managers all around London … so many people adored him and his passion shone through.” He also collected cinema memorabilia. “When we first met,” said Helen, “I worked as an usherette and my family used to joke that what he was really after was my torch.” So great was his passion, the auction house said, that cinema staff came to view him as “London’s greatest film fan”. Duggan was born in 1954 and grew up in Uxbridge. His favourite films included the Clint Eastwood spaghetti western The Good, the Bad and the Ugly and Giuseppe Tornatore’s sentimental love letter to movie-going, Cinema Paradiso. The first tranche of his posters going under the hammer will include such rarities as two Star Wars posters from the year of its release in 1977. One features a generic Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia who look nothing like the actors who played them. After the studio changed its mind it was replaced with one showing the actors Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, Alec Guinness and Peter Cushing. The other being sold was released before the Academy Awards and does not mention the seven Oscars it won. Both have an estimate of £1,000-1,500 each. Other highlights include a poster for The Rocky Horror Picture Show promising “gorgeous gals”, “thrills & chills” and “lotsa larfs & sex”; a poster for the Hammer parody Carry on Screaming showing damsel in distress Angela Douglas being carried away by the film’s monster, Oddbod; and “From the Master of Shock, A Shocking Masterpiece!”, a poster for Alfred Hitchcock’s Frenzy. James Bond features heavily in the sale, including Thunderball – “Big, Brilliant Bondshell!”; A View to a Kill – “Has JAMES BOND finally met his match?”; and a double bill of The Spy Who Loved Me and The Pink Panther Strikes Again – “Nobody Does it Better than Bond and the Panther Together!” The auctions adviser, Ivan Macquisten, said the market for movie posters was a strong one, attracting film buffs as well as the general buyer who wanted a big and colourful talking point on their wall. “The great thing about posters as a market is that they are a gateway collectible to other areas of collecting,” he said. “You get a lot of bang for your buck.”