Nuno Espírito Santo has warned Wolves’ place in the Europa League group stage is far from secure, despite winning at Torino. Wolves will welcome the Serie A side to Molineux next Thursday with an advantage carved out by a Bremer own goal and second-half strikes from Diogo Jota and Raúl Jiménez . Nuno said: “It’s far from being over, it’s a close tie. We have to play next week against a very tough and a very good team. We played good, we were organised, we stayed in shape, we produced some goals but, like I say, there’s still one game to go.” This was already Wolves’ seventh game of the season, with their Europa League commitments meaning they have been playing competitive football since 25 July. Nuno, however, retained seven of the side who had started the 1-1 draw against Manchester United at Molineux on Monday. Among those who kept their place was João Moutinho, the 32-year-old Portugual midfielder who has started every one of Wolves’ seven games. “He respects himself, he rests, he’s a fantastic player and other players play also,” Nuno said. “It’s a very busy schedule. We have to manage that and always try to make good decisions so the team stay compact and organised. “Moutinho is just one case among others that play two games in a row and three games in a row, then we have to decide for the next one. The most important thing is that the players understand that they have to really work hard.” Wolves opened the scoring just before half-time when Bremer was credited with getting the final touch in a crowded goalmouth to Moutinho’s flighted free-kick. Jota doubled the lead by finishing the impressive approach work of Adama Traoré before Lorenzo De Silvestri immediately pulled one back for Torino. Jiménez restored Wolves’ two-goal lead with his fifth Europa League goal of the season but Andrea Belotti converted a last-minute penalty to give Torino hope heading into the second leg. On the performance of Traoré – whose end product has often been questioned, even if his pace and power has not – Nuno added: “I’m pleased. He helped the team, others did what they had to do. It’s about tasks, it’s about rules, it’s about always being a team. “Knowing that, when you know yourselves better and the characteristic of the player is what they can give to the team is important.” The Torino goalscorer De Silvestri told his club’s website: “We lost, but we have to think about our two goals scored. They still give us hope for the return match. “They’re a very physical team, they put us in difficulty under that perspective.”