Rich parents are being chased by universities offering super-luxe accommodation more akin to a boutique hotel than traditional digs – with annual rents topping £20,000. The Stay Club, Colindale, London: £10,086-£20,604“Live your life like a movie star”, says the blurb at this north London student development offering “luxurious club suites”. Neon graphic art decorates huge community spaces, penthouse rooms give panoramic views over the capital from the 19th floor, and guests have access to a “vibrant roof terrace”. The drawback? Colindale is in London’s outer zone 4, and a half-hour journey into town. True Glasgow: £7,040-£10,710“True luxury … see the space where your memories will be made” boasts the developers of True Glasgow’s West End student hall. Residents can take a giant slide from the first floor to the ground, an on-site “personal training team” and a “picture house with a 4k screen … just saying”. Redvers Tower, Sheffield: £6,579-£10,965Sheffield offers students the full monty with a private dining room (is that a bottle of fine Bordeaux in the pic?) a far cry from the city’s days of mass redundancies in the steel industry. Those with the deepest pockets get access to the “platinum” penthouse” where “your student life just got awesome”. Crown Place, Norwich: £7,650 – £14,790 a yearUsefully marketed in both English and Chinese, this new-for-2019 student hall offers a free on-site gym, games room with supercar-inspired gaming chairs and a state of the art music studio with grand piano, guitars, drum kit and recording mic. St Peter’s Hall, Bournemouth: £9,435-£11,475What is it about exclusive dinner party rooms? Here’s another luxury development for students that imagines all they want to do is host soirees. There’s also the obligatory private fitness suite and soft-furnished cinema room children of the well to do must now expect. iQ Shoreditch, London: £14,406-£20,622 a yearA free on-site gym “to get that enviable body”, “24-hour parcel collection” so you never miss an Amazon delivery, and great wifi “so you can watch all the funny YouTube videos without burning a hole in your pocket”. Meanwhile, coming in 2019: “A brand new sky lounge. This premium social space including a games area, kitchen, designer seating and study facilities.” What? Did someone mention studying? Coppin House, Derry: £2,775 a yearAt just £75 a week, and a contract limited to just 37 weeks, these must be the UK’s cheapest university-provided halls. You get a spacious study bedroom “fully equipped with a bed, desk, chair, wardrobe and bedside locker”. The communal lounge boasts “a TV for residents to unwind at the end of the day”. Unfortunately there’s no exclusive private dining area. But there is a Sainsbury’s next door. Pictures and additional research by MyStudentHalls.com