Stuart Broad has set England the target of bowling out Australia by lunch on day four if they are to turn this soggy second Ashes Test into a series-levelling victory. There are 196 overs remaining in the match and, though the tourists are still batting in their first innings, – they resume this morning on 80 for four in reply to England’s 258 all out – Broad is not calling a draw just yet. He said: “We’re pretty positive. We’d need to bowl Australia out by lunch but there are 98 overs for the next two days and for both teams that has been enough to bowl each other out so far. There could be an intriguing game left in this Test. So get the wickets by lunch, ideally bat until half an hour before lunch on day five and then try to force a result that way.” As well as a wicket apiece for Broad and Chris Woakes during the solitary session of play there was a maiden Test scalp for Jofra Archer. Cameron Bancroft lbw for 13 is the answer to a future pub quiz question, coming amid a seven-over spell from the 24-year-old that showed off his control as much as his pace. Broad, 128 Test caps Archer’s senior, said: “I don’t think Jofra bowled as quick as he can. He showed great control and bowled a nice nagging length. I don’t think there’s any doubt he has the attributes to be a Test cricketer. There are going to be times when he blows teams away. “It’s a big learning experience and he seems willing and keen to learn. In our minds, because he’s been involved with the World Cup and talked about so much in the last six months, we think he’s an experienced, older and knows-it-all cricketer but he’s still learning his trade a little bit, although he’s doing it with great success.” Archer sent down only two balls to Steve Smith at the end of his work – the first clocked at 93.5mph – and, if the rain stays away, an intriguing battle awaits. The right-hander left well outside off stump and often in exaggerated fashion but Broad says such movement does not affect the bowler. That said, the 32-year-old fancies another idiosyncratic Smith movement may have put off Aleem Dar at the non-striker’s end when the umpire turned down his lbw shout against Travis Head – a decision overturned on review. Broad said: “He is quite fidgety. He might have even done Aleem Dar on Head’s lbw because he threw his arm out as if to say ‘that’s going down leg side’. I think Aleem was going to give it and maybe saw Steve’s hand go. [The movements] are the way he stays in his batting bubble and he does it very well.” Meanwhile, the England bowler Olly Stone has been ruled out for the rest of the season with a partial stress fracture to his lower back, his county Warwickshire have announced. The 25-year-old made his Test debut in England’s victory over Ireland at Lord’s last month, but was unavailable for the start of the Ashes series. Stone’s injury was sustained on England’s tour of the Caribbean earlier this year, returning to action in early July, and will now cause him to miss the remainder of the season. “We’re obviously gutted to lose him just over a month after returning to senior cricket,” Warwickshire’s sport director Paul Farbrace said in a statement.