What were you hoping for?A fun evening with someone interesting and attractive, along with some good food. First impressions?Well dressed, good posture. An enthusiastic and warm hello. Beautiful long brown hair and eyes to match. What did you talk about?Where we’d grown up, the patriarchy, London life, uni life, veggies and vegans, travel stories, our jobs and – best of all – nightmare dating experiences. Any awkward moments?Not that I noticed. Though we did struggle to understand our friendly waiter, who had a strong Spanish accent. Good table manners?Very. She even used knife and fork on our pan con tomate while I opted for hands on. Best thing about Briony?Her nightmare first-date story about the man who made her pay for her theatre ticket before they even met. A bonus was that she guessed my age as seven years too young. Would you introduce her to your friends?I can’t see us together, so unfortunately not. Describe Briony in three wordsChatty, energetic, decisive. What do you think she made of you?Nice but not her type. Did you go on somewhere?Nope, it was clear we both wanted to head home. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?To have met at a vegan restaurant. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?Unfortunately not, there was clearly no spark. What were you hoping for?Pleasant conversation with someone who has a few interesting hobbies and a good sense of humour, and some delicious food and drink. First impressions?He looked as if he went home after work to change; I thought I should have done the same. What did you talk about?Careers, travel and how delicious the food was. He laughed when I said I loved watching Love Island but it wasn’t a joke. Any awkward moments?When I guessed his age as 32. Good table manners?Impeccable. I told him I was pescatarian, so he decided to be pescatarian for the night too. He also insisted I have the large olive. Best thing about Stephen?His friendliness. Would you introduce him to your friends?I’m sure he’d get on well with them. Describe Stephen in three wordsChatty, polite, driven. What do you think he made of you?“She can talk the hind legs off a donkey.” Did you go on somewhere?No, but we left as the restaurant was closing. And... did you kiss?That was never really on the cards. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?I wouldn’t have had the emergency sandwich before the meal, so I could have ordered dessert. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?Our lives are at very different stages. • Stephen and Briony ate at Parrillan, Coal Drops Yard, London N1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com