Just over a decade ago, Toni Morrison sat down on a steel bench in Charleston Harbor, South Carolina. Her writing had inspired this simple memorial, at the waterway through which so many enslaved people were trafficked,. One in two African Americans is descended from someone who passed through that harbour. As the end of the slave trade loomed and South Carolinians binge-imported black bodies, so many Africans died there that they were thrown into the water, their floating corpses markers of a mass grave. Morrison wanted people to remember. “It’s never too late to honour the dead,” she said. “It’s never too late to applaud the living who do them honour.” I realised parts of my emotional architecture that I thought innate had in fact been planted by Morrison’s words It was Morrison – as I discovered when I first picked up one of her books – whose work hummed with the spirit of honouring the dead. The novel I read then was her first, The Bluest Eye, the story of a young girl who believes in the ugliness of her blackness and poverty. It was also the first that altered my own journey. I was a teenage girl battling, like many my age, with a strong sense of self-loathing, and like many others with African heritage, with a sense that my existence was wrong. Then I read the story of Pecola Breedlove, who yearns for the blue eyes she believes confer beauty, and for the first time I understood how – as Morrison described it – “something as grotesque as the demonisation of an entire race could take root inside the most delicate member of society: a child; the most vulnerable member: a female”. Morrison captured the trauma of slavery and racism so powerfully that my sense of the world – the world of a mixed-race, British-Ghanaian girl, a story so different from those told in her books – became forever infused with her narration of the African American experience. Her writing in novels such as Beloved and Home, rooted firmly in the landscape of the American south, made the sight of June bugs, the taste of fresh peaches, the cool of a tin bath, part of the memory of blackness. She made the pain and power of her ancestors such a deep aspect of my own consciousness, and – as Hilton Als so powerfully put it – she broke our hearts with the truth. I first read Song of Solomon – the book that most deeply resonated with me – in that initial adolescent haze of euphoric thirst for Morrison’s writing. When I reread it, just a few years ago, I realised parts of my emotional architecture that I thought innate had in fact been planted by Morrison’s words, taking root in my psyche and growing there, like the maple, fruit and chokecherry trees that populate her prose. This is, I think, what Barack Obama meant when he said Song of Solomon taught him “how to be”. That is the power of Morrison’s fiction. Storytelling was Toni Morrison’s inheritance. Her parents – both of whom had experienced the brutality of the deep south first hand, told her traditional African American folktales passed down over years of enslavement and resistance. But Morrison’s genius – eventually recognised by the literary establishment with a host of awards including the Pulitzer and the Nobel – was also the product of hard grind. One of the most inspiring things for me about her life is that, a mother of two young children, she wrote The Bluest Eye while working full time as an editor at Random House. As well as incubating the novels without which – as Oprah Winfrey put it – American literature as we know it would not exist, Morrison was also supporting the work of other black authors – Gayl Jones, Angela Davis and Chinua Achebe among them. And it was not just her fiction that resonated with me. Writing my own book about blackness and identity – something I cannot conceive of having done had Toni Morrison not driven me, with urgency, to write – I found a speech she delivered at Portland State University in 1975. “Somebody says you have no language and so you spend 20 years proving that you do. Somebody says your head isn’t shaped properly so you have scientists working on the fact that it is,” Morrison said. “Somebody says that you have no art so you dredge that up. Somebody says that you have no kingdoms and so you dredge that up. None of that is necessary. There will always be one more thing.” When terror struck her city on 11 September 2001, Morrison spoke directly to the dead. “I have nothing to give … except this gesture, this thread thrown between your humanity and mine,” she wrote. “I want to hold you in my arms and as your soul got shot of its box of flesh to understand, as you have done, the wit of eternity: its gift of unhinged release tearing through the darkness of its knell.” Morrison was not afraid to write of death, of spirits, ghosts, ancestors, destiny and magic. She did more than any other writer to show the pain of her people to the world – a suffering that echoes down the ages – while cautioning powerfully about the distraction of racism. She revealed the sins of her nation, while profoundly elevating its canon. She suffused the telling of blackness with beauty, while steering us away from the perils of the white gaze. That’s why she told her stories. And why we will never, ever stop reading them. • Afua Hirsch is a Guardian columnist