Any snooty film critic worth their weight in pretentious non-fiction books has, at some point, uttered a variation of the following line: “Put your phone down and watch the damn movie!” While television is a different beast – particularly with the rise of contemporary habits such as second-screening – it remains virtually unheard of for someone to say: “Pick up your phone to watch this, because it’s been designed especially for it.” That is precisely the case, however, with ABC’s seven-part narrative series Content, which will not be beaming into a TV set near you. Instead, it will be available from 4 September exclusively on YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and iView, designed to watch on that same device you’re told to turn off at the cinema. “The premise was: how do you take a conventional movie structure and put it on a phone? Then we developed it from there,” says executive producer for the ABC, Que Minh Luu. The show is a comedy about a narcissistic millennial determined to become an online influencer, no matter what it takes – from keeping the camera rolling during a literal car crash (prescient, it turns out), to performing her first “mukbang”. The high concept is that it unfolds in real time, entirely from the perspective of the protagonist’s smartphone. We not only see the social media posts, video calls and various online exploits of young Brisbane woman Lucy (Charlotte Nicdao), but also every action she performs on her smartphone, including backspaces and things she deletes. This enables the film-makers to put an interesting spin on the old “show don’t tell” dictum, providing a digital window into Lucy’s mind. Watching Content feels like eavesdropping on somebody else’s private communication – or observing a phone that’s suddenly become possessed. Presented in a portrait ratio that takes up the entirety of the viewer’s smartphone, Content has been billed as “Australia’s first ever vertical video series”. It belongs to a small genre of narrative productions told entirely through screens, such as the feature film thrillers Searching and Unfriended, which unfold via laptop and smartphones. Co-director Daley Pearson, who executive-produced the smash-hit animated kids show Bluey, attributes part of his inspiration for Content to the realisation that “if I was to die and whatever god there was gave me stats on my life, I’m pretty sure I would be shocked to find out how much of the relationships with people I love the most were lived through phones”. I would be shocked to find out how much of the relationships with people I love the most were lived through phones As we watch Lucy unlock her home screen, load Spotify, check her messages, pose for selfies, neglect her best friend Daisy (Gemma Bird Matheson) and load apps such as Tinder and Facebook, the show unfolds with a seemingly effortless quality. In reality, most of Content was animated (Luu estimates around 80%) rather than taken from screen captures of an actual phone. It required a different kind of writing. The question “what happens next?” is a common one in the construction of narratives. However, in this instance, the plot was written and developed in tiny increments, capturing the small but dramatically meaningful actions Lucy performs through her phone. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Every day we would be making the next couple of seconds up,” says Pearson. “We would stick to the story – the spine was the same – but everything you see on the screen, every comment that pops up on the screen for example, was written. Everything was created.” To research how audiences would react to the show, focus group test screenings were held during which the film-makers observed viewers through two-way mirrors. “We had explained the concept to them, but most people were quite flummoxed until they actually saw it in front of their own eyes,” recounts Luu. “What we got out of those sessions was that people understood the format. They got it. They understood that this way of absorbing a story could be funny and dramatic and engaging to watch.” Presenting a narrative in this style led to unexpected discoveries. The film-makers, for example, observed how viewers responded when, while watching Content, notifications from their own devices appeared on the screen, mixed in with Lucy’s. When you compare this situation to traditional films, says Pearson, “the equivalent would be that you’re watching a western and somebody comes into the cinema on a horse. You’d think: is that for me? Is this part of the movie? We were a bit worried about this. We thought, do we ask people to put their phones on flight mode? “I was very concerned that we were putting the conceit ahead of the characters. That kept me up at night. But in this instance, the story felt like it couldn’t have been told another way.” • Content premieres on 4 September exclusively on YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and iView