Readers of a certain age will remember when Thursday evenings meant Top of the Pops and nothing else. Well, unless you were a swot, in which case it meant Tomorrow’s World. TOTP was appointment TV – a water cooler programme long before anyone in the UK had any idea what water coolers actually were. From rock gods to rappers, pop princesses to indie idiots, all musical life was on Top of the Pops. It was bewitching and bewildering in equal measure. Whether it was the far-out fashions, the awkward audience or the rabidly enthusiastic presenters, it was half-an-hour of telly guaranteed to get you talking or, at the very least, provoke your parents into an argument over whether the singer in Culture Club was a boy or a girl. And then there was the comedy gold offered up by the miming. Who, for instance, can forget the time in 1988 when a technical hitch saw All About Eve sit motionless through the first half of their hit Martha’s Harbour, oblivious to the fact that, thanks to a faulty playback, they were the only ones – in the studio or at home – who couldn’t actually hear the song. Lucky them. In 1991, however, the producers relaxed their rules on miming, allowing artists the option of singing live over a backing track instead. Yes, there had been live performances before – New Order were the first to go fully live when they sang Blue Monday in 1983 – but they were few and far between. And there was a good reason for that – they were usually rubbish. With one key element of quality control now absent, something fundamental changed about Top of the Pops. No longer would we see the likes of Orbital draping their unplugged power leads over their sequencers lest anybody thought they were actually playing live. The playfulness that saw the Gallagher brothers swap places for Roll With It (without the show’s producers even noticing) would give way to a new professionalism and earnestness, such that, at times, it began to resemble a slightly brighter episode of Jools Holland’s Later, only without the chin-scratching, token folk singer and bloody boogie-woogie piano. Yes, the artists, God forbid, were beginning to take TOTP seriously, and nobody wanted to see that. Changing the time slot in June 1996 merely compounded matters. With the Euro 96 football tournament hogging the nation’s attention, the Beeb sneakily shunted TOTP from its long-standing slot on a Thursday evening to 7.30pm on Friday, putting it in direct competition with Britain’s favourite soap, Coronation Street. Faced with a choice between Alex James and Alec Gilroy, between Wannabe and Weatherfield, viewers opted for Corrie and the dwindling ratings plunged still further. “It’s Friday, it’s still No 1,” they insisted, “it’s Top of the Pops!” But it hadn’t been for some time. Remarkably, TOTP managed to drag on for another decade, but come the summer of 2006 it had gone. The final weekly TOTP was broadcast on July 30 that year and featured many musical greats including David Bowie, the Rolling Stones and Robbie Williams, to name but two.