As the Vuelta a España celebrates its 25th edition since its move from April to September, there is no debate about the success of a shift that seemed radical at the time. The third Grand Tour now has a settled place in the season’s narrative, offering a chance for revenge or redemption after the Tour de France, and this year is no exception, given an added twist by a particularly active summer transfer market. The biggest move of the summer was the former Giro d’Italia winner Tom Dumoulin’s transfer to the Jumbo‑Visma squad, who have made no bones of their ambition to shake the dominance of Ineos (formerly Team Sky) in the Tour de France. With a budget second only to the British squad, they clearly aim to match Dave Brailsford’s team for strength in depth. Even with Dumoulin waiting in the wings and the Tour revelation Wout van Aert recovering from a serious crash, Jumbo still field the strongest squad by far in the Vuelta, led by Primoz Roglic and the Tour de France third finisher Steven Kruiswijk, supported by the promising American Sepp Kuss. If they can finally take a Grand Tour win, that will tee up a duel next year with Ineos in the Tour; it might also enable Roglic or Kruiswijk to stake a claim as leader before Dumoulin appears. With Simon Yates resting and Chris Froome convalescing, former Vuelta winners are thin on the ground in this year’s field. Nairo Quintana starts among the favourites; after the late withdrawal of the Giro winner Richard Carapaz, he is likely to claim sole leadership of Movistar’s strong squad alongside another former victor, the world champion Alejandro Valverde. It is four years since the Italian Fabio Aru won his Vuelta, and he has yet to show that was more than a flash in the pan. The Colombian Rigoberto Urán and the Dane Jakob Fuglsang have redemption on their minds after failing to live up to expectations in July, while among the other favourites the Colombians Miguel-Ángel López and Esteban Chaves will look to take full advantage of a mountainous route with a single flat time trial, on French soil in Pau 10 days in. With Froome, Geraint Thomas and the Tour winner Egan Bernal all absent, Team Ineos are built around the seasoned Dutchman Wout Poels and the promising young Briton Tao Geogeghan-Hart, who rode strongly at the Giro this year until his race was wrecked by a crash. Geogeghan‑Hart is just one of an up-and-coming generation of British riders along with the Cumbrian James Knox and Lancaster’s Hugh Carthy. After two years of British victories, this year’s race is one where the UK contingent will be riding for experience. They all face one of the exceptionally mountainous courses which have come to typify the Vuelta in recent years. The first summit finish is as early as day five and is followed on day nine by a brutally short mountain stage in Andorra, and the time trial in Pau. There are no fewer than five mountain top finishes in the eight days prior to the finale in Madrid, and there are slim pickings for any sprinters daring enough to start. The fastest of their number is Sam Bennett, who is looking to become only the fifth Irishman to win a Vuelta stage, which would set him up nicely before his move next season to the super-strong Deceuninck squad. Primoz Roglic Fourth in last year’s Tour de France and third in this year’s Giro d’Italia, the former ski jumper starts the Vuelta with the strongest team behind him. The only question is whether he can deal with the repeated climbing and the unpredictable nature of the final Grand Tour of the year. Nairo Quintana Vuelta winner in 2016, and Giro victor in a far-off 2014, the Colombian should benefit from Richard Carapaz’s late withdrawal: for once, Movistar have “goal clarity” rather than merely hoping that weight of numbers will swing things their way. The only downside: he is leaving the Spanish team so they may not be 100% behind him. Sam Bennett The 28-year-old Irish sprinter has 10 wins to his credit this year - most recently three in three days at the BinckBank Tour - but this is his first Grand Tour start of 2019. He was smarting after being left out of the Tour de France and Giro, but will look to stake his claim as one of the finest sprinters of his generation.