Mudlarks are river scavengers, but Lara Maiklem is more like a time traveller. Using old maps as guides to London’s former boatyards, quaysides, bridges, causeways, jetties and great houses – all those places where the rubbish was once dumped – she scours the foreshore of the Thames looking for links to another life: Roman brooches, clay pipes, Victorian shoe buckles, Mesolithic flints. A vast and mobile archaeological site, the Thames is uniquely suited to mudlarks because it is tidal, which means that every day, as Maiklem explains, it grants access to its contents, “which shift and change as the water ebbs and flows, to reveal the story of a city, its people and their relationship with a natural force”. Every drowned, unwanted or lost object is precious to Maiklem, who reveals, as she takes us downriver from Richmond to the Estuary, a preternatural sympathy for the broken, mud-caked and out of context. When, during one of her daybreak larking stints, she finds a body, “arms outstretched, her long hair spread out like a soft halo”, she feels not horror but fellowship: “I was the first to be with her after her final and most private moment.” A custodian of the past, Maiklem’s relation to the life of the river is personal rather than scientific. She sees the Thames as the home of her forebears and the medium of their messages. Alert to the ethics of ownership, she collects only those treasures that the museums reject, but engraved wedding rings are thrown back into the water: Maiklem does not want their sadness in her life. Time was when mudlarking was the reserve of the destitute, but these days a mudlark permit is needed, for which you have to belong to the Society of Mudlarks (founded in the 1970s), and to be eligible to join the society you need to have already held a standard permit and reported your findings to the Museum of London for two years. Even then, you may not be given membership because the society “maintains a deliberate air of mystery and exclusivity”. Maiklem divides mudlarks into hunters and gatherers. Hunters – usually men – are goal orientated and tend to employ metal detectors; the shoreline is “a battlefield” of “petty feuding, territorial disputes, jealousies, fierce competition and paranoia”. For gatherers, usually women, the search is as important as the find: mudlarking is meditation. It was her mother who taught her to take pleasure in small things, pointing out the curl of lichen on a twig, the veins on a leaf. As a country child, Maiklem learned to empty her mind, “slow down and lose myself in the minutiae of my surroundings”. Good mudlarks do not need to look too hard: “The key to spotting objects on the foreshore is simply to relax and look through the surface.” Only then will the eye detect patterns and imperfections in the sludge, such as flakes of rust, dots of glass and pearls the size of pinheads. Maiklem likes to kneel down with her nose inches from the foreshore: “I breathe in the muddy aroma of silt and algae and listen to the sound of water drying on the stones: a barely discernible fizz-pop as it evaporates and the lacquered shine turns to a powdering of fine grey silt.” Her prose has none of the self-conscious sensibility that defines contemporary nature writing; her thoughtful sentences read as though she were talking to herself. There is nothing that Maiklem does not know about the history of the river or the thingyness of things. “The wooden fid I found washed up on the foreshore at Limehouse has become one of my most treasured finds.” Wooden fid? “Fids were used by sailors, riggers and rope-makers to create spaces through which the rope could be woven together or ‘spliced’.” Mudlarking is a treasure trove of such curiosities. Finding a green marble stopper from a Codd bottle, she explains that Codd bottles, from where we get the word “codswallop”, were used for soda in the 1870s. Gas from the drink pressurised the marble to the neck of the bottle where it rested in a rubber ring, thus creating a seal. She has other stoppers in her collection, the oldest – a mushroom-shaped plug of red clay – is Roman, and once belonged in the neck of an amphora. “What I like most about it,” she says, “is the faint line that runs just below the top, from once resting on a sealing bung of clay or plant stuff.” There is a great deal to learn from these pages, not least the insight that finding lost things is the best way of losing yourself. It is, above all, her wisdom that makes Lara Maiklem such restful company. • Mudlarking: Lost and Found on the River Thames is published by Bloomsbury (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.