As the Brexit crisis engulfs us and thoughts turn to stockpiling, I spend a lot of time thinking about chickpeas. It was the same in 2008, although it is salutary to remember that the phrase “food shortages” never even came up at the height of the financial crisis. “Chickpeas, though … In case the cashpoints run out of money, should I have a load of dried chickpeas?” I asked the other day. “No,” said a friend. “The point is not to raise yourself above everyone else. You have to meet it with solidarity.” “OK. But chickpeas are really nice.” I don’t think it was really about chickpeas; I think dried beans in general are a security blanket. They give you a veneer of self-sufficiency. Who needs manufacturing and cold storage when you have agrarian-era skills and a big bag of beans? And they do have to be dried. There isn’t a canned chickpea anywhere in the world that tastes as good as the most average, nubbly little dried number that you found in a corner shop behind some nappies. There’s more textural variety in beans that you soak yourself – partly because some of them tenderise faster than others – as well as a subtlety and depth because of the stage at which you add salt. Principally, with a dried bean, you’re sticking your oar in more often, making more interventions at each stage of the cycle, and each one can, if that’s your game, make it more delicious. When it comes to rehydrating chickpeas, I follow the American genius Paula Wolfert and add to the water a teaspoon of salt and one of bicarbonate of soda, which has a tenderising effect. An overnight soak is non-negotiable. There is such a thing as a “quick soak”, where you bring beans to the boil from rock hard, take them off the heat and leave them for an hour in the water. I’ve never done it, as my formative years – the 80s, the height of bean-mania, crucible of restaurants such as Cranks that didn’t sell anything but beans, era of the fart joke – were full of stories about food poisoning from undersoaked and undercooked beans. Nothing will persuade me to quick-soak a bean, any more than I would go swimming straight after food or have a dream in which I die, because these are the things that will definitely kill you. But sure, try it. On that tenderising, by the way: too much bicarbonate makes any bean taste of soap, and some people can taste the soap even in trace amounts, so it is fine not to use it, especially if your beans aren’t very old. Beans are 16% moisture when they leave the warehouse, and that steadily drops off, while the skin hardens and makes them less absorbent until, after a year (according to Delia Smith) or 15 years (according to my mother), they won’t become tender whatever you do. There’s a freezer method – quick-soak, freeze, thaw – that breaks down the tough wall that older beans develop, but here you have to ask yourself some questions about your bean footprint. Returning the next day to your Wolfert-soaking chickpeas, rinse them and put them in a clay pot with 60ml of olive oil, a bay leaf, a grated onion and water to cover. Something truly peculiar happens to the onion: it dissolves to make a thick sauce and, unless you had made it yourself, Rumpelstiltskin could lock you in a room for a year and you wouldn’t be able to say what it was. Seal the pot with flour and water. Cook on a very low heat (130C/110C fan/250F/gas mark ½) for three hours. You could eat these for ever. You could add different things (chilli sauce in the morning, feta in the afternoon, a poached egg at night) and have them for every meal, then also as snacks. Napoleon’s more famous food legacy is his flouncy pudding, but Napoleon beans, which he is said to have eaten every other day during his exile on Saint Helena, are standard whites distinguished by their dressing. I’d get them to an edible state the same way as the chickpeas, then dress while warm with mustard, tarragon, parsley, chives and shallots. They are really nourishing and satisfying even if you’re not trying to get over losing an empire. Fava beans sound exotic and a bit intellectual because of Hannibal Lecter, but of course they are just broad beans, with all the ball ache for which broad beans are famous – you really have to peel them. It’s enough of a faff when they’re fresh and raw, but when they have been dried, soaked and cooked, it’s more or less impossible unless you have a fidgeting disorder, and even then you’ll only end up with seven or eight. They make a great dip, though. All beans make great dips, apart from kidney beans, which make a dip that tastes like cement and looks a bit like it. Is it an illusion, the off-grid, survivalist, Gloria Gaynor can-do attitude fostered by a dried bean? If so, it’s a delicious one.