The government has increased the fund available to struggling high streets to £1bn, a move that will pump cash into 100 English towns including Blackpool, Scarborough and Clacton. Last year the then chancellor, Philip Hammond, announced the £675m  fund as part of a wider package of measures designed to tackle the high street crisis in which one in 10 shops in UK town centres  lie empty. On Monday the Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) said an additional £325m would increase the size of the pot to £1bn. A group of 50 towns had already been shortlisted to receive cash from the fund after submitting the outline for projects – such as new bus services or the conversion of empty retail units into homes – which local leaders think will help revitalise their centres. Now that “shortlist” has doubled in length, with another 50 towns added, including Dover, Grimsby and Carlisle. All the towns are eligible to receive up to £150,000 to develop more detailed proposals. Boris Johnson said the fund would help unlock growth. “Our high streets are right at the heart of our communities and I will do everything I can to make sure they remain vibrant places where people want to go, meet and spend their money,” said the prime minister. “This scheme is going to re-energise and transform even more of our high streets – helping them to attract new businesses, boost local growth and create new infrastructure and jobs.” Launched in December 2018, the fund is part of a wider government plan to regenerate town centres and high streets as retail sales move online. Other announced initiatives include £900m in business rates relief for small retailers and a taskforce of experts to assist local officials in developing “innovative strategies to help high streets evolve”. In February, an inquiry by MPs concluded that the fund was not big enough to meet the scale of the challenge faced by Britain’s high streets as shopping habits changed. Town centres needs more government funding and private sector investment if “meaningful change is to be achieved”, according to the select committee report, which advocated taxing online sales and cutting property taxes for retailers. The document that sets out how the high-street fund will work says there is no guarantee” shortlisted towns will receive the money they want at the end of the application process, and that the final decision will be based on the strength of their business plan. The maximum award under the scheme is £25m but MHCLG expects most projects to be in the region of £5m-£10m. The government wants projects to be co-funded by the local authority or private firms.