Breffni Holahan gives a searing performance as Essie in Margaret Perry’s corrosive play about a woman’s disintegration. Essie is trapped atop a stone plinth dusted in dirt. Gigantic spikes of rock splinter the air around her. Her feet dangle. Having lost her job and broken up with her girlfriend, she is in every way ungrounded. This is where Perry’s play is rooted: in the queasy gap between her feet and the floor. Perry’s writing is as sharp as the rocky spikes, exact in its disdain for the ways the modern world overwhelms. In preparation for job interviews, Essie asks family and friends for words that describe her, desperately searching for something recognisable when she has lost all sense of herself. Interviewers want to know what makes her unique, but the more words Essie collects, the less secure she feels; anyone can fit the role of bubbly if they try hard enough. Scornful of vagueness, Perry ridicules the bland buzzwords we are expected to define ourselves by and sell ourselves with when, really, knowing someone takes time. Thomas Martin’s graceful direction complements Alison Neighbour’s fractured set as we watch Essie fall apart. On display like a bust in a museum, she crumbles under the weight of all that she should be. She glitches to the sound of rocks clashing and every time she moves, dust falls. When her ex says “What would you do without me?” there is a sense of having had a limb dislocated. Her job; another ligament. And so on until she is left alone, picked apart like Prometheus on his rockface. Holahan flickers between anger, despair and beaming pretence as she flails, holding together – just – the image of herself, rather than the real thing. Rage turns to heartbreak as the acute fury is upended by moments of softness. Alex Fernandes’s lighting embalms Holahan in gold as she remembers moments of beautiful intimate nonsense with her ex and the delicacy of the moment is agonising. Collapsible is a modern Beckettian cry for help. But it also mocks how we love to watch the ruins of a train-wrecked woman, as from Essie’s ashy pit, a jolting ending chastises us for enjoying the beauty of her pain. Collapsible is at Assembly Roxy, Edinburgh, until 25 August