These are tough times to be an estate agent. A period of rocketing prices in the middle of the decade has made residential property expensive. Buyers are unable or unwilling to pay the prices demanded by sellers and with unemployment low sellers feel in no need to adjust their expectations downwards. The result is a flat market with next to no house price inflation. Or so it seemed before the release of the latest UK Finance figures for mortgage lending, which showed approvals at a 28-month high. Boom times are back for the housing market. Or perhaps not. One explanation for the strong data is that buyers are worried about a no-deal Brexit and are doing their deals while the going is good. This seems implausible for a number of reasons. Firstly, the UK Finance figures are for July, which was before the odds shortened on Britain leaving without a deal. Secondly, since the referendum consumers have doggedly refused to get het up about Brexit. Finally, if potential buyers really imagine Brexit is going to be an economic cataclysm they would be sitting tight until after 31 October in expectation of sharply lower prices. Hansen Lu, property economist at Capital Economics, makes the point that UK Finance figures only cover mortgage lending by banks, which constitutes about two thirds of the total. Bank of England data covering the entire mortgage market suggests activity is less strong. Competition to sell mortgages is as keen now as it was before the financial crisis of 2008, only with much lower interest rates. The idea that this is a new dawn for the property market is mistaken. This is simply banks offering a variety of low-cost deals and securing market share at the expense of their rivals. Kerching! Equity partners at Deloitte are in for an average payout of £882,000 this year – a £50K increase on 2018 and the highest in a decade. This amounts to a two-fingered salute to parliament, the Competition and Markets Authority and the public alike. The accountants have taken some serious stick in recent years, all of it deserved, but seem impervious to it. If the mortgage market is an example of competition at its keenest then accountancy is a textbook case of what happens when there is little or no competition. Four big firms dominate the market and exploit their market power to the full. Firms pay more than they would have to in a properly competitive market, too often – as the Financial Reporting Council has found – for substandard work. Scrutiny of the accountants has intensified after the high-profile collapses of Carillion, Patisserie Valerie and BHS. But judging by the payouts at Deloitte, the first of the big four to publish its 2019 results, perhaps by not enough. Massive pay outs to partners are only possible because firms are able to sell lucrative consultancy services on the back of audits. The CMA has called for greater distance between the two arms of the accountants’ businesses but decided against recommending that they should be broken up. A opportunity wasted, sadly. It has been a long time since UBS Wealth Management advised its clients to go underweight in equities: the period in 2012 when the euro was on the brink of collapse and Mario Draghi ultimately came to the rescue with his “whatever it takes” speech. But its easy to see why the advice is being given again. China’s yuan fell to an 11-year-low on the currency markets in response to the escalation of its trade war with the US. The financial markets are skittish, down last week because of new tariff announcements from Washington and Beijing, up yesterday because Donald Trump said at the G7 in Biarritz that China is now keen on a deal. In truth, Trump can carry on waging his trade war or he can sustain share prices at their current levels. He can’t have both.