Too Darn Hot sustained a career-ending leg injury at Goodwood last week, bringing a rollercoaster career to a sudden halt. In landing the Sussex Stakes, his first success in Britain since October, the three-year-old seemed to have got back on track after a difficult first half to the season and was being aimed at races such as the QEII, the Prix du Moulin and the Breeders’ Cup Mile. But such plans have been obliterated. “Too Darn Hot has undergone emergency surgery to his right-hind cannon after x-rays revealed a hairline fracture,” said Simon Marsh, the racing manager to the horse’s owners, Andrew and Madeleine Lloyd-Webber. “I am glad to say he has come safely through surgery. The injury is not life-threatening and he should make afull recovery.” Too Darn Hot will begin a new career in the new year as a stallion at Sheikh Mohammed’s Dalham Hall Stud in Newmarket. His final record reads six wins from nine starts but the memories that will linger are of his flawless juvenile campaign that ended with a comfortable Dewhurst Stakes victory over Advertise and Anthony Van Dyck. A setback in the spring cost him the chance to line up in the 2,000 Guineas and he started the year with three consecutive defeats. His trainer, John Gosden, said last week he and Marsh had helped bring about those defeats with some poor decision-making but added: “The horse has fortunately overcome both his manager and his trainer. He’s proved that being champion juvenile last year was no fluke.” Peter Bryan has become the fourth jockey in four months to besuspended after returning a positive test for cocaine. As in the cases of Kieran Shoemark, Kevin Lundie and Callum Rodriguez, he has been suspended for a period of six months and must hope he is still regarded as a fit and proper person when he is allowed to reapply forhis licence. “It’s my own fault and I’m going to have to pay the price,” the 22-year-old Bryan said. He gave his positive test while riding at Perth in late April. “I’d taken it a few days before. The tests are random and obviously I didn’t know I was going to be tested when I rode there.” Catterick 2.00 Magna Moralia 2.30 Pearl Noir 3.05 Jimmy Krankyar (nb) 3.35 Chickenfortea 4.10 Mr Greenlight 4.40 Piedita 5.10 The Stalking Moon 5.45 Alotabottle Newbury 2.15 Arabian Dream  2.45 Strict Tempo 3.20 Sesame Birah 3.50 Perfect Outing 4.25 Wafy 4.55 Space Ace 5.30 Tavus 6.05 Alandalos Nottingham 5.25 Sir Boris 6.00 King’s View 6.30 Desert Lion 7.00 Last Look 7.30 Garrison Law 8.00 Spanish Aria (nap) 8.30 Gregorian Girl Ripon 5.50 Betty Grable 6.20 Cloudea 6.50 Ice Skate 7.20 Oasis Prince 7.50 Count D’Orsay 8.20 Menin Gate Bryan comes from a very successful racing family. Peter Bowen, who trained Snoopy Loopy to win a Betfair Chase, is his uncle while the top jump jockeys James and Sean Bowen are cousins. His brother Joshua is an apprentice with Andrew Balding. “My mother and father are very disappointed but they tell me to look forward and keep my head down,” he said. “I think I’ve learned my lesson.” A spokesperson for Racing Welfare said the charity provides “fully confidential, non-judgmental support to horse racing’s workforce and their close dependents. Anyone struggling with addiction or anyone affected by someone else’s addiction can contact us 24 hours a day, 7 days a week via Racing’s Support Line on 0800 6300 443 or at www.support.racingwelfare.co.uk.”