Joe Denly’s belated Test career owes much to the perspective that comes with age. After a handful of one-day caps in his early 20s he admits he went missing in county cricket and overcame a crippling run of poor form only when he stopped craving an England return so badly. On the eve of this series, when others might be hyped up with adrenaline, the 33-year-old could scarcely have been more Zen. He spoke calmly of the good fortune by which he was getting this late stab at Ashes cricket, a determination to enjoy the ride come rain or shine and the experience he hoped to bring as a senior pro. Nevertheless Denly cannot have been impervious to the chat surrounding his position since first being called up for the winter tour to Sri Lanka and then earning a debut in the Caribbean in January. No England cricketer in recent times has so obviously been the pick of one selector – in his case a former Kent teammate, and now convener of the panel, Ed Smith. Even before this third Test Trevor Bayliss was betraying a touch of uncertainty about Denly when he suggested Jason Roy may be better suited down the order. It was clear who the head coach fancied in the plum spot away from the new ball, despite neither man having pulled up many trees. And so with one half-century from 10 innings to his name before this match – 69 in St Lucia that booked his continuation through to the summer - and a near-miss with the World Cup squad after Bayliss and Eoin Morgan lobbied for Liam Dawson at the 11th hour, Denly could have been forgiven for feeling a bit of an outsider. It is not often the top-scorer in an innings attracts a fair chunk of the heat but when the total is 67 and the top score is 12, all bets are off. Denly had faced 49 balls during England’s Ashes-blowing blow-out on day two, edging seven and missing a further 16. With white-ball success having fed into his original England chance – as opposed to outright first-class dominance – and an expansive drive his downfall amid the meltdown, Denly was beginning to sum up the team’s issues as a whole. Yet on day three at Headingley, perhaps in a similar vein to the reduced expectations that saw him overcome a mid-career slump at Middlesex, Denly produced a performance that should earn him at least one more Test; another hint at the “touch of class in his DNA” that Smith lauded on first picking him. It started in the morning, when Denly’s initial fumble at third man talked Marnus Labuschagne into a second run, only for a lasered throw to Jonny Bairstow at the stumps to prise Australia’s new limpet from his rock. It may seem a little thing with England’s predicament so forlorn but being swamped by his teammates will have provided an early confidence boost. Did this bleed into the batting that followed? Arriving at the crease with the score 15 for two and Roy having been dispatched by a pearler from Pat Cummins, there were times early on in Denly’s innings where one wondered if the lessons of Black Friday had really been learned. As well as wearing one on the helmet from Cummins early in the piece – and getting into some awkward positions against the short ball generally – there were a number of whooshing drives at fresh air that suggested England’s long-held desire to go hard at width will not be reprogrammed overnight. But slowly Denly began to find his tempo, feeding off Joe Root’s growing assuredness at the other end in a stand of 136 that has given England a puncher’s chance of a Headingley miracle. Where runs first came off Denly’s edge, as the balls ticked over they started to come via the middle. A lofted drive off Nathan Lyon here, a pull off Josh Hazlewood there - who knew that Test batting gets easier the more time you spend out there? In the end it came unstuck when both men lost some momentum in the evening session. Denly, having reached 50 from 134 balls, went 20 without scoring before another Cummins delivery came into his body and flicked the glove on the way through to Tim Paine. It was a flat end to an otherwise encouraging innings and it is likely to prove inconsequential in terms of the result. But with some hard-fought Ashes runs on the board, Denly will feel more like an England Test cricketer than ever before.