The shadows of Old Trafford are visible from the highest vantage points of this stadium but since the Super League Grand Final was first staged in Manchester, in 1998, any notion of the Red Devils heading four miles down the road to compete in the biggest game of the season have been nothing more than a pipe dream: until now, one suspects. They are unfashionable, they are unfancied but there is no doubting it now: Salford are a threat to everyone in the end-of-season run-in. They had not won six consecutive top-flight league games for 40 years before this deserved victory, which moves them into third. With two games remaining, the play-offs are beckoning at long last. Generations of supporters have come and gone since their last title win, in 1976, living in hope rather than expectation of a side capable of competing for major honours and bringing genuine sporting success back to the city. “It’s taken a while to get the right mix here but we’ve some genuine guys who want to compete,” said their highly regarded coach, Ian Watson. They were certainly made to work hard for it in the first half against a spirited Warrington side, with Krisnan Inu’s penalty the only score of the opening 40 minutes, but five days after winning the Challenge Cup at Wembley, it was perhaps understandable that Warrington were unable to replicate their defensive efforts after half-time. Four tries in 14 minutes swung the contest decisively in Salford’s favour and from there a jaded, under-strength Wolves side were never likely to respond. “I was really proud,” Steve Price, the Warrington coach, said. “We rolled our sleeves up, put the gloves on and went down swinging.” While this is six straight wins for Salford, for the Wolves it was their sixth consecutive Super League defeat. Two months ago they were comfortable in second and play-off certainties. Now they could end the weekend level on points with sides outside the top five. Nine minutes after half-time their defensive line was breached for the first time when Ken Sio pounced on an error from Tom Lineham to score and that threatened to open the floodgates. Eight minutes later Sio had his second following some superb build-up play and, despite trailing only 10-0, the vistors looked in trouble. It seemed certain Warrington would make it six consecutive years that the cup winners have lost their first league game after Wembley when Jake Bibby finished a wonderful long-range Salford move on the hour, Inu’s conversion making it 16-0. Sio’s hat-trick came three minutes later, when he seized on a Lineham kick to race the length of the pitch and ensure no way back for Warrington. To their credit they did battle until the final hooter, a point underlined when they concluded scoring with a minute left with Danny Walker ensuring they would at least avoid the ignominy of finishing scoreless. But this was not about the Wolves. This was Salford’s night and on this showing there may be more of these nights to come over the next few weeks. Salford Evalds; Sio, Welham, Bibby, Inu; Lolohea, Hastings; Mossop, Tomkins, Dudson, Jones, McCarthy, Burke Interchange Lussick, J Johnson, Walker, Flanagan Tries Sio 3, Bibby Goals Inu 3 Warrington Ratchford; Lineham, Goodwin, Burrell, Mamo; Hughes, M Smith; Philbin, Walker, Tasi, Murdoch-Masila, Livett, J Clark Interchange D Clark, Akauola, L Johnson, Westwood Try Walker Goal Ratchford Referee Chris Kendall Attendance 4,879