I had my DNA tested last year. I wasn’t surprised to find out that most of me comes from Ireland, nor that more than 30% can be traced back to Benin and Mali, from where my ancestors were stolen and taken to the Caribbean. But English? Amazingly, a whole 10% of me comes from this land. When you are mixed-race it can be difficult to put your foot on the soil and feel at home anywhere; difficult to locate the place that owns you. It’s not as simple as saying, “I come from Manchester”, or Liverpool or Bristol, because sometimes you can be made to feel like an outsider whatever your sense of belonging. But Moseley, the Birmingham suburb where I grew up, was never like that. The house my parents bought on Springfield Road in 1960 squeezed into the Moseley postcode by about 500 yards – since our street bled into the adjacent Irish area, less posh and more obviously immigrant – but that 500 yards was important. It was Moseley, my little piece of England, my 10%. Moseley Village was, in the 1960s and 70s, the epitome of bohemian. When I was 13 – so that’s 1973 – my art teacher, a straight-up hippie, wore cord loons, a ban-the-bomb pendant and a handlebar moustache. His Joni Mitchell-esque wife had green hair. Green. 1973. Superb, I thought – or the 70s equivalent. Ornate Victorian mansions on Moseley’s most prestigious wide avenues housed the teenage devotees of Rock Against Racism and punk In the village centre, two strange shops sold dangerous roots, tangy black teas and packaged food that smelt of yeast and forest. There was, way before it was a thing, an artisan baker and a tattoo parlour. One Moseley resident, Pete the Feet – who died recently – never wore shoes. As in, never. Everyone waited for the winter when he would cave in and buy a pair of boots. It never came. By the time I was 16, if you weren’t in a band you were an oddity. A friend of mine invited me to listen to him and his mates rehearse. White guys playing reggae? “Yeah, right,” I thought, a Studio One aficionado. OK, so it wasn’t roots or rockers, but it was reggae – and those friends turned into UB40. My brother was also in a band, my sister was in a band, I sang backing vocals. But then so did everyone. Ornate Victorian mansions on Moseley’s most prestigious wide avenues housed the teenage devotees of Rock Against Racism and punk. In my brother’s band there was the son of a surgeon; an Irish immigrant; a white, working-class kid; a drummer from St Kitts, and himself – a mixed-race boy with barely enough to eat. True multiculturalism was the norm. In the Prince of Wales, we debated with middle-class students and academics making one drink last the whole night. We sang angry songs at the Jug of Ale. We hurried down to the Moseley Arms for Thursday night lock-ins and passed out the next day in Moseley Private Park. We tatted around the annual festival every summer and sang Stand Down, Margaret with Ranking Roger in the Fighting Cocks pub (“the Grappling Penis”) and we schlepped down Salisbury Road to the arts centre for pottery and jewellery making. We wandered Moseley Bog, looking for what Tolkien had seen, and tramped our spliff butts into the mud. They say you’re only ever six feet away from a rat. In Moseley, it was places of worship: you could change your religion every month for a year and still be kneeling somewhere in B13. There was a Hare Krishna centre, Scientologists, Rastafarians, communists (OK, not a religion but still …), any number of Bible study groups and unaffiliated communes, Christadelphians, a synagogue and a beautiful 15th-century Anglican church. Jehovah’s Witnesses reliably informed me that I would die at Armageddon if I didn’t repent, but the Buddhists assured me that there was no death, only change. I puffed on that one for ages. It was a time to be alive, all right. It was also a time to die. My co-lodger, a beautiful, gentle man, believed he was an angel and escaped this earth by taking his own life. Some died so completely and spiritually in mental institutions and prisons that it’s hard to remember who they were before. Overdoses were not rare. Nostalgia is dangerous bollocks. I moved 12 times in five years – from dive to slum, squat to sofa. I once rented a big room from a Polish woman who removed a grate from the ceiling in the basement boiler room below so the heat could waft occasionally into my Arctic bedsit. In another bedsit, carved out of the eaves of an Edwardian wreck, I shared the toilet with two men, both drunks without a good aim between them. Prostitution in the area brought kerb crawlers and abuse. Most of the time, I was broke, hungry, probably dirty and never quite cool. A few bad trips frightened me straight. I feared my angel escape was just around the corner. One by one, friends drifted away and became barristers, counsellors, lecturers, electricians and mechanics. Eventually, the wise bit of me wised up and took control. But I was already shaped by Moseley. I would always be drawn to the weird and different, people with not enough to eat but plenty to say, to art and music and books and ideas, to the sense that there is an essential self and the closer you align your life to it, the happier you will be. I’m talking to myself here. Moseley has moved on, too. After years of decline it’s affluent again: in 2015 a Sunday Times poll named it the best place to live in the UK. It’s not as bohemian, not as vibrant, and most of the old characters have gone. There are sleek new-build flats and hipster cafes, no more live gigs in beery upper rooms, and my singing voice has been compromised by age and tobacco. But, actually, it was never that good. Like I said, nostalgia is bollocks. • Kit de Waal is the author of The Trick to Time and Becoming Dinah