China’s world No 3, Ding Liren, won a dramatic play-off against Magnus Carlsen on Thursday to capture the prestigious $325,000 Sinquefield Cup in St Louis and strengthen the growing impression that the 26-year-old can challenge for the Norwegian’s global crown in 2020. Ding beat Carlsen 2-0 in five-minute blitz after the pair had tied on 6.5/11 in the tournament proper. They then drew two one-hour rapid games before moving on to the much faster time control. Carlsen was under early pressure from Ding’s Catalan Opening in the first blitz game, went into an opposite coloured bishops ending a pawn down, remained lost, but missed a saving chance when, moving fast, he failed to spot and claim a draw by threefold repetition of position. Carlsen, in his must-win second blitz game, provoked complications which would have defeated most opponents but Ding defended well. At the end Carlsen made a move threatening checkmate which Ding countered by a decisive mate threat of his own. It was a traumatic moment for Carlsen, who had won his previous 10 tie-break play-offs in major contests dating back to 2007. The defeat also ended his run of six classical tournament victories in a row, starting with tied first at St Louis 2018 and continuing this year with Wijk aan Zee, Shamkir, Grenke, Stavanger and Zagreb. The players in St Louis were identical with those in Zagreb where Carlsen scored in majestic style, but this time he escaped his drawing run in only the final two games. His rare failure can be traced back to the St Louis speed event immediately before the Sinquefield Cup, where he lost 10 games out of 27 and confessed to loss of confidence. His early games in the Sinquefield were over-cautious as he struggled to gradually restore full self-belief. Carlsen will now take a break, returning in October for Fide’s new 160-player event in the Isle of Man, a venue where the world champion previously scored in 2017. His current unbeaten run is 90 games, so its 11 rounds will give him the chance to break Ding’s 100-game record. Carlsen’s other target, a new rating record of 2,900 points, may have to wait until the Grand Tour final at London Olympia in December or Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee in January. Final Sinquefield Cup leading scores were Ding and Carlsen 6.5/11, Vishy Anand and Sergey Karjakin 6. The former world champion Anand, 49, was the oldest player by 13 years, yet could easily have won the tournament had he been able to cash in several favourable positions. The Indian said afterwards: “I think it’s the first tournament where I’m completely gutted with my plus one. Normally you’d be happy but I think with my positions Magnus would have made plus six. I am really embarrassed by my technique.” As for Ding, he can expect a hero’s welcome when he returns to Beijing and to his home city Wenzhou this weekend. His achievement marks a triumph for China’s “Big Dragon” long-term strategy which launched in 1974 and aimed to make the country one of the leading chess powers by 2010. Its first big success came at the 1978 Olympaid, where the Dutch grandmaster Jan Hein Donner, who had made disparaging remarks about Chinese players, was brilliantly crushed in the 20-move “Chinese Immortal”. When Xie Jun became world champion, China was one of the strongest countries in women’s chess, and in 2014 they also captured gold in the open Olympiad. China currently holds both Olympiad titles while Ju Wenjun is the individual women’s champion but it is Carlsen’s crown which is the glittering prize. Ding Liren is already qualified through rating for the eight-player candidates in early 2020 which will settle Carlsen’s next challenger. He is still narrowly behind Fabiano Caruana, who lost to Carlsen in 2018, in the ratings but seems likely to overtake the American very soon. 3634 1 Rh8! If exh1=Q 2 Rc8 mate. If d2 2 Qh7 mate. If Bxb4 2 Nxb4 mate. If Ne5 2 Ne3 mate.