Depending on your outlook, it is either perfectly fair that this feels like a typical golf tournament at its halfway juncture or the dumbing down of what should be a marquee environment. Sunday’s winner of the Tour Championship will stroll off with $15m after the PGA Tour simplified the conclusion to both its season and the FedEx Cup; handicapped starts, as afforded to players before a ball was struck at East Lake, haven’t altered the dynamic or impacted on the atmosphere. This cuts both ways, of course. In the perfect defence of the amended format, stellar names lead the pack. Rory McIlroy trailed by three when taking to the 17th tee in round two. The Northern Irishman’s birdie-birdie finish and trouble as encountered by Justin Thomas means McIlroy is now just one back, with Brooks Koepka currently the man to catch at 13 under par. Thomas has tied McIlroy at minus 12. “It’s anybody’s golf tournament,” said Thomas. Not altogether true; but this is wonderfully poised. The machinations of this event are apparent when it is highlighted that McIlroy’s actual on-course score is the joint best in the field alongside Paul Casey. At nine under, Casey is two adrift of fourth placed Xander Schauffele. “It feels totally normal,” said McIlroy. “It feels like a normal Tour Championship. If you play well, you’re in those last groups every day.” McIlroy seemed to benefit from a 90-minute late afternoon rain delay, given he played his subsequent stretch in minus three. Thomas, conversely, was one over for his back nine when producing a 68. “I was sort of stuck in neutral before that,” McIlroy admitted. “Then I made that birdie on the 12th hole, I got going from there, and then a fast finish.” Koepka, golf’s man for the big occasion, naturally commands respect. His three under par 67 felt a little underwhelming given he was at that position by the turn. “I don’t feel 100% but it’s definitely close,” said Koepka, in what will serve as a warning to his fellow competitors. Tommy Fleetwood had marauded through the field when four under par through 10 holes. The Englishman’s scenario would have been even more promising at that juncture but for a missed birdie putt from inside 5ft at the 1st. Worse was to follow for Fleetwood late in his round as he bogeyed the 12th and 13th before taking a double bogey six at the 16th. Given the promise as displayed for so long, Fleetwood understandably cut a disconsolate figure when signing for a 70 which means an aggregate of two under par. Justin Rose’s grip on the FedEx Cup, as won 11 months in the kind of afterthought circumstances the PGA Tour were subsequently desperate to avoid, loosened after a Friday 74. Rose had pocketed $10m in 2018 as the golfing world heralded the Tour Championship victory of Tiger Woods. Dustin Johnson, who has been curiously out of sorts with driver in hand, added a 72 to Thursday’s 73. At five over par, Johnson’s hopes of winning the FedEx Cup for the first time are all but done. Not that he appears in downbeat mood; Johnson covered Koepka’s name as displayed on his parking berth with a copy of one of the nude photos as posed for by the four-time major winner and revealed this week. Koepka saw the funny side, whilst admitting the prank was ruined by the footage of the updated signage spreading across the internet long before he arrived for his late tee time. “I had two hours to laugh about it,” he said. “It’s not really that funny when you get here and the cameras are there.” Chez Reavie was safely ensconced in the clubhouse upon completion of a 64 before the hooter was blown. Reavie revealed his hole-in-one – as delivered at the 9th – was his 21st in competition, which marks a quite incredible feat even for a professional. “I have just aimed it at the hole and got lucky a few times,” shrugged Reavie. The simplicity of this explanation was almost offensive.