If caps were awarded for determination and bloody-mindedness, James Davies would take some catching. The Scarlets flanker has spent his career trying to prove he is not too small to play international rugby and finally, with mobility now regarded as essential as power, the 28-year old has emerged from the shadows. Davies will win his fourth cap against England on Saturday, more than a year after his last Test appearance and, for the first time, will be alongside his older brother, Jonathan, who, in a 10-year international career, has become one of the world’s leading centres. “If you had told me even a couple of months ago that I would be playing in this match, I would not have believed it,” said Davies, who played eight matches for the Scarlets last season because of injuries and is still troubled by a nerve problem in his legs and back. “I have had the ability throughout my career to deal with injuries. This is one of the hardest I have had to manage but I am in a good place now.” Davies, who was part of Great Britain’s Sevens squad in the 2016 Olympics, along with the England wing Ruaridh McConnochie, was overlooked by Wales despite standing out for the Scarlets. Size was then a key factor in selection but when he made his debut against Italy in the 2018 Six Nations and played in the two Tests against Argentina that summer, he won round Warren Gatland only for injury to thwart his progress. “I have been doubted throughout my career because of my size,” said Davies, who at 6ft and 16st would not have been categorised as small 20 years ago. “It stopped me getting an academy place but I have always tried to prove people wrong. It has been my spur and keeps me going every day. Once I get into an environment, I tend to take opportunities and change people’s opinions. The World Cup is the biggest prize going and I have the chance to put my name forward.” Gatland admitted size was a factor behind Davies’s omission before last year. “He has said all his career he has been knocked for being too small and not able to compete at the highest level and we probably had some of those thoughts as well,” the coach said. “We were incredibly impressed with him in Argentina and he has a great opportunity this weekend.” Davies knows he needs to impress with Gatland likely to take five back rows to Japan. “I remarked to Gats that the back-row group is so impressive that if you don’t get called up you will have no arguments,” he said. “The opportunity has come sooner than I expected having not played all year and it is about me stepping up and making sure I do my job right.” The Davieses will become the first brothers to play in the same Wales team since Jamie and Nicky Robinson in 2006. “It will be a proud moment for mum and dad,” said Davies, whose nickname is Cubby, a nod to Jonathan’s, Fox, a reference to the pub their parents ran in west Wales, the Fox and Hounds. “It is special playing alongside him at the Scarlets and it will be the same with Wales. We have not talked about it because it is all about the team. I will not be hugging and kissing him before the game.” The brothers used to share a flat in Cardiff but James was kicked out. “It was awful: he was very messy,” said Jonathan, who will win his 75th cap. “I am looking forward to seeing how he goes. He has worked hard over the summer and always gives a good account of himself. This weekend is not about sugar-coating but warranting a seat on the plane to Japan.”