This Is England’s Joe Gilgun is the creator and star of this new Shameless-ish, Lock Stock-esque comedy, complete with a Trainspotting-inspired opening in which his character Vinnie, a “bipolar thief that lives in the woods”, bemoans the Guardian and quinoa. While this might sound like a show genetically engineered to appeal to your average 30-year-old male, Brassic is also a very funny look at the working class, rural life and mental health, as this double bill soon makes clear.  Hannah J Davies The winner of the week’s most startling programme, this finds Chris Choi following up reports that garden centres may not be all that environmentally friendly, what with allegations of the use of black plastic and environmentally unsound peat-based compost. Don’t tell Alan Titchmarsh. Ali Catterall Think you know everything about eight-armed cephalopods? You’re in for a surprise with this Natural World doc, in which marine biologist David Scheel installs an octopus in a tank in his living room in Alaska. See how they form an unexpectedly intimate relationship; they even watch TV together (Blue Planet, naturally). Mike Bradley The new venture from the always watchable Khoo takes her to a Scandi cabin where she cooks up some easy food. Demonstrating how to wrap up a tortilla is as complicated as it gets, but all the inspiration you need is there, with pink pickled onions and wild boar tacos among the items on her menu. Hannah Verdier After three seasons, Noah Hawley’s gnomic time-travelling drama set in the X-Men universe bows out with a characteristically mind-boggling turn. It’s a combination of Lynchian darkness, psychedelic trips and shuddering timeslips as hero David Haller reunites with Farouk and Switch for one final mesmeric plot twist. MB Moribund father Richard (played with deadpan brilliance by Tobias Menzies) actually cracks a smile at the start of this instalment of Aisling Bea’s tender comedy. Why? Because no one can resist the teasing humour of her character, Aine, who this week gets lured into a blind date by sister Shona. MB The Day of the Jackal (Fred Zinnemann, 1973), 6pm, TCM Fred “High Noon” Zinnemann’s effort is pretty loyal to Frederick Forsyth’s intricate novel – and he pulls off the feat of sustaining suspense, even though we know the Jackal must fail. Edward Fox is the cold-fish English assassin contracted to kill General de Gaulle; Michel Lonsdale is the French cop hunting him. Paul Howlett Test cricket: England v Australia 10am, Sky Sports The Ashes. Day one of the potentially crucial third Test from Headingley. PGA Tour golf: The Tour Championship 6pm, Sky Sports Golf. Atlanta’s East Lake Golf Club hosts the final event of the FedEx Cup. T20 Blast cricket: Sussex Sharks v Essex Eagles 6.55pm, Sky Sports The Ashes. A South Division clash.