She blows in like a song carried on a powerful current: a wild-haired woman, larger than life, carrying a tall carved stick. She loses things in that hair, she says; finds pens in there days after they went missing. A force of energy swirls around her as she sweeps into the Brisbane cafe, fresh from her daily 9km run. The stick is a tokotoko, a Māori symbol of status and authority, given to the celebrated scholar poet Selina Tusitala Marsh when she became New Zealand’s poet laureate in 2017. She carries it everywhere, a talisman not of war but of words. “We Polynesians love the materiality of these objects because they carry a story and they carry a spirit,” Marsh says. “So the more they are touched, the more they are spoken to, the more they build their own genealogy and story.” When Barack Obama got to touch it on a visit to New Zealand last March, he was more interested in how she got the tokotoko through security. “My husband said, ‘Can you take him [a photo of her with Obama] off your phone now? He’s been there for a year!’” Now an associate professor lecturing in creative writing and Pacific literature, Marsh was the first Pacific Islander to graduate with a PhD in English from the University of Auckland in 2004. “What an insult to the supposed diversity of Auckland,” she says. She had grown up in the working-class suburb of Avondale with a Samoan mother, who arrived in New Zealand barely literate and unable to speak English; her father was a steelworker of Celtic descent. The turning point for Marsh came when she was 11 and the New Zealand bard Sam Hunt visited her school. “My whole world pivoted,” she says. “He embodied this thing called ‘poetry’, that until then had been this static, inaccessible thing. I grew up with my nose pressed against stuff I didn’t know how to get.” She now travels to schools, bringing her performance poetry to kids: “All 11-year-olds should have the opportunity to see and hear poetry in a way that explodes their world.” In 2019 Marsh was appointed as an Officer of the NZ Order of Merit for services to poetry, literature and the Pacific community. Her published collections – including Fast Talking PI, Dark Sparring and Tightrope – have been heavily garlanded with awards, and her work translated into multiple languages and across numerous forms, appearing in museums and parks and on billboards, even graffitied on to a wall in Avondale where she grew up. She also edits Pasifika Poetry, a website devoted to preserving and curating the work of poets from the region, and is co-chair of the South Pacific Association of Language and Literature. Mophead, an autobiographical work, will be published in October. Marsh belongs to a generation that has seen poetry move away from a privileged white male enclave to something of a global revival: a short form of expression that is fluid, elastic and – as poets such as Rupi Kaur have found – can respond to events in an Insta world. “Because we are so attuned to soundbites of information, it is instant contact,” she says of the Instagram wave. “Those short, sharp, really punchy poems are in a multimedia [world] which can be circulated and forwarded.” One of Marsh’s memories of her mother revolves around the orange two-seater Spider sports car she bought when her divorce money came through; Marsh remembers her and her siblings – “look how tall we are!” – somehow having to fold themselves and the groceries into the tiny space at the back. When her mother died, a bereft Marsh took up kickboxing to somehow try to kick away the grief. “Sparring and kickboxing gave me the opportunity to physically spar this really bad energy and the incantation through the movement.” The aggressive movement flowed through her body into words and became her 2013 collection, Dark Sparring. “Anything that had a syncopated beat started stimulating words and phrases. If I can sound it in a way that everything in the body sings it, it is like a poem in the body.” Lately she has gotten into psy-trance music: “I am writing like a demon. Just these beats putting me in the zone.” Marsh’s poetry incorporates Māori and Pacific Island languages, often with lines going in opposite directions, powerful images, references to high and lowbrow culture, and humour. How to Make a Captain Cook Cupcake was written in response to a statue of James Cook being covered in pink paint on Australia Day. Be a mapMarking the massacresUncharted rivers of bloodBe silencedBe blackbirdedBe herded in shooting partiesBe shotBe left to rot in reservesBe absent so your land can be minedHave your bones lined upIn foreign museum cases for Scientific EnquiryBe fired in your belly. Colonialism is a theme that comes up often in Marsh’s work. In 2016 she recited another poem, Unity, in Westminister Abbey; she had been commissioned to write it for the Queen. In a piece for the Guardian, she wrote about how surreal it was to be seated so closely to someone whose “peeps colonised my peeps” – a history her poem didn’t shy from. All the royal family were there, along with Kofi Annan and numerous heads of state. She turned to introduce herself to the man next to her, holding out her hand. “He looks at me, then down at my hand, then averts his gaze,” she wrote later. She hoped no one had seen this astounding piece of snobbery, racism or classism – but she looked up and there was Alexandra Smith, the wife of the New Zealand high commission Sir Lockwood Smith, mouth opened and brow furrowed. (“I can’t believe he did that to you! I’m so offended!” Smith later said to Marsh. “How rude!”) The encounter inspired her poem Pussycat. The moral of the story is, she says, “Never piss off a poet.” These days Marsh writes on the kitchen table at her home on glorious Waiheke Island: “I have got to do it with nana watching Who Wants to be a bloody Millionaire over and over again.” But her Samoan mother-in-law has made it all possible by taking over running the house and children. Even though she rails against the “unconscious bias” of towns where “the only Pacific Islanders you see are in the service industry”, she prefers subversion in her poetry, rather than overt anger. “Anger can come in many forms but it is not my natural way to be an angry strident voice. You can seduce someone to get your point across, or you can use humour.” Marsh shows me a notebook covering in handwriting, words crossed out, written in the margins. “Journalling is my most important tool; this becomes my net to catch ideas, moments or images. It is a practical application. It creates the circumstances for the magic to happen; everything is caught, everything. There are about a dozen poems here, it is a daily thing I do.” Poetry is both “hard work and inspiration. You put in a poem what you don’t know, you find out what it is. It is an absolute joy when both myself and the reader gets re-pivoted; when something they thought they know gets turned on its head.” • Selena Tusitala Marsh will be appearing at the Queensland poetry festival, which runs from 22–25 August