The argy-bargy during Steve Smith’s first Test back after suspension has carried on exactly as you might have expected. Smith has generously given the Edgbaston partisans plenty of hours to give him an earful over the fence, while others in the crowd have applauded his batting and made the argument that the world should move on because he has finished his punishment. The interesting thing about this is that Smith has not finished his punishment. His year-long ban from playing has ended, but not the second year’s ban from holding leadership positions in any Australia team. So it was equally interesting to see him in the slip cordon as Australia tried to take the last few English first-innings wickets, directing traffic in the field as smoothly as he ever did while captain. Moving Warner to the midwicket boundary was a good one, out in front of the loudest part of the Hollies Stand. In 2013, Warner mollified England fans by shadow‑boxing to the Rocky theme song after having tried to thump Joe Root in a bar; in 2019 he turned out his pockets after the crowd sang about him hiding sandpaper. It is a simple but effective public relations strategy and even though Warner has at times behaved more egregiously than Smith, he can also be more accessible, less taciturn, easier to warm to. The obvious line to draw out was that Smith had taken over the side anew in all but name, and that Tim Paine, who originally replaced him in South Africa in 2018, is now playing on in Smith’s shadow. Except that is not really what the scenes have to mean at all. Leadership comes in a lot of different forms and the formality or otherwise of a position can be entirely irrelevant in the face of individual strengths or weaknesses. Smith was incomparably a leader on the first day of this Test, when he hauled his team out of the mire and carried them to safety thanks to his epic century. Ever since his batting clicked at Test level in 2013, Smith has been a leader in this way: three tons touring India in 2017, three in the Ashes of 2017-18. It has always been his most impressive cricketing attribute. Equally, despite all the talk about how Smith loves batting, the truth is that he loves being involved in any capacity. He is just as switched on waiting for a catch, which is why he takes so many brilliant ones. On the first evening, as soon as he lost his off stump on 144, he turned and sprinted to the boundary to get ready to field. He just wants to be out there. Having him in the cordon would be a great help to a captain who also has to concentrate on keeping wicket, knowing that an experienced teammate is keeping a close eye on how a batsman is playing and which fielders are manning which positions. The part of leadership where Smith failed was when it came to more ephemeral things: the way his team conducted themselves, the personal behaviour of his players – the impression they gave to the world at large. Things that are not precise in concept or in measurement but that matter in a representative team, given that it is supposed to be a collective embodiment of the people backing it. The Australian Test team does not need Steve Smith to be their captain again. He can skip the media appointments and promo shoots, the vague business of team dynamics and values and ethos. He can follow what has already been put in place. Paine has done a fine job in reshaping that since this team met disaster, and when his tenure ends it will be time to look to the future, not recreate the past. Smith can leave other people to keep those things in line. He can carry on being Smith. He can lead with the bat, lead on the field, and in doing so keep working to make up for what he called a failure of his leadership in South Africa last year. It has been less than one match back, and that’s already exactly what he’s doing. No more, no less.