You can pretty much divide people’s memories of doing their A-levels into two camps: a) those who found the experience full of detentions, sexual frustrations and “your mum” jokes, akin to The Inbetweeners; or b) those who found the experience full of sex and drugs at some groovy rock’n’roll sixth-form college, much like Skins. Written by father and son team Bryan Elsley and Jamie Brittain as “a show about teenagers, but one that actually means something”, Skins was commissioned as E4’s flagship show. They held open auditions to find “real” teenagers, snagging Dev Patel, Daniel Kaluuya and Kaya Scodelario, and bagging the now grown-up annoying kid from About a Boy (Nicholas Hoult) to play Tony. Skins wasn’t afraid to tackle the dark issues. The very first episode included a car crash, a sleeping pill overdose, an unwanted debt to a drug dealer, and a plan to help geeky Sid lose his virginity. For comparison, the The Inbetweeners’ First Day revolved around Will having to wear an embarrassing name badge, being photographed having a poo and then getting busted for underage drinking. Just saying. The first two series of Skins was British drama at its very best, featuring real teenage characters with real teenage character flaws. Tony is antisocial and manipulative, especially towards his girlfriend Michelle, but suffers brain damage for the whole of series two after getting hit by a bus. Tony’s best friend Sid is secretly in love with Michelle. Cassie suffers from anorexia nervosa. Chris spends the £1,000 his mum left him on a massive house party. And Dev Patel will never forget getting his bum out on a freezing beach in Wales. Panicking for an answer to how Skins could live beyond the second series when the characters had all graduated from Roundview College, Elsley came up with the ingenious plan of getting in a brand new set of characters to repopulate the lower sixth, and sending the previous actors off to the job centre/Danny Boyle’s house. The third and fourth series introduced us to hard-nosed womaniser Cook, man-eating homophobic twin Katie and her lesbian sister Emily, and Freddie, who’s in the middle of a love triangle between Cook and Tony’s younger sister Effy. While Skins managed to stay considerably ace, the plot lines also got darker and, eventually, dafter. For example, Cook gets a handjob in a strip club, receives a death threat from local gangster Johnny White (Mackenzie Crook), and ends up with an electronic tag after getting charged with GBH for beating up a random partygoer, all when he should really have been at home revising for his A-level History paper. But it’s when skater Freddie is clobbered to death with a baseball bat by a maniac psychiatrist in the final episode of series four that Skins finally takes the “I don’t remember any of this happening to me at school” biscuit. Series five and six introduced us to even more new characters, but by the time Skins had turned into Goodfellas, it was time to just switch off your television and go and do something less boring instead.