Putting forward a case for coloured mascara as a sound beauty purchase is a Herculean task. Asking you to wear not one but two colours simultaneously, as per Vivetta AW19, well, that’s just taking liberties. But here goes anyway. In sweltering weather, the idea of full-on maquillage feels ludicrous. On the other hand, as long as it’s not from sunburn, your face will always welcome a pop of colour. Two-tone lashes will do just that. They are eye-opening, face-lifting, fun and re-application is unnecessary – as long as you make sure it’s waterproof. 1. Milk Kush Lash Primer £20.50, cultbeauty.co.uk 2. Suqqu Eyelash Mascara in pink £29, selfridges.com 3. LA Girl Volumatic Mascara in turquoise £7, beautybay.com 4. Givenchy Volume Disturbia in red £23.50, houseoffraser.co.uk 5. Chanel Le Volume Révolution De Chanel 3d-Printed Brush Extreme Volume Mascara in white £28, chanel.com Sometimes I catch my reflection and I just look angry. ‘You’re holding a lot of tension in your jaw’ a facialist once told me. Ah, the gift of modern life. One answer to this present day malady, she said, was regular facial exercises. So I now knead my face using my knuckles and I make ridiculous faces to ‘stretch’ my facial muscles. My favourite is what I call the ‘wide-mouth silent scream’ face. I am not consistent in this ritual, but when I am, it makes all the difference. Everything is much more sculpted and it gets rid of my ‘resting bitch face’. There is power in facial massage – Face Gym has built their entire mantra on this truth. Their non-invasive workouts for the 40-plus muscles in your face claim to stimulate collagen, boost circulation, reduce puffiness, define your cheekbones and jawline and diffuse facial tension. And they deliver. Face Gym’s newest workouts incorporate gadgets and skincare for even more impressive results. And you can keep up the good work at home with their skincare ‘training’ range. They recommend a weekly workout, which is fine if you have deep pockets. For everyone else, it is great for special occasions. I was left with a razor-sharp jawline, sculpted cheekbones, a glow off the Richter scale and a less angry-looking face. Face Gym workouts from £50 facegym.com Seaside scents This divine Graham Greene-inspired scent is a blend of jasmine, rose and candy that also pays homage to the British seaside town. Miller Harris Brighton Rock, £75 for 50ml, millerharris.com Charcoal cleanse A clay and charcoal-based mask that gives blemish-prone skin a deep cleanse, lifts dead skin cells, smooths and leaves your reflection remarkably brighter. The Ordinary Salicylic Acid 2% Mask, £9.90, theordinary.com Skin perfection Want makeup artist Pat McGrath’s signature ‘no-filter needed’ skin? Her foundation, primer and setting powder, aka the holy trinity, is out now. Pat McGrath Sublime Perfection products, from £50, selfridges.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.