The line between relief and disappointment can be so incredibly fine it was little wonder Javi Gracia and Steve Bruce seemed caught in a tangle of conflicted emotions. While Gracia appeared marginally happier with Watford’s first point of the season – not to mention the slightly improved job security that accompanied it – Newcastle’s manager at least had the satisfaction of seeing another potential mini-crisis averted on Tyneside. “We’re only one point behind Manchester United and Chelsea, we must be doing alright,” said Bruce, jokingly, after an often incoherent 90 minutes that suggested he and Gracia could be in for an even longer slog of a winter than Ole Gunnar Solskjær and Frank Lampard. “It was hard work but the Premier League’s hard work. It could have been better but I’ll accept it.” Despite Newcastle’s encouraging, if unexpected, win at Tottenham last Sunday, the crowd of 44,157 was the lowest for a Premier League fixture at St James’ Park in seven years. Those that turned up saw Gracia enjoy the sort of morale-boosting start his side so desperately needed in the wake of three straight defeats. After two minutes Tom Cleverley’s 20-yard shot was deflected into the path of Will Hughes, who delighted in beating Martin Dubravka from close range. Watford’s celebrations had barely subsided before Gracia’s new-look back five – “I had to change something,” he said – was stretched to the limit by an incisive left-wing cross from the impressive Christian Atsu. It really should have prefaced an equaliser for Miguel Almirón, but the unmarked Paraguayan’s first touch let him down, permitting the fast-reacting Ben Foster to step off his line and defuse the danger. It was the sort of fluffed chance that suggests that Almirón’s long wait for his first goal in a Newcastle shirt is exerting a psychologically debilitating effect. “It’s just really bad luck,” said Bruce. “He’s a joy to work with and a really good footballer who just needs one goal to get up and running.” As half-time beckoned, Fabian Schär advanced to show Almirón precisely how to polish off an inviting opening. When Gracia’s defensive quintet failed to cope with Emil Krafth’s right-wing cross, bagatelle-style penalty area chaos ensued. The fallout concluded with Isaac Hayden knocking a loose ball down and Schär hooking beyond Foster. There seemed a strong suspicion that Hayden might have handled the ball but puzzlingly VAR was not deployed. The scrappiness of the preamble to that equaliser proved emblematic of a slapdash encounter with both sides struggling to retain possession, let alone create clear-cut chances. Foster had an opportunity to remind everyone of his enduring class when, early in the second half, he performed wonders to tip Hayden’s rising shot over the bar. Perhaps sensing the game might be slipping from his team’s grasp Gracia replaced Hughes and the unsettled Abdoulaye Doucouré – who up against a half-fit, slightly one-paced Sean Longstaff did not look worth £30m of Everton’s money – with Isaac Success and Nathaniel Chalobah. Success might have won it for Watford after connecting with a superb cross from Cleverley, but Dubravka showed off outstanding reflexes to prove reassuringly equal to his header. When Success turned provider, cueing up Roberto Pereyra, Bruce’s goalkeeper once again rescued his side “It’s an important point, and a good point from a close and equal game,” said Gracia. “But we still need a big victory.”