A Sydney lawyer who was filmed using a cafe chair to distract and try to contain the man accused of a stabbing rampage in Sydney’s CBD says he had “no option” but to act. Police are still yet to charge the man arrested over the rampage, in which one woman was killed and another stabbed, as the NSW government launches a review of accused’s treatment by health services. John Bamford, 64, told Seven’s Sunrise program he was getting lunch on Tuesday when he saw a man emerge from the side of a building “and I think he had the knife raised”. “I just grabbed the chair and, you know, went after him basically as best I could,” the lawyer said. “I had to get rid of my papers that I had taken for lunch to read so I had to drop them on my cafe, but the guy knows me there so I didn’t worry about that.” He said the man armed with a knife claimed to have a bomb. “He said he had a bomb in his bag, but the zip was undone, it didn’t look like he had a bomb to me,” he said. Bamford said he had no option but to act and the reaction to his bravery was “a bit overegged”. “What am I gonna do, go home and say I was there and I could have done something and backed away from it? I mean there was just, there was no option,” Bamford said. Other members of the public used a milk crate to pin down the man accused of carrying out the attack. Bamford was reluctant to come forward and speak about the incident but said he was trying to get ahead of “what was going to eventuate” with people hounding him. Mert Ney is accused of killing 24-year-old Michaela Dunn in a Clarence Street apartment before allegedly stabbing 41-year-old Linda Bo at the Hotel CBD. The 20-year-old remains under police guard in hospital and is yet to be charged. Ney’s family reported him missing following a domestic dispute last week. It’s understood he sought medical treatment around that time. The New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, and the mental health minister, Bronnie Taylor, described the circumstances as “tragic” and have ordered a review. “As with any critical incident, NSW Health will be reviewing all aspects of the care and treatment of the alleged perpetrator,” they said in a joint statement. The outcomes of the review will be provided to the ministers once complete. Police believe Ney attended the Clarence Street unit to see Dunn, who was a sex worker. She was later found with a slashed neck and pronounced dead at the scene. On Wednesday Dunn’s mother told Nine News her daughter was a “beautiful, loving woman who had studied at university and travelled widely”, while her friend Joan Westenberg told Guardian Australia she was “an incredible person. In every single way”. It’s understood Bo, who Ney allegedly stabbed in the shoulder, was released from hospital on Wednesday night. Investigators are still trying to piece together why Ney – who had a history of mental illness – allegedly launched the attack. He was allegedly carrying a USB stick with information about recent mass casualties in New Zealand and the United States, and could be heard on video footage shouting “Allahu akbar”. But police have not classed the attack as a terrorist incident and have not identified any links to terrorist organisations. A relative yesterday said neither he nor his family were religious. The NSW police commissioner, Mick Fuller, described the men who helped detain Ney as “the highest order of heroes”. “They saved lives,” he said.