In Lucy Mangan’s review (8 August) of the Channel 4 documentary Jade: The Reality Star Who Changed Britain there is no mention of the of the word “exploitation”. While it may be obvious to some, it would have been useful to address the exploitation of Jade Goody directly. This programme demonstrates, yet again, how people connected with her exploited her for their own gain, be it to make money, further their careers, raise their profile or get enjoyment through ridicule. Big Brother, a quasi-study of human behaviour, was in fact an exploitation of the weak or disillusioned through the selection of candidates who could be manipulated to expose their vulnerabilities, dreams, fears and prejudices for our “enjoyment” and Channel 4’s profit margin. Most of those connected with the programme happily used this exploitation for their gain, while claiming it was an exposé of “real” people’s lives and great entertainment. While presenter Davina McCall’s tears showed her recognition of this fact, it never distracted her, or her fellow commentators, from ramping up mob hysteria. By producing this documentary, Channel 4 shows that nothing has changed, and it is once again exploiting Jade.Len HughesBebington, Wirral • Lucy Mangan hit the reality TV nail on the head when she described the sneers of the press and the dark underbelly that is the instant fame machinery. Jade Goody was pilloried, but beat the detractors. The subconscious essence of reality TV is schadenfreude, delighting at the misfortune of others. Reality TV contestants won’t always be nice to each other, dance as perfectly as the professionals do or make the best icing. We wait for them to fail.Jonathan HauxwellCrosshills, North Yorkshire • In her sympathetic account of Jade Goody’s story, Suzanne Moore (A victim of bitter Britain, G2, 12 August) describes it as “a tale of a more innocent time”. But far from innocent, Jade’s story is part of the moment when the mass media began to portray the working class as feckless and ignorant. It begot a whole series of “reality” TV shows in which people on benefits and single parents were attacked, just as the working class was being destroyed – economically and intellectually – by Thatcherism and the neoliberal economics that continues to dominate the politics of our country. Jade’s story is not just about celebrity culture and the othering of people at the bottom of society. It is but one episode in the marginalisation of the working class through the development of a single narrative based on the neoliberal discourse that now dominates.Ann TobinBonsall, Derbyshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition