This mango and coconut tart is not only silky smooth, it’s also an explosion of fruity flavours. Have fun arranging the fruit on top in geometric shapes, or just throw it on in a rustic fashion. Makes: one sharing sized rectangular tart (14in x 5in)Prep time: pastry (20 minutes), filling (20 minutes), plus fruit arranging timeBake time: 25 minutes Pastry: (or use vegan alternative, below)225g plain flour155g salted butter (cubed, room temp)40g caster sugar2 1/2 - 3tbsp of beaten egg To make the pastry vegan:240g plain flour1/3tsp salt30g caster sugar145g organic extra virgin coconut oil (not liquid - it should be room temperature and scoopable)44-54g cold water Filling:260g mango pulp400g coconut milk95g caster sugar50g cornflour1/2tsp vanilla30g coconut oil/butter Topping: Strawberries, mango, kiwi, dragonfruit First make the pastry. Rub the butter into the flour and sugar until evenly distributed. Add the beaten egg and mix until the pastry forms a ball. For the vegan pastry: mix all the dry ingredients in a large mixing bowl. Add the coconut oil and use your fingers to rub it in until it resembles fine breadcrumbs. Add the water to combine and form a ball. Try to work the pastry as little as possible. On a well floured surface, roll out the pastry into a rough rectangular shape that is slightly larger than the tart tin. Carefully roll the pastry over a floured rolling pin, then use to drape it over the tart tin. Press the pastry into the sides and trim the excess. If there are any gaps, use extra pastry to fill them in. Prick the base of the tart all over with a fork. Place tart in the fridge for 15 minutes. Preheat the oven to 180C. Line the tart with foil, covering all the edges, and fill with baking beads or rice. Blind bake for 15 minutes with the foil on. Then remove the beads and foil, and bake for a further 10-15 minutes until golden brown all over. Set aside while you make the filling. For the filling, add all the ingredients (apart from the coconut oil/butter) to a food processer and blend until the mango pulp is smooth and combined. Pour into a pan and stir continuously over medium heat until thickened and it holds a trail. Stir through the coconut oil/butter until melted. If the ingredients separate, just blend in the food processor until they combine again. Pour into the tart shell and leave to set and form a skin. Cut up different fruit (use your own favourite fruits) and arrange on top to decorate. Eat straight away or store in the fridge until ready to eat! Baking with Kim-Joy: Cute and Creative Bakes to Make You Smile is published by Quadrille on 22 August. To order a copy for £15.84 (RRP £18) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846