Norwich were dumped out of the Carabao Cup by League Two Crawley as Bez Lubala’s deflected first-half shot was enough to secure a 1-0 win for Town. Daniel Farke’s decision to change all 11 starters for the Canaries proved costly as the Premier League new boys produced a disjointed performance and were duly punished. Lubala’s 18th-minute goal, his fifth in six outings, came against the run of play but Norwich struggled to produce a response after it flew past Ralf Fahrmann. Patrick Roberts struck a post and Emi Buendia sent a shot on to the crossbar but Crawley had plenty of chances to add to their lead and were worthy winners. There was further bad news for Norwich, who fear they may have lost their goalkeeper Tim Krul to long-term injury. Norwich were not the only top-flight side to fall as Colchester beat Crystal Palace on penalties after a goalless draw at Selhurst Park, with Noah Chilvers scoring the decisive kick as Colchester scored all five from the spot. Sheffield United were unconvincing in seeing off Blackburn 2-1 at Bramall Lane. Richard Stearman and Ollie Norwood scored first-half goals after Blackburn’s Adam Armstrong saw an early penalty saved, but Sam Gallagher’s header set up a nervy finish. Watford eased the pressure on Javi Gracia with their first win in nine games, comfortably seeing off Coventry 3-0. Their record signing, Ismaila Sarr, opened the scoring in the 37th minute with his first Watford goal before Daryl Janmaat and Adalberto Penaranda added to the score in the second half. Brighton needed a stoppage-time winner from Glenn Murray to win 2-1 at Bristol Rovers, having seen Aaron Connolly’s slightly fortunate opener cancelled out by an excellent goal from Tom Nichols, while Michael Obafemi’s 57th-minute header saw Southampton to a 1-0 win at Fulham. Stoke eased the pressure on Nathan Jones with a dramatic victory at Leeds on penalties. Danny Batth’s header and Sam Vokes’ close-range finish put Stoke 2-0 up but Jack Butland’s miserable run of fortune continued when his clearance struck a defender and fell for Eddie Nketiah to finish before Helder Costa levelled in the 81st minute. But as the game headed to penalties, Butland was not hiding as he took and scored Stoke’s fifth penalty before Jack Harrison struck a post. Nottingham Forest cruised to a 3-0 win over their closest rivals, Derby, as Albert Adomah opened the scoring before further goals from Joe Lolley and Joao Carvalho. Yakou Méïté scored twice late on, one from the penalty spot, as the Championship side Reading won 4-2 at League Two Plymouth, who led twice on the night. James Henry scored from the spot in the fourth minute of stoppage time as League One’s Oxford came from 2-0 down to force penalties against Championship Millwall, and they capitalised as John Mousinho drilled the decisive spot-kick past Luke Steele. Luton won 3-0 away to their fellow Championship side Cardiff after a Junior Hoilett own goal and further strikes from Alan Sheehan and Jake Jervis. Liam Boyce’s hat-trick helped Burton to a 4-0 win over Morecambe, while Rochdale were 2-1 winners over Carlisle and MK Dons were 4-1 winners away to Southend in another all League One tie. Jarrod Bowen’s goal in the fifth minute of stoppage time saw Hull force penalties against Preston as it finished 2-2, with Preston winning 5-4 in the shoot-out. The game between Grimsby and Macclesfield at Blundell Park was abandoned at half-time after a torrential storm with the score 0-0.