Zharnel Hughes is one of the most laidback members of the British team. But in those quiet moments away from training he loves playing Mortal Kombat on the PlayStation and applying death blow “fatalities” to his opponents. This weekend at the UK trials in Birmingham he will be hoping to do much the same to Linford Christie’s 100m British record of 9.87sec which has stood for 26 years – and the indications are that he is in the form to do it. “I’d love to get it,” says the 24‑year‑old. “I ran 9.96sec in London last month in the heats which was quite easy and I shut down from far out. I believe I can run 9.8, possibly a 9.7 but we’ll see. Sometimes the wind can fluctuate at the Alexander Stadium, it all depends how I execute my race but I’m in good shape and looking forward to it.” For good measure Hughes is also running in the 200m as he seeks to become the first man to win over 100m and 200m at the UK trials since Marlon Devonish in 2007. But he knows the double will not be easy given the likes of Miguel Francis and Adam Gemili – who have both run sub‑20sec for 200m – are in the field. “Those guys are really good,” Hughes says. “They show up when it matters, they are great competitors. Aside from us being competitors at trials, we are quite cool. We have the same determination. We’re ambitious to make it on to the podium. But I’m looking forward to competing, getting the job done and securing my spot for the world championships in Doha next month.” It is more than four years since Hughes was hailed as the next Usain Bolt after switching allegiances to Britain from the Caribbean island of Anguilla as a teenager. And while no one can hold a candle to Bolt, with whom he used to train, Hughes is now ranked third in the world over 100m after recovering from a serious knee injury. “I’ve learned from Usain that it’s about consistency, trust in yourself, not doubting yourself regardless of everything and despite if you’re not having the best season. Learn to have confidence in yourself, enjoy the moment and trust in yourself.” The potential absence of Christian Coleman from the world championships next month after allegedly missing three drug tests mean that Hughes will be seen as a big contender for gold, especially over 100m, but he insists he is not feeling any extra pressure. “I try not to let the pressure get to me, even though the spotlight may be on me. I’m quite laid-back. I find ways to keep calm by playing video games, listening to music, doing some online shopping and not think too much about racing. Because that’s when it gets draining and that’s when the pressure can consume you. “Right now, I’m on checkout at Selfridges. I’m always buying some little designer things. When it comes to games, I’m playing Fifa and also Mortal Kombat – I like getting my fatalities there.”