A second pro-Hong Kong rally has been held in Melbourne’s CBD on Saturday after clashes with Chinese nationalists on Friday night sparked a police warning that violence would not be tolerated. A pro-China march has also been held in Sydney, with videos showing hundreds descending on the city’s Town Hall, chanting “Long Live China” and singing the Chinese national anthem. “If Hong Kongers don’t love Hong Kong, get the fuck out,” some protesters reportedly chanted. “If you don’t love China, you’re our enemy. Isolate them. Get the fuck out.” Rallies have also been held in Adelaide and Brisbane and follow months of demonstrations in Hong Kong. In Melbourne, more than a hundred people gathered outside the State Library on Swanston Street on Saturday for a peaceful rally in solidarity with protesters in Hong Kong. Among them were members of Melbourne’s Uyghur community as well as Tibetan and Vietnamese groups, carrying flags, posters and signs reading “We love Hong Kong! We love Australia” and “Step Down Carrie Lam Puppet. Let the HK people vote.” A handful of people began shouting at the group but were escorted away from the rally by police, who had an increased presence compared with an event held at the same location where violence broke out. TONIGHT: Clashes in Melbourne between #hongkong pro-democracy and "One-#China" camps. pic.twitter.com/OPIYVJtal0 Outside State Library of Melbourne, protestors in support of Hong Kong appear heavily outnumbered by loud pro-China counter-protestors, mostly young. Some I ask have come after seeing footage on WeChat. Now seperated by police, shouting slurs and singing patriotic songs. pic.twitter.com/jjKoK1VGhb One arrest made of a Chinese student from pro-"One-China" camp. #HongKong rally #Melbourne pic.twitter.com/hmJR4jKCF1 Things getting really heated here at the Melbourne rally in support for Hong Kong. Pro-china supporters attempt to interrupt the protest #HongKongProtests #antiELAB #freedomhk pic.twitter.com/uNHXnd8cZS Hundreds gathered outside the State Library on Swanston Street from about 7pm on Friday for a planned rally in solidarity with protesters in Hong Kong. Violence began out when a group of pro-China protesters arrived. The event was estimated to have attracted 600 people at its peak. Videos posted to social media show the rival groups pushing and shoving one another before being separated by police. A Victoria police spokeswoman confirmed two men were interviewed in relation to unlawful assault, before being released pending summons. “We respect the right of the community to express their views peacefully and lawfully but will not tolerate those who break the law or engage in antisocial or violent behaviour,” she said. Similar protests were also held in Adelaide, Brisbane and Sydney, and follow months of demonstrations in Hong Kong. Hong Kong has been plunged into its biggest political crisis since the former British colony’s return to Chinese rule in 1997, with a wave of protests against a now suspended extradition bill which would see people sent to mainland China for trial in Communist Party-controlled courts. The protests, which started in April have now transformed into broader demands including the resignation of Hong Kong’s embattled leader Carrie Lam and calls for a “free Hong Kong”.