Chris Wilder made 10 signings and broke Sheffield United’s transfer record on four occasions this summer, but an evergreen and unwavering source fashioned a late equaliser here, with Billy Sharp scoring his first Premier League goal to salvage a point and ensure an enjoyable return to the top flight after what has been a 12-year hiatus. Six minutes after stepping off the bench – and with two minutes of normal time to play – Sharp reacted quickest as the ball pinballed around the Bournemouth box to poke home and cancel out Chris Mepham’s opener. For Sharp, a serial goalscorer below this division, it had been a long time coming. The Sheffield United captain became the top goalscorer in English league football in the 21st century en route to promotion from the Championship last season, and here he found the back of the net with the first shot in his third Premier League appearance. The elation was evident as Sharp stormed across the pitch to rejoice with the delirious travelling supporters. “They ambushed us on our [pre-match] walk through Bournemouth city centre, all piling out of a boozer about 11 o’clock, so that was an experience for the boys,” said Wilder. “I think a few of them were trying to get hold of some spare tickets. I’m delighted for them, and everybody connected to the football club. It has been a long time that we’ve been out of the division.” Those supporters serenaded their team throughout with the lyrics of an infectious ditty dreamed up by the defender John Egan at the end of last season. The words “they called us journeyman” were most salient here. The 33-year-old Sharp was one of four players who started this journey with Wilder in League One three years ago and his late leveller kickstarts the next leg of this extraordinary ride under Wilder, a boyhood Blade, who has cited Bournemouth and Brighton as inspirations for his fearless side. Until the hour mark had passed, when Mepham opened the scoring, there were few chances. The half-time entertainment – whereby a fan from each team attempted to beat Cherry Bear, the Bournemouth mascot – was as lively as any of the first-half fare. David McGoldrick and Callum Robinson tested Aaron Ramsdale, the 21-year-old Bournemouth goalkeeper making his debut against his former club, and after the interval Dean Henderson kept out a rasping strike by another busy debutant down the other end after the Bournemouth midfielder Philip Billing took aim from 20 yards. When Enda Stevens blocked off Ryan Fraser, the winger whipped in a delicious cross from the resulting free-kick, which caused havoc in the box. Billing strained to keep the ball alive before Nathan Aké tried to acrobatically hook it goalwards. Then Henderson saved superbly to deny Callum Wilson but, with the goalkeeper on the ropes, Mepham took advantage by slamming in from close range. Wilder decided to throw on his £20m summer recruit, Oli McBurnie, in search of parity but it was another substitute, Sharp, a wily old head, who delivered. “Who do you want floating about in that area?” Wilder said. “Mr Sheffield United, and I’m delighted for him.”