Donald Trump was characteristically unaware of the ironic significance of his metaphor about freeing ourselves from the “anchor” of the EU (Britain can ‘easily cope’ with no deal, claims Johnson at G7, 26 August). Rather than getting himself into a pickle over pork pies, Boris Johnson could have responded with the absurd fact that it has been illegal for decades for the Pentagon to acquire anchor chain from a foreign supplier. That embargo has nothing to do with national security, of course, but is a tiny manifestation of the all-pervasive, deep-rooted protectionism of the land of the free. It is not only the likes of Boeing and Pfizer that lobby Congress and the administration mercilessly and successfully: even a small company can readily bend the ear of a tame representative in Washington, with far-reaching and long-standing consequences. So much of the US single market is closed to outsiders more firmly than the one we are leaving. When I worked there, it was disturbing that so many Americans – far more educated, aware and sensible than Trump – failed to see the hypocrisy of their policies and laws. Overcoming such an anti-competitive, nationalistic mindset will certainly not be a cinch. Geoff MagnusDefence counsellor, British embassy, Washington, 1997-2000 • Perhaps understandably your correspondents assessing Boris Johnson’s G7 summit turn the spotlight on the twin pillars of Brexit and the transatlantic relationship. One notable aspect of the prime minister’s performance has sadly escaped attention: namely, his role in championing an international development issue that the G7 has ducked. Boris Johnson arrived in Biarritz with an important pledge for children around the world affected by war and humanitarian emergency. He has committed the UK to spending £90m over three years in support of a little-known, but highly effective, mechanism for financing education provision for children like the Rohingya now living as refugees in Bangladesh, but also for refugees from Syria, South Sudan and other countries. This is an investment that could help keep alive the hope of education for more than 600,000 children. Many more need help – and, having demonstrated leadership by example, Britain is well placed to call on other G7 partners to step up. The increasingly polarised debate on Brexit will doubtless continue. But whatever the outcome of that debate, the UK’s actions on refugee education surely underscore the values that must define Global Britain. Whatever the architecture of our future relationship with Europe, the UK is, and must remain, an international development superpower.Kevin WatkinsCEO, Save the Children • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition