Ryanair has been granted an injunction to stop a 48-hour strike planned by its Irish-based pilots, as it awaits the outcome of a last-minute court action to prevent its UK-based pilots walking out ahead of the busy bank holiday weekend. The Irish high court granted the injunction, halting strike action planned by 180 Ryanair pilots who are members of the Irish Air Line Pilots’ Association. The court agreed with legal arguments made by Ryanair that the union had not allowed for a mediation process to be completed before announcing the strike. In a tweet following the ruling, Ryanair said the injunction prevents a “small minority” of Irish pilots from striking, “which will come as a huge relief to thousands of Irish passengers and their families during the last week of the school holidays”. Update for Irish customers: pic.twitter.com/X1vaXKDNVs Ryanair has been accused of missing the chance to resolve its pay dispute with pilots by seekinglast-minute high court injunctions the day before the start of strikes. The low-cost airline will find out later on Wednesday if its attempt to block the UK strike, planned for Thursday and Friday this week, through legal action in London is successful. The British Airline Pilots’ Association (Balpa) has accused the airline of “bullying tactics” and wasting time by seeking to block the strike action instead of pursuing talks with pilots. The association also raised concerns that Ryanair was continuing to sell tickets for strike days, which come in the run-up to the busy August bank holiday weekend. It raised the issue of whether Europe’s biggest budget airline would offer compensation to passengers if they ended up being unable to fly. When Ryanair faced strike action and cancelled flights last year it refused to offer compensation. “Ryanair pilots in the UK have a serious dispute with their company which will not be resolved by raising legal technicalities in the high court,” said Brian Strutton, Balpa’s general secretary. “Their attempt to block lawful strike action is just another demonstration of the bullying tactics the airline appears to favour. It means that all the time that could have been used to try to find a resolution will have been spent preparing for court action.” Ryanair pilots who are members of Balpa are also planning a 72-hour strike from 00.01 BST on 2 September until midnight on 4 September. Earlier this month, Ryanair’s pilots in Ireland voted to join their UK-based colleagues in the first 48-hour strike if pay demands are not met. Ryanair is challenging the strike in court in Dublin, with a decision also expected on Wednesday. Ryanair’s UK pilots recently agreed a 20% salary increase, with senior captains earning up to £180,000 a year. The airline refused to recognise trade unions for many years but changed its stance at the beginning of 2018 after an error caused it to mismanage its pilot rostering schedule. It was forced to cancel hundreds of flights, putting itself at the mercy of pilots to resolve the mess. Last month, Ryanair’s boss, Michael O’Leary, told staff to prepare for as many as 900 job cuts as he warned that expansion plans would be slowed dramatically after the grounding of the Boeing 737 Max. O’Leary said in a video message to employees that Ryanair had an excess of more than 500 pilots and about 400 cabin crew. Earlier this year, Ryanair won the dubious honour of being named the UK’s least-liked short-haul airline for the sixth year running. The results from a Which? survey of airline passengers ranked Ryanair at the bottom of 19 carriers flying from the UK.