Vicky Jones has a lot to celebrate, and yet she has a natural inclination to undersell herself. As well as a playwright in her own right (2016’s The One), she is the director of Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s hit play Fleabag, a show so popular its title has now become synonymous with every emotionally nuanced female character on screen. The play premiered at the Edinburgh fringe in 2013, bagged a Fringe First award, went on to have two runs at Soho Theatre, a Bafta-winning hit TV spin-off series and a recent, lauded, off-Broadway run. This month, Fleabag has its final victory lap at Wyndham’s Theatre in London. It is a phenomenal success story yet Jones is careful not to overplay things, describing the current West End run as “nerve-wracking; ridiculous; dream-time”. Jones herself is a bundle of contradictions; part fiery Fleabag and part sensitive best friend Boo, a role that Waller-Bridge based on Jones. She obviously always had a strong idea of what she liked – and did not like – from very early on in her career. The friendship between Jones and Waller-Bridge began when Jones walked out of theatre rehearsals after clashing with a producer; Waller-Bridge, already a fan of Jones and her work, quit in protest. The friends went on to form the company DryWrite, which hosted an exceptionally talented bunch of emerging playwrights, including Jack Thorne, Mike Bartlett, Lucy Kirkwood and Ella Hickson. The pair goaded their writers with clever provocations: write work that will elicit heckling; get the audience to sympathise with a monster; push the line between what is funny and what is sad. “We both got a sense of what we liked without knowing what we were going to write ourselves. Phoebe probably did. But she was always telling me that I was a writer, which I refused to believe.” It was a dearth of decent female roles that eventually turned Jones to writing – a desire, perhaps, to serve her friend rather than serve herself: “I wanted to write for Phoebe because I felt like she was consistently disappointed when she was being offered certain kinds of roles. They weren’t dynamic or exciting enough.” Fleabag was also a result of heated conversations the two friends were having about porn: “We’re in a much better time for feminism now but [before we started writing it] we both felt like there wasn’t much leadership for feminism. It wasn’t easy to call yourself a feminist. You had to justify yourself. It was difficult to find a language for it and porn was the one thing that kept coming up that made us feel bad.” The character of Fleabag, then, was a feminist thought experiment. What would happen if a girl had access to porn at a young age? How would that make her feel about herself, her body and the value of sex? Despite sexuality being a key theme of the show, Jones believes that the excessive focus by critics on Fleabag’s exploits has obscured the deeper and darker elements that underpin the show. It’s the kind of limited and limiting response that Jones believes is down to gender bias. And that doesn’t just go for the journalists: “People who Phoebe and I really respect, we’ve overheard them say that we’re just out to shock, which is quite hurtful, really.” Jones’s latest work is Run, an upcoming series for HBO and the first TV-producing credit for DryWrite. The show is about a young mum who, “tired and uninspired by her life”, walks away from her kids. Run is part of a new wave of shows – think Motherland, and Amy Schumer’s recent standup hour Growing – that are rewriting the myth of motherhood. Jones has been writing the show while taking care of her first baby and it’s been a slog: “It’s really hard to find the words. I’ve been going through so many shades of it. I’m pretty sure it’s good to bust taboos about women and to point out gender equality in social attitudes but, at the same time, I keep thinking: I don’t think I’d do it; I don’t think I’d leave my son.” Just as Fleabag was an extension of early conversations between Jones and Waller-Bridge, Run is a continuation of the dialogue that Jones has been having with many of her female friends: “I feel it’s so easy to take it all upon yourself because motherhood is so complicated in terms of feminism. You feel this overwhelming responsibility to be the best you can be and you very easily put aside your needs and rights. You think you’re doing it to be a good mother but it ends up being woefully unfair if you’re not careful.” The knack, says Jones, is to keep talking. Keep writing. Keep questioning. And never be afraid of your inner Fleabag. Fleabag is at Wyndham’s Theatre, WC2, Tuesday 20 August to 14 September