Riot police in Hong Kong have fired teargas and rubber bullets on protesters in at least five locations as demonstrators staged a daylong citywide strike during which two cars rammed the crowds. Officers charged protesters who had occupied roads, surrounded police stations, and staged a rally near government offices on Monday. Police fired multiple rounds of teargas, pepper spray and rubber bullets and had arrested 82 people by the early evening. Swaths of the city were paralysed as workers went on strike and protesters took over major intersections and disrupted traffic. Seven districts were holding simultaneous rallies, with demonstrators filling up parks, shopping malls, and spilling over into nearby roads and bridges. The protests were triggered by a controversial bill that would have allowed extraditions to mainland China, where the Communist party controls the courts, but have since evolved into a broader pro-democracy movement. Public anger – fuelled by the aggressive tactics used by the police against demonstrators – has collided with years of frustration over worsening inequality and the cost of living in one of the world's most expensive, densely populated cities. The protest movement was given fresh impetus on 21 July when gangs of men attacked protesters and commuters at a mass transit station – while authorities seemingly did little to intervene. Underlying the movement is a push for full democracy in the city, whose leader is chosen by a committee dominated by a pro-Beijing establishment rather than by direct elections. Protesters have vowed to keep their movement going until their core demands are met, such as the resignation of the city's leader, Carrie Lam, an independent inquiry into police tactics, an amnesty for those arrested and a permanent withdrawal of the bill. Hongkongers have seen Beijing’s influence grow in recent years, as activists have been jailed and pro-democracy lawmakers disqualified from running or holding office. Independent booksellers have disappeared from the city, before reappearing in mainland China facing charges. Under the terms of the agreement by which the former British colony was returned to Chinese control in 1997, the semi-autonomous region was meant to maintain a “high degree of autonomy” through an independent judiciary, a free press and an open market economy, a framework known as “one country, two systems”. The extradition bill was seen as an attempt to undermine this and to give Beijing the ability to try pro-democracy activists under the judicial system of the mainland. Lam has shown no sign of backing down beyond agreeing to suspend the extradition bill, while Beijing has issued increasingly shrill condemnations but has left it to the city's semi-autonomous government to deal with the situation. Meanwhile police have violently clashed directly with protesters, repeatedly firing teargas and rubber bullets. Beijing has ramped up its accusations that foreign countries are “fanning the fire” of unrest in the city. China’s top diplomat Yang Jiechi has ordered the US to “immediately stop interfering in Hong Kong affairs in any form”. Lily Kuo and Verna Yu in Hong Kong More than 200 flights were cancelled and several lines of the MTR, the rail network serving Hong Kong, were suspended as protesters, many wearing face masks and black clothing, blocked the doors of trains, preventing their departure from the stations. Protesters not only blocked train doors from closing, they placed bicycles, trolleys and steel bars on the tracks of the East Rail line that connects the heart of Hong Kong to one of the border checkpoints with mainland China, and wedged fire extinguishers between the train and the platform to stop trains from leaving.“These should not have been on the tracks. If trains hit these objects there could have been serious consequences,” said the railway company’s spokesman. As the city enters its ninth consecutive week of mass protests, tensions have escalated. Two taxis and one private car rammed through roadblocks protesters had set up, narrowly missing people crowded on the streets. In Yuen Long, the site of a violent attack on commuters on 21 July, a car rammed through a barricade, injuring one person. In Sha Tin, in Hong Kong’s New Territories, protesters, some with bricks, chased after a taxi that broke through three roadblocks. Hong Kong’s embattled leader, Carrie Lam, said the mass protests had pushed the city to the brink of a “very dangerous situation” and condemned protesters for damaging its economy and stability. The comments angered many, bringing more out to simultaneous rallies held in seven districts. “Such extensive disruptions in the name of certain demands or uncooperative movement have seriously undermined Hong Kong law and order and are pushing our city, the city we all love, and many of us helped to build, to the verge of a very dangerous situation,” Lam said. But Joel Tse, a 25-year-old advertising industry professional, said: “I want Carrie Lam to come out and fix the problem, not give us some bullshit.” He said he had been on the fence as to whether or not to join Monday’s general strike – the first in Hong Kong for more than 50 years. After watching the chief executive’s press conference earlier, he decided to join the thousands dressed in black, the signature colour of the protests, at Tamar Park in Admiralty, near government offices. “Whatever she’s doing, she’s not helping. She’s further inciting anger,” said Avery Ng, a local politician and pro-democracy activist who was at Tamar as teargas was deployed to disperse protesters.Ng said the police had been “randomly shooting teargas canisters out from inside the central government offices”, where hours earlier Lam had been giving her speech.“We won’t see the end of this saga, unless she does something. Not even [necessarily] meeting the demands.”But he added he thought Lam was “no longer in the driver’s seat”. 1 July 1997: Hong Kong, previously a British colony, is returned to China under the framework of "one country, two systems". The "Basic Law" constitution guarantees to protect, for the next 50 years, the democratic institutions that make Hong Kong distinct from Communist-ruled mainland China. 2003: Hong Kong's leaders introduce legislation that would forbid acts of treason and subversion against the Chinese government. The bill resembles laws used to charge dissidents on the mainland. An estimated half a million people turn out to protest against the bill. As a result of the backlash, further action on the proposal is halted. 2007: The Basic Law stated that the ultimate aim was for Hong Kong's voters to achieve a complete democracy, but China decides in 2007 that universal suffrage in elections for the chief executive cannot be implemented until 2017. Some lawmakers are chosen by business and trade groups, while others are elected by vote. In a bid to accelerate a decision on universal suffrage, five lawmakers resign. But this act is followed by the adoption of the Beijing-backed electoral changes, which expand the chief executive's selection committee and add more seats for lawmakers elected by direct vote. The legislation divides Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp, as some support the reforms while others say they will only delay full democracy while reinforcing a structure that favors Beijing. 2014: The Chinese government introduces a bill allowing Hong Kong residents to vote for their leader in 2017, but with one major caveat: the candidates must be approved by Beijing. Pro-democracy lawmakers are incensed by the bill, which they call an example of "fake universal suffrage" and "fake democracy". The move triggers a massive protest as crowds occupy some of Hong Kong's most crowded districts for 70 days. In June 2015, Hong Kong legislators formally reject the bill, and electoral reform stalls. The current chief executive, Carrie Lam, widely seen as the Chinese Communist Party's favored candidate, is hand-picked in 2017 by a 1,200-person committee dominated by pro-Beijing elites. 2019: Lam pushes amendments to extradition laws that would allow people to be sent to mainland China to face charges. The proposed legislation triggers a huge protest, with organizers putting the turnout at 1 million, and a standoff that forces the legislature to postpone debate on the bills. At a shopping complex in Sha Tin, a district where clashes with police last month angered many local residents, hundreds of protesters took over the high-end commercial centre, forcing stores to shut. Crowds of protesters clad in black sat on the floor of the mall chanting: “Hong Kong people, let’s go!” Many of those attending the rally said they had taken time off work to come to support the protesters, many of them young, who have clashed with police in weekly protests since June. “I am here to support the youngsters. They fight really hard for Hong Kong’s freedom and today Carrie Lam’s response to us was ridiculous,” said Camille Lam, 28, who works in a retail company. Others said they were worried that the situation, the former British colony’s most serious political crisis since it was returned to Chinese control in 1997, was escalating. “Things are getting more serious now, and more violent. The government is not listening and that is unacceptable,” said Chun Yee, 28, a piano teacher who had cancelled all her classes for the day. Police said in a press conference on Monday that they had arrested 420 people since the protests began in June, the youngest aged 14 and the oldest 76. The police condemned protesters for using petrol bombs, slingshots and bricks as weapons. Faith Tang, 30, a teacher at a language school, said the principal had closed the centre that day because so many teachers and administrative staff had stayed home. Tang said she joined the strike in order to force the government to respond to the protesters’ demands, which include the complete withdrawal of a controversial extradition bill. She said she joined the strike “to stand with my fellow Hongkongers, to show support for our relentless fight for freedom and justice”. Some commuters going to work said they were supportive of the strike, even if they themselves could not participate. “This is a last resort,” said Cindy Chan, waiting in a long bus line after severe delays on her local train line. Chan works in utilities and said she was unable to take time off from work. “The government doesn’t listen to the opinions of the people and later you can see it’s getting worse and worse,” she said. The citywide protests began over an extradition bill to send suspects to China, but have turned into a broader political movement for the semi-autonomous city, with protesters demanding the protection of freedoms for Hongkongers and accountability from the Hong Kong government. Flanked by members of her government, Lam said she had already responded to the protesters’ demands. “Some people may not agree with our response … but we have considered every factor. What is in front of us is Hong Kong’s stability and future and escalated violence,” she said.