What I’d give to know what was said at the commissioning meeting that led to the new sculpture at the Dreamland theme park in Margate. The piece is planned as a tribute to the town’s autumn hosting of the Turner prize exhibition. Did a young creative, during a working breakfast, muse: “So the prize is named after Turner, the artist who did the landscapes. But that’s just boring, right? So how about we go with a different Turner instead? Kathleen? Lana? Anthea? Or how about a massive inflatable Tina Turner?” Too expensive? “If the budget won’t stretch to a whole body, let’s just go with her head. If we can raise a bit of extra cash, maybe we can throw in a hand, too.” Looking at the early images of the piece, which is 7m (23ft) high and will house a karaoke machine so that visitors can climb inside and sing along to Turner classics, I can’t decide whether it’s monstrous, brilliant or plain terrifying. It may be all of these things at once. Certainly, it encapsulates all that is bold and bonkers about 21st-century public art. And perhaps we should applaud Dreamland for trying to inject some fun into what is so often a solemn and serious endeavour. Far too often large-scale public works drip with sanctimony as they invite passersby to, y’know, really think about the world. A case in point is Damien Hirst’s 20m Verity in Ilfracombe, Devon, depicting as it does a semi-flayed pregnant woman standing on a pile of books while waving a sword and carrying the scales of justice. If art is meant to provoke, then this undoubtedly succeeds. It makes children cry, dogs whimper and residents quite possibly daydream about pickling its creator in formaldehyde. Others, such as Sean Henry’s Couple, achieve the precise opposite of what was intended. Henry’s sculpture is a steel platform off the coast of Newbiggin-by-the-Sea, Northumberland, on which two giant figures look out to sea. It is, one presumes, meant to draw attention to the watery sunset, which is a nice idea were it not for the fact you can no longer see it owing to the unprepossessing artwork obscuring the view. The Dreamland piece also has the advantage of being temporary: like a fairground bouncy castle, it can be deflated at a moment’s notice. Would that we could have stuck a pin in Anish Kapoor’s Orbit, a ghastly tangle of steel tubing commissioned for the 2012 Olympics, which was later turned into a slide to give it a practical function; or Maggi Hambling’s tribute to Oscar Wilde, essentially a crayon drawing rising from a coffin, that the late, great art critic Tom Lubbock, called “a plain disaster … An empty space would be better”. One of the inherent problems of art in a public space lies in its remit of trying to please everyone. Outdoor art needs to satisfy councils, funding bodies and local businesses, which is why it often ends up being boringly mediocre or wildly ill-judged. There is also a difference between what is deemed acceptable in a gallery and outside it. While no one is threatening to deposit Marc Quinn’s blood installations or Piero Manzoni’s tinned poo on town-centre roundabouts, rules nonetheless apply. Lubbock wrote that public art “stands for us. It’s a form of collective speech and collective action.” Clearly, pitching it right is a challenge. As well as speaking of the culture and society in which we live, it needs to have an air of mystery without being obscure, and aesthetically pleasing without being twee. Ideally, it shouldn’t put people off their lunch. Antony Gormley pulled off all these things with Angel of the North, and his iron figures on Crosby beach in Merseyside. Perhaps the most successful public artwork of recent years is the fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square, which has variously hosted a sculpture of a pregnant woman with no arms, a royal blue cockerel, a replica of HMS Victory and a hand with a comically elongated thumb. It works largely because no work is permanent, which makes it open to experimentation or silliness. Given the number of pieces that have been quietly removed over the years, among them Quebec’s notorious “toilet” sculpture (a gift from Jacques Chirac) and Egypt’s grim replica of an ancient Nefertiti bust, we shouldn’t fret too much about the carbuncles planted in our towns and countryside. The public and critics rarely get a say at point of commissioning, though they can be relied upon to stamp their feet when faced with a blot on the landscape. History has shown us that, when everything goes right, public art can be beautiful, beloved and teach us much about past lives and cultures. Margate’s blow-up Tina is by no means the next Burghers of Calais, but what it lacks in elegance it makes up for in enthusiasm. And what is public art if not a mad exercise in optimism? • Fiona Sturges is an arts writer specialising in books, music, podcasting and TV