You’ll come to know Nicole Dennis-Benn’s characters as intimately as you would a lover. They are refined in their humanity and depth. Patsy, her tender second novel, revolves around queerness and generational trauma. Like her 2016 debut, Here Comes the Sun, it centres on Jamaica – its culture, beauty, idiosyncrasies and socioeconomic struggles – but ranges more widely: all the way to America. Patsy has a gnawing urge to escape the Caribbean and find love. Thanks to a mother who eschewed parental responsibility in favour of God, her life in Kingston contains too many cold, bloody secrets for it to be fulfilling. But when she gets her US visa, she passes on the harm she suffered by leaving behind her five-year-old daughter, Tru. From this moment the book splits, as brutal as a breakup. Tru is left in Jamaica under her father’s care, reassured by her mother’s promise to return, while Patsy seeks a new start in Brooklyn, lured by letters from her childhood love – the light-skinned, ocean-eyed and broken Cicely. Patsy imagines a future with Cicely. But when she arrives in the US, not only is the country systematically inhospitable to immigrants without “papers”, but Patsy finds Cicely has moved on – she has a controlling husband, a son and little room for anyone else. The novel powerfully captures the sense of isolation that occurs if you are far from home and lack money, stability and community. It has much in common with Samuel Selvon’s The Lonely Londoners in its depiction of migration, and for British Caribbean readers linked to the Windrush generation, much of the narrative will feel familiar. Severed mother and child bonds are part of our world. Many children such as Tru were left behind by parents who would send barrels stuffed with clothes, shoes, toys and other treats in lieu of their presence. How such an upbringing affects a young person, and why so many of us replicate our parents’ lives, is addressed through Tru. Like her mother, she has mental health issues and must confront questions about sexuality and gender. It’s Tru’s friends on the football pitch who give her a sense of belonging. Friendships, we’re told repeatedly, can save and soothe you. But whether the novels’s characters are bonding or breaking, their interactions are described with grace and nuance. Even through all the hardship, moving so far from home has its thrilling moments. Dennis-Benn’s descriptions of sex are compelling – among the most honest and affecting you will find. With renewed hostility to newcomers in the US and UK, the publication of Patsy feels perfectly timed. • Patsy is published by Oneworld (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99