The nation’s most dramatic open-air theatre – the creation of the remarkable Rowena Cade and her gardener Billy Rawlings – is quite the experience even before the show starts. The steeply shelving auditorium tumbles down the cliffs to a stage whose backdrop is the Atlantic.Getting there/away For afternoon performances, take the A1 bus between Penzance and Porthcurno. For evening shows (Tuesday to Thursday), there’s a special bookable bus (call 01736 810181) between St Ives and the Minack via Penzance.• Adult £14, child £7. Shows: until 9 August I, Don Quixote; 19-23 August Blue Stockings; 26-30 August The Government Inspector; 2-6 September The Mill On The Floss, minack.com Opened in 2015 on the former bowling green at Dyke Road Park, BOAT was the brainchild of the late playwright Adrian Bunting. Already an integral part of the city’s cultural scene, its classical layout, modelled on the more intimate amphitheatres of the ancient world, has made it a fixture on many a touring company’s itinerary.Getting there/away The theatre is an easy walk from several railway stations: Brighton (around 20 mins), Hove (25 mins) or Preston Park (20 mins). Buses 55, 27C, 27 and 77 go past the park and there are cycle lanes to the theatre from the city centre.• Adult £12, family £35-£40. Shows include: 14 August The Wind in the Willows; 18 August Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves; 21-24 August Mill on the Floss; 25 August Alice in Wonderland, brightonopenairtheatre.co.uk Billed as “Europe’s first-ever pop-up Shakespearian theatre”, the Rose is a 13-sided confection thrown up beneath the imposing motte of Clifford’s Tower. Surrounding it there’s a Shakespearean-style village with food and drink stalls, Elizabethan gardens and wandering minstrels.Getting there/away Short walk to York’s railway (20 mins) and bus stations. During summer there is a park-and-ride bus service put on especially for the theatre, which operates to and from the Askham Bar Park & Ride site.• Tickets from £12.50. Shows throughout August: Twelfth Night, Henry V and Hamlet, shakespearesrosetheatre.com. Shakespeare’s Rose also pops up at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, throughout August (a half-hourly theatre bus service runs between the palace and Oxford/Oxford Parkway railway stations; last bus 10.45pm). Kids stuck in front of their screens? Inspire them to explore the outdoors with this imaginative adaptation of Robert Macfarlane and Jackie Morris’s bestseller, The Lost Words. The family experience takes words from nature that have vanished from the Oxford Junior Dictionary and presents them afresh for a new generation.Getting there/away Disley railway station is a half-mile walk from the park entrance.• Tickets £10-£14. Shows 20-24 August (three daytime shows a day): The Lost Words - Told in Gold, nationaltrust.org.uk/lyme Roll up, roll up! For one night only at Edgbaston’s Martineau Gardens, the deck of the park’s pirate shipwreck will be transformed into the setting for Shakespeare’s timeless mistaken-identity farce. Bring blankets, chairs and a picnic, and brace yourself for audience interaction, live music, and plenty of tomfoolery.Getting there/away Within easy walking distance of the Five Ways (around 20 mins) and University (30 mins) railway stations, or take the 63 bus from Birmingham New Street station.• Advance tickets: adult , child £10, family £38-£46. Show 24 August: The Comedy of Errors, folksytheatre.co.uk With woodland to roam in, 3,600 plant species and a sumptuous 18th-century walled garden, Greenbank Garden makes for a pastoral slice of Glaswegian suburbia – perfect for a fast-paced romp through some classic Jane Austen.Getting there/away Six miles south of Glasgow city centre. An easy walk from/to Whitecraigs or Williamwood railway stations (both approx 25 mins).• Adult £13.50-£16, child £8, family £37-£46. Show 30 August: Sense and Sensibility, nts.org.uk. And on 29 August, this production comes to Talkin Tarn Country Park in Cumbria (near Brampton railway station) Perched on the north bank of the River Dee, this 20-acre greensward adorned with trees and flower beds is considered one of the finest Victorian parks in the land (albeit one with a non-Victorian miniature railway). Bring a picnic or order a wood-fired pizza from the theatre’s own Twelfth Slice pizzeria and grab a glass of wine, craft beer or cocktail from the bar.Getting there/away Chester bus and railway stations are a 10-minute amble away.• Adult from £26.50 (one child free with each adult), under-26 from £19.50. Shows all month to 25 August: The Borrowers, Twelfth Night, Henry V, grosvenorparkopenairtheatre.co.uk Theatre performed in historical locations sometimes throws up pleasing anachronisms. At Walmer Castle, you may watch Elizabeth Gaskell’s satirical take on Knutsford life played out in front of a great coastal fortress designed by Henry VIII to ward off invasion by the fleets of a 16th-century French/Spanish alliance. The castle’s lovely gardens at least go some way to softening the building’s bellicose mien.Getting there/away It’s a 25-minute walk from Walmer railway station, or take Stagecoach’s East Kent service 82/82A from Deal railway station.• Adult £17.60, child £12.10, family (2+2) £49.22. Show 23 August: Cranford, chapterhouse.org This Anglo-Saxon ship burial on the beguiling River Deben is not merely one of Britain’s most important archaeological sites, it’s also a beautiful 103-hectare estate (that’s recently had a significant revamp). There are clearly few locations better in which to watch a new play by Karen Forbes about the life of the remarkable Edith Pretty, without whom Sutton Hoo’s treasures may never have been discovered.Getting there/away It’s an easy 20-minute walk from Melton railway station.• Adult £15, child £13. Show 24-26 August: Edith in the Beginning, nationaltrust.org.uk/sutton-hoo It was Charles I who ordered this stronghold damaged so that it couldn’t be used by his Roundhead foes. However, there’s still enough of the mighty curtain walls left to evoke scenes of dashing knights and wimple-garbed damsels. The Norman motte is topped with a 19th-century hunting lodge, and formal gardens complete the backdrop for the revels.Getting there/away The castle is practically opposite Abergavenny bus station and a few minutes’ walk from the railway station.• Adult £14, child £8, family (2+2) £40. Show 14 August: Sense and Sensibility. 20 August: Private Lives. 22 August: Ali Baba and the 40 Thieves. 30 August: Gangsta Granny, abergavennymuseum.co.uk Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.