Two familiar faces settled it for Arsenal. But after the strike duo of Alexandre Lacazette and Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang secured a second win of the season, it was the performance of new boy Dani Ceballos that had the home supporters licking their lips. The Real Madrid loanee received a standing ovation when he was replaced by Lucas Torreira with seven minutes remaining after a brilliant display that hinted Arsenal could have secured one of the bargains of the summer. Along with the experienced defender David Luiz - an £8m signing from Chelsea – Ceballos was making his full debut against opponents who have now lost 11 matches in a row against Arsenal. When Ashley Barnes equalised on the stroke of half-time, it was tempting to think Arsenal’s old vulnerabilities at the back would undermine them yet again but a dominant second-half display, capped by Aubameyang’s ninth goal in his last seven games, was the least that they deserved. “We wanted to create a good atmosphere to start off the season in front of our own supporters and the impact that the new players had in their first match was very encouraging,” said a visibly delighted Unai Emery. Arsenal’s head coach had been unable to call on Mesut Özil despite his return to training this week after security concerns as the former Germany international was deemed not to be match fit, although Sead Kolasinac did make a late appearance from the bench. By then, the hosts were back in front after Ceballos pounced to dispossess Johann Gudmundsson in his own half before feeding Aubameyang to score what turned out to be the winner. “We’re disappointed but our mentality was excellent,” said Sean Dyche, who felt Mike Dean should have cautioned “three or four” Arsenal players who went to ground too easily. “When you think what an advert the Premier League is for worldwide football and it’s people just blatantly falling on the floor, how do you expect it to stop?” said the Burnley manager. Emery had opted to field the teenager Joe Willock alongside Matteo Guendouzi, meaning that Arsenal’s midfield pair boasted a total of 39 years and 24 Premier League starts between them. On his return to the side after an ankle scare in pre-season, it was Lacazette who opened the scoring after his initial effort had been turned over by Nick Pope. Showing superb strength to hold off the challenge of Erik Pieters, the shot seemed to take the goalkeeper by surprise and the ball squirmed through his legs. Yet for all their flowing attacking play, which often began at the feet of Ceballos, there was always a sneaking suspicion that Arsenal remained vulnerable on the break. One corner midway through the first half was scrambled away to safety with the dangerous Barnes lurking, while David Luiz’s new partnership with Sokratis Papastathopoulos looked rocky whenever Burnley delivered a ball into the box. Two saves from Pope to deny Reiss Nelson and Guendouzi kept his side in the game and there was a sense of inevitability about Burnley’s equaliser when it came two minutes before half-time. David Luiz was guilty of playing Barnes onside when Dwight McNeil’s shot deflected into the path of the striker, who made no mistake from 12 yards out. Arsenal thought they had restored their lead straight away only for the assistant’s flag to rule out Reiss Nelson’s tap-in after Nacho Monreal had strayed offside in the buildup. The England Under-21 forward could feel unlucky to be withdrawn at the break for the £72m signing Nicolas Pépé, with Aubameyang switched to the left to accommodate the Ivorian. Burnley could easily have found themselves ahead had Westwood hit the target with an unmarked header 15 minutes into the second half. By then, Aubameyang had twice come close to scoring at the other end, the second effort well saved by Pope after a lovely pass from Pépé. The England goalkeeper then had to dive at full stretch to tip a curling shot from Ceballos around the post. He could do nothing about the next chance as Aubameyang fired home from just outside the area. Even then Burnley nearly earned a point when McNeil headed off target and a late goalmouth scramble ended, much to Emery’s relief, with Guendouzi heading the ball away to safety.