Stephen Fry is lying prostrate on the stage. It’s a pretext for telling the story of Odysseus, washed up on the shore and lying naked (he spares us the nudity), but there’s also a joke. The former QI frontman is now five and a half hours into his three-part show, with more than two hours to come, and he’s pretending to be exhausted. But nothing of the kind. Fry is his same unflappable self at the end of this adaptation of his bestselling retellings of the ancient Greek myths as he was at the start. He remains jovial, avuncular and head-spinningly capable of retaining the details of whole families of gods, heroes and men. Whenever a character has six children, he’ll be sure to namecheck them all. In one section responding to audience questions, he says he’d have loved to have done four or five shows – and you don’t doubt him. Curiously for a show littered with etymological asides, he uses the word marathon only once – and for the purpose of making a joke about distance. But a marathon this is – a Herculean task even, or, as some might argue, a Sisyphean task because it’s not certain the rewards you get out are equal to the effort put in. Fry is certainly impressive. His voice rounded and reassuring, he steers us through stories of bravery, cunning and struggle with the boyish enthusiasm he had as an eight-year-old reading them for the first time. To this he adds his characteristic wit, throwing in modern-day references to lighten the portentous tone, and a mimic’s love of silly voices, Michael Caine and Brian Blessed among them. Sitting centre stage in a studded leather armchair, as if he’s been transported from a stuffy London club, he relates the adventures of the 12 Olympian gods, the heroes who followed them and the mortal men who came in their wake. Tales blend into each other and frequently have to be interrupted so we can catch up on the backstory. It wouldn’t be hard to lose a sense of structure, but Tim Carroll’s production neatly divides each act into chunks, giving Fry a chance to break off with digressions from the central narrative. Designer Douglas Paraschuk works with Kevin Lamotte (lights) and Nick Bottomley (projections) to create an aesthetic that’s less Acropolis than suburban Greek taverna, all sparkly skies, gleaming columns and stadium-rock colours. Regarded as theatre, it’s a little gauche, but at heart this is a simple storytelling show in which Fry takes on the role of sage and we gather round the metaphorical campfire to listen in wide-eyed wonder. As a storyteller he is not given to poetry, preferring a lean and direct approach that drives the plot forward. At its best, when these archetypal stories exert their grip, we become like children, caught up in the high-stakes drama. There are times when the cast of characters becomes too big to keep track of (Fry knows better than anyone that every bit-part player could have a story of their own), but for the most part he keeps us on track. The question is less one of quality than quantity. Each of the standalone instalments works fine, but as a trilogy, it lacks the cumulative power to justify the enterprise. For all its merits, it’s an easier show to be impressed by than to love. Mythos, A Trilogy: Gods. Heroes. Men is at Festival theatre, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews.