Picture the scene. You and your kids are sporting in the fountains in the square behind London’s King’s Cross station. Your phone beeps. A news alert tells you that the owners of this (pseudo-) public space, Argent, are using facial recognition software in security cameras. You look up from your phone and see a camera pointed right at you. It’s not just the police who are photographing and identifying you on the street now, but private security operatives too. Not only do you worry that your boss might thereby acquire data to undermine your claim to be “working from home”, but you are furious at this violation of your privacy, not to mention feeling quite stupid for forgetting a towel. Your fears are not allayed by this statement from Argent: “These cameras use a number of detection and tracking methods, including facial recognition, but also have sophisticated systems in place to protect the privacy of the general public,” particularly when they didn’t disclose what these systems are. What do you do? Unless you happen to work for Big Brother Watch or Liberty, both of which campaign against the use of biometric technology by public authorities or private security companies, and so might cut you some slack in the event that your facial data from chillaxing fountain-style proves you’ve been bunking off, the best thing to do is to hack your face, and possibly your children’s faces too. Do what now? One hack against facial recognition technology is to wear what is effectively a hi-tech witch’s hat. Devised by Project KOVR, this hood is part of an anti-surveillance coat that works on the same principle as Faraday bags, which can block electromagnetic signals to and from your phone or your car keys. The hood is constructed of layers of what the makers call “metalliferous fabrics” that block radiation and thwart facial recognition software too. Your data and face will remain private while you’re inside it. If you really want to protect your privacy while looking like a member of a KKK chapter from another galaxy, this is the way to go. There are less extreme hacks available. Scientists at China’s Fudan University are developing an invisibility mask that uses tiny infrared LEDs wired to the inside of a baseball cap to project dots of light on to the wearer’s face. The researchers found that they could trick facial recognition software into thinking they were Moby, which is the perfect disguise to baffle your boss – so long as you’re prepared to be mistaken for a musician who claimed to have dated Natalie Portman but was then obliged to retract and apologise for the suggestion. The cap is similar in principle to Harry Potter’s invisibility cloak. Earlier this summer, a commercial version of this cloak was launched at nearby King’s Cross’s Platform 9¾. Does it work? Sadly, this version only makes wearers invisible if they’re being viewed through a smartphone or tablet app that’s free to download upon purchase. That, plus the fact that the £59.99 invisibility cloak doesn’t come with a hood, still less one that blocks facial recognition software using metalliferous fabric, means it is functionally useless for our present purpose. More promising is Hyperface, a project being developed by Berlin-based artist and technologist Adam Harvey to overwhelm and confuse facial recognition software by printing patterns on to clothing that a computer can interpret as a face. Harvey earlier developed an open-source project called CV Dazzle that encouraged humans to camouflage themselves with make-up and crazy hair to create an unreadable “anti-face”. If your kids are set on going to the face painting booth after the fountains, maybe suggest to the makeup artist they go nuts with the paint – and restyle their hair while they’re about it. If none of these hacks works for you, take solace from the current hopelessness of facial recognition technology. University of Essex of researchers found that the Met’s trials of facial recognition technology to search for suspects had an 81% error rate. If you’re a person of colour you may not feel reassured, though, by research that suggests the darker your skin tone, the more likely you are to be misidentified by facial recognition software . To thwart such miscarriages of justice, privacy violations and algorithmically facilitated racism, my favourite hack is to wear is a 3D printed mask of someone else’s face. A 3D printed prosthetic image of artist Leo Selvaggio, the creator of the project URME Surveillance, is on sale for $200. If successful, this mask may make Selvaggio the most wanted – though ultimately wrongly accused – man on earth. Theoretically, you could print a mask of anyone, but one tip: unless you want to be chased through the fountains by mobs of angry Guardian readers, perhaps it’s best to avoid a Boris Johnson mask. • Stuart Jeffries is a feature writer