While Justin Langer referred to the decision to keep Steve Smith out of the third Test as a “no brainer”, with no apparent irony, the debate around concussion in sport continues to rage. Whether Smith should have returned to the pitch after Jofra Archer’s wicked delivery struck his helmet has been the cause of much contention. But one of the bigger hurdles to jump in Australia is the mythologising of athletes who play through injury. From rugby league’s John Sattler playing the 1970 grand final with a broken jaw to Dermott Brereton playing on with two broken ribs and a ruptured kidney in the 1989 VFL grand final, Australian sport is full of tales of heroes who pushed through the pain against all medical advice. They are etched into the folklore of the game. Such is the perception of toughness and bravery as the most important attributes an athlete can possess, the idea that anyone with a suspected concussion should immediately be removed from the game is a difficult pill for some to swallow. Super Netball this week released a compilation video of the “big hits” of the season featuring elbows to heads, bodies hitting floorboards and players having their legs taken out in the air. It’s an attitude to hardness that women’s sport seems to be pressured into taking to prove they can mix it in a sporting world that was built by men, for men. Perceptions of hardness were also highlighted in the NRL last week when Phil Gould expressed his fear that “doctors and lawyers will end the game within 20 years”. “This is professional sport, it should be coming with a warning: ‘don’t try this at home’,” Gould said during a Channel 9 broadcast. “These are professionals out here, they know what they’re doing. It’s not about out here, making this safe for women and children. This is professional rugby league, they’re playing for sheep stations. This is careers on the line, there’s a lot at stake. Accidents will happen.” Though Gould’s comments were specifically in regard to a crusher tackle, when one of the game’s most prominent media voices is more concerned about the perceived softness of the game than the safety of its players, there are wider implications for a collision sport. With chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a brain disease that has been linked to repeated concussions, being discovered in former rugby league players for the first time this year – and the likes of Peter Sterling prepared to donate his brain for testing after death – it is an issue that is becoming increasingly serious in Australian sport. However there remains contention around the connection between CTE and concussion, and Sport Australia’s position is that there is not yet reliable enough evidence to link the two. Despite these lingering doubts, Sport Australia, along with Sports Medicine Australia and the Australian Medical Association continue to urge sporting organisations to err on the side of caution. All official advice through these bodies indicates that athletes with a suspected concussion should not return to play on the same day as the injury occurred, which calls into question the efficacy of on-ground testing, such as the Scat3 test used on Smith. In these tests, athletes are asked to assess their own symptoms, while a doctor also checks for outward signs of concussion, such as glassy eyes and delayed verbal and physical responses. Athletes are also asked to remember lists of words and numbers, recite the months backwards and have their balance checked. Smith reportedly passed three concussion tests before being cleared to head back to the crease, but these tests are not always reliable, as UK brain injury charity Headway said on Sunday. A solution remains elusive. Removing players immediately for suspected concussion could potentially cause problems – it opens the door to underhanded tactics being employed whereby opposition players deliberately target the heads of key players in order to have them taken from the field, and to stay on the sidelines. However there are also questions around how team doctors – who are answerable to coaches and administrators desperate to win – and athletes who have been fed images of the glory of winning against the odds after being injured, can truly make the best medical decisions on whether to return to play. It is a highly fraught debate that needs much more considered thought in pursuit of a solution. It is also one that is not helped by traditionalists like Gould and the “bring back the biff” brigade weighing in with outdated ideas around masculinity and its role in sport when the health of athletes is on the line.