Fifty people have been confirmed killed, and 50 injured, in Friday’s terrorist attack on two mosques in the New Zealand city of Christchurch. As of Saturday night, 36 people remained in hospital. New Zealand police have not yet issued any public identification of any victims of attack. Those listed here are those victims who have been confirmed as killed, missing or injured – either by statements from family members, official organisations or both. We will update this article with new information once it has been confirmed. Seventy-one-year-old Haji-Daoud Nabi died as he tried to save the lives of fellow worshippers at Al Noor mosque. Nabi came to New Zealand from Afghanistan in 1977 and was a beloved community leader. His son, Yama al-Nabi, was running late for a meeting with his father at the mosque, and escaped the shooting by minutes. He told assembled media on Saturday that his father “jumped in the firing line to save somebody else’s life”. “He has passed away,” Nabi said. Lilik Abdul Hamid, a father of two, was an engineer for Air New Zealand. He had worked in Christchurch for 16 years. His death was confirmed on Sunday in an official statement from Air New Zealand’s chief executive officer Christopher Luxon. Fourteen-year-old Sayyad Milne was a keen footballer who was shot at Al Noor mosque while attending Friday prayers, as he did every week. The Year 10 student at Cashmere high school had dreamed of being an international footballer one day. His father, John Milne, told New Zealand radio his son had died. “I’ve lost my little boy, he’s just turned 14,” he said. “It’s so hard ... to see him just gunned down by someone who didn’t care about anyone or anything.” His mother, Noraini, managed to escape. Atta Elayyan, 33, was the goalkeeper of New Zealand’s national men’s futsal team. Elayyan, who had just become a father, was confirmed killed by New Zealand’s football association on Sunday. A Palestinian man who was born in Kuwait, Elayyan was also a popular member of the Christchurch tech industry. He leaves behind his wife Farah and young daughter Aya. “There is huge hole in our hearts,” said teammate Josh Margetts. QUOTE | @NZ_Football Futsal Development Manager @margetts_josh: “To Atta’s family, we are deeply sorry for your loss. We can’t imagine what you are going through, but please know we love you and we are here for you during this incredibly difficult time.” #RIPAtta @MainlandFooty pic.twitter.com/tCcileWiUK Retired engineer Ali Almadani came to New Zealand from the United Arab Emirates in 1998. His daughter, Maha Elmadani, is a Christchurch-based graphic designer, and told news site Stuff.co.nz that her father had died on Friday. Father and son Naeem Rashid and 21-year-old Taha Naeem were both killed on Friday. Pakistan’s foreign affairs minister tweeted that the pair were confirmed killed. Syrian refugee Khaled Mustafa had survived civil war and atrocities in Syria before he was killed on Friday in the terrorist attack. Ali Akil, a spokesman for the group Syrian Solidarity New Zealand said Mustafa’s wife confirmed he had been killed. “[They] survived atrocities” and “arrived here in a safe haven only to be killed in the most atrocious way,” said Akil. “They were just looking for a safe place.” Three-year-old Mucad Ibrahim is currently missing. He was at the Al Noor mosque on Friday with his father and brother when the attack happened. His older brother, Abdi Ibrahim, told Stuff.co.nz Mucad was missing, feared dead. Father and son Zulfirman and Averroes Syah are injured but alive. Alta Marie, Zulfirman’s husband, said he shielded their son from bullets during the attack. Zulfirman is in a stable condition following extensive surgery, Marie said, while Averroes, aged two, only suffered minor injuries thanks to his father’s actions. “While he is still in the intensive care unit at this stage, he will be moved to the general ward whenever it is deemed appropriate - likely in the next day or so,” she told the New Zealand Herald. “His condition has only improved since he arrived at the hospital yesterday.”