On Thursday afternoon, MPs will vote yet again on Brexit, this time on a government motion proposing to ask the EU for a delay to the departure date. MPs tabled 10 amendments to the motion, of which four were selected by the Speaker, John Bercow, for votes. MPs will then vote on the motion as amended, or not. H. Cross-party request for second referendum Tabled by former Tory Sarah Wollaston, now of the Independent Group, and signed by around 30 MPs, this seeks a delay for a new referendum, which would have remain as an option. If it passes, amendments I and E would not be voted on. I. Benn amendment A cross-party group of senior backbenchers have submitted an amendment that, if passed, would allow the Commons to debate next steps on Brexit on Wednesday next week. The motion, handed in a few minutes before the 10.30am deadline, is signed by Labour’s Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper and Conservatives Oliver Letwin and Dominic Grieve, as well SNP, Liberal Democrat and Plaid Cymru MPs. The amendment says it is designed “to enable the House of Commons to find a way forward that can command majority support” by effectively allowing MPs to wrest control of parliamentary time from Theresa May’s government. There is also an amendment to this amendment, from Labour’s Lucy Powell, changing the timing, which Bercow also allowed. If it is voted on (if amendment H loses) and passes then amendment E would not be voted on. E. Labour amendment Led by Jeremy Corbyn, this notes the rejection by parliament of May’s Brexit plan, and of no deal, and says the government should “provide parliamentary time for this house to find a majority for a different approach”. J. Bryant amendment Notes that the guide to parliamentary procedure, Erskine May, states a motion or an amendment which is the same, in substance, as a question which has been decided in the affirmative or negative during the current session may not be brought forward again during that session. If this amendment was passed it could give the Speaker the power to block another vote on May’s deal as it has been voted down twice by parliament already. This will be voted on whatever else happens. A. Plaid Cymru amendment This amendment, signed by Plaid’s four MPs, called for a delay to Brexit until 2021, and a second referendum at the end of this. B. Ruling out a second referendum Signed by more than 100 MPs, mainly Conservative but also Labour’s Caroline Flint and Gareth Snell, this stated that “the result of the 2016 EU referendum should be respected and that a second EU referendum would be divisive and expensive, and therefore should not take place”. C. Revoke article 50 Put forward by the SNP’s Angus Brendan MacNeil and Tory remainer Ken Clarke, and signed by about 30 other MPs, this called for the entire Brexit process to be cancelled. D. Liberal Democrat second referendum plan Tabled by the the Lib Dems’ 11 MPs, this also called for a Brexit delay and a second referendum. F. SNP/Plaid second referendum plan Yet another extension/second referendum amendment, this also called for remain to be an option in the referendum, and for the revocation of article 50 to be possible in the interim. G. The Chope amendment Tabled by Conservative Brexiter and regular malcontent Christopher Chope – and signed only by him – it said Brexit should be delayed for two months “for the specific purpose of replacing the UK negotiating team”.