Like everyone else at this point, I have many questions about Brexit, starting with “why” and going from there. For example: are concerns about how Britain is going to cope merely “project fear”, as some Brexity folk still have it? Is it going to be like the blitz, as other Brexity people have promised enthusiastically? Such people include someone called Ant Middleton from Channel 4’s SAS: Who Dares Wins, who said last year in a tweet (since deleted): “A ‘no deal’ for our country would actually be a blessing in disguise. It would force us into hardship and suffering which would unite & bring us together, bringing back British values of loyalty and a sense of community!” Truly, there are few things as touching as a grown man playing soldiers by waxing nostalgic for a time he didn’t live through. And by “touching” I mean “nauseating”. I try to avoid writing about Brexit for the same reason I avoid eating my hair: you just end up choking on the pointlessness of it all. But one question has become too pressing to ignore: just how self-centred do you have to be to think the risk of making it harder for people to get necessary medications is an irrelevant niggle while you achieve your masturbatory fantasy of “sovereignty”? Sure, talk of insulin supplies, say, is a bummer when you are entertaining dreams of sailing victoriously back from Brussels beneath a St George’s flag, like George Washington crossing the Delaware in Emanuel Leutze’s painting, only less American (although, given that our supermarkets may soon be stuffed with chlorinated chicken from the US, maybe not). But for those who have long been dependent on certain drugs, these niggly questions make a no-deal Brexit less of a blessing in disguise. In January, a coalition of epilepsy and neurology organisations wrote to the Guardian. Under the headline “No-deal Brexit poses a potentially fatal risk to those with epilepsy”, they warned, well, exactly that: the government’s plans to safeguard against medicine shortages in the event of no-deal could endanger people with epilepsy (a small detail no one painted on the side of a bus). The government has insisted it is prepared for a possible medicines shortage, but, given that it couldn’t even hire a ferry firm with any ferries, groups such as Epilepsy Action – as well as people with epilepsy – remain unreassured. As if to prove the point, Stephen Hammond, the minister of state for health, recently confirmed that no-deal could result in travel disruption for much longer than the six weeks previously suggested by the government, meaning the plans for stockpiling medicines are predictably inadequate. I started having seizures when I was 14 – possibly because my psychiatrist at the time put me on a high dosage of antidepressants and sedatives, or possibly because it was always there, waiting to come out. Usually, I have grand mal seizures, which means I fall forwards and black out for about 10 or 15 minutes. In my teens and 20s, they were a source of enormous shame. While my peers threw themselves eagerly into late-night parties, I always felt as if I was holding my breath, worrying about having a seizure. And it turned out I was right to do so. Sometimes my seizures come out of nowhere but they are usually sparked by fatigue, so having a seizure at the end of a late night became my party trick. (I occasionally have them in airports after a long flight; it’s not a travel tip, but you learn a lot about a country from the emergency rooms of its airports.) Yet for all my fear of public embarrassment, the worst, always, is at home on my own: waking up on the floor, groggy, with only the black eye in the mirror to let me know what happened. I have read a lot about epilepsy, much of it quasi-romantic, with talk of visions and colours and unleashed creativity. I envy people who get that. All I have got from my epilepsy is anxiety, bruises and a knowledge of what death must be like: one minute you are here, the next is blackness. Waking up again always feels like a resurrection, and for a reason: every week, 21 people in the UK die from epilepsy-related causes. For a long time, I dealt with the problem by pretending it didn’t exist, going out later and later, as if ignoring the issue would make it go away. Spoiler: it didn’t. Finally finding the right medication made my life livable, and I am less reckless these days, but the fear never leaves you. I know of three people who drowned after having a seizure in the bath, so I never have a bath if I am on my own at home. Similarly, I never carried my babies in a sling, in case I had a seizure and crushed them. Not the greatest of sacrifices, admittedly, but these are the kind of things you have to think about when you have epilepsy. The Brexiters’ airy “Don’t worry, we’ve got it in hand” is reminiscent of my insistence that all would be fine if I went out until 3am, because I wanted it to be. But not everyone can wing it on vague promises and optimism – and people with epilepsy know that better than most.