Prep 25 minCook 1 hr 15 minServes 4-6 60ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra for drizzling1kg braising beef, cut into 4cm cubesSalt and black pepper4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced2 carrots, peeled and diced½ celeriac, peeled and diced2 parsnips, peeled and diced3 large shallots, peeled and chopped2 leeks (white and light green part only), diced1 small bunch thyme4 bay leaves (ideally fresh)1 ½ bottles red wine3 litres chicken stock1 savoy cabbage, core removed, heart finely sliced Heat half the oil in a large casserole dish over a medium heat. When the oil is smoking, add the beef, season and cook on all sides for about 15 minutes, until nicely browned. Remove from the dish and set aside. Turn down the heat, add the remaining oil and gently fry the garlic for two to three minutes, without colouring. Add the carrots, cook for one minute, then add the celeriac and parsnips, and cook for a further two minutes. Add the shallots, leeks, thyme and bay leaves, stir and cook for a further 15 minutes. Pour in the wine, then cook over a high heat until it has reduced by half. Add the stock and beef, then reduce the heat and simmer for 20 minutes, uncovered, skimming off any froth that rises to the top. Cover the casserole with a lid or foil and cook for two hours, then uncover and simmer for 15-20 minutes, until the sauce starts to thicken. Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil, cook the cabbage for two to three minutes, then drain, season, and stir in a splash of olive oil. Serve the stew with the cabbage on top. Prep 30 minCook 25 minServes 4-6 For the caldereta25ml light olive oil (such as arbequina)1 large onion, peeled and finely diced100g tomatoes, peeled and chopped1 pinch saffron2 tsp sweet pimentón125ml dry white wine100ml Spanish brandy100ml manzanilla or fino sherry80ml pastis150g potato, peeled and cut into 1cm cubes1.7 litres good-quality fish stock4 langoustines, cut in half lengthways12 prawns, peeled8 mussels400g fish (monkfish, red mullet and cod), cut into 2cm pieces2 slices white bread1 garlic clove, peeled For the picada2 garlic cloves, peeled1 small bunch flat-leaf parsley50g hazelnuts, whole, blanched, lightly toasted50g almonds, whole, blanched, lightly toastedA drizzle of light olive oil First, make the picada. In a pestle and mortar, crush the garlic, parsley, hazelnuts and almonds with a drizzle of arbequina olive oil, until a paste forms. For the caldereta, heat the oil in a large pan on a medium heat, add the onion and cook until golden. Add the chopped tomatoes and cook until a paste forms. Stir in the saffron, then the picada and pimentón. Pour in the wine, brandy, sherry and pastis, and cook for two minutes to evaporate the alcohol. Add the potatoes, stir for a minute, then pour in the stock and simmer for 10 minutes. Add the langoustines, prawns, mussels and fish, and cook for five to seven minutes, then season to taste. In a medium-sized pan, fry the bread in a drizzle of olive oil until golden. Rub one side with garlic and serve with the caldereta. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. Prep 20 minSoak 2 hrCook 1 hr 15 minServes 4-6 8 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 free-range chicken, cut into piecesSalt and black pepper2 carrots, peeled and diced4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced2 onions, peeled and sliced finely into half moons3 dried red chillies, soaked in warm water for 2 hours4 tbsp smoked paprika1 tbsp caster sugar2 tbsp tomato puree8 medium tomatoes, diced500g potatoes, peeled and cut into 2.5cm cubes1 small bunch thyme3 bay leaves, ideally fresh750ml chicken stock8-12 tinned or jarred piquillo peppers, drained and sliced4 tbsp chopped fresh chives4 tbsp chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley Heat half the oil in a large casserole dish. Add the chicken pieces, season, then cook on all sides for about 15 minutes, until browned. Remove from the dish and set aside. Add the rest of the oil, along with the carrot, garlic and onions, and fry for 10 minutes over a medium heat. Drain the dried chillies and remove the seeds, then slice and add to the pan. Cook for five minutes, then add the smoked paprika, sugar, tomato puree and diced tomatoes. Cook for 15 minutes, then add the potatoes, thyme, bay leaves and stock. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat to a gentle simmer, and cook for 25 minutes, or until the potatoes are very tender. Add the piquillo peppers and cook for another five minutes. Adjust the seasoning as necessary, and serve with the chives and parsley sprinkled over the top. Prep 5 minCook 40 minServes 4-6 400g new potatoes, scrubbed40ml extra-virgin olive oil4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced250g green beans, topped and tailed1 tbsp smoked paprika250g lentils3 sprigs thyme2 bay leaves, ideally fresh1 dried chilliSalt and black pepper Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil, cook the potatoes for 10-12 minutes, then cut each one in half. Heat the oil in a large saucepan on a medium heat and cook the potato halves until golden. Add the garlic, cook until lightly golden, then add the beans and cook for two to three minutes, stirring regularly. Mix in the smoked paprika, add the lentils plus enough water to cover them by 5cm, then the thyme, bay leaves and chilli. Season, cook on a medium-low heat until the lentils are soft, and season again to taste. (Different lentils require different amounts of water when cooking, so if they’re absorbing more water than expected, add more water a little at a time.) Spoon into bowls and serve hot. • Nieves Barragán Mohacho is chef-director of Sabor, London W1.