Predicting the winner of this year’s Six Nations entering the final week is almost as tough as it was six weeks ago. Wales may be the only unbeaten side with one game left but no grand slam is ever claimed without serious palpitations before the final weekend. All it needs is an Irish win in Cardiff and England will earn their third championship title in four years in the event of Scotland losing at Twickenham. A Super Saturday awaits for someone, either way, with Ireland arithmetically still involved in the event of Welsh and English defeats. Given the staggered kick-off times demanded by the broadcasters, it is also entirely possible Wales will have ascended to northern hemisphere rugby heaven at the Principality Stadium before the Calcutta Cup game has kicked off. If not, Eddie Jones may yet have the last laugh after all. Is it really possible Wales will win the compelling battle of the Severn Bridge but lose the war? On the basis of their first-half display in Saturday’s 18-11 victory over Scotland, they still have more than enough energy to confound Ireland. If, alternatively, they allow their momentum to drift away, as happened in the second half at Murrayfield, a less than glorious final chapter will unfold. A defining test of character, as much as ability, now awaits. In the Warren Gatland era they have usually responded positively to the pressure of seriously big occasions, as underlined in Cardiff just over a fortnight ago. Ireland have not won in Wales in the Six Nations since 2013 and this weekend’s matchday atmosphere will once again be off the scale. A big week might await Irish hopefuls at the Cheltenham Festival but they will be second favourites in Saturday’s two-horse race. Apart from anything else it is now a decade since Wales last lost at home on a final Six Nations weekend, albeit in a game forever etched in Irish hearts. On that fabled 2009 occasion Ronan O’Gara popped over a blessed late drop-goal to secure Ireland’s first grand slam since 1948; this time, with Wales tilting for a fourth grand slam in 14 years, the boot is on the other foot. With a three-point “bonus” to ensure a grand-slam champion always beats a rival who loses once but gains a fistful of bonus points, Wales also have the benefit of not having to waste time on complex arithmetical permutations. Even a draw with a try bonus point would be insufficient assuming England beat a fitful Scotland, leaving Wales to rely on the proven method that has propelled them this far. England may have scored 19 tries in four games compared with Wales’s nine but no defence has been meaner than Shaun Edwards’s red brick wall, which has yielded fewer than 15 points per game so far. If Liam Williams, among the players of the tournament to date, is fit to face the Irish, it will also be a major psychological boost, the full-back having looked certain to be sidelined as he trudged off with an apparent shoulder injury. Assuming it is only a “stinger” as Gatland has indicated, Wales will be hugely relieved and Ireland’s task will grow that extra bit tougher. A grand slam would be an equally deserved reward for Alun Wyn Jones, who has now participated in 62 Test wins for Wales, more than any other Welshman in history. Given the lock was also involved in Wales’s 2008 triumph in Gatland’s first season in charge, there is absolutely no prospect of complacency setting in this time. Ignore those arguing that Wales have not hit any great heights in this Six Nations to date; the resolve and commitment shown in their defiant second-half efforts against France, England and Scotland have been considerable. Should they hold their nerve again in Cardiff, it would reinforce their reputation as the strongest-minded team out there, even if Italy’s head coach, Conor O’Shea, believes Gatland’s team are merely the second best squad in the competition. “England are an unbelievably powerful side. They are a hurting side and they are the best side in the Guinness Six Nations in my opinion,” said O’Shea, having seen his own team taken apart 57-14 at Twickenham. Last month’s result in Cardiff might imply otherwise but no one else has yet come remotely close to eclipsing England in terms of strike power. No defender in the world would relish trying to stop Joe Cokanasiga and Manu Tuilagi at full tilt and, crucially, there is enough pace and footballing ability elsewhere in England’s backline to complement their power. While Jones took exception to inevitable comparisons between Cokanasiga and a young Jonah Lomu, he does believe the modern game increasingly favours athletic giants. “If you look at the Scotland-Wales game and our game, the physicality is just getting greater and greater,” he said. “If you have big people who can move fast and have skill, it is pretty advantageous. Whenever you pick a side you are always looking for the biggest, fastest, most skilful guys who like to hit and hurt people.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Whether or not it proves sufficient to pip Wales, another thunderous display against the Scots would certainly endorse the claims of England to be genuine World Cup contenders in Japan. “I don’t think they 100% believe it but all the players are starting to believe they can be the best team in the world,” said Jones. True or not, the 2019 Six Nations title is currently still Wales’s to lose.