Almond Eye took the first step here on Saturday on a path towards Longchamp and a possible meeting with Enable in the Arc and she did so with a flourish. She is the most exciting horse to emerge from Japan since Deep Impact in 2006 and, though she finished only a length and a quarter in front of Vivlos in the $6m Dubai Turf, her class was obvious as she seized control a furlong out before idling just a little in the closing stages. The conclusion of Saturday’s race had echoes of Almond Eye’s success in the Japan Cup last November, when she broke the course record having sat close behind a lightning pace. When the four-year-old quickens she does so almost imperceptibly, closing in on the lead with little sign that Christophe Lemaire, her jockey, has told her to go. It is a potent weapon for any rider to have and once Almond Eye has the lead she has not, as yet, shown any sign of surrendering it. This was the seventh straight win for her in a sequence that has also seen her complete the Fillies’ Triple Crown in Japan. But it is where the streak might lead that is firing the imagination of racing fans both in her native country and in Europe, as she already appears one of the biggest obstacles between John Gosden’s Enable and a historic third success in the Arc this October. Coral cut Almond Eye from 10-1 to 5-1 for the Arc after this success, with Enable still a narrow favourite on 4-1 and another filly, Sea Of Class, edged out by a short nose last season, at 9-2. Paris has yet to be confirmed as the intended final destination for Almond Eye this year but after several near-misses for Japanese-trained horses over the last 15 years, it is difficult to imagine that it will be anything else. Ascot 2.10 My Way 2.45 Bold Reason 3.20 Volt Face 3.55 Capeland  4.30 Rathlin Rose (nb) 5.05 Kings Ryde 5.40 In Arrears Doncaster 2.00 Capriolette 2.35 Cool Exhibit 3.10 Cold Stare 3.45 Crowned Eagle (nap) 4.20 Indomeneo 4.55 Mister Chiang  5.30 Ormesher “Down the stretch when I pulled her out, she used her powerful stride as usual,” Lemaire said. “She was very relaxed but the thing was, we took the lead a little bit soon and so I think she relaxed a little bit in the last few yards. I had to give her a few cracks, unfortunately, just to keep her concentrated to the end. “We will go step-by-step. It’s the trainer’s job to see how she comes back from Dubai and [decide] the next step. We did a good job today, it was beautiful, I think everyone enjoyed seeing such a good horse on the track.” Sakae Kunieda, Almond Eye’s trainer, suggested afterwards that she may have one more run in Europe to prepare her for Paris. “She made a great start, then she was in the middle group but, at the corner Christophe took her outside and it was a good position,” he said. “I thought then, maybe she’ll easily win. She is getting better and better. Maybe there will be one race in Europe [before the Arc].” Later in the evening Saeed bin Suroor’s Thunder Snow became the first horse to win the Dubai World Cup twice but the race was very different from his easy success 12 months ago. Thunder Snow and Christophe Soumillon appeared to be struggling to close on the lead as North America and Gronkowski fought a duel up front rounding the home turn. They were still slugging it out halfway down the straight but no sooner had Gronkowski taken the measure of North America than Soumillon coaxed more from last year’s winner. Thunder Snow took the lead within sight of the line but Gronkowski fought back once again and the two horses passed the post with just a nose between them in one of the closest finishes in the World Cup’s 23-year history. The ultimate target for Thunder Snow is now likely to be a return to America for the Breeders’ Cup Classic, in which he finished third last season. Greg Wood’s accommodation in Dubai is provided by the Emirates Racing Authority