Theresa May has written to the EU seeking a brief delay to Brexit until the end of June, telling MPs that a longer delay would mean “a failure to deliver” on the result of the 2016 referendum. Speaking at the start of prime minister’s questions, May said she would present her Brexit plan to the Commons for a third time, and if it was passed the delay would allow time to implement it. If it was again defeated, parliament would have to decide how to proceed, May said. As she spoke, No 10 released the text of her letter to Donald Tusk, the European council president, formally seeking the delay, saying only that the time would allow her to ask the Commons again about her plan. The letter said May had planned to bring her deal back to the Commons this week for a third vote, but did not specify what would happen if the vote was lost. The announcement prompted angry scenes at PMQs, with Jeremy Corbyn accusing May of having “no plan” and embarking on a reckless course. “We are now in the midst of a full-scale national crisis,” the Labour leader said. “Incompetence, failure and intransigence from the prime minister and her government have brought us to this point.” At the start of PMQs, asked by the SNP’s Pete Wishart about her plans, May said she did not want to extend Brexit beyond a point where the UK would need to hold new European parliamentary elections in May. “I do not believe such elections would be in anyone’s interest,” she told the Commons. “The idea that three years after voting to leave the EU the people of this country should be asked to elect a new set of MEPs is, I believe, unacceptable. it would be a failure to deliver on the referendum decision that this house said it would honour.” She said she had written to Tusk to seek the extension, adding: “The government intends to bring forward proposals for a third meaningful vote. “If that vote is passed, the extension will give the house time to consider the withdrawal agreement bill. If not, the house will have to decide how to proceed. But as prime minister I am not prepared to delay Brexit any further than 30 June.” During his exchanges with May, Corbyn said her plan had been rejected decisively twice, and she was “ploughing on, with an unachievable, unsupported deal”. He said: “Surely after two big rejections by the house she must have noticed there isn’t mucb support for the deal that she negotiated?” Corbyn asked the prime minister: “She told the house the EU would only allow an extension to article 50 if there was a clear purpose. She’s travelling to Brussels tomorrow morning to meet the EU leaders. What is her clear purpose?” May did not respond to this, but instead accused MPs of self-indulgently delaying the Brexit process, prompting loud shouts of protest in the Commons. “The outcome of a long extension would be endless hours and days of this house carrying on contemplating its navel on Europe and failing to address the issues that matter to our constituents,” she said. “This house has indulged itself on Europe for too long. it’s time for this house to determine that it will deliver on Brexit for the British people. That’s what the British people deserve – they deserve better than this house has given them so far.” The letter to Tusk outlined the recent chronology of events in parliament, and how May’s plan was again rejected, with MPs then voting against a no-deal departure. “I had intended to bring the vote back to the House of Commons this week,” she wrote, noting the potential difficulties caused by the ruling of the Speaker, John Bercow, against repeated votes on the same issue. Even if it was passed, she wrote, the departure process “will clearly not be completed before 29 March”. She concluded: “While we will consult with the opposition in the usual way to plan the passage of this bill as quickly and smoothly as possible, the timetable for this is inevitably uncertain at this stage. I am therefore writing to inform the European council that the UK is seeking an extension to the article 50 period under article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union.” Other MPs also expressed alarm at May’s course of action. Yvette Cooper, the Labour MP who chair the home affairs committee, said the prime minister’s only plan was asking people to back “the same plan that she has put to this house twice, and that has been roundly defeated twice”. Cooper said: “Why will she not just open up, just think again, just allow the indicative votes that others have put forward? Because what she is doing, by sticking to this failed plan, is deeply dangerous for our country. In the national interest, I beg this prime minister to think again.”