The remain-supporting Conservative MP, Dominic Grieve, is facing deselection by his party after losing a confidence vote held by his local association by 182 to 131 votes. The Conservative association in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire – Grieve’s constituency – said it no longer had confidence in the former attorney general after he put his case to members at a meeting on Friday. And, while he remains its MP for the time being, a meeting will soon be convened to discuss his future. Grieve has been at the forefront of efforts to ensure that parliament has a significant influence over how Brexit is managed, with the prime minister struggling to force her deal through the Commons. He is also a prominent remainer, has called for a second referendum and addressed a pro-EU rally attended by an estimated one million people in Westminster last weekend. Following the announcement of his defeat on Friday evening, Grieve was defended by fellow parliamentarians from his own party, and others. Dominic Grieve is principled intelligent and an outstanding politician and lawyer. He has been true to his values and beliefs. If the Beaconsfield Conservative party doesn’t see that it is a huge huge loss for us and the country. Full takeover of the Tory Party by the hard right ERG sect underway tonight. Dominic Grieve is a national hero, who has done more than anyone to try to save Britain from this #BrexitShambles disaster. #FinalSay #PeopleVote https://t.co/D4KtaEIBDC Senior Tory backbencher Tom Tugendhat, chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee, said the no confidence vote in Grieve was “deeply disappointing”. Grieve has been at the centre of the Tories’ internal battle over Brexit and told MPs last week he had “never felt more ashamed” of his party. But he said he has no intention of leaving it, despite the moves to oust him. At that time, he acknowledged there were members of his association who were “dissatisfied” but said they were “entitled to express their views”. He said: “I’ve been a member of the Conservatives for 43 years. I’ve no intention of leaving it.” He has not commented following the announcement of his defeat at the Beaconsfield association. The local campaign against Grieve was led by the man who stood as the Ukip candidate for Beaconsfield in 2017. The Times reported that Jon Conway, a pantomime producer, had been recruited by the Conservatives after serving as a regional organiser for Vote Leave. “I took the decision to ‘fight City Hall from within’ and resigned as Ukip chairman to join the Tory party a year ago,” Conway reportedly told local members. Grieve acknowledged his rival’s past allegiances last week. In a statement released on Friday evening, Beaconsfield Conservative association’s chair, Jackson Ng, said: “I am pleased to see over 350 members attend. [Beaconsfield] is proud to be one of the largest associations in the Conservative party and also a broad church of members with a wide variety of opinions. “Our members had a robust discussion with our MP, Dominic Grieve QC, on Brexit, before voting on a motion of confidence in him as our MP, which I can confirm, with a heavy heart, that he failed to retain. “He remains our Conservative MP but I will be speaking as soon as possible to my fellow officers and the executive council.”