Jeremy Corbyn has demanded a general election in response to Theresa May’s 149-vote Brexit deal defeat – but made no mention of a second referendum. The Labour leader also pledged that his party would vote against a no-deal Brexit outcome in Wednesday’s vote and signalled that he would continue to press for a customs union with the EU. “The prime minister has run down the clock and the clock has been run out on her,” he said in the House of Commons. “It’s time that we have a general election and the people can choose who their government should be.” But despite Corbyn’s call for another poll, the party is understood to not have immediate plans to call for a vote of no confidence that could precipitate what would be the third general election in four years. The opposition will initially focus on opposing no deal – which is expected to be defeated on Wednesday – and believes that an extension to the 29 March deadline is inevitable because more time is needed to negotiate an alternative. Only three Labour MPs voted with the government, the serial rebels John Mann and Kevin Barron plus former minister Caroline Flint, despite May’s attempt to woo them with promises on workers’ rights and a £1.6bn seven-year regeneration fund. Two independent former Labour MPs, Frank Field and Ian Austin, voted with the government. Flint intervened while Corbyn was speaking in the Commons earlier in the day, arguing that May’s revised deal was better because Downing Street had promised that “if the EU raised standards in health and safety and employment rights” MPs “could vote to support that increase, and not only that but go further than the EU”. But other Labour MPs who had considered voting for May’s deal indicated they had little interest in expending political capital in voting for a proposition that was going to be overwhelmingly defeated with so little from the government on the table. One of the party’s MP representing a seat in the north of England said they believed that “around 30 Labour MPs” could yet vote for a Brexit deal if a third meaningful vote were to happen and May were to offer more. Corbyn made no mention of a second referendum – which the party is theoretically committed to supporting if it cannot secure a general election – in his remarks after the vote, and hardly referred to it in his earlier speech in the Commons debate. “If this deal narrowly scrapes through tonight – I don’t think it will – we believe the option should be to go back to the people for a confirmatory vote on it,” Corbyn said, suggesting there is little sign that Labour will reactivate the idea soon. The Labour leader is instead expected to focus on winning support for a scheme that involves a customs union with the EU. Last week he met two Conservative former ministers, Nick Boles and Oliver Letwin, to discuss their “Common Market 2.0” plan, which involves staying in the single market and having a customs union with the EU after Brexit.