In Montenegro on Monday, shortly after confronting the latest episode of racism on the European stage with a goal, a cutting celebration and another commanding performance, Raheem Sterling claimed to be no leader in the fight Uefa has persistently dodged. Reluctantly and sadly necessarily, that is precisely what he has become. Sterling, perhaps to his own surprise, is emerging as a unifying figure in an England shirt. Leadership and responsibility have always been attributes that have impressed in the Manchester City forward on the pitch. They were part of the attraction for Liverpool’s academy scouts –and a host of Premier League rivals – when tempting him from Queens Park Rangers as a 15-year-old. His refusal to hide when a game was not going his way, and determination to change it, is what prompted Roy Hodgson’s memorable description of Sterling before the 2014 World Cup. “He’s got bollocks,” the England manager would regularly say. Hodgson’s assessment must now include the 24-year-old’s resolute stand against racism, whether overt or underlying, home or abroad, within the game or society at large. “I didn’t mean to be a leader,” said Sterling on going public with his thoughts on being racially abused at Chelsea in December and the double standards of certain media in its coverage of black and white footballers. “I don’t think I’m a leader. It’s just something I thought to myself that I’d been seeing for a while and I thought it was sad and I just wanted to bring awareness. I didn’t say anyone was racist, I was just speaking about something that was serious at the time.” Sterling laughed in the face of his abusers at Stamford Bridge before challenging, on Instagram the next day, the media’s contrasting portrayal of two successful young City players – white Phil Foden and black Tosin Adarabioyo – when buying their families a house. He elaborated on his frustrations with media coverage of black sportspeople and entertainers in a rare and illuminating interview with the New York Times this month. “It is a stereotype of black people: chains and jewellery, bling and money,” he argued. At the Podgorica City Stadium on Monday he articulated his defiance to the racist abuse by cupping his ears to the most vociferous section of the home crowd after scoring England’s fifth goal. “Not an outpouring of frustration,” Sterling clarified. “It was just to let them know then you’re going to have to do better than that to stop us.” His reaction, plus those of Danny Rose and Callum Hudson-Odoi who were also subjected to monkey chants in Montenegro, drew praise from the sports minister Mims Davies and Football Against Racism in Europe (Fare). Fare had designated the Euro 2020 qualifier as high risk and joined Sterling in calling for tougher sanctions than Uefa often impose. “We commend the reaction of the England players involved, no human being should have to face abuse and vilification for their race or identity, something that many Montenegrins will understand from the divisive and bloody recent history of the Balkans,” it said in a statement. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Sterling has matured on and off the pitch under Pep Guardiola, and to a degree that vindicates the public warnings Brendan Rodgers issued to the teenager at Liverpool. Attempts to help fund new sporting and educational facilities for young people near where he grew up in north London, with a local community centre under threat by Brent council, is another example of his public engagement. However, the forward has long been concerned that the media projects a false, flash image of him that has contributed to being viewed as a divisive figure at away grounds. Those who have worked with Sterling on his rise from the St Raphael’s estate in Neasden to the summit of English football – at QPR, Liverpool, City and on the England scene – testify to a more stoic, polite and considered character. Not, as Sterling has often said himself, that he is a saint. The England forward was disturbed by the wider implications of what happened at the Euro 2020 qualifier in Podgorica. The 5-1 victory, he said, should have been remembered for “someone like Declan [Rice] coming in for his first game and wanting the ball and being so assured on the ball”. “Callum [Hudson-Odoi] as well, to see how much of a talent he is. But then silly stuff keeps happening and keeps occurring in football in 2019, which is a massive shame. But we can only do so much as footballers. We can only bring the awareness and then let the people who are really in charge put a stop to this. Banning one or two people isn’t going to change anything, the next time it happens then it will be one or two fans again. So I think there needs to be a more serious take on this. Whoever is in charge – and I don’t know if it is a stadium ban – but they have to do something to make them think again if they want to support their team. Even if it’s our England fans. It should be the same everywhere. There’s no time for us just to be cancelling two people’s season tickets.” Sterling said he became aware of the racist abuse only when Rose pointed it out in the second half, and that his celebration was a gesture of support to teammates who have come to look up to the 24-year-old. He added: “It’s a real shame to be coming somewhere to be reminded of what skin colour you are, or what you resemble. I know what colour I am. It’s just a shame that some people think it’s cool to make fun of you for it. I don’t think it is as bad as it could be, but it’s 2019 and it’s time this has been put to bed.”