Astonishing and frustrating, and as compelling as it is very, very long, Anne Imhof’s show Sex fills the Tanks space at London’s Tate Modern. Imhof’s “durational” performances are a test. Sex lasts four hours. Wander out for a drink or the call of nature and you’ll miss something. No one person can see it all in any case, as the action, and inaction, moves between the three spaces. Something is always happening somewhere; or several things, everywhere. “The working title for the Tanks piece was either Death Wish or Great Expectations,” Imhof tells me. Coming after her Faust, which filled the German pavilion at the last Venice Biennale, and won the 41-year-old German the Golden Lion for best pavilion (which it was, without a doubt), she eventually settled on Sex.It debuted on Thursday. Will there be sex, I ask her. Not in the way you know it, she replies when we meet a few days before. Whatever it is, people must come to the work now with all kinds of expectations, probably wanting spectacle. One earlier work, Angst, took its cues from Kafka, but the relationship of Imhof’s Faust to Goethe was, at best, oblique. Faust in German also means fist. “I started working [on Sex] nine months ago, and we started in the Tanks two weeks ago. I was very hesitant. I haven’t made that many big shows,” Imhof says. “The German pavilion at Venice is actually quite small.” She occupied every bit of the pavilion, from the ground to the roof, installing a transparent glass floor. Performers crawled about under our feet, and climbed on to shelves and interior balconies to watch us. Doberman pinschers roamed inside cages. I snuck in at different times of day through the opening week, always seeing something unexpected. The performers in Sex make you feel uncertain whether your presence is welcome. Meet their eyes and you get a good hard stare, or an expression of distain. Poking my head into a dark corner, a woman gives me a baleful look, and a young man’s implacable expression tells me to fuck off. It’s like being in a darkroom at a sex club. There is an etiquette. Don’t get too close, don’t interfere, no touching without consent. And then some guy pogos into me, and elbows his way between the viewers. What are the limits? Where should I be? Is eye contact allowed? I am left with a head full of images. A man thrashes at his own shadow with a bullwhip, the rhythmic echo of whip against wall a metronomic ricochet through the space. A waltz, set to a heartbeat pulse, becomes a wrestling match, or a tender embrace as the couple slowly falls on to a mat. A procession passes through, bodies lifted by their companions. Carrying becomes caring. Or are they being led to an auto-da-fé? A man looks down at the milling audience from a high gantry, as though he were on a balcony, watching the street below. The audience is a crowd, greeting and kissing friends, some ignoring the spectacle, gossiping, elbowing each other for a better view. Some stay quiet and apart, others behave as if they were at a drinks party, posing, seeing and being seen. It is a bit like a medieval moshpit of groundlings, with iPhones. All I see is a performer’s distorted shadow, the audience’s mobiles held aloft to get a better view. “I really didn’t want this to happen”, Imhof says, “But I set myself up for it.” In Faust there were stampedes of viewers, desperate not to miss the next perverse moment. Imhof has learned to incorporate this dynamic into the work. Her performers have learned not to smile but to stay in their role, not to make it easier for themselves or for the viewer. They occupy their own space, not leaving. “This is crucial,” she says. The performers are checking their phones too, connected via WhatsApp, telling them where to go and what’s next. This is how things are now. Sometimes the audience is a sea of noise, a tide moving through these echoing spaces. Amid the noise of the inattentive audience there are moments of silence and tenderness, then thundering guitar noise, chords like foghorns, live song and recorded chants, Baroque couplets, human coupling. Two performers move through, bundles of burning branches in their hands. Others stalk the spaces, and go between us purposefully, but arriving nowhere, stalling, backtracking, beginning again. Imhof rehearsed in her living room in Berlin. “We just push all the stuff to the sides,” she tells me. The Golden Lion she won at Venice is a prop now. It sits in a row with the bongs. All kinds of detritus is lined up in little rows against the walls. Cans and bottles of beer. Motorcycle helmets. Pack of sugar, playing cards, a cast-aluminium beetle. Mobile phones, a lighter. “I like the franticness of putting things in a row,” Imhof says. When she moved her studio from Frankfurt, where she has lived for years, to Berlin, she set things up in exactly the same way. “Everything needs to be the same, even when it is a bit messy.” The interconnected spaces of the Tanks are hung with paintings – yellow and black fade into one another, like closeups of shadow and light on a leg or an arm. Other paintings are scratched through, violent outlines of empty heads and limbs that disappear into nothing. There are ghostly recalls of Jean-Michel Basquiat and early 1950s De Kooning. Graffiti, wounds, shadows. Somehow, her paintings inform her performances. Imhof still thinks of herself as a painter, a maker of images. Grubby mattresses lay about in one room, on a soiled carpet. Piers cross the two largest tanks. One is for the audience, as though it were raising us above a concrete wasteland. A much higher pier crosses a second space above our heads. These are used by the performers. Here and there, raised platforms, something between a bed and a diving board, sit on high pillars. A man lounges, imperiously vaping, on one of them . Performers ascend and descend, to stretch out, kneel, or even sleep. There is no onstage or offstage. Everything that is visible, or out of sight in another room, is part of the imaginary world of the piece. You always think you are missing something frenzied, or dirty, or enchanting. At Venice, Faust seemed like a metaphor for the whole biennale. You always end up disassociated, desperate, hungry for spectacle, strung-out with art-lag. There is a lot of waiting, in the transitions between one thing and another. Imhof has spent a lot of time preparing the performers to be in the space, and “to do nothing without feeling humiliated”. These extended moments of stasis have their own timbre, and create a great deal of the work’s tension. “If it were left just to me it would be one peak after another. Peaks, peaks, peaks,” she says, punching her fist into her palm. For long periods performers lie on their raised beds and lounge on mattresses on the floor, vaping, checking their phones. Alone and in little groups, backs against a wall, like builders on a lunchbreak, they sit around in a state of suspension, even when you catch their eye. During the day the spaces are empty, devoid of any action but your own. Guitarist Eliza Douglas sits on the edge of a high pier and sings. The voice has something of Nico’s tenderness and malice. Unlike Nico, Douglas can sing in tune. There are songs about sex, taunting songs, duets and solos. Sometimes they are heartbreaking. “Death, please spare me for just another year,” she sings. The music has a much greater role than in earlier works. The songs, Imhof says, as though surprised, even have a beginning and end. One peters out for what seems an interminable time, a though it were slowly edging away to the horizon, as a strobe leaks in from the next room. One character is played by different performers, “like a doppelganger motif. There are people copying each other’s gestures. There is an image where Josh is standing over Mickey, who is on his knees, making these turns, and after a while you realise that Josh can’t leave, because that’s the rule, until the person on their knees stops.” Topping from the bottom, I suggest, referring to the dynamics of BDSM play. Whenever someone asks me what the work is about, there is an emphasis on 'contentlessness' – a hollowing out “We were looking a lot at Prince Igor’s movements from The Rite of Spring, but it is mostly about the hunched-over-ness of the entrance scene,” she explains. “There is a flaneur character who enters the space over and over again, making these grand gestures, but who is only ‘entering for the entering’.” What am I doing here? The longer I stay, the more the work becomes an entire world, even if I have no role. Imhof’s work has been described as a Gesamtkunstwerk. “I have real problems with that. I don’t want to be compared to Wagner!” she says. “Whenever someone asks me what the work is about, there is an emphasis on ‘contentlessness’ – a hollowing out”, says Imhof. “But it should be OK to do something for the sake of it.” It is enough. Anne Imhof: Sex is at Tate Modern, London, until 31 March.