I hated maths as a kid, and I still do. But there are occasional moments when it comes in handy in the kitchen, especially in solving that never-ending problem of what to make for lunch or dinner. My solution is meal maths, and the equation goes as follows: vegetables + store-cupboard pulses + dressing = triumph. Last week, that involved combining pre-cooked lentils with slow-roasted vegetables and a perky, hot lemon dressing. It’s an endlessly adaptable recipe that’s worth stocking the cupboard for (and sharing with you). I love this particular combination of vegetables, but you could use anything you’ve got in the fridge, really: carrots, cabbage, aubergines, cauliflower and courgettes would all work, too. Just make sure you start with roughly 1kg of vegetables. Prep 10 minCook 40 minServes 4 as a light meal 1 aubergine3 red peppers8 banana shallots4 garlic cloves 7 tbsp olive oil1 tsp dried marjoram1 tsp dried oregano1½ tsp salt1 lemon, juiced1 tsp chilli flakes150g frozen peas, defrosted2 x 250g packs pre-cooked puy lentils – to my mind, Merchant Gourmet’s are some of the finest you can buy Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Chop the aubergine and peppers into roughly 2cm x 4cm, bite-sized chunks, then put in a large bowl that’s pretty enough to serve the final salad in. Top and tail the shallots, take off and discard the skins, then quarter them and add to the bowl. Roughly crush the whole, unpeeled garlic cloves with the back of a knife, and add to the bowl with four tablespoons of the oil, the marjoram, oregano and a teaspoon of salt. Mix everything with your hands until all the vegetables are coated in herby oil, then tip out on to two roasting trays (don’t wash up the bowl – you’re going to re-use it later). Gently pat down the vegetables, so they sit in one even layer, then roast for 40 minutes, stirring once halfway through. While the vegetables are cooking, make the dressing. Pour the remaining three tablespoons of oil into the salad bowl, add the lemon juice and chilli flakes, and mix well. Lift the garlic cloves from the roast vegetable trays, squeeze out the flesh on to a board, then roughly chop and stir into the dressing. Add the peas to the salad bowl, and toss to mix. If you’d prefer to eat the salad warm, heat the lentils according to the instructions, otherwise just tip them straight from the packet into the salad bowl, add the roast vegetables and remaining half-teaspoon of salt, toss and serve. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.