If you’ve ever wondered how JK Rowling, Cardi B and Malala Yousafzai might fare on the pitch, then Saturday’s SheBelieves Cup match between the Lionesses and the United States is likely the closest you’ll get to seeing it. Each USA player will be wearing the name of a woman who’s personally inspired them on the back of their shirt for Saturday’s match in Nashville, a list with no shortage on inspired and unexpected choices. Defender Becky Sauerbrunn’s jersey will honor Ruth Bader Ginsburg, midfielder Rose Lavelle’s Rowling and forward Mallory Pugh’s Beyoncé, the US Soccer Federation said Saturday. Each member of the USWNT has chosen the name of a woman who's personally inspired them to wear on the back of their shirt for the England match today. pic.twitter.com/4GJ2AbrprJ Other famous women on the uniforms include Mother Teresa (midfielder McCall Zerboni), Sally Ride (defender Tierna Davidson), Carrie Underwood (midfielder Julie Ertz), Tina Fey (defender Emily Sonnett) and Jennifer Lawrence (defender Abby Dahlkemper). All 23 members gave the reasons behind their selections on US Soccer’s website. Megan Rapinoe, the talismanic midfielder who’s emerged as a voice of social conscience on the team, explained her choice of the groundbreaking poet and civil rights activist Audre Lorde, saying: “[She] was unapologetically herself. She so beautifully and powerfully expressed all parts of herself and her experiences at once. She was a woman, a lesbian, a feminist, a person of color, a civil right activist and a poet. She understood so clearly that change does not come from playing by the existing set of rules.” Athletes honored include Serena Williams (defender Crystal Dunn) and former US women’s team stars Mia Hamm (midfielder Samantha Mewis), Abby Wambach (forward Alex Morgan) and Briana Scurry (goalkeeper Adrianna Franch). The United States, which settled for a 2-2 draw with Japan on Wednesday’s opening night of the four-team, round-robin competition, will look to bounce back at Nashville’s Nissan Stadium against England, who came from behind for a 2-1 victory over Brazil.