I met my husband when I was 23 and in a relationship with someone else, who was making me unhappy. Initially we had a pretty good sex life, but over a year or two this fizzled out. Sex became sporadic and I wondered if I was to blame, as I am stressy and anxious. When we had sex, it was very satisfying for both of us, but my desire was limited. The lack of a “successful” sex life made me unhappy and it felt as if something was missing. We were best friends and shared so many interests. I adored him and many would say he was the perfect husband: generous, kind, intelligent, successful, supportive and fun. Plus, we enjoyed doing the same things and everyone I knew felt positively about him. However, in the last couple of years, my eyes wandered. I had a brief affair, of which he was aware. It was intensely passionate, something I felt my own relationship was lacking. I started seeing a therapist, who questioned how I felt about my husband when I met him. I realised I had never really fancied him. I wonder whether he was an escape route from my previous relationship. I left my husband two months ago, feeling that if there was never any attraction the relationship was probably untenable. I don’t want to give up on sex. But what if I have been too hasty, given how fantastic he is in every other way? I know physical attraction will wane in most relationships. Should I be trying to make it work? At 34 with no children, I feel there is a pressure to make a decision – and fairly fast. One of the things that struck me about your letter was how much you outsource what you do and how you think you should feel. You were in an unhappy relationship but didn’t do anything until your husband came along. You were married but wanted passion, so you had an affair. You sound quite emotionally young for your age and as if you’ve never really thought about what you want and what makes you happy. You remind me of someone bobbing about in a little sailboat, going wherever the sea takes them. The psychosexual and relationship therapist Kate Moyle (cosrt.org.uk) also picked up on how “you seemed stuck because of the things you feel you should be doing, and I wonder where all that ‘should’ comes from? A lot of couples need to work on sex in long-term relationships. That is the reality. We go through ages and stages. If we are quite secure in ourselves, we can be secure with other people. When it comes to sex, we have to make ourselves very vulnerable physically and that can be quite overwhelming if we don’t have a solid sense of self.” So I did wonder about you and where your anxiety comes from. Your early life, how you related to your parents, how secure you are: they are all important things to find out about yourself. Now is not a bad time to do that. My hunch is that you want to move on, but you’re scared to do so without a guarantee that you’ll meet someone else. Moyle was a little perplexed about you saying you were never really attracted to your husband but the sex was very satisfying when you had it. “If sex is the only thing lacking in your relations, is that all that needs to be different to make it OK?” I think that’s a pertinent question to ask yourself. Two more are: how will you feel if you do nothing and how will you feel if you reunite and you still feel like this in 10 years? There is, of course, a whole other person in this equation: your husband. How does he feel about you, about your marriage? Does he want to get back with you? Does he want children? You’ve been unfaithful to him once, which in itself isn’t a deal-breaker, but is he OK with that? Whether you fancied your husband when you first got together is interesting but irrelevant now – what matters is how you feel currently. You can’t get back with your husband just because you think you might want a baby or because of what you fear will happen if you don’t get back together with him. If you reunite, it has to be for positive reasons – and for both of you. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence