Formula One is set to re-introduce the awarding of a bonus point for the driver who records the fastest lap at a grand prix this season, after an absence of 60 years. The decision is still subject to ratification but is expected to be implemented before the season begins in Melbourne next week. The award of a point for the fastest lap was used in Formula One when the championship began in 1950 and remained in place until 1959. Its revival is believed to have come about after the concept proved popular in fan surveys conducted by the sport. F1’s owners, Liberty Media, have been clear they are willing to adapt to new ideas, in this case an incentive to add potential drama to the final third of a race. The driver setting the time will be awarded the point only if he subsequently finishes in the top 10 of the race, while the team will also earn a constructors’ championship point. With the current point-scoring system it seems more likely to have an impact on a tightly contested midfield than at the front of the grid but in theory the extra points could decide the drivers’ championship. In 1958 Mike Hawthorn beat Stirling Moss to the title by a single point, having set two fastest laps more than Moss. There have been plenty of drivers switching seats in the buildup to the new season. Daniel Ricciardo has left Red Bull for Renault, with Carlos Sainz moving to McLaren after Fernando Alonso's departure. Frenchman Pierre Gasly has been promoted from Toro Rosso to replace Ricciardo, with British-Thai driver Alex Albon taking his place. Charles Leclerc moves from Sauber to partner Sebastian Vettel at Ferrari, trading places with Kimi Räikkönen (pictured), who will race for a rebranded Alfa Romeo team. Force India are now known as Racing Point, with Lance Stroll joining them from Williams. The British constructor welcomes two new drivers –home hopeful and Formula 2 world champion George Russell and Robert Kubica, who makes his F1 return eight years after suffering life-threatening injuries in a rallying accident. Alfa Romeo Kimi Räikkönen (Fin), Antonio Giovinazzi (It)Ferrari Sebastian Vettel (Ger), Charles Leclerc (Mon)Haas Romain Grosjean (Fr), Kevin Magnussen (Den)McLaren Lando Norris (GB), Carlos Sainz (Sp)Mercedes Lewis Hamilton (GB), Valtteri Bottas (Fin)Racing Point Sergio Pérez (Mex), Lance Stroll (Can)Red Bull Pierre Gasly (Fr), Max Verstappen (Neth)Renault Daniel Ricciardo (Aus), Nico Hülkenburg (Ger)Toro Rosso Alexander Albon (Thai), Daniil Kvyat (Rus)Williams George Russell (GB), Robert Kubica (Pol) The decision has already been agreed by the FIA’s world motor sport council but still requires the approval of the F1 strategy group – consisting of representatives of teams, F1 management and the FIA – and the F1 commission, representing teams, sponsors and race promoters. It requires a majority of support from the former and a unanimous agreement from the latter. They are expected to give their approval, however, with the strategy group already behind it. With practice in Melbourne set to begin next Friday, and the Australian Grand Prix taking place two days later, a deadline for an electronic vote on introducing the new regulation has been set for Monday.