Born in Harrow in 1980, Nikesh Shukla is the award-winning author of novels including Coconut Unlimited and Meatspace. His latest, The One Who Wrote Destiny, is out now in paperback. His second young adult novel, The Boxer, is published in June. His screenwriting credits include Kabadasses and Two Dosas. Shukla is co-founder of the Good Literary Agency, editor of The Good Journal, and of The Good Immigrant – an essay collection of 21 writers exploring what it means to be black, Asian and minority ethnic in Britain today, which is being developed into a TV show. The Good Immigrant USA, edited by Nikesh Shukla and Chimene Suleyman, is a collection of essays from first- and second-generation immigrants to the US including Teju Cole, Jenny Zhang, and Chigozie Obioma, and is published this month. The Good Immigrant was a huge success. How did you conceive of it?I’d read Ta-Nehisi Coates’s Between the World and Me and Claudia Rankine’s Citizen and thought, where is Britain’s progressive, contemporary book about race issues? I was sick of the assumption that whenever people of colour get an opportunity it’s not because of our skill or merit. Instead of my default, which is to whine about things on Twitter, I thought: I’m going to do something constructive. The amazing thing is that we were crowdfunded in three days. I pressed refresh and there was a name, Joanne Rowling, and she took out patron level. It was a really exciting time. What motivated you to bring out a US version?The Good Immigrant started as a platform to showcase writers of colour. It wasn’t designed to be a political tool. I guess because of the times we’re living in, that’s what it became. What was going on in America was hard to ignore: Chimene Suleyman had moved there and we talked about some of the complexities around the race conversation she saw – we started envisaging a sequel. The 26 writers in the collection engage with many vital questions…The book doesn’t come up with easy answers. What’s similar to the UK book is this feeling of precariousness that people from immigrant backgrounds feel, which raises questions such as: what does it mean to be American? What does it mean to be from one place and live in another? What does the world look like? I’ve been brought up to think of society as very outward-facing, but everything that’s happening around Trump and Brexit makes the world feel smaller and that makes me really sad. We’re in an extreme state of precariousness, which is terrifying. I was told once, ‘we’re already publishing an Indian writer this year' The essays powerfully explore the psychological as well as physical effects of this precariousness… Fatimah Asghar discusses that in her piece when she talks about how loneliness has followed her her entire life because of the way people respond to her cultural background and where she finds herself in America today. “We wanted to humanise immigrants, let them tell their own stories and finally be in charge of their own narrative”, you write in the editor’s note…I realised who the book was for while at Manchester literature festival – there was this fizz in the air. Audience members were saying “thank you, we feel seen – it makes our stories valid”. When you’re from a marginalised background and you read the work it’s powerful. I’m here in front of you because of the mentorship of other writers such as Niven Govinden, Salena Godden and Nii Ayikwei Parkes; without them I wouldn’t have a career – they gave me permission when I needed it, solace when I needed it. You are also a champion of other writers…So many of us artists and writers are here because of the people who helped us along. It takes a village to raise a child and it takes a community to build an artist and I’m here because of all the people who invested time in me. I believe in community – The Good Immigrant is a success because of the community spirit put into it. So much of my success is because of the people who came before me; I can’t pay them back, but I can pay them forward. Would you define yourself as an activist?I think it’s important to speak truth to power, but the real activists are the ones who put everything on the line for the cause they believe in. My uncle Mahesh is a source of strength for me: in 1968 he tried to buy a house in Huddersfield but they had a policy not to sell to “coloured people”. He’s the first person to have brought a case of racial discrimination under the Race Relations Act. I remember him saying that laws had changed but nothing had been done to work on people’s hearts and minds, and that was the tragedy of this country. The work I’m doing around representation is about trying to change people’s hearts and minds. You’re a prolific writer of novels, nonfiction and screenplays. Which form do you feel most at home in?I feel most at home with fiction as I’m interested in what makes people do the things they do; fiction gives me space to explore that. My nonfiction is a tool of advocacy. I’m quite quiet and shy, but screenwriting gives me the chance to make people laugh and I’ve always been a fan of comedy. What books are on your bedside table?I’ve just finished How to Lose a Country [by Ece Temelkuran], which I adored – it’s the seven steps from a democracy to a dictatorship. I love Fatimah Asghar’s collection of poetry If They Come For Us. I just read Kerry Hudson’s Lowborn, which I feel is going to be one of the most important books of the year, and I’m starting Angela Saini’s Superior, which is fascinating. Speaking of my mentors, Niven Govinden’s This Brutal House is astounding. What kind of reader were you as a child?I was a voracious reader. I read a lot of Spiderman comics. I read The Buddha of Suburbia when I was a teenager, which was a powerful influence on me. When I was 18, I read heaps of paperbacks, and in the uni bookshop I discovered writers of colour like Arundhati Roy and Meera Syal. Then White Teeth came out and it was amazing reading that. Did you find many barriers to getting published?Yes. People told me my novel Coconut Unlimited was too niche as it was about Asians. I was told once, “we’re already publishing an Indian writer this year” and thought, well there can be more than one of us, and I’m from Harrow. That creates this sort of competitive feeling that we’ll have to duke it out with each other to fight for scraps. We can all co-exist. There were barriers – you keep going, you’re persistent; you get to the point where the only feedback you care about applies to the writing and not the colour of your skin; you meet the right people and have mentors, and eventually something happens. How do you juggle everything?I spend a lot of time on trains which is very good non-internet writing time. I work really hard – as the old immigrant saying goes: you have to work twice as hard to have half the opportunities. • The Good Immigrant USA, edited by Nikesh Shukla and Chimene Suleyman, is published by Little Brown (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99