These are fun to make and look cute, as well as tasting delicious, with bursts of raspberry combined with the chocolate. Prep time: 15 mins (cupcakes), 5 mins (royal icing) Bake time: 20 minsPlus decorating timeMakes: 12For the cupcakes150g butter150g caster sugar150g eggs (about 3 eggs) ¼ tsp vanilla bean paste150g self-raising flour½ tsp baking powder100g frozen raspberriesFor the royal icing20g egg white112g icing sugarBlack gel food dye PlusPink marshmallows (small and medium) Chocolate to melt Preheat the oven to 180C/356F/gas mark 4. Line a 12-hole cupcake tin with paper cupcake cases. Cream together the butter and sugar until light in colour and fluffy. In a separate bowl, whisk together the eggs. Add the eggs to the butter/sugar mixture, one to two tablespoons at a time, whisking well after each addition. Add the vanilla bean paste and mix. Add the flour and baking powder, and whisk on slow speed until smooth and there are no visible pockets of flour. Avoid overmixing unnecessarily. Use a spatula to fold in the frozen raspberries. Divide the mixture evenly between the 12 cupcake liners. Bake for 20 mins, or until risen and golden and firm on top. Transfer to a wire rack to cool. While the cupcakes are baking, start making the marshmallow pig toppers. To make the royal icing, whisk together the icing sugar and egg white until smooth. Transfer a small amount to a second bowl and dye this black. Transfer the icing to piping bags. Use a medium-sized marshmallow for the pig’s body, then use the small marshmallows for the nose and ears. Cut the marshmallows into triangular shapes for the ears. Secure the marshmallow pieces using the white royal icing. Pipe the eyes and nose using the black royal icing. Chop chocolate into small pieces, place in a microwaveable bowl and heat in short bursts, stirring well after each burst until it is completely melted. Leave to thicken to a consistency that is still liquid but not so thin that it drips off the edge of the cupcake. Top the cupcakes with this, then place the marshmallow pig in the chocolate. Drizzle over a little more melted chocolate. Repeat with all the cupcakes and enjoy. You can follow Kim-Joy on Twitter and Instagram at @kimjoyskitchen