The year before my father died, he came with us to Sweden for the summer. He had been living with his dementia for more than 10 years by then, and – mildly, sweetly, uncomplainingly – he was gradually disappearing, memories falling away, words going, recognition fading, in the great unravelling. But he was very happy on that holiday. He was a man who had a deep love for the natural world and felt at home in it; he knew the names of English birds and insects, wildflowers and trees. When I was a child, I remember him taking me to listen to the dawn chorus in the woods near our house. Standing under the canopy of trees in the bright wash of sound, he would tell me which song was the mistle thrush and which the blackbird. At least, I think I remember this, but perhaps I make it up as a story to tell myself when I’m sad. In Sweden, he picked wild mushrooms in the forest, went to a joyful crayfish party where he drank aquavit and wore a garland in his white hair, sat with a palette of watercolours looking out at the meadow although his paintbrush never quite made it to the paper. And one evening, we took him to have a sauna – he loved saunas because they reminded him of the time he had spent in Finland as a carefree young man. Afterwards, we helped him into the lake. It was a beautiful, soft dusk; in the fugitive light, the trees were massed shapes and the moon was shining on the water. I remember the stillness, just the occasional lap of water against the jetty. My father, old and frail, swam out a few yards and then he started to sing. It was a song I’d never heard before, have never heard since. He was swimming in small circles and singing to himself. He seemed quite contented, happy even, but at the same time it was the loneliest sight: as if there was no one left in the world, just him in the half-​darkness and brimming silence, with the lake and the trees and the moon and scattered stars. The edges of the self are soft; the boundaries of the self are thin and porous. In that moment, I could believe that my father and the world were one; it was pouring into him, and he was emptying out into it. His self – bashed about by the years, picked apart by his dementia – was, in this moment of kindness, beyond language, consciousness and fear, lost and contained in the multiplicity of things and at home in the vast wonder of life. Or that is what I tell myself now, three years later, trying to make sense of an illness that has the power to dismantle the self, that comes like a robber in the night to sneak into a house built up over a lifetime, to wreck and plunder and despoil it, sniggering behind the broken doors. The following February my father went into hospital with leg ulcers that were slow to heal. There were strict visiting hours and then, with an outbreak of norovirus, a virtual lockdown of the ward, which meant that for days on end he was alone: nobody to hold his hand, speak his name, tell him he was loved; nobody to keep him tethered to the world. His leg ulcers were healed, but away from the home he loved, stripped of familiar routines and surrounded by strangers and machines, he swiftly lost his bearings and his fragile hold upon his self. There is a great chasm between care and “care”, and my father fell into it. When he at last came home, he was a ghost of himself, skeletal, immobile, inarticulate and lost. No more saunas for him, no more forests and lakes and flowers in his hair; he wasn’t in the twilight of the illness now but in its gathering dark. After several months of radically slowed-​down dying, as autumn turned to winter and with a hard cold wind blowing, he left us at last. But against the memories of his terrible last months – the small room downstairs where he lay in a hospital bed waiting and waiting for nothing while the birds he loved came to the bird table outside his window; the routine of washing, feeding, lifting; the nurses and doctors and carers and the whole bureaucracy of illness and death; the sense of a mind dying and a body crumbling and not a damn thing to be done about it – against this stifling, drawn-​out ending, I set the memory of my father in a Swedish lake, in peace, in soft dusk and that mysterious fusion of the self with the world. I used to say that we are made of our memories, but what happens when memories are lost? Who are we then? If we are out of our mind, where have we gone? If we have lost the plot, what happens to the story we are in? Even at the bitter end, I never thought my father wasn’t himself – although at the same time I felt he had lost himself. He was gone but he remained; he was absent and yet powerfully present. There was something that endured beyond language and recollection, a trace perhaps, like grooves that life had worn into him the way a river carves into rock. He still had his sweetness; his past lived on in his smile, his frown, the way he raised his bushy silver eyebrows. It lived on in us. He might not have recognised us, but we could recognise him. I don’t know what the word for this indelible essence is – once, it would have been “soul”. Civilisation, control and safety form a crust over deep waters. In all of us, often pushed into the corner of our minds, is the uneasy awareness of how frail our hold over ourselves is, how precarious a grip we have on our own minds and bodies. Dementia – all the many and often harrowing forms of dementia – makes us ask what is it to be a self, to be human. It is often called the plague of our time; it is the “disease of the century”. People talk of dementia as if it were a time bomb. In truth, the bomb went off long ago, but quietly, privately, out of sight: a hidden demolition job. Men and women who live with dementia are often missing people – forgotten and denied by a society that values independence, prosperity, youth and success and turns away from vulnerability. They are the reminders that we get old, we decay; death comes to us all in the end. Of all the illnesses, it is the one we now most fear. It is “the story of suffering” – and like suffering, it lasts. And this suffering spreads, from the individual, to those who care for them and about them, to their community, to the country as a whole. Dementia is, as one doctor said to me, “profoundly disrespectful of patients, carers, health systems, social care… it doesn’t fit into the structures we’ve created”. There can be no other illness that is so defined by its impact not just on those who live with it but on those around them. Its meanings are physiological, psychological, social, economic, political and philosophical. Its costs are unquantifiable – I don’t mean the financial costs, though these are huge (the Alzheimer’s Society estimates that, in the UK alone, the cost is £26bn and, in the world, $818bn – and steadily rising – more than the cost of cancer, stroke and heart disease combined), but the costs in human terms: the shame, confusion, fear, sorrow, guilt, loneliness. It provokes profound moral questions about the society in which we live, about the values we hold and about the meaning of life itself. At the same time, we are the first generation to have really considered it mindfully. When I was a child, it was scarcely visible and rarely acknowledged. My grandfather on my mother’s side of the family had dementia, as did my grandmother on my father’s. Although I was aware of this, it was only in a muted way: they became like figures who had once been vivid in my life but were now being gradually rubbed out. I was perhaps embarrassed by them, these people who used to be figures of authority and now were so helpless, and I was also a bit queasy about the bodily nature of the disease, but I didn’t think about what it was like for them or let myself imagine the tragedy that was being played out, sometimes in the form of a nasty farce. It was a stigma, a source of shame, fear and denial, and it went on behind closed doors. The D word. We are aware of it now in a way that is radically different from 20 or 30 years ago and this awareness brings social, political and moral responsibility. Now we can see that which was previously hidden. In the 70s, there were about 300,000 people with dementia in the UK, spread thinly across the country. Today, there are three times that number. In 25 years, there will be something like 1.7 million. In the US, the incidence of death from Alzheimer’s alone increased 55% in the 15 years between 1999 and 2014. Go into a hospital ward, even a general one, and several or most of the beds are occupied by people with dementia. Go into a residential home for the elderly. Look at the obituaries. Read the news stories, the uplifting ones and the ones that make you want to howl in sorrow. I know scarcely anyone who doesn’t have some kind of intimate connection to the disease. It’s all around us, in our families and in our genes; perhaps in our own futures (approximately one out of six people over 80 get dementia, and the older the age the higher the chance; it’s like there’s a sniper in the garden). If it’s not you or me, it’s someone we love. We can no longer just talk about “them” – it’s “us” now, and how we face up to this challenge becomes a question of our collective humanity. For in an age where autonomy and agency are so highly valued, there are questions we urgently need to ask: what do we owe others and what do we owe ourselves? Who matters? Why do some people seem to matter less than others? Why do some people become ignored, invisible, neglected, abandoned? What is it to be human, and what is it to act in a human way? The word “we” is used persistently and easily. It speaks of community, democracy, collaboration. It lays claim to a collective voice, as if we were, as the politicians like to say, all in this together. In the same boat – well, yes, but some people are in the first-​class cabins with a sea view and cocktails at dinner, others are down in the hold, and still others are not seen at all. The light doesn’t fall on them; we don’t even realise they are on board with us. And quite a few have fallen into the cold water and they’re drowning out there in the darkness, while the band plays on. Those we do not see. Those we do not care about. Those we do not mourn. Those we neglect to the point of death… If my father had been an important man, I think he might have been treated differently at his time of greatest need – and of course, he was important, but only to those people who knew and loved him and whose lives were bound up with his. A sense of the preciousness of every life should be designed into a system, a society, so that we do not need to feel identification in order to rescue one another. We all have an obligation to one another – even to people we are hostile to – because the world is “given to us in common”, to share and to pass on. There is no I without a you, no me without us. We are at one another’s mercy in the end, and we should have a passionate, unequivocal commitment to everyone, to anyone – honouring them not out of love but out of common humanity. In the past few years, I have been thinking a great deal about the meaning of rules and of boundaries: the walls of institutions on which rules – thou shalt not – are posted; the fences around gardens, the doors (that can be shut fast or open), the borders (that are often more porous than I understood), the minds (that are also embodied); the bodies (that both contain us and yet expose us to the world), the I and the we, the us and the them, self and other. How much are we connected to one another and how much are we separated? How far are we private, discrete people and how far part of a public, communal life? How much can we – should we – rely on others and be relied on in our turn? What are our responsibilities to the world in which we live, and then what are our responsibilities to our self? To explore dementia’s meaning and its excruciating losses is to think about how far we as a society and as individuals are responsible for the suffering of others: what we owe one another, what we care about, what matters in this world we all share. Who matters. Steve Gentleman (the name is accurate), professor of neuropathology in the department of medicine at Imperial College London, is a detective of the brain. He looks for disease, shrinkage, hollows, hardening, white lesions in the limbic system, amyloid deposits. I ask him if he ever feels – I struggle for a right word, can’t find it – odd about dissecting brains: odd because of what it tells us about identity, and because in the end all the urgent business of being human, all the despair, anxiety, appetite, terror, love and joy, resides in this piece of flesh. He smiles and shakes his head. He has no faith – perhaps it would be hard to if day after day you slice brains, scalpel out morsels of executive function, episodic memory – but he is full of wonder at how infinitely complex, subtle and plastic the brain is, and how it is still mysterious to us. Because, after all, we are not just our brain: our brain is in a body, is part of it and in the community. There’s no end to its possibilities. Alzheimer’s disease leads to nerve-cell death and tissue loss in the brain. Abnormalities include beta-amyloid plaques, tangles of the protein tau, loss of connection between the cells and inflammation. The cortex shrivels up and the ventricles grow larger. Over time the brain shrinks dramatically until every area is affected. Yet some brains, when dissected, show no sign of dementia even when the person has been diagnosed with the illness, while others are badly damaged even though the person seemed not to have shown signs of cognitive impairment. The link between observable deterioration in the brain and the way a person acts, feels and communicates in the world is not straightforward, and this is because the brain lives and works in a network of reciprocal connections. Looking at the brain cannot tell us all we need to know about the brain: it is so much more than itself – a brain in a body in a particular life. Part of Steve Gentleman’s research is to compare the brain that he observes with the lifestyle of the man or woman to whom it belonged, to seek out patterns that will begin to explain why it is that some people are swiftly demolished by the illness when others are able to withstand its attacks for longer. Exercise, diet, geography, career, mood, the state of a relationship: all these things may make a difference to the way a person responds to what is happening in the intricately folded labyrinths of the brain. The brain on its chopping board is inert, a lifeless beige thing, but neuro-images of the living brain display its fizzing connectivity, its marvel and mystery. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow. The images – still and moving – are like the northern lights, like coral reefs or trees in blossom, in kaleidoscopic flux. It may seem, looking at these iridescent patterns, that here’s a brain in love, in fear, in envy and in a clutch of hope. But brain-​scan images are not straightforward photographs of the brain in action; they are representations of the areas that are working at their hardest. It’s a bit like looking at New York City from a helicopter and seeing how the crowds move through the streets: you learn a lot about the movement of people over time and in response to events, but you don’t really know what it’s like to be in New York. And the brain is not the mind. Nevertheless, the image of a brain damaged by dementia is dismaying: dead grey patches amid the glorious colour. Dr Claudia Wald is consultant psychiatrist at the Kensington & Chelsea and Westminster Memory Service, which provides dementia assessment and diagnosis and ongoing support for people with memory difficulties. Memory clinics like this are based on models from the US and were set up in the early 80s in every region of the country. She sits in her pleasant room, sunlight falling through the window. She is tall and open-​faced, and her voice is reassuring; she feels a kind place to be. “People of your age,” she says, “start to fear their fading memories. With age comes effortful thinking and remembering”: much forgetfulness is age-​related and non-​problematic. We all forget as we get older, and this is normal, natural, part of the ageing process. Dementia is not natural, it is a disease. But still, there is a grey area, a place of uncertainty and trepidation, when forgetfulness deepens – when, as so many people with dementia say, something seems “not quite right”. In her diagnostic work, Claudia Wald is looking for changes in behaviour. Almost always, the initial assessment is done in the person’s home, where the atmosphere is more relaxed, less contrived, and where much can be learned from context (the state of the house, of the fridge). She takes a detailed clinical history and uses scans only where there is diagnostic uncertainty: “I am trying to find out who the person was; I am looking for change.” She must assess what part of the memory is affected: long-​term memory? Language? (The language centre is next to the memory centre.) “The bank of words seeping away,” she says – then adds: “This happens to us anyway.” Recalling names? Faces? In her diagnostic criteria, at least two domains must be affected (language and memory, say; or memory and behaviour; or memory and sense of direction), before she gives a formal name to the symptoms she finds. Between the inevitable process of ageing and the clear diagnosis of dementia lies the swampy territory of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), an interim stage which some see as a pathologising of natural forgetfulness and others as a helpful indication of future problems. For there is no scientific boundary between disease and normality; lines may be drawn, but their exact location is a matter of evaluative judgment. “It’s a grey area,” says Wald. “And at what point in that grey area is treatment appropriate? What is ‘normal’ as we get older?” Often she will find that circumstances have changed, so that props are stripped away: the death of a spouse who had been compensating for failing cognitive function, going into hospital, breaking a leg, moving house. “These things can expose difficulties that had been hidden.” Depression, she says, can be a precursor and a risk factor and it can be very difficult to treat. “Old age brings with it profound losses: the loss of a spouse, of family, of friends, of work, of health. There is huge loneliness and fear of death.” All this means that the diagnosis is often not straightforward, and often it is the relative or carer who notices the change – because how can the I know that the I is slipping? The disease crept into his life slowly and silently, no broken windows or alarm bells, just rustles in the night “A diagnosis,” says Wald, “is just the start of learning how to live well with this condition. There can be a paradoxical comfort from knowing there’s a name and a reason for this changed sense of self, but some people do not want to know.” I notice a subtle change in her manner. She picks up her pen: “Are you ready?” My racing heart, my sweating palms. It’s like being back at school and doing an exam – except I am the exam that I don’t want to fail. “Remember these words,” she instructs. ‘“Apple’, ‘penny’, ‘table’. I will ask you for them later.” I nod. Apple, penny, table. Apple, penny, table. “I am going to give you an address which I want you to remember. David Barnes, 73 Orchard Drive, Kingsbridge, Devon. Have you got that?” “Yes.” I am holding the lines in my head, repeating them to myself. Apple, penny, table. David Barnes, 73 Orchard Drive, Kingsbridge, Devon. She asks me the date and I get it wrong by a day. My heart bangs harder. She asks me who the prime minister is and this I get right – though I am talking in an oddly jocose, self-​conscious manner that I don’t like at all. My face feels stretched. She asks tells me to count back in sevens from a hundred. I was never quick at maths. “Ninety-​three,” I say. “Eighty-​six. “Seventy-​nine.” Apple, penny, table. “Seventy-​two.” David Barnes. Next I have to give as many words as possible starting with “P”. My mind blanks but off I shoot, hectic; my voice comes out scratchy and I am grinning foolishly. The words arrive as jerky Latinate multisyllables – parsimonious, peri-menopausal, penitential, patriarchal, pertinacious, programmatic, plausibility – with the occasional home-​run of simple ones: put, plant, pot, press, poppy, potato, poem. As I reach the end of my minute, I realise I forgot all the ph’s. I haven’t told her how I find it increasingly hard to recognise faces. I haven’t told her that sometimes I’ll fail to see what’s in front of my eyes. I repeat the address, and the burden of holding it in my mind lifts from me. I say: “Apple, penny, table.” My heartbeat is slowing. She asks me to draw a clock. I do so and then see, appalled, that I’ve put one o’clock at midnight and midnight nowhere at all. “You’re fine,” says Claudia Wald. I know I am really, but I want to weep. The disease crept into my father’s life slowly and silently, no broken windows or alarm bells shrilling, just occasional rustles in the night, a creak on the stairs, odd things missing from their usual place but not missed. I don’t know when he suspected and I don’t know when we did either, or which came first. His mother had had dementia at a young age; his elder sister too. And my father had always been absent-​minded – which is no indicator of dementia, but it felt like one, as if his future was woven into his benevolent, abstracted personality, the way he could disappear into his own secret world where no one could follow. Fog thickened. His vagueness became a kind of lostness. His cheerfulness (perhaps a form of stoicism) was punctured by an anxiety that sometimes blighted his final decade, even when he was – this is one of those catch-​all phrases that catches less than it drops – “living well” with the condition. Time heals; time undoes. In those sliding-​down years there wasn’t one thing, a particular event, though of course I look back now and I recognise the signs. When he struggled to remember the name of a flower that grew in the hedgerow. When his hand, holding a mug of tea, shook. When he lost his hearing aid yet again, lost track of what he was saying, lost his way (but we all do that). Scraped the car against a gateway. Left the key in the lock. When we asked him the time and he told us the cricket score (but he always was absent-​minded). When on his face I would see an expression I didn’t recognise (but he was always a little mysterious: he stood just out of reach). We didn’t talk about it at first: when is the point at which you say, Do you think that something is wrong, that your memory is beginning to fail you? There came a time when we all knew. He went to see a doctor; he had his memory test; eventually he received the sentence, hedged about with reassurances and strategies and tact, but there it was nonetheless: you have dementia. For me, it wasn’t a punch to the solar plexus, more like a soft nudge that pushed him over that moveable line – from knowing really to really knowing. In fact, I can’t even remember hearing the news. • This is an edited extract from What Dementia Teaches Us About Love by Nicci Gerrard, published by Allen Lane on 4 April (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846 • Nicci Gerrard will be talking at the Emmanuel Centre in London on 1 April. Tickets are available from howtoacademy.com