Leanne Riley does not look at Twitter too much, she says. Which is why one of her posts sticks out; it is a link to a picture of her England No 9 shirt neatly folded on a bed the day of their Six Nations match against France in February. Lying on the shirt is a picture of a steely-haired man slightly awkwardly but determinedly cradling a newborn. Alongside it, Riley wrote: “This one’s for you Grandad.” The 25-year-old’s granddad, Derek, had always wanted to watch her play live for England but ill health and distance meant he had followed every match on Sky instead. Then, last December, he asked Riley’s father if he would pick him up in Coventry “on the way” to Doncaster for the key game against France on 10 February. He never got the chance. “He passed away at the start of the year,” Riley says. She hesitates. Her voice breaks a little. “I’m sorry, you’re the first to ask me about that,” she says. “It was kind of expected because he was in hospital over Christmas ... but he had never watched me play live before.” It is the only time in the interview when she is even a smidgeon less than sure-footed. Until that point, it has been clear why she is doing media before Harlequins’ Game Changer match against Gloucester-Hartpury at the Twickenham Stoop on Saturday. The eloquent and impassioned words outlining the team’s determination to grow the game and the belief they can transfer the obvious interest in the grand slam-winning England side into the Tyrrells Premier 15s have come thick and fast. Almost all of the discussion has been centred on support. From the record crowds attracted by England in this Six Nations at Exeter’s Sandy Park and at Twickenham, to their own record for a domestic game of 4,542 that Quins are hoping to beat on Saturday. And Riley’s grandad was clearly one of her biggest supporters in a very close family. “I got a lot of messages before the [France] game after I put that up,” she adds. “He was a true supporter. Even though he couldn’t be there, he’d watch everything on TV and my dad would always make sure he’d got it on record before a game. I know he was really excited to come and watch ... I would have loved him to be there.” England won that game against France, avenging a two-point defeat the previous year, and went on to seal the slam, beating Italy and Scotland without conceding another point, lifting the trophy in the evening at Twickenham, after the men’s match. Playing at Twickenham has its pros and cons. It cannot be much fun warming up and watching most of the 82,000 crowd leave. “We are aware that people are going to be leaving but you see the boys still there, signing autographs, and they wish you good luck; and it’s just really cool to imagine you’re playing at the home of rugby. “We got more than 13,000 who stayed to watch for the Scotland game. My first game at Twickenham they only opened one side above the tunnel, now that’s full and they’ve opened the other side. We’re getting there. Obviously we would love it to be full, but it’s still a great atmosphere.” There is still a long way to go to win over everyone but there is no frustration in Riley’s voice when she discusses what she calls “old-fashioned attitudes”. “I don’t see it because I don’t really use Twitter. But when we won the grand slam, one of the girls showed us all a tweet which said: ‘It’s not really a grand slam win – it’s women’s rugby.’ “You are always going to get some people like that but I focus instead on inspiring people to come and see what we can do. We love what we do. I think those who say negative things about women’s rugby, you will find they often haven’t watched a game. We like to play unpredictable rugby; we want to be exciting and get people on the edge of their seats.” The aim, clearly, is to capitalise on the interest that has been shown in the England side to further develop domestic women’s rugby, hence the Game Changer – Quins final regular season game before the play-offs – will be live streamed by the club. Riley adds: “This game is coming at a good time, when we have just won the grand slam. I would like to think that the people who supported us during the Six Nations would want to come and watch us at club level. There’s definitely a craze going around [to capitalise on]. I do a lot of work coaching girls and there’s big support for Quins among girls at grassroots clubs. It’s a huge part of what I want to achieve to inspire them.” While Harlequins still boast firefighters and soldiers among the ranks there are also a number of internationals who have been on professional contracts with England since the start of the year. “We’re really fortunate to be in the position that we’re in with Harlequins and the RFU,” Riley says. “We had contracts for eight months before the last World Cup but it was too late. And I think that other nations will be looking at what we are doing and maybe thinking they need to follow our lead to keep up. I would like to think that in two years women’s rugby would be a fully professional sport.” Ticket prices for the Game Changer start at £5 for juniors and £10 for adults. They can be purchased here