The Bosnian Serb wartime leader, Radovan Karadžić has been sentenced to life in prison at an appeal court in The Hague for his role in mass killings of civilians in the conflict that tore Bosnia apart a quarter century ago. The five judges at the UN-mandated court upheld the 2016 verdict at his first trial almost in its entirety, dismissing all but one of Karadžić’s appeals as “mere disagreement” with the court’s conclusions rather than valid legal objections. And the judges increased the 40-year jail term handed down in 2016 to life in prison. One element from his 2016 conviction involving illegal detentions of civilians was overturned on the grounds he was not allowed to cross-examine witnesses, but the appeal court confirmed Karadžić’s guilt for his role in the worst massacres of civilians Europe had seen since the 1940s. The judges upheld the charge of genocide for the July 1995 massacre of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica pointing to an order Karadžić had signed four months earlier called “Directive 7”, calling for conditions for the people of Srebrenica should be made “unbearable with no hope of further survival”. Reading the verdict, Judge Vagn Prüsse Joensen, said Karadžić had been in constant touch with his forces on the ground at the fall of the Srebrenica. He added that he had also failed to rebut the 2016 court ruling that as commander of chief of Bosnian Serb forces, he was obliged to investigate and punish the perpetrators of war crimes. Similarly, Joensen said Karadžić had “failed to demonstrate error” in the original trial chamber’s findings that Sarajevo was shelled indiscriminately with no distinction between military targets and civilians. The panel of judges also rejected an appeal from the prosecution against Karadžić’s acquittal on the charge of genocide in 20 municipalities where massacres were committed across Bosnia. They said the prosecutors had failed to disprove the 2016 court’s ruling that those massacres should not be classified as genocide. It was a ruling which has infuriated many Bosnians, who argue that the intent of Karadžić’s campaign of “ethnic cleansing” of Serb-held territory was by definition genocidal. Karadžić, now aged 73, listened to most of the verdict sitting impassively in a dark suit, his white hair swept back. He was told to stand at the end of the hearing to hear his jail sentence extended to a life term. At that moment, a cheer went up from the public gallery, separated from the courtroom by bullet-proof glass. He has been held at The Hague since his capture in Belgrade in 2008, and his appeal is one of the last war crimes cases from Bosnian war to be held in The Hague. Karadžić, led a breakaway Serb territory when Bosnia declared independence from a crumbling Yugoslavia in 1992, in the wake of the Soviet Union’s collapse. The subsequent conflict was marked by atrocities against civilians, most carried out by Bosnian Serb troops, who conducted a campaign of “ethnic cleansing” to rid the self-proclaimed Republika Srpska of Muslims and ethnic Croats. About 100,000 people were killed and 2.2 million were left homeless. The mass killings culminated in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, the worst bloodletting on European soil since the second world war. In the 2016 court ruling, Karadžić was found guilty of genocide for Srebrenica, but acquitted on that charge for massacres in other Bosnian municipalities. Although he was found guilty on nine other counts, including crimes against humanity, the acquittal of the broader genocide charge and the fact that he was given a limited jail sentence rather than life, infuriated his victims. On Wednesday, about 30 survivors led by the group the Mothers of Srebrenica gathered outside the court house in the Hague, with placards calling for justice, and pictures of some of the victims. “I think this verdict is historical for justice,” said Munira Subašić, the group’s president. The verdict was streamed online, but only after a 30-minute delay. The delay was introduced after another Hague defendant, Bosnian Croat general Slobodan Praljak, committed suicide in November 2017 by taking poison in the courtroom after his 20-year sentence was upheld. After the conflict, Karadžić went into hiding and was only captured, disguised as a spiritual healer in Belgrade, in 2008. His legacy has lived on in Bosnia, where the ethnic division of the country has largely been frozen in place by the 1995 Dayton peace accord. The Republika Srpska continues to defy the central government in Sarajevo on a range of issues, and Karadžić is still hailed as a hero and martyr by many Serbs. A university dormitory was named after him in 2016. “International justice is for the weak. For the strong, justice lives in the strength of their armaments,” Emir Suljagić, a survivor of the Srebrenica massacre who went on to be Bosnia’s deputy defence minister, told the Turkish news channel, TRT. “[The tribunal’s verdict] has a certain symbolic value, I’m not going to deny that. But in real terms, what Karadzic did in from 1992 to 1995 lives on.” Before the appeal verdict, Karadžić’s lawyer, Peter Robinson, said his client “fervently believed that the trial chamber judgment was wrong and the product of an unfair trial”. Robinson described Karadžić as “an optimistic person by nature”. Karadžić, a poet and psychiatrist turned ruthless political leader, has appealed against the sentence on 50 grounds and accused judges of conducting a “political trial” against him. He represented himself at his trial, with Robinson’s assistance. Prosecutors argued that Karadžić and the Bosnian Serb army commander Ratko Mladić wanted to “permanently remove Muslims and Croats” from Serb-held territory. United Nations prosecutors also asked judges to reverse his acquittal on a second charge of genocide in Bosnia’s municipalities and hand him a life sentence. Mladić, 76, dubbed the “Butcher of Bosnia”, is currently appealing against a life sentence on similar charges. He has previously refused to testify at Karadžić’s trial, calling the UN tribunal “satanic”. The former Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic, Karadžić’s long-time patron during the war, was on trial in the Hague until his death in 2006.