This is the agreement that covers the £39bn payment from the UK to the European Union, citizens’ rights of non-Britons in the UK and British citizens in other EU countries, and the backstop on the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. It also includes details on the 21-month transition period during which the UK abides by EU rules but loses membership of its institutions, the role of the European court of justice in the UK, protocols on Gibraltar and army bases in Cyprus. The agreement is a legally binding document and has to be passed by the British and European parliaments before the UK can leave the EU with a deal. The government has argued that if this is not passed by Friday, the UK cannot leave the EU with a deal. This is the joint declaration drawn up by Theresa May with the EU about what the post-Brexit relationship between the EU and the UK would look like. This is not legally binding and was meant to form the basis of trade talks. John Bercow, the Speaker of the House of Commons, ruled last week there could not just be reruns of previous votes on the deal. There would either have to be changes or MPs would have to be asked to consider a different question. The agreement with the EU about the variable extension only requires MPs to approve the withdrawal agreement to allow the longer delay to 22 May. On Wednesday, May announced she would not lead the second phase of negotiations. Sources close to the government say they have split them so the government can leave the EU on 22 May without passing the more contentious political declaration. Having been rebuffed by the government’s partners in the Democratic Unionist party and some of their own MPs in the Eurosceptic European Research Group, May is trying to force Labour’s hand. It is a way of saying to the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn: “If you want to honour the result of the EU referendum, you should vote for the withdrawal agreement.” Labour said such a move would be a “complete non-starter” and that Corbyn had made that clear to May on Monday. If the move is successful, Brexit would be delayed to 22 May but there will still be issues to sort out. The 2018 EU Withdrawal Act will still require approval of the political declaration by parliament at some point. If the government gets the first part through the Commons, it could seek to get approval for the second part later – possibly after negotiations with other parties about changes to the political declaration. If it fails, the process of “indicative votes” can be expected to continue on Monday. May might also expect renewed calls for her to stand down and allow a new prime minister to see Brexit through. If the government does not win Friday’s vote, it will mean the UK will have to leave the EU by 12 April – the date by which the UK will have to indicate whether it would stand candidates in the 2019 European parliament elections.