It’s the runaway leader for nominations at this year’s British Academy Television awards, a commercial hit acclaimed for its sardonic British wit and created by arguably the nation’s most in-demand TV figure. Yet it seems that Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s spy comedy Killing Eve might have only been included in the running for this year’s awards after some light rule-bending by Bafta. The awards’ rules state that in order to be eligible for this year’s awards, a programme “must have had the worldwide premiere transmission in the UK” between 1 January and 31 December 2018, and that “a UK broadcaster must have the primary editorial control over the programme”. While Killing Eve – which stars Jodie Comer and Sandra Oh respectively as ruthless assassin Villanelle and Eve Posner, the MI5 officer tasked with catching her – aired on BBC Three and BBC One in the UK last September, it was originally commissioned by BBC America, the US pay TV channel co-owned by the BBC and American network AMC, where it received its worldwide premiere in April. BBC America is considered a separate entity to the BBC, and does not receive public funding from the licence fee. The BBC later acquired Killing Eve from BBC America in a deal arranged last June. Bafta rules would suggest that Killing Eve should only be eligible for a nomination in the international series category, rather than the 14 – including best drama series and best actress nods for Comer and Oh – it ultimately received. In a statement to Deadline, Bafta said the series had been deemed eligible “owing to the significant creative contribution from key talent residing in the UK both in front of, and behind, the camera. Development and post-production also took place in the UK.” However, the fact that the series premiered in the US five months before its UK debut remains unaddressed. As well as the presence of creator Waller-Bridge, Killing Eve’s British bona-fides include its production company, the Bloomsbury-based Sid Gentle Films, and its source material, the Codename Villanelle series of books, written by British author and Observer critic Luke Jennings. The series was also originally in development at British broadcaster Sky before eventually being optioned by BBC America. Killing Eve’s bumper crop of Bafta nominations comes ahead of the premiere of its second season on US TV next month. As with its first run, the series will not appear on British TV at the same time, with a launch on BBC Three and BBC One pencilled in for later in the year. The Guardian has sought comment from Bafta and Sid Gentle Films.