Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s appointment as the permanent manager of Manchester United will have the knock-on effect of leaving the Liverpool defender Virgil van Dijk without a place to live. After signing a three-year contract to become the permanent successor to José Mourinho, Solskjær revealed he and his family plan to live in the house he bought in Cheshire 12 years ago. Van Dijk has been living in Solskjær’s 3.4-acre Alderley Edge property since his move from Southampton to Anfield last year but the Norwegian will now return to the family home in the summer. “We’ve really enjoyed the last eight years living in Norway,” Solskjær said in an interview with MUTV. “It’s going to be a change for them but we’re looking forward to it. The six months that we agreed on [when initially taking the job until the end of the season] as a family we agreed to do it separately as there was no need to move them over. That’s gone now. Now we’re moving together. “We built a house, or I started it in 2007, but finally maybe in 2019 we can move into it – that’s long planning!” Solskjær’s appointment was met with universal approval from United’s former greats. “I’m delighted for Ole,” Gary Neville tweeted. “I didn’t think this would happen when he was appointed. However the results and spirit in the club have been incredible since he arrived and he deserves it. He now needs support in the transfer market in terms of finance and the right resource!” Wayne Rooney said on Twitter: “Congratulations to Ole on the job. Well deserved. Looking forward to watching the rest of the season” while the former goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel wrote: “Congratulations my friend, it is well deserved. Up and onwards lets chase some trophies.” Rio Ferdinand continued the theme of the day on Twitter: “Yessss Ole is officially at The Wheel... Signed, Sealed, Delivered! Manager of ManUtd! I hope my Thank You is in post Ole.” Back home, Norway’s Ballon d’Or winner Ada Hegerberg, who worked with Solskjær at a football camp when she was growing up, said: “He’s a great hero for everyone in Norway. I don’t know if people realise how big it actually is – coach of United – and the results they’ve been given is amazing. “He had a big impact on my younger career. I went to his camp and he gave me this big motivation to become something and I remember him coming on his bike, cycling to training, a normal, down-to-earth guy and that made an impact on me. “He stays the same; he knows the values of seeing people. I remember there was this receptionist who got Norwegian chocolate from him and that doesn’t even surprise me, because he’s that kind of person.” Solskjær’s former club, Molde, said in a statement: “Molde Football Club thanks Ole Gunnar Solskjær for the efforts he has made with MFK, and wishes him the best of luck!”