It is perhaps worth recalling the situation in which Tottenham found themselves after the third match of this Champions League group phase. With only one point on the board, even Mauricio Pochettino had practically written them off. “It’s nearly over,” the manager said. “It will be very difficult.” Look at Spurs now. Their ride into the last 16 came complete with white knuckles but what underpinned their progress to the quarter-final – on a memorable night at the home of the Bundesliga leaders – was calmness and conviction. There were anxious moments in a first-half that Borussia Dortmund dominated but with Jan Vertonghen imperious in central defence and Hugo Lloris making a couple of excellent saves as well as several decent ones, they kept the home side at bay. The worry had been that one Dortmund goal would set the alarm bells ringing after Spurs set out to protect a 3-0 first-leg lead. It did not happen. And when Harry Kane ran through on goal after 49 minutes to display his world-class finishing touch, Pochettino’s team could coast into the last eight of Europe’s elite club competition for only the third time in their history. Kane’s nerveless effort also took him to the top of Spurs’s all-time European scoring list with 24 goals. He has 14 in 17 Champions League games, too – a phenomenal ratio that bears comparison with the very best. Dortmund have had chance after chance...But Harry Kane only needed one 👌Clinical finish! pic.twitter.com/hM5ZlNzJl8 This was a perfectly executed away-day number, a performance to advertise the steelier mentality which Pochettino has instilled in his squad. The sound of silence from the Dortmund crowd for most of the second half was a thing of beauty for the Spurs players. The first half was always going to be pivotal and when Tottenham reached the interval with the score intact, it seemed as though they had completed the lion’s share of their task. Dortmund had gone for it, after all. Lucien Favre had omitted Thomas Delaney, the central midfielder, in order to accommodate Paco Alcácer and Mario Götze in the starting lineup. Götze roamed alongside Marco Reus in the central attacking areas, behind Alcácer, and Reus in particular bristled with menace. Dortmund pressed high from the first whistle, swarming all over Spurs, and they struggled to get out of their half. The first-half was a siege, a time for Pochettino’s defenders to prove themselves in the face of wave after wave of attacks from the home side. The manager’s 5-3-2 system looked a little narrow and he would ask Son Heung-min to move to the left flank towards the end of the first-half and Christian Eriksen to go to the right. This was a different way for Spurs to win, too. They played deeper than usual and enjoyed only 35% possession. But Pochettino could be delighted at how his players dug in. Vertonghen set the tone that the manager had asked for with a magnificent saving tackle to deny Reus on 11 minutes, after Davinson Sánchez had erred to allow him in. Reus looked set to punish Spurs only for the Belgian to stretch into a perfectly timed sliding challenge. The atmosphere pulsed and the Yellow Wall – the vast single tier behind one of the goals – really was something to behold; a reminder of Dortmund’s scale. Spurs have based one end of their new stadium on it. And as an aside, the ovation that the diehards on the Yellow Wall gave to their players after the full-time whistle was a demonstration of their class. Dortmund took risks and they pushed, straining for the early goal that would have put a different slant on the match. Spurs suffered. But they resisted. Or, more precisely, Lloris resisted. The goalkeeper made five saves between the midway point and the interval, with two of them classics – the first from Julian Weigl’s glancing header, the second from Götze’s curler. Lloris, who also would deny Alcácer at the very end, now has 100 clean sheets for the club. Spurs had one chance in the first-half but it was a big one. Eriksen’s 31st-minute pass released Son but, one on one with Roman Bürkl, he prodded wide of the near post with his right foot. Should he have taken it on with his left? What incensed Spurs was the nudge that the chasing Marius Wolf gave to Son. The referee, Danny Makkelie, felt there was not enough in it, which spared Dortmund the concession of a penalty. It did not matter. When Spurs fashioned their next chance, early in the second half, it fell to the player that Pochettino would have chosen. Dortmund only half-cleared a Spurs thrust and it was Moussa Sissoko who released Kane with a slide-rule pass. The club’s most lethal finisher had only Bürkl to beat and he had the time. Kane weighed up the situation in a heartbeat, calibrating the angles and the closeness of the chasing defence. Then he finished, putting a little lift on the right-foot shot to make it all the harder for Bürkl. When the ball hit the net, the tie was over. Dortmund’s buildup play had been slick in the first-half, the danger they created palpable, but they lacked ruthlessness in front of goal. Kane, by contrast, had scored with his first sniff of an opening. It is a detail that bodes well for the quarter-finals. Spurs have come a long way. It is where they intend to go that brings the excitement.