More senior Eurosceptics are switching to back Theresa May’s deal over fear of a soft Brexit, amid speculation the prime minister is making a private pact to set a date to stand down when it goes through. More than 20 Conservative Eurosceptics have now publicly suggested they will change their minds, out of 69 who originally refused to back May’s deal. Even with many MPs in the European Research Group caving to pressure, the vote would be extremely tight. The prime minister needs almost all of them to swap their vote within the next 24 hours, plus the Democratic Unionist party, in order to pass her deal on Thursday. She could afford around 15 “Brexit ultras” to hold out, with the exact number dependent on whether any more Labour MPs such as Jim Fitzpatrick end up folding as well. However, there are currently at least 15 Conservative MPs who appear implacably opposed to changing their minds, including six who are pro-remain, such as Justine Greening and Sam Gyimah. A frantic campaign is now under way among some Eurosceptics to persuade the last of their colleagues to get behind May’s deal for fear of losing Brexit altogether, as MPs prepared to vote for alternative options from a Norway-style departure to revoking article 50 or a second referendum. Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader, is said to be in talks to persuade the prime minister to privately agree to stand down if the withdrawal agreement is passed. She would then publicly announce a departure date, with MPs reserving the right to vote down her deal at second reading if she did not honour the pledge to announce she was stepping down. May is set to address a gathering of Conservative backbenchers on the 1922 Committee on Wednesday at 5pm, leading to rumours that she will declare her timetable for leaving office. But people around the prime minister are understood to be worried that openly saying she will quit after Brexit looks like a stitch up in exchange for votes, while some senior ERG MPs are keen to make her departure look dignified rather than publicly forced. Boris Johnson, the former foreign secretary, gave the most overt hints that he could back the deal if the prime minister makes way for a successor to lead the next phase of trade talks. Asked at a Telegraph event whether he would vote for it, the leading Brexiter said: “I am not there yet.” He described it as a “terrible deal, something which I bitterly opposed for a long time”. However, he said he needed “to see that the second phase of the negotiations will be different from the first” and highlighted the “appreciable risk” that not voting for the deal could lead to no Brexit. The momentum in favour of May’s withdrawal agreement intensified as the cross-party group of MPs plotted their series of votes to determine alternative options. MPs will be offered a series of options on a paper ballot and given the opportunity to choose as many as they want to support. The hope is that their responses will clarify whether any alternative to the prime minister’s agreement could command a majority. Another set of votes is likely to be held next Monday to continue the process of whittling down options. The government has still not decide how to whip the vote, as up to 20 ministers against a hard Brexit could resign rather than being forced to reject options such as a Norway-style deal. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the House of Commons, tried to play down the significance of the votes. “We always take parliament’s views very seriously,” she said. “But the reality is that indicative votes are just that: they are indicative … A lot of them are just undeliverable.” She added: “We will look very carefully at [the outcomes]. But the reality is that it may not be negotiable [with the EU], certainly not in the time frame.” However, Sir Oliver Letwin, the architect of the plan, said the government would be forced to take notice. He told Today the idea was to attempt to persuade MPs to “stop insisting on their first preference” in the search for a Brexit deal. “I’m going to be voting this evening for quite a lot of things,” Letwin said. “I do think that we should be willing to leave on pretty much any sensible terms.”