March is a tough month for food-lovers. Blood oranges are finishing their season and rhubarb is no longer the neon pink we so enjoy. Aside from wild garlic, the seasonal calendar will make us wait a little longer before the wave of lovely spring and summer fruits and vegetables arrive. To the store-cupboard we go then, raiding any savoury sauce or spice that puts oomph on to our plates. A nourishing, savoury bowl of soupy noodles and crispy tofu to keep the last of the winter chills away. Prep 20 minCook 40 minServes 4 280g extra-firm tofu (the Tofoo Co is good)6 garlic cloves2 thumb-sized pieces ginger, one peeled, one roughly chopped1 tsp freshly ground Sichuan peppercorns1-2 pinches dried chilli, to taste4 tbsp soy sauce4 spring onions, green and white parts separated10g dried shiitake mushrooms2 tsp cornflour5 tbsp groundnut oil1 spring cabbage, finely shredded3 tbsp mirin2 tbsp rice vinegar200g rice vermicelli noodles Put the tofu between two sheets of kitchen paper and press down to make sure it’s completely dry. Cut into 1cm cubes, dry again in the same way, then transfer to a bowl. Crush half the garlic and grate one piece of peeled ginger, then toss with the tofu. Add the peppercorns, chilli and two tablespoons of soy sauce, mix, then leave to marinate. While the tofu marinates, roughly chop the white parts of the spring onion and the remaining garlic, and add to a pan with the chopped ginger and mushrooms. Cover with a litre of cold water and simmer for 20 minutes. Remove from the heat and set aside. Using a slotted spoon, scoop the tofu from its marinade (reserve the marinade) and toss it in the cornflour. Heat four tablespoons of the oil in a wok over a high heat. Stir-fry the tofu until golden on all sides, then transfer to a plate and keep warm. Return the pan to the heat and add the remaining tablespoon of oil. Add the cabbage and stir-fry for a few minutes, until it is beginning to soften, then add the reserved tofu marinade. Stir-fry for another minute, then add the rest of the soy, the mirin and rice vinegar. Stir to combine, then take off the heat. Cover the noodles with boiling water and leave until tender – about five minutes. Remove the garlic, spring onion and ginger from the broth with a slotted spoon and discard. Pour the broth over the cabbage and bring back up to heat, then taste and adjust the seasoning. Drain the noodles and divide between four bowls. Add the cabbage and broth and top with the crispy tofu. Finely shred the green parts of the spring onion, scatter over the soup and serve with more soy at the table, if you like. Toss the sauteed spring cabbage through fried rice for a comforting supper, either topped with a fried egg, or with egg cooked through the rice with a handful of beansprouts. If you’re not a fan of eggs, the same tofu would be a great topping on spicy, garlic-fried minced pork.