Theresa May kept her decision to play the final card for her Brexit deal secret until the last moment. Only a small number of her closest aides knew for sure that she would pledge to go, though it was long in the making. Cabinet ministers heard it for the first time when the prime minister opened her mouth to speak to Conservative MPs, packed tightly into a boiling hot room which one MP described as “the tube carriage into hell”. David Gauke, the justice secretary, arrived late and struggled to squeeze inside. May gave a heartfelt speech but no departure date in her short address to the 1922 Committee. But a text went round to Conservative MPs immediately afterwards from one of her senior advisers – “May 22”. That date is contingent on her deal passing this week, a proviso that looks far from certain, given the Democratic Unionists have said they will still not back her deal. A source close to the prime minister said she had been thinking about the move for some time. Her speech came from notes, not a fully written text. “Think about what this meant. Of course it had to come from the heart,” one No 10 source said. “It was an emotionally charged atmosphere.” May made space in her speech for a veiled dig at her leadership rivals. “I don’t tour the bars and engage in the gossip – but I do make time to speak to colleagues … And I have heard very clearly the mood of the parliamentary party,” she told MPs. Some were close to tears in the room, though no one implored her to stay in post. “That would have been quite a surprise,” one MP said, raising his eyebrows. Caroline Spelman, one of the MPs who has recently led a rebellion to force the government to take no deal off the table, paid an emotional tribute after the PM spoke. “Thank you for what you have done as a leader and as a friend,” she said. Other MPs used the floor to beg their colleagues to back May’s deal now that a new negotiator was to take the reins for the next stage. MPs praised interventions by Will Quince and Tom Pursglove, both who had previously voted against May’s deal. The man who broke the news to the outside world was a little-known aide to one of the leadership frontrunners. James Cartlidge, the PPS to Jeremy Hunt, nipped out of the room as MPs banged their desks and found himself confronted by a crowd of journalists. “She said she would not remain in post for the next phase of the negotiations,” he said. There were moments of levity inside the room. The chief whip announced the business of the week ahead including votes on agriculture regulations, without mentioning any future votes on Brexit – which drew “a huge belly laugh”, one MP said. Richard Bacon, never one to miss an opportunity, used his question to speak about his housebuilding ideas. Simon Hart, the MP who has organised moderate Tories known as “the Brexit delivery group”, said the mood was respectful. “People really have been ripping lumps out of each other for weeks, but at moment like this, everyone is polite. Apart from being bloody hot, it was upbeat,” he said. “I think we all feel pretty traumatised. I mean, by the time this thing actually ends, then we’ll all get a sense of release.” Most leaving the room said it had been the best of the PM’s performances at the 1922. “We’ve seen the ups and downs,” one MP said. Gillian Keegan said the feeling was that the PM had “done her innings” and deserved a dignified exit. “I do think there’s certainly been lots of people who’ve made it clear they would like to have a go at her job,” she said. In private, though, some MPs were less kind. “She has no sympathy from me for getting us and Britain into this mess,” one said. MPs filed into the corridor after the PM left; many suggested they would now back the deal. Conor Burns, Simon Clarke and Pauline Latham said they would do so with a heavy heart, though some made it contingent on the DUP’s position. Shailesh Vara, who resigned as Northern Ireland minister in protest at the deal, said he had also come to that conclusion. “We would rather not be in this position with a deal we all think is bad,” he said. “But we have the option of either accepting, or something even worse. Perhaps a bad deal is the least bad choice.” Many of the MPs made their way just a few doors down the elegantly carpeted corridor to another House of Commons committee room for a private meeting of the hard Brexiters in the European Research Group. It was there that Boris Johnson told the assembled crowd of Eurosceptics that he had decided to back the deal and prepare for the second stage of the negotiations, which he said would have “a change of tone and a change of mandate” – some coded phrasing from the leadership hopeful. That was not the consensus of the room, and Johnson looked far from triumphant after his speech to the ERG. The former foreign secretary slumped against the back of the wood-panelled room, his arms folded. In contrast, there was pure fury from the ERG heavyweight Steve Baker, who called May’s speech “a pantomime” and raged that he “could tear this place down and bulldoze it into the river”. “His voice was cracking with emotion, so much so that at the end he was hugged by Jacob Rees-Mogg and others at the top table,” said an ERG source. “We are not a hugging group.” David Jones, a former Brexit minister, also gave an emotive speech, parts of it in Latin, quoting Tacitus on the Romans’ battles with the Britons and imploring MPs to stand firm against the Romans. Classicists in the room looked perplexed, Johnson included, and several shouted back: “But they all got annihilated?” Some in the room suggested there were as many as 30 “spartans” – the nickname that the last refuseniks have been given – while others suggest it was as low as 12. Without the DUP’s backing and with at least seven remainer Tories determined to keep voting the deal down, the deal could still be sunk without a significant number of Labour rebels. The meeting broke up to head for the lobbies to vote on the options that could follow if May’s deal is defeated again. The alternative options printed on the green slips handed out to MPs – a customs union, membership of the single market, a referendum – were what had already convinced some Eurosceptics that May’s deal had to be better. “When you see it in black and white, printed like that, then it hits home,” one Tory Brexiter said. The prime minister herself slipped away from the Commons as MPs filed into the lobbies to vote on the Brexit options which she hoped she would never have to deliver. She arrived back in Downing Street to give a private speech to her political team. No 10 sources suggested May now hoped to bid farewell to the world stage at the G20 summit in Japan on 28 June. David Cameron too, hoped he could do his goodbye tour at the 2016 G20 summit in China. In the end, he was out of the job within 18 days.