On the face of it, Wednesday’s long-awaited indicative votes about what sort of Brexit plan MPs could back did not tell us very much, beyond that there is no majority for a hard Brexit, soft Brext, no-deal Brexit, or ending Brexit, or indeed for putting any of these rejected options to the people for another vote. But while the organisers are hopeful a new set of votes on Monday could result in some kind of consensus, it is still possible to divine more indications from the votes, and what alternative plan could emerge if Theresa May’s deal is voted down again. The idea of a customs union-based exit came closest to winning – 264 votes for and 272 against – and this was in a vote where 102 of the 638 voting members of the Commons did not take part, including the cabinet. The 235 Tories who did oppose the idea are not all hard Brexiters, and some could presumably be tempted across if May’s deal was no more. The Independent Group of remain-minded former Labour and Conservative MPs also opposed it, their minds set on a softer Brexit still – but this, too, might not be an option in the future. This much-touted idea, which would propose UK membership of the European Free Trade Association (Efta) and European Economic Area (EEA), lost more heavily, by 188 to 283. But Oliver Letwin, the Conservative MP who instigated the process for the votes, said on Thursday this did not mean the idea was over, noting that many fellow Tories were waiting to see the fate of May’s deal. The idea was opposed by more than 40 Labour MPs, many of them in leave-backing seats, which indicates the struggle it faces. The Independent Group also opposed it. But one positive indicator is that the DUP abstained – membership of Efta and the EEA would remove any issues about the Irish border. Not on the face of it. The idea was defeated by MPs in the Commons earlier in the month, and on Wednesday a plan put forward by Labour veteran Margaret Beckett went down by 268 votes to 295. However, it’s not necessarily that clear. Beckett’s proposal, a plan drawn up by the Labour MPs Peter Kyle and Phil Wilson, is subtly different to the calls for a so-called people’s vote – seen by some as a back door to frustrate Brexit – in that it seeks to enshrine the idea of a confirmatory referendum for whatever deal emerges. And the longer the confusion goes on as to what will happen, the more its appeal could grow. Proponents note that Beckett’s plan won the highest number of positive votes of the eight options. In the “no” column were more than 30 Labour or ex-Labour MPs, while only eight Conservatives backed it. Both of these numbers could potentially shift. This is still the default option, albeit now for 12 April rather than this Friday. But it seems clear it is not a popular idea with many MPs. The Tory MP John Baron proposed that a no-deal departure on 12 April should be the active choice – and saw his plan thumpingly defeated by 160 votes in favour to 400 against. The “yes” column was almost entirely made up of Conservative Brexiters – and there are simply not enough of them. All that said, the lack of an alternative plan, and with time pressing, means many in London and the EU believe Britain could still easily leave without a deal. Probably, as does May’s decision to announce she will step down as prime minister once the next stage of Brexit begins. That change in Downing Street is reliant on her plan passing, and with the DUP withholding support, she might end up stuck, creating another logjam. Even if there is a new PM, whoever succeeds May might want to seek to buoy their legitimacy with a poll. But there are two big obstacles. One is that an election before any Brexit deal is finalised would necessarily require a long-ish extension to departure, one that would require the UK to take part in European elections in May, a battle none of the mainstream parties would relish. The other issue is that largely static polls leave open the very real possibility that weeks of campaigning could end up in another hung parliament, one no closer to resolving Brexit.