This country has been in a political and constitutional quandary since the results of the Brexit referendum in June 2016. Today the crisis deepened in a dramatic and decisive way. The Commons Speaker John Bercow said he was minded not to allow the government to bring back its Brexit deal for a third meaningful vote because it breaks parliamentary convention. Mr Bercow has history – going back all the way to 1604 – on his side. Under the “same question, same session” rule MPs cannot be asked to decide a question they have already decided in the same session. It’s the parliamentary equivalent of the double jeopardy rule. “Decisions of the house matter. They have weight,” he said. Theresa May has tried to use votes in parliament to grind her opponents down until they accepted the only Brexit that would work was hers. This strategy involved ignoring decisions of parliament. MPs voted to take the date of the UK leaving the European Union of 29 March 2019 out of law – but ministers did nothing. Parliament voted against a no-deal Brexit – but it remained as the default option in statute. It is time to stop the prime minister playing a game of chicken with the future of the country. The speaker, representing the collective voice of parliament, has a duty to uphold the legislature’s supremacy over the government and the judiciary. Mr Bercow is right to remind the government that it cannot go on ignoring the will of the House. Mrs May risks losing an important weapon in her armoury. She now has little choice but to go to the European council meeting this week and seek changes to her withdrawal agreement that has already been defeated twice in parliament. She needs to come back with a Brexit plan that commands the confidence of the House. Mr Bercow not unreasonably suggested that for MPs to vote again, the Brexit deal they vote on must be “fundamentally different”. There are clearly ways around the Speaker’s thinking and Mrs May could prorogue parliament to get her way. This is a nuclear-sized option. It would involve starting a new session with a clean slate and putting the Brexit deal motion again to MPs. There are other measures, though they are equally historic in nature. Parliamentarians could also seize control to prevent the rules being applied – a radical move MPs considered last week to force a softer Brexit. Mr Bercow must be aware such a coalition could be marshalled against him in a vote of no confidence. Once the genie of a determined Commons majority is uncorked there will be no putting it back. If the risks are high for the Speaker, they are higher for Mrs May. She could lose her Brexit deal and lose power. She has only herself to blame for this sorry state of affairs. Since becoming premier she has failed to build a consensus across parliament for Brexit, preferring instead to define it in terms that would curry favour with Tory hardliners. Parliamentary conventions have been ignored to the extent that even cabinet ministers have voted against the government without resigning. There is no love lost between ministers and Mr Bercow as testy exchanges in parliament attest. This ought to be a matter of some concern. Whereas the American speaker is the head of the largest party in Congress, the British speaker is supposed to be above politics. For all his faults, and there are many, Mr Bercow has championed the rights of MPs. For decades the balance of power has shifted from the legislature to the executive. The Speaker is right to prevent this government from tipping the scales too far from a parliamentary politics to a plebiscitary one.