On a bleak stretch of England’s north-east coast, they gathered to save Brexit and begin the long march to Westminster. Few of the 300 cheery souls who walked out with Nigel Farage on to grassy cliffs south of Sunderland, Tyne & Wear, will make it all the way to London, but there was a determination to reach the first staging post on the 270-mile journey. Whatever happens they will always have Hartlepool – and maybe Middlesbrough. This coast once shimmered with the gunmetal and sailcloth of Europe’s biggest fishing fleet, but the last ship built here sailed more than 30 years ago. The Leave Means Leave campaign group must have hoped for a lot more than the few hundred who turned up in weather that could only be called filthy. They may have to get used to paltry numbers. Even seasoned outdoor types expressed doubt about protesters having enough in the tank to walk 20 miles a day for two weeks on uneven terrain in uncertain weather. You can’t really fault Farage’s commitment to a mission that has spanned a bored midlife – or his ability to wring every ounce from it and make it look like a sacred calling. Here he was in one of those full-length Barbour coats that you don’t often see beyond Sloane Square or the royal shooting estates, and buttressed by a personal detail of familiars. He won’t complete every leg of the march – far from it – but he will get his feet and hands just dirty enough to claim it as his own when it enters Parliament Square on 29 March, the original, now imperilled, date of Brexit. The marchers had set off from the Hendon Grange pub, a robust old English brick tavern left looking forlornly for its lost community. Farage tried to rally them: “The will of the people is very clear. If you see what has been happening in parliament this week, we may well not be leaving the EU. If politicians think they can walk all over us, we’re going to march back and tell them they can’t. It’s as simple as that.” The excursions and alarums that always accompany a Farage circus were evident. A flock of counter-protesters turned up and a very English exchange of slogans and epithets ensued, peppered with the odd profanity. Pleasingly, some have become proficient in the catchy anti-Brexit chant you now hear outside Westminster during John Bercow’s happy hour – the one adapted from hit song We’re Not Gonna Take It, by famed EU lovers Twisted Sister. Perhaps in the event of no-deal they will commandeer one of Twisted Sister’s other études on the human condition: Burn in Hell. As we set off, the usual murder of flags and banners accompanied them – Union Jacks only just outnumbering crosses of St George. It soon became clear, though, that this was no snarling Tommy Robinson-type legion of delinquents. These were a dignified and rather weary troupe, politely granting interviews and talking of their frustration with a Brexit danse macabre of one step back and two to the side. They feel their Brexit has been drugged and abducted and will emerge blinking into the sunlight a few weeks hence, bearing no resemblance to what they thought they’d voted for.Ian Stanbidge from Chester seemed resigned to Brexit meeting a sticky end and was disappointed at the turnout. “Many of us are here simply to show Westminster that we care about this and know what they’re trying to do. They need to know that those of us who voted for Brexit are still rock-solid behind it.” The choice of Sunderland as the location for this last howl of Brexit is a fitting one for this city seems to have become emblematic of Brexit. Three years ago, on the night of 23 June, when it was revealed that Sunderland’s voters had opted for Leave 61%-39% everyone knew that the Brexit ball was on the slates. Such a margin had previously seemed unthinkable. Up and down England’s east coast solid, Labour-voting communities came out for Brexit and Farage and a host of Tory opportunists who have seen their fading careers revived. There was undisguised glee by some Remainers when the Japanese car giants Nissan recently announced it was transferring the manufacture of its next-generation X-Trail model from Sunderland to Japan. There is palpable irritation at the sanctimonious and disdainful attitudes of Britain’s urban elites among some of these marchers. Jim Kerr from Sunderland is clutching a Union Jack but refuses to be defined by what he says are lazy stereotypes. “Look,” he says, “we’re not racists or in any way anti-immigration as has been portrayed by sections of the press. This is about respecting a democratic, once-in-a-lifetime vote. If Brexit doesn’t happen what sort of precedent does that create for any future election that the elites don’t fancy the look of. The people of the north-east who voted for Brexit knew exactly what we were voting for and few of us have changed our minds. What is so ‘extreme’ or ‘narrow-minded’ about wanting to trade with Europe without bartering away large parts of our sovereignty? You wouldn’t get the Japanese agreeing to that.” In these north-east communities a pulsing resentment of Westminster has been evident for a while as, one by one, its old industries disappeared. They don’t blame Europe for this but there is a lingering resentment that Westminster’s elites didn’t lift a finger to help them. Labour made a gift of these communities to Farage. Yesterday, he at least had the decency to make a gesture of gratitude ... even if it only lasts as far as Hartlepool.