A devout Catholic journalist has said she is being investigated by police after she called a transgender woman a man on Twitter. Caroline Farrow appeared on ITV’s Good Morning Britain alongside Susie Green, whose daughter Jackie Green is transgender, to discuss Girlguiding’s decision to let children who have changed their gender join the organisation. On Tuesday Farrow tweeted that she did not “remember said tweets”, adding: “I probably said ‘he’ or ‘son’ or something. All I have been told is that following an appearance on Good Morning Britain I made some tweets misgendering Susie Green’s child and that I need to attend a taped interview.” Farrow, who is married to a priest, said: “I have pointed out to police that I am a Catholic journalist/commentator and it is my religious belief that a person cannot change sex.” She added that she would “happily do jail time” for her “right to say that people cannot change sex”. Using the wrong pronoun could be an offence under the Malicious Communications Act, which makes it a crime to send messages that are indecent or grossly offensive, threatening, or contain information which is false or believed to be false, if the purpose for sending it is to cause distress or anxiety. Breaking the law carries a maximum sentence of two years in prison. Farrow said the police’s decision to launch an investigation was an “outrage”. She tweeted: “I can’t sleep I am so furious.” Farrow argued she had done nothing wrong and the mistake was “inadvertent and Freudian” as she tries “really hard not to misgender people”. Surrey police confirmed on Tuesday they received an allegation over tweets by Farrow on 15 October. A police spokesman told the Daily Telegraph: “A thorough investigation is being carried out to establish whether any criminal offences have taken place.” The Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, said in November that forces should focus their resources on tackling violence over other types of crime. Surrey police’s former chief constable Lynne Owens said in 2015 that, as a result of £25m in cuts and the loss of 250 officers, minor crimes would be ignored in favour of investigation of offences against vulnerable people. In February, a teacher who was accused of misgendering a child was told by police that she had committed a hate crime. The teacher reportedly refused to acknowledge that the pupil self-identified as a boy and failed to use the pupil’s preferred pronouns of “he” or “him”. Last year, it was reported that a teacher was suing a school after he faced disciplinary action for referring to a transgender pupil as a girl. Joshua Sutcliffe, from Oxford, said he was investigated after he said “well done, girls” to a group that included a student who identifies as a boy. The 27-year-old Christian pastor is now suing the school for constructive dismissal and discrimination. Last October, a transgender lawyer launched the UK’s first “deadnaming” case in the high court against Father Ted’s screenplay writer after he referred to her using her birth name. The transgender activist Stephanie Hayden is suing Graham Linehan, the co-writer of the comedy TV series, for defamation and harassment after he allegedly published a series of tweets “deliberately misgendering” her by using her previous male name, otherwise known as “deadnaming”. Hayden said Linehan “caused her distress” and that his actions constituted harassment, a misuse of private information, and were a “gross affront to her dignity as a woman”.