Deranged, deluded, desperate. And that’s just me watching the endgame of this Brexit debacle. Deluded, I guess, in that I still think Brexit does not mean Brexit at all, it means something else altogether and always has done. To have properly opposed it people need to have understood that. Deranged in hoping that a petition that I signed – oh why not? – is more than some foot-stomping remainery thing. And I am desperate that a hollowed-out shell of a woman represents our country. Locked out of the EU dinner (even Greece was in the room before Europe publicly degraded that country), terribly alone with power draining away, Theresa May does represent in some horribly strange way the state of the nation. The troika always wins, remember that? My ambivalence about the EU is not tolerable in liberal discourse. Take me to the gulag. For all of this madness is found on both sides and is embodied in May’s being. She is unable to engage in dialogue, unable to listen, unable to do anything more than simply turn up at meetings in which everyone in the room despises her. There is something in her very aloneness that is both damaged and damaging, and yet emotionally comprehensible. The fantasy that we don’t need others is a very strong one. We will manage all by ourselves. For all the analyses I keep reading of the reasons behind Brexit – colonial nostalgia, pure racism, a fake reenactment of the blitz spirit, the need for sovereignty in a globalised world – I still feel this other thing strongly. It is primal. “You have abandoned me and therefore we will have to manage by ourselves. We never needed you anyway.” I hear it in communities that voted leave who knew exactly what it is to have survived tough times, the deindustrialised towns; those who survived the miners’ strike and whose towns were flooded with heroin and now newer opiates. Brexit may not be a rational response but if you can’t work with it, if you can’t hear it then you further abandon those people as the Tories have done. The middle class precariat now feels this insecurity but if the referendum had never happened I wonder how long it would have taken us to feel it anyway. It was already coming. The demons that Brexit released have always been there and needed facing down. This would have required bravery and honesty. It was obvious during the referendum for Scottish independence that parts of England wanted their day, yet this was ignored as some sort of inherently racist, nativist impulse when it was always far more complicated. May herself, the Protestant work ethic made miserable flesh, seemed to have no core belief beyond that of cruelty to the immigrant. Yet what this friendless isolate represented at first was the very opposite of what had just ruined the country. She had no charm. That was a weird plus somehow. David Cameron’s charm offensive had got him into power, winging it while letting George Osborne wreak havoc on the lives of ordinary people. May offered not charisma but another quality fetishised in our national fantasy. Willpower. Margaret Thatcher haunts the rightwing press and the Tories still. The will to power. This delusion is poorly impersonated by May: delusions of grandeur mean that evidence doesn’t matter, that you can dismiss other people’s belief or anger, that you can act as if your belief is always true and persist in getting others to believe it. We associate delusions of grandeur with flamboyance – May fooled us at first due to her lack of flair, but she is a reckless, power–crazed liar, a void in statement jewellery. Willpower has been confused with stamina, but willpower is also connected with self-reflection and integrity. May cannot self–reflect, apologise or relate. The bunker was built long ago. But in all this time, remain has missed its chance to tell another story of vulnerability, of the relationship between independence and dependence – life as it is lived. Why? Because politicians do not like to talk this way – it denotes powerlessness not strength. Remain has deluded itself in myriad ways. It has too often been a parallel monologue full of self-righteousness, signifying nothing, led by those who we have not trusted for many years. A complete failure of leadership does not happen in a vacuum – it happens when no one takes responsibilty. We are all part of this whichever way we voted. That’s hard to say right now, I know. It is time for all of us, leave and remain, to let go of the fantasy of being right, in favour of the reality of working across this divide to salvage a morsel of dignity. May cannot do that. An intervention needs to be made, that much has been clear for some time. Broken Britain no longer refers to those at the bottom but those at the top, those who no longer feel properly represented … well, welcome home. Some of us have felt like that for decades, and simply been dismissed as apathetic or anarchists. But we have known that some things are beyond our control, beyond our individual vote, beyond our personal choice, however much the system pretends otherwise. The delusion crashes when we realise that no man is an island. No island is an island any more. We need each other. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist