1) It wasn’t always a case of Fifa v Pro Evo. For a spell in the mid-90s, EA’s juggernaut had two other rivals – the still-loved Sensible Soccer, but also the little-lamented Actua Soccer, Gremlin Interactive’s groundbreaking title which was the first fully 3D home videogaming take on football. This time next year it will be a quarter of a century old, but some of the series’ glitches and Barry Davies commentary snippets will live forever. 2) During the motorcycling in Costa Rica, leaping from bike to bike is apparently the done thing. And then having a bit of biff, before walking off, more or less oblivious to the fact that there’s a race still happening (both riders have been suspended for two years). Plenty more racing rucks here, starting with a textbook two-footed leap and stroppy helmet fling combo. 3) Happy birthday Nasser Hussain! Here’s 207 of his finest, from the 1997 Ashes, as he reaches 51 not out. And many happy returns Steve Bull! Twenty of his best on the occasion of his 54th. Sooty’s best mate Matthew Corbett turns 71 today, and both once bore witness to Superdog locking horns with Geoff Capes. 4) On this day in 1990, Jesse Owens was posthumously awarded his “fifth gold medal” by George Bush Sr – the Congressional Gold Medal. Here’s how he won three of the others, a bit more of his to-and-fro with the aptly-named Luz Long into the sandpit, and the US squad’s 1936 4x100m victory in full. Heather Dorniden hit the deck during the 600m at the 2008 Big 10 Indoor Track meeting to be left way behind the field. And then … whoosh. A similar story looked on the cards when John Ngugi fell early in the 5,000m at the 1990 Commonwealth Games in Auckland, and then surged, adrenalised, from the back to lead in almost the blink of an eye. But the effort it took the Kenyan led to one of the most astonishing distance race finishes of all time, which has particular Australian and Welsh interest. Another from this day, again in 1990: Michael Jordan single-handedly takes the Bulls away from the Cavs with a haul of 69 points – his best ever individual tally in a game. Selected highlights here, but dig out some Space Jam loungewear, Air Jordans, a box of Wheaties and treat yourself to the whole thing. And then play the weird arcade game where MJ simply can’t stop dribbling a ball around no matter how bad the zombie and mutant spider threat gets. Or maybe stick to NBA Jam. Topping the list of single-outing scoring charts is Wilt Chamberlain, whose 100-point game in 1962 – when the three-point line didn’t exist – is still the professional record. Children: be not freaked by some of his underarm free throws. Or how much he towered over Ed Sullivan. 5) Not that type of player: some heart-warming sportsmanship in Turkish youth football, as the Galatasaray under-14s captain Beknaz Almazbekov deliberately misses a penalty after wrongly being awarded a penalty. 6) Just another normal week for the ever-colourful Nick Kyrgios then, at the Miami Open: an underarm ace against Dusan Lajovic, and a no-look volley and through-the-legs winner against Borna Coric. 1) Don’t want feelings of terror, nausea and general ick? Don’t click on this link to footage of mountain bikers taking on The White Line trail in Sedona, Arizona. For the avoidance of doubt, that’s a line you either stick to, or you drop to near-certain death. 2) December 2006 – one of the better MOTD goal of the month competitions. 3) This instinctive turn-and-thwack from Patrick Berger for Pompey against Charlton in 2004 is sans-shabbiness too. Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, denothemeno, JanOlssen Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.