Over to you, Liverpool. A fifth straight league victory for Manchester City, courtesy of Riyad Mahrez’s second-half goal, means that Pep Guardiola’s side can enjoy the view from the top of the table while cranking up the pressure on their rivals. Liverpool face Everton at Goodison Park and will need to win if they want to regain top spot in a title race where there is so little margin for error. It may have been a scrappy goal that settled this contest but the gulf in class was huge. To put the game into perspective, Bournemouth failed to register an attempt on goal of any description and never even managed to win a corner. Eddie Howe’s team had only 18% of possession and City were so dominant that it actually felt strange to see Bournemouth stray into the opposition half on the odd occasion. That is more of a compliment to City than a criticism of Bournemouth. Guardiola’s side passed the ball to death and were in so much control that it is no exaggeration to say it seemed as though they had an extra two players on the pitch for much of the afternoon. “We played incredible, one of the best performances we’ve ever played,” Guardiola said. “We didn’t concede one shot on target. Every time we lost the ball we had three or four guys going to recover it. Bournemouth are incredibly well organised, with 11 players in the box, so there’s really no spaces – but we found them. We created a lot of chances. I don’t know what’s going to happen at the end of the season but these players deserve all my admiration and respect. Today was a special moment for all of us.” The only sour note for Manchester City was the sight of Kevin De Bruyne pulling up with a hamstring injury towards the end of the first half. De Bruyne knew immediately he had a problem and walked straight off the pitch before Mahrez, his replacement, had time to get his shirt on. “Kevin felt something in the hamstring. It’s normal, we’ve played 25 games in 93 days,” said Guardiola, who confirmed that his decision to withdraw John Stones early in the second half was more of a precaution because the defender felt a little bit of discomfort with the groin injury that has been troubling him recently. Guardiola acknowledged that the decisive goal was important for Mahrez as well as City. It was the club-record signing’s first in the league in almost three months and came on the back of a disappointing performance against West Ham in midweek, when he looked short of confidence and was substituted early in the second half. “His time is going to come because there are a lot of games,” Guardiola said. “I don’t have any doubts about his quality. I know his mentality is aggressive but he has to understand where he is, and where he is is a team who got 100 points [last season] and in every single game fight and run and play. The people in front are Leroy [Sané], who last season was one of the most important players we had, Bernardo [Silva], who is the best player in the league, and Raheem [Sterling], so they are incredible players.” As with the 1-0 win over West Ham in midweek, this was a day when City needed to be patient, and that approach paid off 10 minutes into the second half. Oleksandr Zinchenko and David Silva swapped passes and then City got a little bit of luck when the ball fell kindly to the Spaniard after Charlie Daniels tried to make a challenge. David Silva shifted the ball on to Mahrez and the winger stabbed a low right-foot shot inside Artur Boruc’s near post. Underworked up until that stage, Boruc was about to get busy. Sterling was denied on a couple of occasions by the Bournemouth goalkeeper, who also pushed Sergio Agüero’s cross on to the bar and repelled Mahrez’s far-post header. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels In truth, it was one-way traffic and the outcome was never in doubt from the moment Mahrez scored. “We were pleased with how we defended overall,” Howe said. “The only disappointment for me would be that their goal is probably the ugliest they will score this season.”