Cornell du Preez’s determination to continue his career never dimmed. Not when the doctors told him his throat injury was the kind sustained by car crash victims, not when he had to eat through a tube in his nose after countless operations and not even when he was left unable to speak for a month. So it is testament to the Worcester back‑rower’s character that he makes his comeback on Saturday after seven months out of action. Du Preez was barely five minutes into his Worcester debut on the opening weekend of the season against Wasps when a collision with Joe Launchbury’s knee resulted in his freak injury. The 28-year-old discusses the incident which left him with a fractured larynx with a calmness that belies the terror he felt when, attempting to explain to the club doctor what had happened, no words came out. “The thing I was worried about was breathing, that was the major concern,” says Du Preez. “I was trying to speak to the doctor and explain what happened but there was nothing coming out. It was a scary at the time, a bit terrifying. It’s difficult but you have to calm yourself down because you can freak yourself out which it makes it even harder.” Du Preez would spend the next six weeks in Heartlands hospital in Birmingham. For four of them he could only communicate by writing things down because his vocal cord was paralysed and he needed a stent inserted into his neck. “I’m pretty much a quiet guy anyway,” adds Du Preez. “But it was frustrating at times – especially if you want to get a point across or ask the doctors questions about what is going on. “[The doctors] had not dealt with it before in rugby. They’ve only usually dealt with it in car crashes. The biggest thing was, they can fix it but they weren’t sure if I could get back to doing contact again. Initially it was about the best quality of life, getting my breathing again, talking again. But as the months went on I was improving and recovering much better than they thought I would. [Retirement] is not a decision you want to make but you have to look at yourself and your health. But it was always my mindset that I want to play again.” Du Preez was inundated with well wishes, and Launchbury reached out to him upon discovering the severity of the injury, but it was the support of his girlfriend, Anel, that kept him going through the endless days in hospital. “You do things to keep your mind busy because you can’t do much activity-wise,” he said. “My girlfriend was in the Cayman Islands when it happened. I messaged her saying she might need to get a flight back and I woke up and she was there. She drove every day to Birmingham and sat there the whole day, I couldn’t even speak but having someone there was a big help.” Du Preez was initially ruled out for the whole season but such has been his progress that he has been back in training for the past couple of months. He has, however, had to pass various tests to get to the stage where he is ready to take the field again, against Harlequins in the Challenge Cup quarter‑final at Sixways on Saturday. “It was hard breathing at the beginning because the airway was a bit narrower but you get used to it and I’m pretty much back at the same levels I was pre-season. I had a lot of scans and the doctor said everything has healed as well as it can, it’s got the same robustness as anyone else.” And what about that first collision? “I miss contact. It’s something you miss when you don’t have it.” The only lingering effect for Du Preez is a slightly scruffy voice – no bad thing according to the South African-born Scotland international, who could yet cap an extraordinary first season since leaving Edinburgh by breaking his way back into Gregor Townsend’s World Cup plans. “I learned a lot about myself,” says Du Preez. “Being grateful for what you take for granted. Some days you’re tired, you don’t feel like training but now I wake up and I’m happy to be involved because you just realise how quickly things can be taken away from you.”