Queen Victoria is falling into the arms of John Brown. He rocks her as if a child, her body heavy with grief, before she steps into a stoic arabesque. “What he’s doing is making you strong through your stubbornness,” choreographer Cathy Marston tells dancer Abigail Prudames, playing the mourning queen preparing to face her public after her beloved Albert’s death. We’re in rehearsals for Victoria, Marston’s latest work for Northern Ballet following her acclaimed Jane Eyre in 2016. Marston must be the most accomplished British female choreographer in ballet right now, but she’s spent most of her professional life in Europe, first as a dancer, then for six years as director of Bern Ballett. Freelance since 2013, Marston still lives in Switzerland with her Australian husband and two young children, but she’s about to have a flurry of work on stage in the UK. There’s another outing for the award-winning The Suit, made for Ballet Black, and then San Francisco Ballet dancing Snowblind, based on Edith Wharton’s novel Ethan Frome. In June, Jane Eyre will have its US debut at the Met in New York courtesy of American Ballet Theatre. “That’s a huge deal, it’s terrifying,” she says. Marston’s career, she says, has suddenly taken an upswing. “I think the whole discussion about [the lack of] female choreographers just played into my lap at the right time,” she says, underplaying her talent somewhat. There also seems to be a renewed interest in narrative dance, following years where complex abstraction was the dominant trend. The 43-year-old has made abstract work in the past, “but the narrative was always in me,” she says. “It was only towards the end of being in Bern that I really accepted what I am as a voice. I love stories, and that’s what makes it work for me.” Marston’s love of storytelling comes partly from her parents, who were both English teachers in Cambridge, and from the legacy of the Royal Ballet, where she joined the Upper School at 16, although she didn’t completely fit in. When her mum and dad went to the first parents’ day, her ballet teacher told them: “Cathy’s doing OK, the problem with her is that she thinks for herself.” Marston delves into the detail and psychology of her characters and strives to strip away anything extraneous, from steps to props. “I challenge myself more and more to use limited means to tell lots,” she says. It was Northern Ballet’s director David Nixon who suggested Victoria as a subject, prompting Marston to quickly binge-watch the ITV series. “It’s amazing how much you think you know Queen Victoria, and it turned out I didn’t know anything,” she says. “It’s been really exciting doing all that research, but then it was a challenge to find what was going to be my way in.” Her way in is through the eyes of Victoria’s youngest child, Beatrice. “The story goes that on the night that Albert died, Victoria ran to four-year-old Beatrice’s bedroom and picked her up and wrapped her in Albert’s dressing gown and never let go,” says Marston. “To be honest, I think that’s probably what I would do, too, but the point is that Beatrice stayed in Victoria’s clasp and she seemed to accept that role. You want her to rebel, but she doesn’t, so when Victoria dies she’s left without an identity. She’s this echo of her mother and spends the next 30 years addressing that and finding out who her mother was.” Creating a new perspective on a real-life figure was a different challenge to the literary adaptations Marston has been working on recently. We get talking about the politics of storytelling, and whose right it is to tell those stories – after all it’s not only women who’ve been historically underrepresented on stage. The Suit, for example, is a story by Can Themba, set in a Johannesburg township. Should it be retold by a black or South African choreographer rather than a white British one? “I thought about that too,” says Marston, “but Cassa [Pancho, Ballet Black’s director] liked the idea and she went for it, I think, partly because being black is not an essential part of the story. It’s about people and emotions and relationships, although it’s important that you feel the oppression of the society in which those characters are living.” Marston now has the question of whether to let other companies who aren’t comprised of black dancers perform the work. “I have agreed to give it to a company in Germany, and I did talk to them about it,” she says. “They felt, sadly, that the issue is 10 years behind in Germany so they didn’t feel nervous about it being a red flag situation. But I said, if we can make that part of the conversation then that feels like a positive thing.” A similar quandary arose when Marston made Lady Chatterley’s Lover for Les Grands Ballets Canadiens last year, which features the character Clifford Chatterley in a wheelchair. “Do I put an able-bodied dancer in a wheelchair?” she asked herself. “I really thought long and hard about whether we could do it in another way,” she says, only they needed to show the past in flashbacks before Clifford was injured, “but it didn’t stop me being rather nervous.” While Marston is sensitive to the power of those who shape our culture, there’s a purism afoot that risks saying you can’t depict anything that doesn’t match your own life experience. “It’s massively dangerous territory,” says Marston. “What would be the point if you couldn’t put yourself in someone else’s shoes, either as an artist or experiencing art? That’s the point of it. There are things to consider, sensitively, but it doesn’t mean you can’t do it.” Long may this thoughtful and inspired choreographer continue to think for herself. Victoria is at Leeds Grand, 9 to 16 March. Then touring.