Investigators will begin analysing flight recorders from the Ethiopian Airlines plane wreckage on Friday, in an attempt to establish what caused the crash that has grounded Boeing’s 737 Max fleet worldwide. The flight data and cockpit voice recorders arrived in France on Thursday, and a spokesman for France’s bureau of civil aviation safety (BEA) said the first analysis was expected to take a couple of days. “First we will try to read the data,” he said, adding that he did not know what condition the black boxes were in. Later on Thursday the BEA tweeted a photo of the flight data recorder, which appeared to show the crash-proof housing protecting the critical recording chip intact. There is mounting anger in Ethiopia over the handling of the crash. In Addis Ababa, about 200 family members of crash victims left a briefing with Ethiopian Airlines officials, saying the carrier has not given them adequate information. Officials said they had opened a call-in centre that is open 18 hours a day to respond to questions, but relatives said they were not getting the answers they needed. Relatives arrived at the crash scene in Hejere, about 31 miles (50km) from Addis Ababa, some wailing or beating their chests as a bulldozer navigated piles of debris. Blue plastic sheeting covered the wreckage of the plane. The crash on Sunday, in which 157 people were killed minutes after takeoff from Addis Ababa, was the second such calamity involving Boeing’s 737 Max in less than six months. A Lion Air jet crashed in Indonesia in October, also shortly after takeoff, killing all 189 people on board. The US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), citing newly refined satellite data and evidence from the scene of the Ethiopian Airlines crash, has suggested the possibility of a shared cause for the two crashes. After assessing that data, “it became clear to all parties that the track of the Ethiopian flight was very close and behaved very similarly to the Lion Air flight”, FAA administrator Daniel Elwell told reporters. But aviation experts cautioned that it was still too early to draw conclusions. “To my mind people are drawing optical conclusions at the moment,” said Robert Mann, aviation consultant and former airline executive. “We need to wait for the hard data from these readers.” One central question investigators will address is whether software used by the 737 Max to prevent stalling and known as MCAS was central to the accident. Lion Air officials have said sensors on their plane produced erroneous information on its last four flights, triggering an automatic nose-down command that the pilots were unable to overcome on its final flight. But Ethiopian Airlines’ chief executive, Tewolde GebreMariam, said its pilots had received special training on how to deal with that problem. “In addition to the basic trainings given for 737 aircraft types, an additional training was given for the Max version,” Tewolde said. “After the Lion Air crash, questions were raised, so Boeing sent further instructions that it said pilots should know.” The two crashes have shaken the aviation industry, scared passengers worldwide and put significant pressure on the world’s biggest aircraft manufacturer to prove the safety of a model intended to be the standard for decades. Donald Trump followed leaders around the world in grounding Boeing’s 737 Max fleet on Wednesday. The US president said safety was of paramount concern. “They have to find the problem … and they will find it,” he said. Boeing said it had full confidence in the safety of the 737 Max, but that “out of an abundance of caution and in order to reassure the flying public” it had decided to temporarily ground the entire fleet. A software fix for the 737 Max that Boeing has been working on since the Lion Air crash will take months to complete, the FAA said on Wednesday. The implementation of that fix was delayed for five weeks because of the US’s government shutdown, the Wall Street Journal revealed this week. Deliveries have effectively been frozen, but production continues. Norwegian Air has said it will seek compensation from Boeing for costs and lost revenue after grounding its 737 Max fleet. Japan became the latest nation to suspend the planes on Thursday, and Garuda Indonesia said it may cancel its order for 20 of the aircraft, depending on the FAA’s position . Under international rules, Ethiopia is leading the investigation, but the BEA will analyse the black boxes as an adviser. The US authorities had lobbied to take the lead in the investigation. While the BEA is one of the world’s best qualified investigation teams Mann said it “looked political” that the boxes had not been sent to the US. Boeing is one of the US’s most powerful lobbyists and spent more than $15m on Washington lobbying last year, according to OpenSecrets.org, a group that tracks lobbying data.