Southampton climbed closer to safety thanks to their third win in four matches, Pierre-Emile Højbjerg securing a deserved victory with a second-half strike on the counter. The win puts Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side level on points with Brighton, who, in addition to trying to figure out a way to get past Manchester City in next week’s FA Cup semi-final, must be wary of slipping into bottom three. The battle to avoid 18th place is getting more fierce. Coming off the back of a victory over Tottenham Hotspur and knowing their need for points was more pressing, Southampton made by far the better start here. They play as a swarm, buzzing around their opponents in a shape that is as difficult to define as they are to repel. But Chris Hughton’s side have never been ashamed to defend in numbers at home, even against lower-ranked teams, and they gave Southampton little room in which to manoeuvre. The visitors would need to be fast and very precise to break through, and for the first half-hour that looked to be beyond them. Brighton, in fact, mustered the first shot, Alireza Jahanbakhsh sending a bobbly effort a couple of yards wide from the edge of the area. Too often, however, Brighton’s counter-attacks unravelled because one of their players, usually Anthony Knockaert or Dale Stephens, did not release the ball fast enough. Only Yves Bissouma truly worried Southampton’s defence, with his deftness and thrust making him Brighton’s most dangerous player. Glenn Murray was barely involved. Southampton were more incisive, except when it came to making the final cut. Nathan Redmond forced a save from Mat Ryan after shuffling his way past Martin Montoya and letting fly from a difficult angle on the left. Then, in the 34th minute, Stuart Armstrong attacked down the same side before nudging a pass through to Danny Ings, who had found a modicum of space 12 yards from goal. But by the time the striker took a touch and got off a sidefooted shot, Bernardo da Silva was able to fling himself in front of it to make a block. Two minutes later Knockaert had to make a similar intervention to foil Redmond after a defence-splitting pass by Højbjerg. Southampton were starting to stretch their hosts. Lewis Dunk was the next to make a vital block, thwarting Armstrong after Ings and Redmond had joined forced to dispossess Stephens in midfield. Oriol Romeu, by contrast, found enough time just before the break to ping a pass from the centre circle to Ings, who flipped it wide to Redmond, who failed to get anywhere near the target from 15 yards. Hasenhüttl’s men may have looked more threatening, but at half-time the score was an emphatic 0-0. Southampton were not discouraged, and Brighton were not emboldened – so it was no shock when the visitors took the lead in the 53rd minute. It was a textbook goal by gegenpressing. Højbjerg started it by winning the ball in midfield and then passing it on and charging forward. Armstrong fed Redmond, who slipped into the path of Højbjerg, who, having darted into the box, poked the ball over the advancing Ryan from eight yards. Now Brighton needed to perk up. But instead Southampton caused more alarm with a flowing attack just before the hour, Dunk having to make a panicked clearance off the line from a shot by Ryan Bertrand. Not until the last 20 minutes did Brighton show any teeth, Shane Duffy retrieving a long cross by Knoackert and laying it back to Montoya, whose shot from the edge of the box bounced out off the crossbar. Moments later Brighton appealed in vain for a penalty after Pröpper went to ground while trying to pounce on a cross spilled by Southampton’s goalkeeper, Angus Gunn. When Hughton replaced Pröpper with Jürgen Locadia one minute later, there were chants of “you don’t know what you’re doing” from home fans. But Locadia came closest to bringing Brighton level, with a smart spin and shot from 18 yards forcing a good save from Gunn. Brighton made their opponents defend for the remainder of the game, something Southampton did like their Premier League lives depended on it.