A funny thing happened to me on a Manchester tram the other day. I found myself engulfed by a small platoon of primary schoolchildren. Unmissable in their hi-vis bibs, making a high-decibel din, they had been to the Imperial War Museum North. I was hemmed in by them at the front of the tram, pinned against the glass of the driver’s cab. A little girl jumped up and said: “Excuse me, sir. Would you like my seat?” “No thanks, angel,” I said. “You sit down, and don’t call me ‘sir’ again because it makes me feel old.” She sat down. They eyed me with mild interest. I asked one lad, who’d had an awful lot to say for himself, what he wanted to be when he was older. “Marvel superhero,” he said. “Policeman,” said another. But was he quick enough to catch baddies? “The second-quickest in the class,” he answered. “Who’s the quickest?” “Him,” he said, pointing at a lad staring out the window, saying nothing at all. . The girl who had offered me a seat announced that she’d like to be a singer, dancer or an actor. “But,” she added, “if I can’t live my dream, I’ll be a nurse, and I’ll definitely do all the really yucky stuff.” We continued in this vein until the future nurse or actor or dancer or singer tapped me on the arm and asked me: “What did you want to do when you were little like us?” Great question, that. I stammered something about wanting to be a farmer and then a lawyer, until my dad told me (correctly) I wasn’t clever enough. She carried on quizzing me, and I felt certain that this little girl would go far because she had demonstrated genuine curiosity, and that’s the main thing you need in life. It’s not what you know; it’s what you want to know. On all media, mainstream and social, no one seems to have the curiosity of that little girl. Nobody wants to know stuff; they just want to tell you what they already know, or how wrong you are about what you think you know. When is the last time you heard anyone on Question Time or a phone-in ask a genuine question along the lines of: “There’s something I don’t quite get; please can you explain …” A doctor of my acquaintance, a consultant at a big London hospital, invariably ends her consultations by asking the patient if they have any questions. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don’t. A specialist in the field of health literacy sat in on one of her clinics recently. “Do me a favour,” she said. “Instead of asking if they have any questions, try asking what questions they have.” Shifting the emphasis on to the assumption that they have questions has, I’m told, made a massive difference. There is a lesson here: perhaps we need to demand curiosity, rather than be ready for it, if and when it comes. But a darker thought strikes me: what if we’re all so sure we know everything, that our honest answer to “What questions do you have?” is: “Sorry, none really. I know all I want to know now and I’ve made my mind up about everything, and I won’t be needing any more information on anything, thank you.”