Twenty years ago, Dave Cullen was a freelance journalist who responded to reports of shots fired at Columbine high school. He drove towards a ring of helicopters hovering over suburban Colorado. The carnage he found there – 13 people dead, more than 20 injured – was hard to fathom. So was the reaction of the student survivors: the day after the shooting, they were numb, emotions muted. What was happening, the teenagers asked him. Would they get better? Cullen spent the next decade investigating why two students had opened fire on their classmates, and what exactly had happened. His first book, Columbine, published in 2009, would become the definitive account, one that pushed back against many persistent Columbine myths, including a belief that high school outcasts had carried out the attack as revenge against the jocks who had bullied them. Cullen’s reporting made him the go-to expert on US mass violence. It also left him with post-traumatic stress. He eventually learned to set boundaries, promising his therapist that he would be careful with his coverage of mass shootings. It was not the stories about the perpetrators that left him shaken – he could follow those with professional distance – but the coverage of survivors. The 14 February 2018 shooting at a high school in Parkland, Florida, which left 17 students and teachers dead, changed all that. For the first time, teenage survivors of such an atrocity reacted with fury. They demanded immediate government action and assailed adults for failing to protect them. The kids did not worry about “politicising” a tragedy: their friends’ murder, they argued, was already political. “They say tougher guns laws do not decrease gun violence. We call BS,” 18-year-old Emma González said in a speech, three days after the shooting, that went viral. Drawn by the promise of real change, Cullen flew to Florida. Throughout the spring, as American teenagers staged waves of walkout protests at high schools across the country, he followed the Parkland students whose outrage had sparked a national move-ment. He reported from the tiny office they set up in a Florida shopping mall, where current students and a few recent graduates workshopped the memes they would use in social media warfare with the National Rifle Association, and documented their early protests. He saw how they were shaken by the counter-protesters who showed up at their events armed with guns. Parkland focuses purely on the March for Our Lives movement, from the founders’ first days organising in one student’s living room, to a rally for gun control that drew hundreds of thousands of people to Washington and more than a million across the country, to their campaign to turn out young voters in the 2018 midterm elections. The book does not delve into the details of the attack at the school, the red flags law enforcement missed, or the partisan local debates over who was most to blame. It does not even mention the shooter’s name. After 20 years of chronicling violence and failure, Cullen wants to tell a story of hope. Unlike Columbine, his new book does not challenge the accepted narrative of the shooting or its aftermath. He believes the Parkland students achieved real change and are on their way to even greater victories. But he does not gloss over what was messy and painful about the movement’s growth. He shows the simmering tension within the Parkland student body over how the media reaction to the shooting made just a handful of them internationally famous. The students who had spoken out most powerfully were not the ones in the freshman building during the attack. They were not the ones who had been injured, or who had just watched their friends get shot. The resentments and jealousies over who had been chosen to speak for the school would not go away. One of the students who appeared on the cover of Time tells Cullen she has lost many of her friends. Cullen discusses the criticism the March for Our Lives founders received for not including any black Parkland students in their initial organising, and how the group would later publicly denounce the longstanding racism of the gun debate, which for years has placed more attention on the rare killings of suburban white children than the everyday deaths of young people of colour.Cullen describes the uncertainty a young activist from Chicago felt as he arrived at the wealthy gated community in Parkland for a joint meeting about youth gun violence activism. What would it look like to work together? The meeting with Chicago activists would mark a turning point towards a more inclusive, national movement. It also provided a key strategic intervention at a moment when the Parkland students were facing increased public abuse, and were struggling to find the right tone to respond. D’Angelo McDade, part of Chicago’s Peace Warrior group, taught the Parkland students Martin Luther King Jr’s six principles of non-violence. Principle three, “non-violence seeks to defeat injustice, not people”, Cullen writes, would prove influential in shaping the students’ political response to their critics. One of the strongest threads is how much the American media is implicated in the problem of mass shootings Cullen’s experience covering school shootings is clear in his nuanced portraits of parents of victims, and survivors and their parents. “It’s like she built herself a pair of wings out of balsa wood and duct tape and jumped off a building,” González’s mother “And we’re just, like, running along beneath her with a net.” Cullen follows Cameron Kasky, one of the first Parkland student leaders, as he juggles his new national profile with his starring role in a student performance of Spring Awakening, a musical inspired by the Columbine shooting. He captures the organisational genius of Jackie Corin, the student government leader who served as a kind of chief operating officer for the March for Our Lives, setting up rallies and town halls nationwide, while still staying on track to finish high school. The book portrays David Hogg, one of the movement’s most fiery and combative spokespeople, as more playful and less angry than he appears on TV. Cullen shows how much Hogg was influenced by the devastation of his sister Lauren who lost multiple friends in the shooting. Over his weeks of reporting, Cullen sees how Lauren begins to recover, moving from ashen-faced and blank, in the first days after the shooting, to once again being able to show joy. Some of Cullen’s best portraits are of the less famous Parkland activists, including the recent graduates who joined the movement and helped define its deft and sometimes satirical social media presence. He presents Matt Deitsch, the group’s red-haired, 20-year-old chief strategist, as a major force, as if one of the Weasley brothers from Harry Potter had been given a crossover episode in The West Wing. There’s no escaping the fact that Parkland has come out quickly, having been researched and written in less than a year. Cullen’s closeness to the students is, at times, a disadvantage. He concentrates so narrowly on the movement’s development that the broader political context rarely comes into focus. The book also offers little perspective on how the Parkland students’ successful use of Twitter fits into broader trends in social media activism, from #BlackLivesMatter to reactionary harassment campaigns such as Gamergate. Cullen does not consider why the March for Our Lives founders, hailed as heroes on the American left, were seen by some conservatives as rude, obnoxious children, mouthing off about policies they did not fully understand. He does not dig into the claims that the Parkland activists were “crisis actors”, or what that belief reveals about the troubling strain of conspiracy theory in contemporary politics. A survey of 800 American adults after the Parkland shooting found that 22% believed the young activists were fully “manipulated by outside groups”. Another quarter thought they were being at least partially manipulated. The Parkland students’ prom was the same weekend as the National Rifle Association’s annual meeting in Texas – one of many contrasts that could have made the book a richer portrayal of the American gun debate as a whole, and provided a clearer view of the students’ political opponents. Parkland only documents what happened at prom, the strain of trying to celebrate a high-school milestone while still mourning lost friends. It’s easy to understand how dazzled Cullen is by the toughness and political acumen of the teens who built a movement to challenge the NRA. Many American adults share his gratitude at the students’ fearlessness in confronting one of America’s most persistent problems. For Cullen, who said in a recent interview that reporting on Parkland activism helped his post-traumatic stress, the gratitude is even more profound. “These Parkland kids literally healed me,” he told New York magazine. Parkland’s insistence on hope, its deep identification with the movement, results in a book that feels smaller than Cullen’s previous work. A decade after it was published, Columbine is still revelatory – a clear-eyed document of how the “lessons learned” after each tragedy too often skip the real causes of violence, in favour of lurid, self-affirming lies. One of the strongest threads through both Columbine and Parkland is how much the American media are implicated in the problem of mass shootings, and in the political stalemate on gun control. Parkland, Cullen writes, was the first time that survivors of such a mass shooting became more famous than the shooter. This spring will mark the 20th anniversary of Columbine. It’s long past time, Cullen argues, for media outlets to own up to their role in giving killers the fame they crave – not just by taking more care in how they use the shooters’ names and photographs, but in considering how to scale back coverage of shootings altogether. “We did not start this, nor have we pulled any triggers. But the killers have made us reliable partners,” he writes in his new epilogue to Columbine. “These are ‘Made for TV’ movies, by boys desperate to be heard. Why do we keep handing them the mic?” • Parkland is published by Publisher (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.