In 2014, Alex Poots, then artistic director of the Manchester international festival, was approached by a group of New Yorkers with a perplexing proposal. Would he be interested, they asked, in moving to Manhattan to run an as yet unbuilt arts centre, to which $75m (£57m) in public money had been committed but for which, at that stage, there were no offices, no staff, no website, no bank account and no mission, beyond that of creating something that was “unlike anything else in New York”? A blank space, in other words, and “terrifying”, says Poots, which is why his instinct was to jump and say yes. “There’s that quote: if you’re not in over your head, how will you ever find out how tall you are?” Five years later, we are in the offices of what, this April, is going to open as the Shed, the largest new art space to have opened in New York since the Lincoln Center in 1962. Since being hired, Poots and his board have raised half-a-billion dollars in private funding and doubled the scale of the Shed so that, when it opens this spring with a programme of original commissions including works by Steve McQueen and Björk, it will be in a multistorey glass complex where the largest performance space can accommodate up to 1,200 people. There will be rehearsal and lab spaces for emerging artists, a pop-up bookshop and a 20,000 sq ft outdoor plaza for huge events. Behind all of this will be Poots who, at 52, has the kinetic energy of someone staring down an extremely short deadline and asks the central question of any public art space: “Who is it for?” A quick way to answer this is to revisit one of the small, pivotal disagreements Poots had with the original concept for the Shed when he signed on in 2014. At that point, it existed largely as the brainchild of Daniel Doctoroff, at the time deputy mayor of New York under Michael Bloomberg, who came up with the idea of a spectacularly funded arts space to be built alongside Hudson Yards, a luxury housing development on the west side of Manhattan that was attracting criticism as yet another of the city’s gifts to the rich. The Culture Shed, as it was then called, would be built on public land as a way of broadening the scope of the overall development. All of which sounded great to Poots, with the exception of the name. “I didn’t like the sound of it,” he says. “Culture Shed – it sounded a bit preachy.” He called a friend, one of the creative directors at Framestore, the company responsible for the CGI sequences in the Alfonso Cuarón film, Gravity. “And he said, ‘Why would you call it Culture Shed? It’s like a soap opera putting on a laugh track to tell your dumb audience when to laugh.’” Then he called Marina Abramovic, who in her inimitable style said: “Why call it that? When they made Apple, they didn’t call it the Apple Computer.” Finally, Poots went back to the board and suggested dropping “culture” from the title and just calling it the Shed. “I liked the idea of the Shed because it’s where you make things,” he said. Plus, “it would’ve been shortened anyway, like the Met, so you may as well save on rebranding costs in three years’ time.” The point about all this is that Poots wanted to signal, from the name down, that this was not a conventional museum or a gatekeeper to high culture. It would not house a permanent collection, nor would it stage revivals of existing works. It was a radical new space for work across all disciplines, “a commissioning centre for all arts”, which, in New York at least, had never been done before, with an emphasis on emerging talent. The inaugural show will be a five-night concert series called Soundtrack of America, a celebration of African American music directed by McQueen, but featuring largely unknown musicians. “We’re launching a half-a-billion dollar arts facility with unknown, early-career African American talent.” If anyone can democratise access to the arts it is Poots, whose work as an impresario goes back to his early 20s, when he played trumpet in a band and, with the canny eye he would later bring to multimillion dollar shows, told the band leader after a single rehearsal: “This band could be better and I should start by firing myself.” It was his short-lived career as a trumpet player that laid the foundations for everything that came after, teaching Poots to be suspicious of the conventional hierarchies between high and low art, and before that, while he was still a schoolboy in Edinburgh, suggesting to him he could actually be good at something. “I was really painfully average at everything else,” he says, whose Irish father was a dentist and French mother a teacher. “None of it interested me. But I had this thing – I was able to play the trumpet really well – and if I hadn’t had that, I’d probably be on the scrapheap somewhere.” He trained classically, but started doing jazz and pop from an early age. “Subconsciously, I had the feeling, ‘Why is it when I go out and play pop, it’s second-class music, even though sometimes when I play it, I’m playing better than I ever have? But when I go out and do a classical thing, that’s like the pillar of everything, whether I’ve played well or not?’ That has definitely informed everything I’ve done.” For a while, Poots thought he might become a professional musician. Then, one night in his early 20s, he had a sobering experience after performing in a production of Verdi’s Requiem in Edinburgh. “I was doing the offstage trumpet part, where you do nothing for most of the production, then play for about three minutes and go home. It’s highly stressful and I had a dream that night, in which I was doing Verdi’s Requiem but I was 50 – the age I am now. And the thing that woke me up in a cold sweat was that it wasn’t quite as good as when I was 20.” He quit trumpet cold, moved to London and enrolled in a degree course in music at City University, where he wrote his dissertation on what would become the driving interest of his career: “How, between art forms, there’s a shared essence. I studied it through [the lens of] Miles Davis, who brought in Debussian techniques, bebop and rock music. And when he gets it right, there’s this synthesis. Even though they’re antithetical, they’re also complimentary. There can be that blossoming.” For the next 10 years, Poots worked his way through the major institutions of British culture, starting at the Barbican as a curator and moving on to oversee projects with David Brook at Channel 4 and Nick Serota at the Tate, including a series called Tate Live, his first real foray into visual art, in which he worked with McQueen, Wolfgang Tillmans and Arvo Pärt. He was very good at creating events that generated publicity but which occasionally backfired. In 2001, Poots came up with the first Fatboy Slim concert on Brighton beach – “I remember pitching that idea to Norman” – to which tens of thousands turned up, causing chaos and dominating headlines. He was also very good at dismantling traditional barriers between the arts. In 2005, when Poots was appointed as artistic director of the inaugural Manchester international festival, he wanted to celebrate the city’s roots as the first modern industrial centre by investing in wholly new projects. One of the breakout successes in Manchester was Monkey: Journey to the West, a pop opera collaboration between Damon Albarn’s band Gorillaz and the director Chen Shi-Zheng, a stage production with an anarchic circus-like feel to it and an electric energy. “He’s constantly challenging you by putting different kinds of creative forces together; the kind of thing nobody would think of doing, but he does,” says Chen, whose new show, Dragon Spring Phoenix Rise, is in the opening lineup for the Shed. When Poots first approached Chen with the idea of creating an opera in Manchester, they cycled through scores of potential music collaborators until Poots suggested Gorillaz. “He showed me their video and their songs, and I immediately fell for it. I thought this would work.” Chen’s new show is styled as a “futuristic kung fu musical” and written with Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger, creators of the Kung Fu Panda movie franchise, and would have been impossible to stage anywhere else, he says. The liberating thing about the Shed is that it marries Poots’s vision to a flexible performance space, in which the walls can retract and the audience can be moved around. “Directors are always trying to destroy the proscenium theatre, to expand, come out, extend and come closer to the audience,” says Poots. “A new space gives new opportunities for your art form. Now we have that.” Among other startling collaborations in the Shed’s opening schedule will be the dramatic work Norma Jeane Baker of Troy, written by the poet Anne Carson and starring Ben Whishaw and Renée Fleming (Carson wrote it specifically with Whishaw in mind and after reading the script he jumped at it). The painter Gerhard Richter will collaborate with the composer Steve Reich for an immersive live performance. One of the most exciting events will be the Shed’s opening show, Soundtrack of America, devised and directed by McQueen and with a creative team including Quincy Jones. As Poots says: “I don’t think anyone can disagree that African American music is the most influential art form of the past 100 years. I don’t think even film goes as deep and as far as this.” Each night, a handful of artists will trace the roots of their own music back through the genealogy of African American music and, after performing that journey, “will end with their song”. McQueen and Poots have known each other for almost 20 years; in fact, it was McQueen who introduced Poots to his wife, Kathryn Spellman, a visiting sociology professor at Columbia University. “What I like about Alex,” says McQueen, “is that he says ‘let’s do it’. In the UK, it’s often about making do, or being told we can’t do that. But he says ‘let’s do it’ and that mentality is very similar to mine.” This rapport was particularly evident in the lead-up to the pair’s 2007 collaboration, Queen and Country, in which McQueen created 155 sheets of postage stamps, each bearing a photo of a British solider killed in Iraq, and which before he turned to Poots, had stalled. “I came out from a very bad meeting with the Ministry of Defence, who shut the door in our faces when we asked for help – with addresses of next of kin and so forth. One of them suggested we [illustrate the stamps] with landscapes. After the meeting I was sitting with a colleague in a restaurant and Alex was sitting two tables from us, and my colleague said we should ask him for help. And the second we asked, he was getting numbers out, calling people – and we got it done. We found an amazing researcher, and 94% of the families approached responded in an overwhelmingly positive way. And that’s Alex Poots: the whole question of anything in the world is how do we do it? How do we get it done? It’s that simple, and Alex is a genius at it.” The word “relevance” can be deadly to any artistic production, but Poots is keen for younger audiences, in particular, to have a sense of the impact of how obscure or abstract works can resonate in the real world. He cites Henry David Thoreau’s essay, Civil Disobedience, written in 1849, “which goes on decades later to inspire Mandela, and Martin Luther King. What very few people know was that Thoreau was inspired by a 13th-century poet from Persia, called Saadi of Shiraz. So you can say to a bunch of kids: ‘Who says that art doesn’t have the power to influence changing society? Here’s a really good example.’” The education and involvement of young people is one of Poots’s primary ambitions for the Shed. He talks with frustration about his experience of education departments at many cultural centres in the UK, which, he says, have tended to be “the poor relation”. “It was the thing you put at the end of the corridor to satisfy the Arts Council. And I thought, ‘Can’t we do better?’ I wanted the Shed to have the widest civic responsibility, to go beyond being a space that commissions work for the public.” To this end, he sat down with Tamara McCaw, the Shed’s chief civic programme officer, and came up with one of the opening programme’s most radical commissions, involving three years of work in local schools and building on foundations laid down by Poots during the three years he was director of the Park Avenue Armory. It is called Maze and features a dance company led by Reggie Gray and made up of dancers, spotted and trained via the Shed’s FlexNYC programme, from low‑income neighbourhoods across the city. The production will specialise in a dance movement called flex. “When I was in my 20s, [the theatre director] Peter Sellars said to me, ‘Alex, one day you will stumble on something in the community that is so precious and beautiful; just make sure you notice it and grab it with both arms.’ And over 20 years later I rang him and said, ‘I’ve found them! They’re amazing, these flex dancers in Bed-Stuy in Brooklyn – that’s the great news. The challenging news is you have to co-direct the show and it’s in seven months.’” There were challenges. “These dancers are all self-taught and unpaid,” says Poots. “Kids who do it at night; by day, they’re working in fast-food chains or [have] no work. When I gave them their first ever show at the Armory, in 2015, some of them had not been out of Brooklyn to Manhattan. Some did not have bank accounts.” What is extraordinary about this show is the way Poots and McCaw have devised it as a sort of self-perpetuating commission. “Tamara said, ‘Why don’t we make a programme that is three-dimensional, so that the kids become teachers? Because they can do it already and they teach other kids in the community for free. So why don’t we formalise it: pay them for it, train them, almost become their company management, and make that part of the commission?’ That’s a project and kids in three years will be able to learn flex and join the company.” Without waving any banners, this aspect of the Shed’s ambitions is effortlessly political, as are some of the more formal structures in place. Ticketing, for example, will reserve 10% of every row for tickets priced at $10 for those on low incomes, ensuring that, rather than sitting up in the cheap seats, they will be next to those who paid $195 apiece. Everything is up for reinvention, with the hope that, as long as it isn’t “faddish”, the result will push forward every format and bring to fruition a line Poots likes to quote from EM Forster: “Only connect the prose and the passion and both will be exalted.”