We asked you to tell us which songs reflect the uncertainty of life – ones that seem to sum up Britain’s current aimlessness amid Brexit negotiations, or that you reach for when you don’t know where else to turn. Hundreds of you got in touch with your ideas – here’s what some of you said. We’ve also collated 100 of the best suggestions into a Spotify playlist below. Ball of Confusion (That’s What the World is Today) by the TemptationsSo many of the lyrics could easily be applied to our current state of affairs. There is so much irony here, and musically the lyrics coupled with the repetitive bassline produces a hammering effect, a roll call of problems that are piled on to society. And of course we don’t know where the world’s headed! Andrew, Birmingham Survivor by Destiny’s ChildWhether you love, hate or are indifferent to Theresa May, she is the definition of a survivor. Also, how good would it be if she danced on to the podium to Survivor for her next speech? You know you want to see that. Rebecca, London Us and Them by Pink FloydIt’s a weary old song: tired, resigned and sums up how I feel about anything news related – Brexit, populism, austerity, rising intolerance. Pressure on solidaristic institutions and rising inequality and every one looking for an easy “them” to blame. Brilliant song that I suspect, sadly, will always be relevant. Ben, Durham Crazy Crazy Nights by KissI’m currently studying abroad and, with the time difference, the Brexit vote coverage goes on well into the evening. Sometimes I stay up really late WhatsApping friends about the clusterfuck of it all, only to be faced with Germans expecting me to make sense of it all – to no avail. That’s why I initially chose this, but, listening more to the lyrics, I think it could apply to Theresa May or indeed militant leavers and remainers, although I must stress – never been a Kiss fan. Chantal, Kiel, Germany I Will Survive by Gloria GaynorWe voted to leave! If people don’t like the thought of leaving, more should have gone out and voted when they had the chance. Why are we messing around? I am fed up with all the politicians rattling on, making the country look silly. The UK is a strong country and we will survive. Melanie, London Hocus Pocus by Focus1. It’s the same thing over and over again but with slight variations. 2. It’s mostly one person saying a lot of stuff, but it’s all gibberish. 3. It goes on for a bit too long. 4. You can’t quite tell whether or not it’s a joke. The only real difference is that the song was fun, progressive and well-executed.James, Bristol