Good morning, I’m Warren Murray, and if you want something done properly, here it is. British MPs have seized control of the parliamentary timetable for a series of “indicative votes” on the next steps for Brexit – but Theresa May has not committed to abide by the outcome. The House of Commons passed by a comfortable 329 ayes to 302 noes an amendment led by the Conservative former minister Sir Oliver Letwin which provides for a series of indicative votes on finding a consensus Brexit solution. The PM lost three ministers who resigned to back the process, which will get under way today. The options are manifold and could include “Norway-plus”, “Canada-style”, Labour’s customs union, a version of May’s deal, no deal, a possible second referendum and others yet to be invented. There is not yet a clear picture of whether MPs from either the Conservatives or Labour will be given a free vote or whipped to vote along party lines. The Tory rebel Dominic Grieve said: “We have got to find an alternative … There should be nothing that is forbidden to be discussed.” Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, said: “This house must also consider whether any deal should be put to the people for a confirmatory vote. Where this government has failed, this house must, and I believe will, succeed.” The players and the punditry were up late. The BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg said the next few days could lay the ground for a “‘democratic event’ – code in Whitehall for what you and me would normally call ‘an election’”. Arron Banks, co-founder of Leave.EU, said remaining looked better than May’s deal, which he called a “toxic surrender document”. Guto Bebb MP, leading supporter of the People’s Vote campaign, predicted: “When it becomes clear that any form of Brexit will let down everyone – no matter how they voted in 2016 – MPs will decide the only way out of this crisis is to hand the final decision back to the British people.” Let’s see what the rest of the day brings – Politics Live will be under way in due course. Too poor to play – Children of less well-off tenants in at least one London housing development are being blocked from using communal play areas with their peers from wealthier families. “Our children’s friends look down from their windows and can’t come and join us. We want them to be given back the access that was shown in the original plans,” said Louise Whitely, a private owner in the Baylis Old School complex. Families living in the social housing part of the development instead have access to a small strip of toddler play equipment. The grotesque situation arose after the developer, Henley Homes, turned its back on its original sales pitch that the complex would have common areas “for the use of all the residents”. Salvatore Rea, who rents a flat, said: “My children are friends with all the other children on this development – but when it is summer they can’t join them. Children shouldn’t know who owns and who is renting.” The private property managers say it is fair because the social housing tenants don’t contribute towards service charges; the social housing provider insists it has no say; and the council won’t intervene. The Green party is calling for a ban on future segregated play areas. Pass the alcosynth – It is not a new form of electronic pop music by or for the inebriated, but rather an alcohol alternative that would provide the same relaxing and socially lubricating qualities without the hangovers, damage to the body and risk of getting paralytic. Professor David Nutt, a former government drugs adviser, says he is getting close to producing a non-toxic substitute called “Alcarelle”. Society has chosen, he says, “to ignore the harms of alcohol because we enjoy it. What I’m trying to do is provide something to enjoy that is much less harmful.” Moving on now, to sobering findings that long sedentary stints during the day could be the cause of almost 70,000 deaths a year, as well as costing the NHS upwards of £700m annually. Dr Keith Diaz, an expert in behavioural medicine at Columbia University, said “sit less, move more, and move often” should be the mantra. Mueller extra-time – Democrats are showing no signs of backing down from the legal questions encircling Donald Trump and his associates, after the president dubiously claimed the Mueller report’s findings represented his “total exoneration”. The report was inconclusive on whether Trump obstructed justice, and Democratic lawmakers want to haul the attorney general, William Barr, to Capitol Hill for questions on that point. The Democratic chairs of the House intelligence, judiciary and oversight committees have called for the complete release of Robert Mueller’s report and “all underlying documents”. But some strategists have said Democrats should move on to preparing for the 2020 election: “It’s pretty clear impeachment is not in the cards, at least not right now,” said Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist. ‘We can’t afford to give up’ – Yemen this week marks a grim anniversary: four years since the Saudi-led military coalition intervened in its civil war, leading to the deaths of at least 60,000 people and sparking the world’s biggest humanitarian crisis. But Jaclin al-Batani, a university lecturer and political activist, insists: “Aden is my home. It has its problems, but so does everywhere. To me it is the best place in the world.” Hisham al-Omeisy spent five months as a prisoner of conscience but continues to critique both sides in the war as he campaigns for a political solution. “It is difficult and dangerous to be independent anywhere, but especially in Yemen,” he says; however, “we can’t afford to give up.” Middle East correspondent Bethan McKernan meets the activists working to hold Yemen together. Small misstep for women – Nasa’s plans for an all-female spacewalk have fallen through, partly because it doesn’t have enough spacesuits of the correct size. International Space Station astronauts Christina Koch and Anne McClain were due to take part in the first mission of its kind on 29 March. But a “medium-size hard upper torso – essentially the shirt of the spacesuit” will not be ready for McClain in time, says Nasa. Koch will still become the 14th woman to make a spacewalk; McClain has already had her first go, last week. We are testing the Guardian Briefing, a short audio version of the Morning Briefing adapted for Google Home devices and the Google Assistant. Using a mix of both human and synthetic voices, the Guardian Briefing brings you up to speed with the day’s top headlines in under two minutes. Give it a try by saying “Hey Google, ask for the Guardian Briefing”. It is compatible with Google Assistant-enabled devices including Google Home speakers and Android/iOS smartphones. iPhone users will need to install the free Google Assistant app. You can find out more about the experiment on the Guardian Voice Lab blog. As the project develops, the Guardian Briefing will also pull stories from across the Guardian website throughout the day to keep the headlines up to date. We’d love to hear what you think – help us to get it right by emailing your thoughts to voicelab@theguardian.com. Following the death of Love Island’s Mike Thalassitis, Jonny Mitchell, a friend and former contestant, and Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, a former producer of US show The Bachelor, discuss their experiences of reality TV. Plus Gaby Hinsliff on the stubborn obduracy of Theresa May. Millions of us now have virtual assistants, in our homes and our pockets. Even children’s toys are getting smart. But when we talk to them, who is listening – and can anything Alexa picks up be used by the police? James Vlahos examines life in a world where less and less of what we say goes unheard. In breaking news this morning, UFC’s biggest star, Conor McGregor, has announced his decision to retire from mixed martial arts. The Irishman is the former UFC featherweight and lightweight champion and the biggest draw in mixed martial arts. Gareth Southgate denounced as “unacceptable” the racist abuse to which his players were subjected by sections of the home support during their resounding 5-1 win in Montenegro, where full debutant Callum Hudson-Odoi delivered a sparking display. Ravichandran Ashwin’s controversial Mankad dismissal of Joss Buttler in the IPL overshadowed the return of banned former Australia captain Steve Smith. A US TV reporter, Jennifer Ravalo, has described the moment she was kissed on the lips by Bulgarian heavyweight boxer Kubrat Pulev following a post-fight interview as “embarrassing” and “strange”. Michael Schumacher’s son, Mick, will make his Formula One debut in a test for Ferrari on 2 April, after the Bahrain Grand Prix. And Newcastle, who are at the bottom of the Premiership despite winning their past three matches, face losing Calum Green for the rest of the season after he was cited for allegedly biting the Sale hooker Rob Webber last weekend. Asian shares have bounced back after two days of losses as US 10-year Treasury yields edged higher, but the outlook remained murky as investors weighed the odds of whether the economy stateside is in danger of slipping into recession. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan rebounded 0.3% after losing 1.4% in the previous session. The Nikkei jumped 1.8% after its biggest drop since late December on Monday. China’s CSI300 and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index rose by 0.3% and 0.5% respectively. Australian shares were flat. The FTSE will be higher at the open. Sterling has been trading at $1.319 and €1.166 overnight. Many of the papers have variations on a theme, with headlines saying MPs have voted to “take” or “seize” control of Brexit. The Guardian’s splash is: “Beleaguered May fights to keep control of Brexit”, the Telegraph has “MPs vote to take control”, the Times says “MPs seize control of Brexit”, and the i’s splash is “Commons takes control of Brexit”. The FT is interested in what happens next: “Commons seizes control from May with vote to explore Brexit options”. The Mail asks: “Is Britain plunging into yet another election?” and the Sun publishes revelations that May would consider resigning in exchange for passage of her Brexit deal: “Back me and sack me”. The Express is furious: “They’ve now stolen what’s left of Brexit” while the Mirror largely ignores all that, instead reporting: “Energy giants stash £900m of your money”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com