Eurosceptic Conservatives have insisted they could still force a no-deal Brexit even if the House of Commons votes on Wednesday against crashing out of the EU without a deal. Jacob Rees-Mogg, chair of the European Research Group (ERG), said it was a “serious point” that the risk of a softer Brexit or a second referendum may have increased after the deal’s defeat, but he believed most MPs considered a no-deal exit more likely. He said the European commission president Jean-Claude Juncker “has said there will be no more negotiations so I think our expectations are that we will leave without a deal”. Steve Baker, the former Brexit minister who is the ERG’s chief organiser, announced late on Tuesday that he and others would attempt to force a so-called “managed no deal” in the Commons on Wednesday, when MPs will have a free vote on whether the UK should leave with no agreement. In a late-night amendment signed by the former remainers Nicky Morgan and Damian Green, Baker proposed a 21-month transition to no deal, an idea that the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, has explicitly rejected. Baker said he and others would not be “bullied” by the threat of no Brexit or a softer deal. “It is the worst conceivable reason to vote for a terrible deal to say that if we don’t vote for this deal, which betrays the public vote, then parliament will betray the public vote to a worse degree,” he said. “This is a mad argument. I am not going to allow my conduct to be determined by fear.” The majority of the ERG held the line which was agreed at their meeting on Tuesday afternoon and voted against May’s deal, on the advice of their “star chamber” of eight lawyers who examined the legal advice of the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox. However, more than 30 Brexiters broke with the main Eurosceptic faction on Tuesday night to back Theresa May’s deal. The former Brexit secretary David Davis was the most high-profile name to splinter from the disciplined group, along with several vocal backbench Brexiters including Nadine Dorries and Philip Davies. In total, 39 Conservative MPs switched their votes to back the prime minister after voting against the deal on 15 January, though some of that number were former remainers. The mood among Eurosceptics had been more open-minded in the early morning on Tuesday but when May addressed Tory MPs in a private meeting on Tuesday morning after Cox’s legal advice had been published, the atmosphere darkened. The ERG vice-chair, Mark Francois, said MPs had asked the prime minister “question after question after question” on Cox’s advice that the legal risk remained unchanged. Joint interpretative instrument A legal add-on to the withdrawal agreement. It gives legal force to a letter from Jean-Claude Juncker and Donald Tusk, the presidents of the commission and council, given to May in January. This stated the EU’s intention to negotiate an alternative to the backstop so it would not be triggered, or, if it was triggered, to get out of it as quickly as possible. Unilateral statement from the UK Sets out the British position that, if the backstop was to become permanent and talks on an alternative were going nowhere, the UK believes it would be able to exit the arrangement. Additional language in political declaration Emphasises the urgency felt on both sides to negotiate an alternative to the backstop, and flesh out what a technological fix would look like. However, this has failed to persuade the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, who said that while it 'reduces the risk' of the UK being trapped in a backstop indefinitely, it does not remove it. Daniel Boffey Many of those who had previously suggested they were open to giving the deal a second chance felt that Cox’s advice had sunk its chances. “The attorney general’s advice is clear there is nothing allowing us to exit the backstop if both sides cannot agree the future relationship in good faith,” MP Simon Clarke said. “Given that is arguably precisely the situation we find ourselves in now re the withdrawal agreement, how is that risk ‘highly unlikely’?” By early afternoon, the ERG’s appointed group of eight lawyers, seven of them MPs, recommended that MPs reject the deal. The group included the DUP’s Nigel Dodds as well as the former Brexit secretary Dominic Raab, and was chaired by the veteran Brexiter Bill Cash. Publishing their reasoning, the group said the reassurances “fail to fulfil the commitment made by government … to obtain legally binding changes to the withdrawal agreement.”. May won over a number of MPs by arguing the choice was now political rather than based on legal text. Ben Bradley, the MP for Mansfield who resigned as Tory vice-chair in protest at the deal and who submitted a letter of no confidence in the prime minister, said he had grudgingly decided to back it. Bradley said he believed colleagues should “hold their noses, to get Brexit signed and sealed” without risking further delay. “To those saying no deal would be preferable, I am tempted to agree, but we know and the evidence shows that parliament will not let that happen. If we are to deliver Brexit on time as promised, this is the route to doing it, and the alternative is delay at best.” Other former rebels who declared support before the vote included the backbenchers Johnny Mercer, Nigel Evans and Zac Goldsmith, as well as the chair of the education select committee, Robert Halfon, and the former international development secretary Andrew Mitchell. The former international trade minister Greg Hands, who voted against the deal in January, gave an impassioned speech to the meeting of the ERG, urging his colleagues to back the deal. He said there remained very few people in parliament, including the Speaker, who were prepared to see no deal, “apart from the people in this room” and urged MPs to be realistic.