It’s not often you see sex on top of a coffin on stage, but that’s the gasp-inducing opener of Liam Scarlett’s new Dangerous Liaisons, created for Brisbane’s Queensland Ballet. The Marquise de Merteuil, in mourning attire, grandly presides over her husband’s funeral. When the crowd disperses, her lover Gercourt promptly tears off her veil, and their torrid encounter ends with Merteuil blowing a kiss to the coffin – and embracing the freedom widowhood once afforded women. Roles such as Merteuil are dramatic gold for ballet dancers, and there are quite a few in Dangerous Liaisons, from Valmont – the Marquise’s partner in amorality – to the victims of the two aristocrats’ sexual scheming. Scarlett’s production distils Pierre Choderlos de Laclos’s masterly novel, a French classic published in 1782, into two sizzling acts of dance theatre, made to measure for a company on the rise. Like Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, which Scarlett adapted for the Royal Ballet in 2016, Dangerous Liaisons is an epistolary novel, told through 175 letters – a challenge when it comes to crafting a balanced storyline. “You’re reading these private things that you’re not meant to be reading,” Scarlett says. “What you have is these really great characters, and you need to find the story around them. Once you know what they do, how they walk, how they shout at someone, then you can start piecing it together.” Dangerous Liaisons succeeds where Frankenstein, which opened to mixed reviews and was recently revived, erred. It helps that ballet does aristocratic decadence so well, but there is next to no padding: the corps de ballet only makes brief appearances, clearing the way for featured soloists to flex their acting muscles. Complex character arcs are also given their due. While Valmont (Alexander Idaszak, a gifted actor) sets out to seduce the virtuous Madame de Tourvel (Lucy Green, wonderfully eloquent) on a bet, their long pas de deux in Act 2 shows him mellowing through the smallest of gestures, tenderness seeping into his partnering as he falls for her. Scarlett has been an artistic associate at Queensland Ballet since 2017, an intriguing career development. Brisbane is a long way from home for the British choreographer, a pure product of London’s Royal Ballet, where he performed as a dancer, made his first works and is currently artist in residence. Last year, he was tasked with staging the Royal Ballet’s new production of Swan Lake, a major vote of confidence. His connection to Australia came about by chance, after the Queensland Ballet co-produced two of his works: A Midsummer Night’s Dream, made for the Royal New Zealand Ballet in 2015, and No Man’s Land, which was part of English National Ballet’s Lest We Forget triple bill. In Brisbane, Scarlett found Li Cunxin, of Mao’s Last Dancer fame. Since his appointment as director in 2012, Li has raised the Queensland Ballet’s profile considerably, quadrupling its budget and launching large-scale projects. The company now performs an ambitious mix of classic works and creations – without the pressure, for choreographers, of following in the footsteps of illustrious in-house predecessors. “The rapport with Li, with the dancers, is what made the relationship here sustain itself,” Scarlett says. “What I can do here, I wouldn’t necessarily do in London, and vice versa. The heritage and history of the Royal Ballet mean the world to me, and I feel very proud to be a part of them. I would never jeopardise that, whereas here, I don’t have the same kind of backstory. It’s nice to come in fresh.” While firmly in the tradition of Sir Kenneth MacMillan or John Cranko’s narrative ballets, Dangerous Liaisons is practically a chamber piece by the standards of bigger companies, with 11 characters and an eight-strong ensemble. Queensland Ballet fielded four casts for the opening run. In the first two, Laura Hidalgo and Georgia Swan delivered scintillatingly unrestrained performances as the Machiavellian Merteuil, a feminist before her time, who declares herself “born to avenge my sex” in the novel. Mia Heathcote, on the second night, embodied the opposite – the bright innocence of young Cécile, whom Merteuil and Valmont corrupt as retaliation against her mother. The production still needs to settle down. A few choreographic tweaks would help clarify some of the story’s twists and turns; the period-inspired costumes, designed by Tracy Grant Lord, could do a better job of visually establishing relationships between the many characters, which proved the subject of some confusion in the audience on opening night. An orgy scene led by Valmont and his favourite courtesan, Emilie (Sophie Zoricic, fully owning the raunchy choreography), also feels a little indulgent, ultimately outstaying its welcome. Still, the building blocks are there for Dangerous Liaisons to carve a spot in the international repertoire. Successful narrative scores are hard to come by, and Scarlett’s collage of pieces by Camille Saint-Saëns boasts real dramatic power. Arranged by Martin Yates, it includes stirring melodies the French composer wrote for opera, theatre and film. Moonlighting down under clearly suits Scarlett, and the Queensland Ballet is reaping the benefits. Dangerous Liaisons is at the Playhouse, Queensland Performing Arts Centre, Brisbane, until 6 April