Downing Street has said Theresa May will ask for only a short extension to article 50 after a revolt among Brexiter cabinet ministers and MPs, despite previous promises to MPs that the UK would face a long extension if they did not vote for her deal before Thursday. So what happens next? Pro-Brexit cabinet ministers including Andrea Leadsom, Liam Fox and Chris Grayling told May a long extension would not be acceptable to them, while anger among other MPs was also growing. Tory MPs were expected to demand the prime minister appear before the 1922 Committee of backbenchers on Wednesday evening. There were also rumours some could demand her resignation on the floor of the Commons during prime minister’s questions. May was supposed to send her letter to the EU council president, Donald Tusk, setting out her request for an extension on Tuesday but no such letter appeared. On Wednesday morning, a Downing Street source sought to calm tensions. “The PM won’t be asking for a long extension. There is a case for giving parliament a bit more time to agree a way forward, but the people of this country have been waiting nearly three years now. They are fed up with parliament’s failure to take a decision and the PM shares their frustration.” Yes, last week parliament opted overwhelmingly to request an extension to article 50, by 413 votes to 202, though eight cabinet ministers voted against it in a free vote. The motion was technically not legally binding. However, the motion did not commit to seeking a long extension, only to seek a one-off extension until 30 June as long as the deal was passed. Then it went on to say: “It is highly likely that the European council at its meeting the following day would require a clear purpose for any extension, not least to determine its length, and that any extension beyond 30 June 2019 would require the United Kingdom to hold European parliament elections in May 2019.” Both May and her de facto deputy, David Lidington, suggested that would happen. May told the Commons “a short technical extension is only likely to be on offer if we have a deal in place” and said otherwise it would need to be longer and include holding European parliament elections. “If [the house] is not willing to support a deal in the coming days, and as it is not willing to support leaving without a deal on 29 March, then it is suggesting that there will need to be a much longer extension to article 50,” she said. Lidington went further. “If the house has not come together around a deal by Thursday next week, the only viable extension would be a long one,” he said during the debate. “We would have to hold the European parliament elections, and the government would facilitate a process with the house to consider the potential ways forward to reach a majority.” The European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, said on German radio on Wednesday morning that a decision on a delay to Brexit was unlikely at this week’s EU summit and the bloc’s leaders may have to meet again next week. Juncker told Germany’s Deutschlandfunk radio: “My impression is … that this week at the European council there will be no decision, but that we will probably have to meet again next week.” EU officials say they are still in the dark about what the prime minister is actually requesting. One said on Wednesday morning that despite reports of a letter being drafted, none had been received by Tusk, nor any details about the request for an extension of article 50. MPs will make a fresh attempt to seize control of the process. Labour’s Alison McGovern has tabled a motion under standing order 24, a parliamentary device that would allow a three-hour emergency debate. These are usually on neutral motions, simply saying parliament has debated an issue, but the Speaker hinted on Monday that more use could be made of them to force the government’s hand. He told the Labour MP Helen Goodman: “I think that she should reflect upon the opportunities that the standing order 24 procedure presents, because the opportunities are fuller than has traditionally been acknowledged or taken advantage of by members of the House of Commons.” McGovern, who has campaigned for Labour to support single market membership, said her aim was to hold the government to account.