A panel of lawyers assembled by the Brexit-backing European Research Group of Conservative MPs has rejected the last-ditch concessions secured by Theresa May from the EU27 on the Northern Ireland backstop, making it unlikely her deal will pass. MPs will get their second “meaningful vote” on the deal later on Tuesday, after the prime minister told her cabinet: “Today is the day.” But the ERG’s “star chamber” of lawyers, chaired by the veteran Eurosceptic MP Bill Cash, issued a statement saying the fresh reassurances won by the government “do not materially change the position the UK would find itself in if it were to ratify the withdrawal agreement”. The statement, which was published as the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, addressed MPs at Westminster, was signed by eight Brexit-supporting lawyers, including the former Brexit secretary Dominic Raab, and the Democratic Unionist party’s leader in the Commons, Nigel Dodds. It concluded: “In the light of our own legal analysis and others we do not recommend accepting the government’s motion today.” That suggests the DUP and the ERG are unlikely to vote for May’s deal on Tuesday evening, though it appears not to rule out thepossibility of abstentions. Addressing MPs, Cox urged MPs to make a “political judgement”, and support the deal. He published updated legal advice on Tuesday morning, suggesting the changes “reduce the risk,” of the UK being trapped indefinitely in the Northern Ireland backstop, but only in one narrow set of circumstances. Cox has been a key figure in the negotiations with Brussels in recent weeks, and his legal advice is regarded as crucial in convincing Brexiters to back the prime minister’s deal when she brings it back to the House of Commons later on Tuesday. However, his carefully couched judgment appears unlikely to win over many waverers. It suggested the likelihood of remaining in the backstop permanently has been reduced, but not eliminated, and that a unilateral exit would be possible only “insofar as that situation had been brought about by the bad faith or want of best endeavours of the EU”. The prime minister made a last-minute dash to Strasbourg on Monday night to clinch the deal with the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker. May’s deputy, David Lidington, then announced to MPs that the UK had secured three changes to the agreement the prime minister put before the Commons last Monday. These included a unilateral statement from the UK of the government’s interpretation of the backstop; a “joint interpretative instrument”, clarifying the fact that it is not intended to be permanent; and a joint political statement, signalling both sides’ intention that a new relationship will be in place by 2020, making the backstop unnecessary. Joint interpretative instrument A legal add-on to the withdrawal agreement. It gives legal force to a letter from Jean-Claude Juncker and Donald Tusk, the presidents of the commission and council, given to May in January. This stated the EU’s intention to negotiate an alternative to the backstop so it would not be triggered, or, if it was triggered, to get out of it as quickly as possible. Unilateral statement from the UK Sets out the British position that, if the backstop was to become permanent and talks on an alternative were going nowhere, the UK believes it would be able to exit the arrangement. Additional language in political declaration Emphasises the urgency felt on both sides to negotiate an alternative to the backstop, and flesh out what a technological fix would look like. However, this has failed to persuade the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, who said that while it 'reduces the risk' of the UK being trapped in a backstop indefinitely, it does not remove it. Daniel Boffey Cox’s advice says: “I now consider that the legally binding provisions of the joint instrument and the content of the unilateral declaration reduce the risk that the United Kingdom could be indefinitely and involuntarily detained within the protocol’s provisions at least in so far as that situation had been brought about by the bad faith or want of best endeavours of the EU.” He adds that if the backstop is triggered “simply because of intractable differences” between the two sides, the UK would be left with “no internationally lawful means of exiting the protocol’s arrangements, save by agreement”. That clearly falls short of the unilateral exit mechanism or clear time limit the government initially said it would seek from Brussels. May went from cabinet to speak to Tory backbench MPs in the 1922 Committee and urge them to support the deal. Leaving the room, the vice-chair of the ERG, Mark Francois, said “question after question after question was directed at her on the legal advice, and particularly on paragraph 19 where [Cox] makes the critical observation that the legal risk remains unchanged. Colleague after colleague asked the PM about that.” Francois said the decision would ultimately be up to individual MPs but suggested he would not back the deal. “Speaking purely and entirely for myself, I regret to say I found the prime minister’s answers wholly unconvincing.” Others left the room suggesting there was a small shift. One MP said he had seen “some movement” but grimaced when asked if it would be enough to swing the vote. The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer – himself a lawyer, who had said the overnight announcement changed nothing – said Cox’s advice showed the government’s strategy was “in tatters”. Attorney General confirms that there have been no significant changes to the Withdrawal Agreement despite the legal documents that were agreed last night. The Government’s strategy is now in tatters. pic.twitter.com/xBKJPy5WbL May herself will address the House of Commons , and MPs are expected to vote at about 7pm. Senior Tories expressed alarm at Cox’s careful choice of words on Tuesday, with one cabinet source saying, “That’s that then.” The former minister John Whittingdale said that while he was not a lawyer, Cox’s advice did not seem to offer the guarantees needed, particularly the final paragraph saying the legal risks were unchanged. “That final paragraph is pretty terminal,” he said. Despite Cox’s advice, the Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, sought to present the amended backstop as “a significant change”, and one which would, in effect, allow the UK to unilaterally exit the mechanism. As well as securing “legally binding” changes to the backstop to placate the Democratic Unionist party and the ERG, May was hoping to win over some Labour MPs, having announced a £1.6bn towns fund and strengthened promises on workers’ rights last week. But Labour sources suggested few had changed their minds, with the opportunity to extend article 50, which MPs will vote on on Thursday, removing the immediate threat of a no-deal Brexit and opening up the possibility of a softer deal.