Brexit is disastrous for our country. I’ve not been on a march since 1962 when I marched out of the army. However, I felt very strongly that I had to come here today. This is a fantastic march – unbelievable numbers. I’m in favour of trying to work together rather than in opposition because the world is in a very dangerous situation and leaving Europe just fragments it further – that leads to disastrous politics. So I hope – though I doubt – that Theresa May will listen to this huge objection to her strategy. So many more people now are aware of what the issues are – the collapse of our car manufacturing industry, banks going everywhere and anyone with any money is getting it out of the UK. We have to stop this or it will be disastrous for our country, our children and our future. I’m from Ireland but I’m at university in Glasgow. As a person who will still be in the EU even after Britain leaves, I think it’s important to have connections with the country I live in. I’m lucky that because of the Good Friday agreement I won’t have to apply for settled status after Brexit but I have friends from other European countries who don’t know what’s happening. For me, the EU means the freedom to move around. We can cooperate – as scientists we can share research and join forces. It’s better to work together. It’s important for people like me to be able to study in the UK and I hope today will mean those of us asking for a second referendum won’t just be pushed aside. This country is in crisis and what happens when people are in crisis? They come out to support each other, even if they’re stressed, even if they’re struggling. We’re not an army but we can get up on our feet like an army to let the politicians know. This march is a way of saying we care about the wellbeing of the whole country, because Brexit is going to affect everybody. Instead of whingeing about it, we felt we needed to make ourselves heard. It’s more important for our children than ourselves. It’s about their careers and the future. I’m fed up with hearing Theresa May talk about the numbers who voted to leave, when it was such a small majority. The “will of the people” is not all one way. For me, the EU means being part of something bigger, not fighting each other. I’m so disappointed with how divisive everyone has become, attacking each other. In 2016 I campaigned to remain. Unfortunately, we lost so now I’m doing all I can to get us the best deal possible on leaving – or, if possible, have a second referendum. I think today will definitely be a success in terms of alerting the government to how many people care about this issue. So many people have been disenfranchised in this process and we want our voices to be heard. If nothing else, I think the march will definitely have an impact on opening the politicians’ eyes. I am angry about what’s happened and I’m angry that the parties can’t put aside their politics and listen to what people have to say. This is the true voice of the people.