My heart is heavy. I’ve just returned from visiting my mum in Pakistan where I was stranded because armed conflict between the nuclear states of India and Pakistan shut down airports. After days of waiting and worrying, I could finally make my way back to Sydney. Growing up in Pakistan, the Kashmir conflict and hostility between Pakistan and India was just a fact of life. I experienced two wars as a young child, but it’s a whole other thing as an adult with a better sense of the world. It is scary and heartbreaking in equal measure. During one of my morning walks at a park close to my mum’s place in Lahore, I witnessed people eagerly discussing the “impending war”. Twitter immediately exploded with hashtags calling for war. That same day, I saw images on social media of young students in Mumbai, holding a banner calling for a bombing of Pakistan. It was terrifying to see people actually getting excited about the prospect of war. I felt a deep sense of despair each time, especially given the young age of those marching and beating the drums of war. The profound loss and tragedy of war, impossible to measure, is well known to the two nuclear-armed neighbours who have fought multiple wars since their independence from the British Raj. The region in the foothills of the Himalayas has been under dispute since India and Pakistan came into being in 1947. Both claim it in full, but each controls a section of the territory, separated by one of the world's most heavily militarised borders: the 'line of control' based on a ceasefire border established after a 1947-48 war. China controls another part in the east. India and Pakistan have gone to war three times over Kashmir, most recently in 1999. Artillery, mortar and small arms fire are still frequently exchanged. After the partition of colonial India 71 years ago, small, semi-autonomous 'princely states' across the subcontinent were being folded into India or Pakistan. The ruler of Kashmir dithered over which to join,  until tribal fighters entered from Pakistan intent on taking the region for Islamabad. Kashmir asked Delhi for assistance, signing a treaty of accession in exchange for the intervention of Indian troops, who fought the Pakistanis to the modern-day line of control. In 1948, the UN security council called for a referendum in Kashmir to determine which country the region would join, or whether it would become an independent state. The referendum has never been held. In its 1950 constitution, India granted Kashmir a large measure of independence. But since then it has eroded some of that autonomy and repeatedly intervened to rig elections, and dismiss and jail democratically elected leaders. There has been an armed insurgency against Indian rule over its section of Kashmir for the past three decades. Indian soldiers and Pakistan-backed guerillas fought a war replete with accusations of torture, forced disappearances and extra-judicial killing. Until 2004, the militancy was made up largely of Pakistani and Afghan fighters. Since then, especially after protests were quashed with extreme force in 2016, locals have made up a growing share of the anti-India fighters. For Indians, control of Kashmir – part of the country’s only Muslim-majority state – has been proof of its commitment to religious pluralism. For Pakistan, a state founded as a homeland for south Asian Muslims, it is the last occupied home of its co-religionists. Michael Safi Estimates put the possible death toll of a future full-scale war between India and Pakistan as high as two billion lives. As it stands, the two countries are on the brink of further escalation. So it is scary indeed when there is even the whiff of conflict. Kashmir has been, and will remain, a flashpoint for Pakistan and India. It is part of the mess left behind by the British when they finally gave up their colonial hold over South Asia. The real claim only lies with the people of Kashmir, who have suffered enough The sad reality is that Kashmiri voices are often completely drowned out. An entire generation of young Kashmiris have grown up and known nothing but conflict. Amnesty International reports that there have been more than 50,000 deaths since 1989. The United Nations Human Rights Office last year pointed to staggering human rights abuses that have gone unpunished for decades. Despite this, we rarely hear the voices of Kashmiris themselves. They were not allowed to determine their fate when the boundaries were drawn, and they have not been allowed to do so since. Self-interest and nationalistic rhetoric will never deliver justice to the people of Kashmir. Both countries stake a claim over this disputed area, but the real claim only lies with the people of Kashmir, who have suffered enough. Self-determination for the Kashmiri people is the only answer. Not intervention. Not militarism. On the international stage the situation in Kashmir seems to be a forgotten crisis. Despite the presence of the United National Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan, the international community has chosen to look away from the plight of Kashmiris in recent years. Those cheering for war with their jingoistic slogans calling for death to another country – and, by extension, its people – have either lost the essence of their humanity or they are completely oblivious of the history of death and devastation caused by armed conflict. But there are sparks of hope. In the face of war mongering, there are also those who are not hesitant to lend their voice to the cause of peace. It was very heartening to hear these many voices on both sides of the border. The hashtag #SayNotoWar started trending globally a few days into the conflict. Now is the time to take a moral stand. Just one look at the long-suffering people of Kashmir tells us that beating our chests and war drums can never be the answer. The only honest thing to do is stand alongside them in their struggle for self-determination and long-lasting peace. • Dr Mehreen Faruqi is a federal senator for New South Wales