Assault rifles and military-style semi-automatics have been banned in New Zealand after Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister, announced sweeping and immediate changes to gun laws following the Christchurch mosque shootings. “I absolutely believe there will be a common view amongst New Zealanders, those who use guns for legitimate purposes, and those who have never touched one, that the time for the mass and easy availability of these weapons must end. And today they will,” said Ardern. Parts that are used to convert guns into military-style semi-automatics (MSSAs) have also being banned, along with high-capacity magazines and parts that cause a firearm to generate semi-automatic, automatic or close-to-automatic gunfire. “In short, every semi-automatic weapon used in the terrorist attack on Friday will be banned in this country,” said Ardern. The ban on the sale of the weapons came into effect at 3pm on Thursday – the time of the press conference announcing the ban – with the prime minister warning that “all sales should now cease” of the weapons. Ardern also directed officials to develop a gun-buyback scheme for those who already own such weapons. She said “fair and reasonable compensation” would be paid. The buyback scheme is estimated to cost between NZ$100m and NZ$200m (£52m-£105m). Ardern said the government was still working out how to fund it. New Zealand, a country of fewer than 5 million people, has an estimated 1.2-1.5m firearms. The number of MSSA weapons is not known, but there are 13,500 firearms that require the owner to have an E-category licence, which the government is using to estimate the number of MSSAs. Stuart Nash, the minister of police, said they had “no idea” how many assault rifles were in circulation. “It’s part of the problem,” said Nash. “The prime minister gave a figure for the buyback [cost]; the reason there’s such a large gap is we have no idea. We have an indicative set of numbers around MSSAs.” “To owners who have legitimate uses for their guns, I want to reiterate that the actions being announced today are not because of you and are not directed at you,” Ardern said. “Our actions, on behalf of all New Zealanders, are directed at making sure this never happens again.” The measures were praised internationally, with Rebecca Peters, who helped lead the successful campaign to reform Australia’s gun laws in the 1990s, saying: “It’s been the fastest response ever by a government after a tragedy.” Sandy Hook happened 6 years ago and we can’t even get the Senate to hold a vote on universal background checks w/ #HR8.Christchurch happened, and within days New Zealand acted to get weapons of war out of the consumer market.This is what leadership looks like ⬇️ https://t.co/TcdR63anBt The US senator Bernie Sanders said: “This is what real action to stop gun violence looks like.” He called on the US to follow New Zealand’s lead. Dana Loesch, a spokesperson for the US National Rifle Association (NRA), responded to Sanders on Twitter saying: “The US isn’t NZ. While they do not have an inalienable right to bear arms and to self-defense, we do.” The announcement was welcomed by the New Zealand opposition leader Simon Bridges, who said his National party would “work constructively with the government” on the issue. “We agree that the public doesn’t need access to military-style semi-automatic weapons. National supports them being banned along with assault rifles,” he said. The Green party co-leader and the Police Association also welcomed the changes. “These are weapons that have been used to slaughter innocent children, women and men while they were at their most vulnerable – at prayer. It is a move we, as a community, can be proud of,” said Chris Cahill, president of the Police Association. New Zealand’s police commissioner, Mike Bush, urged people to surrender to police any weapons that had been reclassified as illegal. Police are asking people to contact them online to register firearms they need to surrender. Those who prefer not to do this online can call 0800 311 311. Bush urged New Zealanders not to walk into a police station carrying their weapon without calling ahead and warning police first. “The first step is to encourage people to do it voluntarily,” said Bush. “I’m sure that the majority of people will do so. We will then be working with people to ascertain if they haven’t complied and once that period of grace or amnesty goes those people can, and in all likelihood will be prosecuted.” One of the challenges facing New Zealand as it seeks to close loopholes in its gun laws and recover the now-banned weapons, is that it does not have a centralised register of guns in circulation. A second series of reforms will be presented to cabinet on Monday, including issues such as licensing, registration and storage. Ardern said the immediate changes were intended to take out of circulation the guns that were “most critical to be addressed urgently”. “There are a range of other amendments that we believe do need to be made and that will be the second tranche of reforms, yet to come.” Given the urgency of the legislation, Ardern said there would be a shortened select-committee process for the legislation and that she expected the amendments to the Arms Act to be passed within the next session of parliament on Monday.