A 17-year-old girl has been stabbed in east London, taking the death toll from homicides in the capital to 18 so far this year. She was named by the Metropolitan police on Saturday night as Jodie Chesney. Police responded to reports from the ambulance service of a stabbing in the Romford area at 9.25pm on Friday night. Chesney was pronounced dead at the scene in Harold Hill just over an hour later. No arrests have been made. A woman living nearby told Sky News she had heard loud arguing from the area, known as Amy’s Park, followed by a scream. “The scream was very disturbing to hear,” Krystle Pasha said. “Then I heard someone shouting out: ‘Help me, help me.’” She looked outside, but did not see anyone until police and ambulance crews arrived, she said. Officers sealed off the scene of the park on Saturday as detectives began a murder investigation. Forensics investigators appeared to be focusing on a playground at its centre. A small group of people cried and hugged each other after laying a bunch of flowers at the cordon on Saturday with the message: “We love you forever in our hearts.” Among those leaving tributes were Paul McGeary, a councillor who represents the Gooshays ward where the incident happened, and fellow councillor Tele Lawal. McGeary spoke of his shock that the killing had happened in the semi-rural outer London borough. “This is not something that happens here and I am just completely surprised,” he said. ”It is very shocking for the whole community. I think people will be talking to each other and hopefully providing support to the relatives of the unfortunate person who died.” Lawal said she used to play in the park when she was young. “It is not an area where you will frequently see violence like this,” she said. “It is going to shock our community but it just shows the strain that is happening with young people, with our police, and the resources we need in our community to tackle violence like this. “It is just so sad, the things that are happening in our community. We need to come together and definitely find a solution to tackling crime like this, because a 17-year-old girl should not have passed away.” The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, tweeted: Devastated by the fatal stabbing of a 17 year-old girl in Havering. My thoughts are with her loved ones.It fills me with anger that violent criminals are targeting young Londoners with their whole lives before them. I encourage anyone with information to contact the police. https://t.co/Ipzivn0qFK Police urge anyone with information to contact the incident room on 020 8345 3775, tweet @MetCC or call Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111.