The artist Carolee Schneemann has died at the age of 79. Last summer, she was one of the most intriguing interviewees in Rebel Women: The Great Art Fightback, a wonderful BBC4 documentary about the emergence of feminist performance art in the 60s and 70s. That documentary is exactly my idea of a great night in, and it was the first time I had seen many incredible, revolutionary artists speaking, from Suzanne Lacy to Judy Chicago. Although their work was all strikingly different, the stories they told were pitifully similar. They were derided and rubbished, and it took decades for most of these pioneers to find even a modicum of recognition in the mainstream art world. Talking about her Interior Scroll, from 1975, which saw her pulling a long stream of paper out of her vagina and reading from it, Schneemann said, dryly, that it “probably cost her a lot of nice teaching jobs”. Last week she was written about and remembered in revered and respectful tones, and time has eventually given her the place she deserves in art history. I did not learn about Schneemann during art lessons at school, obviously – on her website, 1964’s Meat Joy is described as having “the character of an erotic rite: excessive, indulgent, a celebration of flesh as material: raw fish, chickens, sausages, wet paint, transparent plastic, rope brushes, paper scrap”; in 1965’s Fuses, she made a film of herself having sex with her then partner, to represent the “energies of the body” – although I do remember trying to copy Mondrian using colouring pencils. Instead, I learned about her through a song, Hot Topic, by the band Le Tigre. It felt appropriate to be reminded of it during International Women’s Day, because Hot Topic should be its anthem; the song is a joyful celebration of (mostly) female artists, writers, musicians, activists and filmmakers, from Gertrude Stein to Angela Davis to Billie Jean King. And it was my introduction to many of these people, the first time I had heard of them, the spark that made me want to go and find out who Schneemann was. Becoming a teenager before the internet had truly taken hold meant that a lot of my cultural references came from music. The Holy Bible by Manic Street Preachers essentially gave me my early teens reading list. With a band like The 1975, named after a Kerouac inscription, that tradition continues. It leads to curiosity and discovery, and if it leads fans down avenues as eye-opening as finding out about Carolee Schneemann, long may these roundabout educations continue. Taylor Swift is on the cover of Elle magazine, and instead of doing an interview, she has written an essay: 30 Things I Learned Before Turning 30. The main lesson I learned before turning 30 was that wine is not a mixer, but Swift has bigger fish to fry. On principle, I am wary of celebrities writing pieces about themselves, which seems to be a growing and lamentable trend; how best to deflect criticism or analysis or independent interpretation than by writing the story yourself? But being a hypocrite and a glutton for punishment, I hoovered it up. I can’t help it: I am fascinated by Swift. Her 30 list is a curious read, half open, half defensive, a controlled portrait of how Swift would like you to see her. She is fond of Jamie Oliver and Nigella Lawson recipes. She has learned more about politics as she has grown up and will be getting more involved in countering what she calls the current “disgusting rhetoric”. She has some regrets about her ubiquitous Squad, and attributes her flashy girl gang phase to not being popular as a teenager, to which more astute fans may reply, duh. But it is lesson number seven that goes far beyond image curation. “I carry QuikClot army grade bandage dressing, which is for gunshot or stab wounds,” she wrote, admitting that after the Manchester Arena attack, the mass shooting at a music festival in Las Vegas and experiences with multiple stalkers, she fears for her fans’ and her own safety. People find it hard to elicit sympathy for famous people, and I often wonder why. Money aside, for the most part it sounds horrendous. World Book Day has an unusual effect on me. I’m generally resistant to organised fun, but I love this. It turns me from a social media grump into a delighted temporary auntie, beaming in the direction of the children of everyone I know, cooing over costumes that people have pulled together for their kids to wear to school. I go on an atypical liking spree: Matilda! Hermione! The cook from Alice in Wonderland, which, according to my nephew, definitely counts! Rachel Shenton, who won an Oscar for her short film, The Silent Child, used the day as an opportunity to urge authors to include more children with disabilities in their stories. The Silent Child is about a deaf six-year-old called Libby; Shenton said that her experience of making it taught her how important it was for “children to see themselves in the programmes and movies they watch and in the books they read… Never seeing themselves can be so demoralising, and makes their experiences seem invisible”. It seems so obvious, but it can’t be said enough: representation matters. Finding characters who are like them makes adults feel less alone. How powerful that must be for children.