Another match for Italy, another defeat – except this was their first in this Six Nations in which they finished a distant second, overwhelmed and overrun by an England side that should have been on the trail of the grand slam next weekend rather than hoping Wales fail to beat Ireland just before Scotland visit here. England’s collapse in the final quarter in Cardiff two weeks ago means the final round of the Six Nations will be more stimulating than a coronation in Twickenham but, should England finish runners-up having overrun the champions, Ireland, in Dublin and made France look like novices here, they will curse their failure to react in the Welsh capital as the home side gradually seized the initiative. The Italy head coach, Conor O’Shea, said after his side’s 21st consecutive defeat in the championship that he regarded England as the best team in it. They are the strongest: only three starters from the side that took the field in Rome last year were in the same positions here and only two of the replacements then were involved. Wales have taken the Six Nations by stealth rather than storm this year, adding up to more than the sum of their parts, while England have been impressive when a gameplan is working, less so than when it went wrong in the final 30 minutes in Cardiff and they failed to change their tactics as, for once, Jones did not look to his replacement backs for inspiration. It may all be over when the Scotland match kicks off here with Wales starting a couple of hours before but this has been a season in which the top four in the world rankings have picked each other off when expected to lose. Ireland will be fully armed in Cardiff but England should not be reliant on anyone else to secure a third title in four years in what has been their most impressive championship under Jones, one that should make them Europe’s flag-carrier in the World Cup. The return of Billy Vunipola and Manu Tuilagi has made a significant difference, making England less vulnerable when working with slow possession. Tom Curry has given them direction at the breakdown and they have greater energy in the front row. They also have Joe Cokanasiga on the right wing and, if he exasperated Jones by his constant tendency to carry the ball in one hand rather than tuck it under an arm, he showed he was far more than a big lump who defenders would rather did not charge at them. A minute had not elapsed when Cokanasiga caught a cross-kick, committed two defenders and flicked the ball out of the back of his hand to Curry who, in admiration or surprise, dropped the pass. Cokanasiga is a catalyst because he does not merely stick his head down and gallop but pictures the next phase of play. His opposite number Angelo Esposito is unlikely to sleep restfully for a while after an evening in which three of his four missed tackles led to tries, but it was England’s ability to manoeuvre the ball into space and force defenders to make decisions that distinguished them rather than their outsize three-quarter line. Italy could not think quickly enough after England abandoned their early kicking strategy that saw the prop Kyle Sinckler roll a grubber for Jonny May that bounced into touch rather than the wing’s hands. Their first try, on seven minutes, came from a lineout that was taken by Joe Launchbury at the front. As Italy massed their forces there, England worked the ball to the back and met little resistance on their way to the line for Jamie George to score. Italy quickly equalised through Tommaso Allan after the fly-half dummied into space and went for the line when he realised how close it was, but it was no more than a television programme being interrupted by an advert. Elliot Daly skipped out of Esposito’s tackle on halfway before freeing May and then Tuilagi, whose last try for England had been in 2014, left Espositio in a heap and Michele Campagnaro in pain on a 50-metre run to the line. Italy were unable to slow down the pace of the game. They did get a breather when Owen Farrell decided to kick a penalty under the posts but Brad Shields made it 31-7 to the home side at the break after Tuilagi had used Allan as a speed bump, and the centre scored his second try four minutes after the restart following Cokanasiga’s quick break with Esposito again left sprawled on the turf. The best that could be said about Italy was that they kept going. They lost three centres and ended up with a prop in the back row and were rewarded for their persistence with a try by Luca Morisi after some precise passing, but this was all about England. George Kruis scored their sixth try after charging down Jayden Hayward’s clearance, the replacement Dan Robson, who was given 19 minutes, finished off a move prompted by Daly and Cokanasiga before Shields finished it off with his second, having blocked Tito Tebaldi’s kick. England boosted their points difference but that will not work to their advantage should they finish level with Wales at the top of the table on Saturday evening having both won their final matches, Jones’s men with a bonus. A grand slam would be the trump card and England have the summer to reflect on what should have been, regardless of how the final matches play out. Test rugby may be more physical than ever but it is not just about size; it is the thought that counts.