The Opener Do not book a buffoon. People can’t cope,still finding seats and folding coats, heavywith home: they’ll barrack or shut down. Avoid, therefore, all turns with titleslike The Elongated Chump,Breezy Comedienne or Just Let Loose! See every house, before it settles,as a beast not fully backed into its cage.Don’t spook the bugger with a premature attack from Don’s Inebriated Dart-Blowers; a doseof Madame Zanza, Boneless in the Buffunless she’s very, very still. Aim for warmth, but not The Beneditti Three:Musicians in Fifty Positions –they generate too much too soon, While Harry Norton The Human Hydrantwould fill the Gents before the interval.Regurgitators always block the Ladies up. Never let fartistes on till the end;paper-tearers, shadowgraphists,Omnivores and infant mimics, not even then. Play safe, get someone big and jovialbut suitably restrained – unless that’s howthey’ve been described by the police. Keith Hutson’s first full-length collection, Baldwin’s Catholic Geese, follows his pamphlet Troupers and Routines: yes, the clues are in the titles. Hutson knows a vast amount about music hall but knows it with a grounded familiarity and personal affection. When he lines up his favourite acts and stars to perform in poems, the poetic platforms are a bit like those in the auditoria of small towns – their restrictions may be testing but they focus energy and ingenuity, and reveal the humanity behind the sequins and greasepaint. The Opener is poetry-reader friendly, tuning us in with its relish for naming names. The novelty acts and novelty-act categories are real, though some are remembered now only in theatrical archives. Hutson himself admits to not knowing what Baldwin’s Catholic Geese actually did, but records that they received a standing ovation for doing it at the Palace theatre, Halifax in the early 1900s. Perhaps they performed an outstanding ovulation, or honked a decade of the rosary in goose Latin. Half the fun of The Opener is that plenty is left to the imagination. It bounces along, wheels sprung by the catalogue of names, in an old-timer impresario’s monologue on the opening acts best avoided if you want to get the audience on side. The speaker’s diction is faintly pedantic and prescriptive at first (“do not”, “therefore”). In the third stanza, he unexpectedly shows his teeth with a defensive metaphor describing the assembling audience “as a beast not fully backed into its cage”. The warmth in the mock-comic warning, “Don’t spook the bugger with a premature attack”, suggests there were a few scars to his psyche and box office before he learned the rules. And it signals an interesting shift in the manner of delivery. Now, with increased confidence, the impresario himself becomes a performer, a comic with an incorrigible ear for an innuendo. “Madame Zanza, Boneless in the Buff” would be high risk, he warns, “unless she’s very, very still” and “The Beneditti Three: Musicians in Fifty Positions” would “generate too much [warmth] too soon”. The alliterative names of the acts, and that sudden fizz of rhyme in “Musicians”/ “positions”, contrast merrily with the simple crispness of the punchlines. It’s interesting that in discussions of theatre, high and lowbrow alike, the sheer discomfort of theatre-going is generally overlooked. This poem captures it almost at once. The first piece of advice, “Do not book a buffoon,” is explained by the fact that people arriving in a theatre are in a transitional state, “still finding seats and folding coats, heavy / with home”. Plumbing practicalities dominate the sixth stanza, and evoke another kind of physical discomfort, beginning with the disturbing spectacle of Harry Norton The Human Hydrant. As you gulp and read on, please note that “Regurgitators” is a reference to the profession of regurgitation (gulp gulp). The sight of the human hydrant would at worst make you want to pee: less watery regurgitators could have a more serious effect, as the poem may be hinting in “block the Ladies up” – although theatrical ladies’ loo queues are inevitable, with or without regurgitation. The generic list in the penultimate stanza reminds us of performance skills we’ve lost, though surely it wasn’t that long ago I goggled admiringly at paper-tearers and shadowgraphists on black-and-white TV? The impresario dismisses them all airily, but saves his best punchline for the last stanza: “Play safe, get someone big and jovial / but suitably restrained – unless that’s how / they’ve been described by the police.” It reminds us of another unglamorous side of the profession. Sombre strands twist throughout the book’s bright weave. The novelty actor’s body contorts itself to earn its bread: the theatrical establishment is not squeamish about exploiting disability. One of the most emotionally affecting poems, Light Brigade, features a lance corporal who lost both legs in the Battle of Balaclava: he rounds up a team of severely disabled children and teaches them to jump. “Theirs was not // to reason why, when he said Jump, but ask / How high?” MacCauley’s Leaping Infants were a success: “Ten years without praise: laughter, instead, / kept both MacCauley and his army fed.” The poem is dedicated to those children. Many of the poems have dedications, in fact, and represent the big names as movingly and humorously as the forgotten support acts – George Formby, Gracie Fields, Les Dawson among them, letting down their guard, or maintaining heroic irascibility. Harmonising rhyme-light symmetrical structures with naturally stressed vocal patterns, Hutson’s lines accommodate terse description, slogans, moments of pathos, pregnant pauses, comic punchlines – all the brilliant patter, but in a voice that resists exaggeration. The collection delivers the comedy and oddity its title promises, but amounts to very much more than a novelty act. It’s a commemoration.   