Thousands of protesters calling for Brexit are rallying outside parliament after MPs inside voted down Theresa May’s withdrawal agreement on the day the UK was supposed to be leaving the EU. Leave Means Leave supporters lined past parliament as a March To Leave procession that started in Sunderland two weeks ago headed for Westminster. Traffic came to a standstill around Parliament Square as Brexit backers blocked the road while chanting “we shall not be moved”, “Brexit now” and “Bye bye EU”. Some moved on to chants of “Oh, Tommy Robinson”, in support of the English Defence League founder who is now advising Ukip and will later address crowds. Robinson, real name Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, was playing his hour-long film attacking the BBC from a large stage on Parliament Street on Friday afternoon as demonstrators gathered outside the Palace of Westminster. Hundreds of people stood in front of the stage, which is officially organised by Ukip, with many more pouring across as Robinson began speaking. Thousands more sat on the grass of Parliament Square enjoying the sunshine, awaiting the arrival of Nigel Farage’s March to Leave. A group of four men milling around on Parliament Street said they had attended the protests outside Parliament on Friday because they “believe in freedom”. Although initially confrontational at being approached by a reporter, they were happy to talk about politics. “David Cameron said it was a vote once in a lifetime,” said one. “Was he talking about a hamster’s lifetime or a human lifetime?” Three of the men, Greek by descent, said the EU’s treatment of the leftwing government in Greece was a major reason for their opposition to the UK’s continuing membership. “We are here for freedom, democracy and peace,” said another. “We’re not fascists, we’re not racists, we’re not even English – our parents are immigrants from abroad. But we love this country more than some English people do.” All said they had supported Labour, until the party’s recent antisemitism crisis. A fourth man in the group, who identified himself as a former Tory turned UKIP member, added: “All leavers want more immigration from the common market – it’s the EU that’s racist by only including Europeans.” Irene Foster, 71, was in Parliament Square, carrying a banner saying: “No to EU.” She, her husband and her friend had all travelled from east Devon to join the demonstration. “I’m old enough to remember what happened when we joined the EU,” Foster said. “Factories were bribed to take the stuff over to EU countries. Out workers were sent over there to show them to use the stuff and when they came back they had no jobs.” Her husband, Paul, 70, said he hoped the UK would leave the EU soon. “This is what we were promised, that leave means leave, and they are all going back on their word now,” he said. Irene said: “The majority of people voted to leave.” Her husband added that if Brexit did not happen, “there’s going to be some very angry people up and down the country”. A coalition of rightwing, pro-Brexit groups were expected to converge on Parliament Square throughout the day. Thousands of supporters of Ukip and Robinson were expected to gather at a stage outside the Red Lion on Parliament Street, under the banner “Make Brexit happen”. At the same time, several thousand more had applied for tickets to a Parliament Square “rally to save Brexit”, organised by Farage’s political vehicle, Leave Means Leave. Their numbers were expected to be bolstered by the Democratic Football Lads Alliance, who had called on supporters to begin gathering in nearby pubs from the early afternoon. Stand Up To Racism were to stage a counter-demo on Richmond Terrace, with a potential march to Whitehall. Weyman Bennett, organiser of Stand Up To Racism, said: “Their protest this Friday is not a genuine demonstration about Brexit, it’s simply a platform to spread their extreme far-right agenda. “Robinson and UKIP are promoting a vile Islamophobic, racist agenda, along with their violent friends in the Democratic Football Lads Alliance. They want to create a far-right street movement and build support for Ukip off the backs of Theresa May’s Brexit crisis. “Whether we voted leave or remain in the EU referendum, anti-racists will not allow the far right to set the agenda and divide us.”