A third teenager has died after a crush at a hotel on St Patrick’s Day in Northern Ireland, police have said. Mark Hamilton, an assistant chief constable with the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI), confirmed a 17-year-old boy, a 17-year-old girl and a 16-year-old boy had died. “It is heartbreaking an event which should have been fun should end in such a terrible tragedy,” he told reporters at the scene. A 16-year-old girl is in a stable condition in hospital, and two other teenagers were injured in the incident in Cookstown, County Tyrone. “Our preliminary investigations show there was a crush towards the front door of this hotel. There looks like there was a large crowd of young people pushing up against the hotel,” Hamilton said. He made a direct appeal for people with footage of the incident to give it to the police, rather than post it on social media. Earlier, the PSNI said family members had been informed after two people were confirmed to have died and one was in a critical condition in hospital. Police had urged parents via Twitter to pick up children attending a St Patrick’s Day event the venue had been hosting. Emma Heatherington, whose two sons, aged 17 and 18, had been at the event, said she “felt sick” when she saw the police appeal. “My two boys were there so I rang them, shaking and thankfully got them both,” she said. “They were on their way home at that stage. They say there was a huge crowd waiting to get into the venue and then a lot of commotion up near the front of the queue, then they said the emergency services arrived and they were all asked to leave. “They came home very shaken with rumours that some people had died.” Hamilton said: “While the exact cause of the incident is still unknown, there are reports of a crush at the scene. At this stage, the cause of the incident is unknown. However, police have commenced a full investigation into the circumstances.” The incident at Greenvale Hotel occurred at about 9.30pm. The Northern Ireland ambulance service said it had received several calls on Sunday evening following reports of people having sustained serious injuries. “NIAS despatched two rapid-response paramedics, two doctors and five emergency crews to the scene,” it said. Colin Neill, the chief executive of Hospitality Ulster, said: “We are devastated to hear of the confirmed PSNI report … This is shocking and tragic news, and our thoughts and prayers are with the families of the deceased.” The Democratic Unionist party leader, Arlene Foster, tweeted that her “thoughts and prayers” were “with everyone impacted by this tonight”. Press Association contributed to this report