Hallie Rubenhold is determined to subvert everything we know about Jack the Ripper, and she does it in style. She asks me to meet her in the most froufrou cafe in Knightsbridge, an Instagrammable shrine of flowers and unicorn statues. It is a strange place to discuss murder, especially the five infamous killings committed on the other side of London, in 19th-century Whitechapel. But we’re making a trip to the home of Annie Chapman, the Ripper’s second victim, a white three-storey house just minutes from Harrods, and now worth £3.5m. “Just think, we’re as far away from Jack the Ripper as we can get,” Rubenhold says – and that’s exactly where the social historian wants to be. Away from the myths about London’s most famous serial killer that have solidified over the last 130 years. And away from the Ripperologists, the armchair historians who are furious that she has dared question the existing narratives around their favourite case. Instead, Rubenhold is entirely focused on the five women who were brutally murdered – Mary Ann “Polly” Nicholls, Annie Chapman, Catherine Eddowes, Elizabeth Stride and Mary Jane Kelly – in just nine weeks in 1888. “For too long there has been this idea that these women were all the same. A nameless, faceless mass of grubby, disgusting people, indistinguishable from one another. And they aren’t,” she says. “They only ended up in the same place.” Though The Five is not the first book to explore the lives of the Ripper victims, it is the first to avoid any speculation as to the identity of their killer. It also declines to dwell on their final moments, a stark and deliberate omission. “We go over and over the mutilations and eviscerations,” Rubenhold says. “We don’t need to know any more about that. We always start with the murders, then focus on who Jack the Ripper was, to the point that he has become a supernatural creature, like Dracula or Frankenstein’s monster. But he was a real person, who killed real people. This all happened. And our disassociation from the reality is what dehumanised these women. They have just become corpses. Can’t we do better?” Born in Los Angeles, 47-year-old Rubenhold came to the UK two decades ago to specialise in British history. Uninterested in stories about kings, queens and generals, she discovered her love for exposing the details of ordinary lives while she was working as an assistant curator at the National Portrait Gallery. She produced two books about Harris’s List of Covent Garden Ladies, a sort of Georgian TripAdvisor for the area’s sex workers, and wrote about women who flouted societal expectations; women such as Lady Seymour Dorothy Worsley, whose lurid public separation from her husband she examined in Lady Worsley’s Whim. Beginning The Five with the idea of focusing on the most famous sex workers in history, Rubenhold was shocked by what she found while searching through coroner inquests, medical, workhouse and police records, and sensationalist newspaper reports – or rather, what she didn’t find. There was no evidence that three of the women – Polly, Annie and Catherine – were sex workers at all. Instead, Polly and Catherine had worked as domestic servants or in laundries, and Annie was supported by her husband, who worked as a private coachman. Evidence of sex work simply wasn’t there. But this has been overlooked, because it isn’t part of the accepted story The other two victims were sex workers, though Swedish-born Elizabeth mostly worked as a maid in Gothenburg and Hyde Park, and opened a coffee shop in Poplar, east London. Even 25-year-old Mary Jane Kelly, the only one of the five not in her 40s and the only one labelled “prostitute” on her death certificate, showed hints of an education and targeted well‑to-do clients in the West End while living in Knightsbridge. So the century-old idea that the Ripper preyed only on rouge-cheeked women sauntering under east London’s gas lights may not be true at all; Rubenhold’s theory, given the position of the bodies (all reclining and outdoors, except for Mary Jane, who was found inside her home), is that they were killed while sleeping rough. “The more I looked for evidence of sex work, the more I found that it just simply wasn’t there,” Rubenhold says. “What I found instead was a lot of convoluted, confused definition of what prostitution was among the working classes and the poor. It is all bound up with sexual practices, partnerships, sex outside of marriage, how people lived with each other – all totally at odds with what we call ‘Victorian morality’.” But that morality was determined “by the dominant upper class, not the majority working class. We have a cognitive bias – this lack of evidence has been conveniently overlooked, because it isn’t part of the accepted story.” In the 19th century, 70,000 people roamed London without knowing where they would sleep that night; when the Ripper stalked the streets in 1888, between 200 and 600 people were sleeping in Trafalgar Square alone. So though sex riled the middle and upper classes, the working class was not so precious. Privacy was a luxury, a bed partner meant protection and sex work was so ubiquitous, Rubenhold argues, that acquaintances of Polly, Annie or Catherine would have been clear if the women were doing it. At Polly’s inquest, a friend from the workhouse outright denied that she lived “a fast life”, even saying that she “seemed very much afraid of it”. A year before the murders, London police had been ordered to stop accusing solitary women at night of being prostitutes, after one woman was falsely charged while out buying gloves. But women still bore what Rubenhold calls “the most cumbersome weight of all” – sexual and moral immaculacy – which meant an unaccompanied homeless woman, especially one in notorious Whitechapel, would have been assumed to be soliciting. Newspapers around the country, desperate to cover the salacious story, embellished and fabricated quotes and questioned the women’s characters: “The media really pushed the idea that these women were asking for it.” Rubenhold says. “These were bad women, out at night. They were dispossessed. They were no longer the angel in the house, or a part of marriages and families. Therefore, they needed to be punished.” Just after the death of Annie, Edward Fairfield, who worked for the Colonial Office, wrote to the Times: “The horror and excitement caused by the murder of the four Whitechapel outcasts imply a universal belief that they had a right to life … if they had, then they had the further right to hire shelter from the bitterness of the English night. If they had no such right, then it was, on the whole, a good thing that they fell in with the unknown surgical genius.” For years, Annie had lived just streets away from Fairfield – but dying drunk and homeless in Whitechapel made her as good as a whore in his eyes. Instead of a shared profession, what the five had in common was tragedy. It is striking, when reading their stories, how easy it is to understand why they fled their homes, why they turned to drink. Polly enjoyed a short-lived step up the social ladder when she moved into Peabody housing with her family, then endured the indignity of watching her husband fall in love with a younger neighbour. Six of Annie’s eight children were born – some living only briefly – with some physical impact from her alcoholism, which would also cause her husband to throw her out of their Knightsbridge home. Catherine was an orphan and vagrant, taking her two children with her to the workhouse or prison, away from her physically abusive husband; a third baby starved in her arms. Rubenhold believes Mary Jane narrowly escaped being trafficked to mainland Europe – she returned hastily from a trip to Paris – a common experience among sex workers at the time. And as a young maid in Sweden, Elizabeth was placed on a “register of shame”. She was unmarried and pregnant – probably by her employer – and so suspected of being a sex worker. Her new status left her unable to get any work other than on the streets. The last years of her life in London were peppered with drunken, angry incidents that Rubenhold suggests could have been the first signs of neurosyphilis, disguised by heavy drinking. “Her desire to numb herself and rage at the world,” Rubenhold believes, “was a natural one.” At times, she had to stop writing as she was “so upset and furious” at the ways society had failed the five. The book ends with a conclusion titled “Just prostitutes”, in which Rubenhold confronts the Ripper “industry” for dismissing evidence that the five were not all sex workers, for perpetuating “the belief that there are good women and bad women; madonnas and whores”. Historians, too, have failed to challenge the myth. “It is negligent of us not to tell the stories of people who had no voice,” she says. “It is morally wrong, to continue excluding people and only consider the privileged. We’re lying to people when we do that.” That The Five is out now is “complete serendipity”, arriving post #MeToo when publishers are searching for more women writing about women, and true crime fans are examining their own interest in killers such as Ted Bundy, and the often overlooked victims. (The Five has already been optioned for TV.) She’s been receiving criticism from Ripperologists for the last eight months; one forum thread dedicated to pulling apart her book in advance of its publication extends to more than 100 pages of comments. “It is tantamount to a witchhunt,” she says. “A woman is saying things they don’t like. They think, ‘You can’t write about this or be an authority on this unless you come through us, or talk about our work, you can’t be accepted.’ They’re disparaging me as a person and a book they haven’t read. It is extraordinary.” As for the identity of the Ripper, she simply doesn’t care. “And I can’t see a situation where we ever find out. But at the end of the day, it is really not that important. Jack the Ripper is dead.” She gives a weary smile. “People hate me already, but they’re really going to hate me for saying that. Some people say they’re only interested in the Ripper because they want justice for his victims. No, justice is served when we respect them as five human beings. Finding their killer is utterly irrelevant. Time to move on.” • The Five is published by Doubleday (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.