Election regulators are actively making contingency plans for the possibility of taking part in European elections in May if Brexit is delayed beyond that point, it has emerged. Sources also say discussions have been taking place between Conservative central office and the party’s MEPs over what to do if a European election takes place in the UK. While the government is adamant it does not want any extension to the Brexit deadline to go beyond the elections, which would take place in 10 weeks’ time, officials are preparing for the possibility of MPs seeking a longer delay, thus requiring the election of new UK MEPs. One of Theresa May’s ministers denied any contingency planning was happening. At Cabinet Office questions on Wednesday, Brandon Lewis was asked by the Labour MP Cat Smith about the call involving returning officers. “It is simply not true,” he said. Officials from the Cabinet Office took part in a conference call on Monday with regional returning officers, who would be in charge of organising the polls. A Cabinet Office spokeswoman said the government had not instigated the process. She said: “We have not asked anyone to start contingency planning for the European parliamentary elections.” But the Electoral Commission said a conference call did take place. This involved the Electoral Coordination and Advisory Board, which brings together the regional returning officers and Cabinet Office officials, and meets regularly. A spokesman for the commission said: “The board has discussed contingency planning for an unscheduled European parliamentary election so that the electoral community would be able to swiftly take the necessary action should circumstances change and these elections need to be held. “The electoral community are experienced in delivering well-run elections but, as with any electoral event, the shorter the lead in time, the more difficult it would be to deliver a well-run poll.” The commission already has a contingency budget in place in case the European elections go ahead. It was, the spokesman added, “for the UK government to decide” if they actually do. Also, officials from Conservative campaign headquarters have “sounded out” the party’s representatives in Brussels and Strasbourg about the possibility of standing again, sources said. One senior Conservative said: “In the course of occasional chats, it was raised this week, half in jest, half not. Let’s face it, it could happen.” A separate source said MEPs had held discussions with party officials over what they might do if there is another election. A Conservative Party spokesman denied that there were any plans by the party for the European elections. “CCHQ is not planning for the European parliamentary elections,” he said. Pro-Brexit forces such as Ukip and Nigel Farage’s proposed new party have vowed to campaign heavily if there is sufficient delay to departure to oblige new elections. One potential complication for those taking part in the elections is that given the short notice, the so-called regulated period for political parties and non-party campaigners, which lays down rules on how much they can spend, would date back to 23 January. This would mean they would have to report and account for any spending back to that date.