MPs backing a soft Brexit are hoping to forge compromise options to be put to parliament when the next round of indicative votes take place in the House of Commons. Supporters of a Norway-style approach, dubbed “common market 2.0”, as well those MPs backing a customs union, hope they can come together and attract a majority for a form of soft Brexit. Discussions are taking place to persuade the Labour frontbench to adopt more broadly appealing wording for a softer Brexit proposal, rather than put their own version of a Labour Brexit deal as one of the options in the next round of voting. Unless Theresa May’s deal passes on Friday, MPs are expecting to vote again on a series of Brexit options on Monday, using a similar system to the first round of voting this Wednesday, where options are put down by MPs and selected by the speaker. In total on Wednesday, the option with the broadest support overall was Tory Ken Clarke’s motion for a customs union, which lost by just eight votes. However, 37 Conservatives voted for the common market 2.0 option on Wednesday, authored by the Conservative Nick Boles and Labour’s Stephen Kinnock, the highest number of any soft Brexit option. Labour did not whip its MPs to vote for Boles’ common market 2.0 motion, though MPs were whipped to support Clarke’s customs union motion. “There are lots of discussions about how to maintain momentum for a soft Brexit,” one senior Labour MP involved in the discussions said. “We should try to find a way of splicing together Labour’s alternative plan, Ken Clarke’s customs union and common market 2.0. But if you go too hard on the customs union aspect then you lose a lot of Tory MPs. “If we can find a form of words that keeps enough Tories on board, that folds in Labour’s plan, we can get one motion for a sensible, pragmatic, bridge-building Brexit.” Corbyn has held multiple meetings with Boles, Kinnock and its other key supporters and is understood to be sympathetic to the proposal. However, Labour is likely to come under a lot of internal pressure to table both its own separate plan and to whip again for a second referendum. Backers of a referendum have also discussed whether they can add a confirmatory referendum to any Brexit option that can command the most support. Some are also keen to see a reworking of SNP MP Joanna Cherry’s motion to revoke article 50 in the event of no deal, which Labour were previously whipped to abstain on. Peter Kyle, one of the MPs who has spearheaded the idea of a confirmatory referendum, suggested it would be difficult to attach a referendum to another Brexit option. “It feels odd attaching a process to a proposition,” he said. “Today we’ve been exploring all the different options to see how we can interpret what the Commons was telling us yesterday and it looks like the compromise needs to be explored more fully in the context that will emerge after tomorrow’s vote.” A referendum still faces substantial opposition within the Labour party, though its opponents were surprised by the amount of support the motion by Margaret Beckett commanded – 80% of the Labour parliamentary party. In total, 27 Labour MPs voted against the motion – which lost by a majority of 27. Shadow housing minister Melanie Onn quit her post to vote against the motion of a confirmatory referendum. The party chair, Ian Lavery, shadow cabinet office minister Jon Trickett and the shadow communities secretary, Andrew Gwynne, also abstained, despite a three-line whip to back the option of a second referendum. A number of shadow ministers also abstained on the vote, including Gloria De Piero, Jim McMahon, Tracy Brabin and Jo Platt. Several Labour MPs told the Guardian they had made angry complaints to their whips about the abstentions on Wednesday night of three shadow cabinet ministers. Labour sources said the three had been spoken to by the whips but the vote had been “exceptional circumstances” and it was unlikely further action would be taken. Among those who voted against the motion was the former shadow cabinet minister Dan Jarvis, who is now also mayor of the Sheffield city region. In a post on Twitter, Jarvis said he was against a new referendum before the final terms of the UK’s future relationship were known. “Such a move would both ignore the democratic legitimacy of the 2016 referendum and would also repeat the mistake of giving the public insufficient information on which to make an informed choice,” he wrote. Jarvis, the MP for Barnsley, acknowledged that party policy was to keep the option of a referendum, but said that had not been the policy at the 2017 general election. “I do not believe that each September we Labour party members can retrospectively rewrite the platforms on which our MPs were elected,” he said.