Château Le Maine Martin Supérieur Vieilles Vignes, Bordeaux, France 2013 (£11.65, Les Caves de Pyrene) Bordeaux is the world’s most famous wine region. For many it’s also the best. But its reputation rests on a few select wines – with prices that are out of reach of all but the richest. According to the comparison website Wine-Searcher, the average price for a bottle of Château Lafite is £731, a bargain next to Petrus, which comes in at a cool £2,439. These prices cover retailers around the world and different (often rare) vintages. But it’s easy to see why many feel alienated by the region. If you’re locked out from the best, why bother with the rest when there’s so much of affordable interest elsewhere? Château Le Maine Martin provides one answer: its joyous unoaked bright fruitiness shows good red Bordeaux needn’t cost the earth. Château du Champ des Treilles Le Petit Champ, Sainte-Foy-Bordeaux, France 2016 (£14.53, Vine Trail) The region has rather fallen out of fashion for a whole generation of wine-drinkers. For the trendier, natural-wine sympathetic sommelier, Bordeaux has a reputation for being stuffy when compared to the exciting small producers in of-the-moment French regions, such as the Jura, the Loire, the Rhône and Burgundy. A recent London event run by one of the UK’s best wine importers, Vine Trail, sought to challenge that, showcasing what is a large and varied region with plenty of interesting experimental vignerons. Among the highlights were the startlingly gossamer-silky, pure red Burgundy-like Haut Médoc Miracle 2016 from Japanese winemaker Osamu Uchida (£25.97) and the supple, sappy, fresh black fruit of Le Petit Champ. Château Fleur Haut Gaussens La Bergeronette, Bordeaux France 2016 (£15.75, Berry Bros & Rudd) The Vine Trail event showed there’s plenty of interesting stuff going on in all corners of Bordeaux, not just in the appellations where the big names cluster. Château du Champ des Treilles (above) has its vineyards in the unfashionable far east of the region, near Bergerac, while Château Beynat 2016 (£11.57, Vine Trail), with its aromatic red cherry and raspberry succulence, shows how the reds of Castillon Cotes de Bordeaux can make delicious reds to rival those of its famous and pricier neighbour St-Emilion. The latter is a blend of merlot and a variety that is becoming increasingly fashionable in Bordeaux, cabernet franc, which is given a rare 100% outing in La Bergeronette, a deliciously fragrant and fresh red on offer with a 30% discount until tomorrow at Bordeaux-loving merchant Berry Bros. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach