Born in London, Adwoa Aboah, 26, began to model while studying drama at Brunel University. The founder of Gurls Talk, an online platform for discussion about mental health, body image and sexuality, in 2017 she was the first cover star of Edward Enninful’s Vogue magazine, and was named GQ Woman of the Year. This year, Barbie is celebrating its 60th anniversary with a new “sheroes” role-model range, including an Adwoa doll. When were you happiest? On a walking safari in the middle of the Kenyan bush. I had no phone, no mirror, nothing, and I was really happy because I had no distractions. Which living person do you most admire, and why? Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie – everything she writes speaks to me. Her Ted talk, We Should All Be Feminists, inspired everything I do with Gurls Talk. What is your most treasured possession? A Prada coat that I bought when I didn’t have enough money to be buying Prada coats. It was a gift for all the work that I had done on myself, but I was skint afterwards. I am really sentimental and hoard a lot of stuff in my house. What is your wallpaper? English phone is my sister, American is my boyfriend. Who would play you in the film of your life? Morgan Freeman. What is your favourite word? Beauty. What is your guiltiest pleasure? Eating bowls of ice. I am obsessed with eating ice. What is top of your bucket list? To see the gorillas in Uganda. What did you want to be when you were growing up? I wanted to be a cooker. Not a cook: I wanted to actually be the stove. If you could go back in time, where would you go?I’d pop to Victorian England, and 90s New York and LA. What do you owe your parents? My happiness. What or who is the greatest love of your life? My sister. Which words or phrases do you most overuse? You know what I mean? And mega. If you could edit your past, what would you change? Nothing. Everything’s got me to this point and I had to learn lots of things. Maybe I just wouldn’t have been so terrified all the time and I would have got up a bit earlier – I missed quite a few mornings. What single thing would improve the quality of your life? They are already things I work on: routine and less sugar. What do you consider your greatest achievement? Gurls Talk. What keeps you awake at night? Manic anxiety. What song would you like played at your funeral? The whole of The Miseducation Of Lauryn Hill. How would you like to be remembered? For persevering, and being a good role model. What is the most important lesson life has taught you? That being honest with yourself and other people around you solves a lot of issues.