China has set its lowest growth target in nearly three decades as premier Li Keqiang warned of “tough” challenges facing the world’s second-largest economy. He set the country’s growth at 6.0 to 6.5%, down from a target of 6.5% last year. In 1990, growth sank to 3.9% because of international sanctions sparked by the Tiananmen square protests. Growth in 2018 was 6.6%, the slowest rate since 1990. Li said that “in pursuing development this year, we will face a graver and more complicated environment as well as risks and challenges”, in a report to be given to the opening of the National People’s Congress, China’s legislative body, on Tuesday. “We must be fully prepared for a tough struggle,” he said, according to prepared remarks. Li also changed China’s new GDP target to a band rather than a specific figure, which has happened only once before, in 2016 when growth was slowing. Outlining “severe challenges” China faced in the past year, Li blamed internal and external risks including “mounting protectionism and unilateralism” – a nod to US sanctions – and slowing domestic demand. “Downward pressure on the Chinese economy continues to increase, growth in consumption is slowing, and growth in effective investment lacks momentum. The real economy faces many difficulties,” Li said. As the economy slows, officials are most worried about mass unemployment and the prospect of social discontent and instability. Li promised tax cuts for manufacturing, transportation and other sectors and measures to increase employment. He also said funding for private businesses would be increased, pledging to increase loans by state-owned banks to small and micro businesses by more than 30%. Li also acknowledged existing sources of instability after a year in which hundreds of parents protested over faulty vaccines, veterans demonstrated over their pensions, and workers and students mobilised in labour strikes. “There is still public dissatisfaction in many areas, such as education, healthcare, elderly care, housing, food and drug safety, and income distribution. Last year saw the occurrence of a number of public safety incidents and major workplace incidents. The lessons these incidents left us with should never be forgotten,” he said. In 2017, China’s economy expanded at 6.6% as a government campaign to root out risky financial debt hit spending by local governments and companies. A protracted trade war with the US has also hit consumer and business confidence. China’s largest political event, a meeting of legislative delegates and political advisers nicknamed the “two sessions” or lianghui, gets under way this week. The largely ceremonial event takes place as the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, faces the most difficult test of his term. The Communist party has long described social stability as predicated on economic development. The Chinese leadership is expected to offer assurances in the form of support for the economy and citizens. In a report on local and central budgets for 2019, officials pledged to focus on preventing local government debt risk, increasing consumer spending and reforming its dominant state sector of state-owned enterprises. So far officials have focused on politics, with Xi calling for strict adherence to ideological work. In Li’s work report on Tuesday, he outlined following “the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought” as the first core principle. This year is a year of sensitive anniversaries, including the 70th anniversary or the founding of the People’s Republic of China as well as the 30th anniversary of the crackdown on Tiananmen Square protests in 1989. 