Behind a hedge in the middle of a field in Shropshire, there is a grassy mound that looks like an overgrown spoil heap. It would be an unremarkable feature in this ancient agricultural landscape, were it not for the fact that it has a little stone doorway in its side. Step through and you find yourself in an atmospheric domed chamber where round stone pillars frame rows of candlelit niches. All that’s missing is Gandalf sitting in the corner, preparing his next spell. More than 5,000 years after our neolithic ancestors built great burial barrows (or mounds) across the land, a Shropshire farmer is reviving the tradition – and he’d rather you didn’t mention druids. “People like to pump mysticism into this stuff,” says Tim Ashton, standing in wellies and a tweed coat outside his new barrow. “But the people who built Stonehenge and the first barrows weren’t a bunch of wishy-washy people in white robes. They were practical farmers like me.” After studying law at Oxford then working as a barrister in Los Angeles, Ashton returned to his family farm at Soulton Hall, near the market town of Wem, to pursue environmentally friendly, no-till farming. After seeing another farmer’s project to build a barrow in Wiltshire, Ashton was spellbound, and decided to add a lasting feature to the land his family has worked for generations. “It took me back to memories of childhood holidays in Anglesey,” he says, “where we stayed in a cottage near a neolithic barrow. When you are four, the idea that you can walk inside a hill is fascinating.” It remains so today. Pauline Dee, a local councillor whose husband Terry’s ashes now rest in one of the burial barrow’s niches, describes how her grandchildren came to help lay the structure’s foundation stone and have enjoyed visiting it since. “It wasn’t a depressing experience like a cemetery can be,” she says. “It’s something they’ll remember for ever and be able to come back to.” Terry’s ashes are contained in a wooden casket secured behind a stone panel carved with an image of hands clasped in prayer. It’s based on a painting Terry gave Dee soon after they met 60 years ago. Dee says her ashes will be going in the barrow too, as will her dog Gigi’s, while her best friends have reserved the niches opposite, so they can all keep each other company down the years. “We love this area so much,” she says. “It’s great to think that we will literally be part of the landscape for ever.” A pair of standing stones mark the way to the mound, which has been aligned to the east, meaning the sun’s rays will hit the back of the chamber at sunrise on the summer solstice. The walls of the structure, meanwhile, incorporate some rocks from neighbouring fields that have been scored by passing ploughs over the centuries, and a potter is making urns from the clay-rich soil. It all makes the barrow feel like a monument to people in harmony with natural cycles, an earthy tomb of soil and stones. This may seem like an eccentric one-off, but the barrow is actually the second “neo-neolithic” funerary monument built by Sacred Stones, a company founded by former banker Toby Angel after he realised there was scope to “do death a lot better”. And he has several more in the works. The UK funeral industry is worth £2bn a year, but it is dominated by a few big companies. “The current choice is dire,” says Angel. “Most people in this country are cremated, but cremation happens in pretty uninspiring places. At the same time, there is a civic need for more interment space: we’re going to run out of burial space in the next three years.” Teaming up with the builder of the Wiltshire barrow, Martin Fildes, and a sixth-generation Welsh stonemason, Geraint Davies, Angel built his first barrow near the village of Hail Weston in Cambridgeshire in 2016. Described as “a secular space full of faith”, it is now home to the ashes of Jews, Buddhists, Catholics and pagans. One of the most recent souls to join was a 22-year-old anime fan, whose niche cover features a carving of the radish spirit from the animated film Spirited Away. At his lively committal ceremony, his mother carried his ashes in a felt urn, led by a piper, followed by a colourful assortment of friends, some dressed in costume, who gave readings and let off a firework. “The ancient barrows were real community hubs, places of storytelling and exchange,” says Angel. “We want them to be full of life – we hold storytelling events with sundowner cocktails in the summer.” Another occupant’s niche has a stained-glass door depicting the Flying Scotsman. His grandchildren come and read train stories to him on a regular basis. Others have hidden personal mementos behind the rocks, among them whisky and a joint. Angel’s own father died last October and his ashes will soon be going in the Cambridgeshire barrow. “Having a tangible reference to death and loss is really important,” he says. “I know my sister will need to come and rage at my father. The barrow is like having your own private chapel where you can come and express your feelings.” The biggest challenge, Angel says, is turning neolithic mound-building into a viable business. The costs, sometimes shared with the landowner, are big and the returns aren’t instant. While the average bill for a burial in the UK is over £4,000, a place in the barrow begins at £750 for a small single niche for a year (after which you can renew the lease or scatter the ashes and plant a tree). For 99 years, the cost is £1,950 and the largest niches – big enough to store a whole family’s ashes – go up to £7,000. But the idea is catching on, as more and more people are looking for non-religious sites of memorial. Angel says around 65% of the niches have already been reserved. One family from Hong Kong has bought space for 12 family members, while author Tom Holland has also acquired a spot. Meanwhile, requests for future barrows have come from landowners in Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire and Norfolk, and from as far afield as Arizona and British Columbia. Sacred Stones will soon be starting work on a round barrow in Warwickshire, and has submitted plans for an oval-shaped one in the grounds of a castle in Perthshire. Each site takes a different form. Davies has drawn up a number of designs, inspired by existing neolithic mounds. One scheme imagines a doughnut-shaped barrow forming an enclosed circular cloister, while another would see an open horseshoe form. Both are designed with communal ceremonies in mind. “Other cultures still have strong traditions like Ancestors’ Day in China or the Day of the Dead in Mexico,” says Ashton, “but we’ve generally lost these festivals to mark the dead in western Europe. The barrow is an invitation to celebrate life and our place in the natural world.”