Thomas Tuchel has warned Paris Saint-Germain they will have to be “200%” to knock Manchester United out of the Champions League, saying Ole Gunner Solskjær’s side are imbued with the spirit that drove their interim manager to be the hero of the club’s 1999 triumph. PSG take a 2-0 advantage into Wednesday night’s last-16 second leg at the Parc des Princes. However their German manager is wary of Solskjær and cited the Norwegian’s famous late winner as a substitute that beat Bayern Munich 2-1 in the final of 20 years ago. “It’s better to always be aware of the qualities of Ole Gunnar Solskjær,” Tuchel said. “He was one of the key players of the biggest era of this club. He was always ready to help, in 30 minutes, 20 mins, 10 or five. This is the spirit of Manchester United, that they are ready for anything. “They are a strong club with a strong history. It is totally normal that we respect his quality. It’s a big challenge for us and we can bring the result from the first match and it is a big challenge for us.” Asked how his side will approach the game, Tuchel said: “We need to forget the first result. Luck is also a factor, but we want to make sure there’s no luck involved. It’s important to reproduce what we did well, to find the right areas and forget the result, just concentrate on the actual performance. “We’re going to play the same game, whether we won or drew the first match. I can’t let the players be influenced by that result. You have to be 200% ready. The result will be what it will be, we just have to give our best.” Solskajer said United require the first goal to have a chance to overturn the deficit. “For us too,” Tuchel said. “The first goal is really important, for us to show qualities and play together as a team. My team has been showing a very good level recently. Tomorrow the key is to be confident but not too confident, not be scared, trust in our skills and qualities as a team. We need to be ready in case Manchester score first. The game is going to be very tight, and we cannot waste our time thinking about every possible eventuality. We need to be ready to react to any type of scenario. The challenge is to play at our best.” Tuchel may have Edinson Cavani back following a muscle injury. “He was with us in the last couple of training sessions. We’ll decide tomorrow together whether he is going to be playing or not,” he said. “I know who’s going to play but I can’t say because we have training. The goalkeepers also know but you’ll have to wait.”