Five weeks into the Six Nations it seems Ireland are still looking for whatever it was they lost in that opening round defeat to England. France are unchanged for Sunday’s game but Joe Schmidt has made seven changes to the team who scraped by Italy in the last round. Six of them are up front, where Rory Best and Cian Healy are back at hooker and prop, James Ryan and Iain Henderson join up at lock, and Josh van der Flier and CJ Stander are in the back row. Behind them Garry Ringrose starts at outside-centre. With Jack Conan on the bench, there is no space for Sean O’Brien, who has been dropped from the squad. Schmidt says it is because he wants to “give a bit more opportunity” to other players. “Josh van der Flier hasn’t let us down at all, so it’s a perfect opportunity to put him back in there, so he’s very much keen and ready to go,” Schmidt said. “With Sean, Jack Conan was initially due to start against Italy, so we wanted to give him an opportunity to get back in with a foot in the door and demonstrate what he can do off the bench.” In the second row, Ultan Dillane is on the bench instead of Quinn Roux and Tadhg Beirne. Schmidt said Beirne was “a little bit sore this week coming back from injury” and that “Ultan has played very well for us against Italy, so we wanted to reward his performance”. He was one of the few who did. Schmidt admitted there were “guys who would have been disappointed with their performance against Italy,” in fact “there was certainly a frustration for everyone,” about their 26-16 win in Rome. “It wasn’t perfect and we were disappointed but collectively we can’t afford to be held back by what happened.” He said Ireland have “picked themselves up really well” and that, besides, “people probably underestimate how tough it is in Rome and the pressure from Italy”. More to the point, Schmidt pointed out that “Wales didn’t get a big score there either and then turned it around with a big game against England”. Ireland could still win the championship and Schmidt said they are determined to be “in the mix” but given their uncertain form so far you guess he would settle for a couple of strong performances against France and Wales. “I know there are a lot of people saying ‘what can we change?’ but a lot of what we did last year is still just as relevant if we want to win games as it will be in 48 hours’ time. We just have to be more accurate. We are not as cohesive as we’d like to be, based on our last three performances probably, but I don’t think that’s going to affect what we deliver on Sunday.” Schmidt is not the first coach to have to deal with a sudden turn for the worse. “Probably, the All Blacks are the only team who consistently stay at the top,” he said. “You consider England, Six Nations Grand Slam, they get the Six Nations the following year, and the year after that they are fifth. How does that happen with most of the same personnel? It’s not apathy, it’s not overconfidence, I’m not sure how you might explain it.” Schmidt’s solution has apparently involved giving Ireland a lot of downtime in the last fortnight, getting them out dining and drinking with each other. He wants them to remember how to enjoy themselves.