Dolly Parton has been criticised by her younger sister for not speaking out more about sexual predators in the country and western music scene, after the star of 9 to 5 said she didn’t identify as a feminist and indicated she had no interest in becoming a cheerleader for the #MeToo movement. In a scathing attack on the Nashville singer’s approach to sexual harassment, Stella Parton urged her sister to use her position as a pop culture icon to advocate more for women’s rights. “I’m ashamed of my sister for keeping her mouth shut,” said Parton, 69, who grew up with Dolly as one of 12 siblings to illiterate parents in Sevier County, Tennessee. “She can run it when it is about something else, but speak up about injustice, Dolly Parton. Speak up. And speak out. Defend women, and don’t just do it in a little song. Speak up.” Speaking on the Our Stories podcast for CountryLine, a fan app for country music, she added: “This is the first time I’ve really publicly called my sister out. But it’s high time that some of these older women speak up and speak out. They’ve all gone through all kinds of abuse in this industry so: speak up!” In an interview with the Guardian last weekend, Dolly Parton, a nine-time Grammy winner and star of the 1980 feminist classic 9 to 5, dismissed her co-star Jane Fonda’s assertion that workplace harassment was worse today than it was in 1980. “I’m pretty sure it’s always been bad. It’s just that with the #MeToo movement women are bolder to speak out against it,” she said. But Parton, 73, also indicated she had no interest in becoming an outspoken advocate for #MeToo or even identifying as particularly feminist. “I don’t think … I mean, I must be if being a feminist means I’m all for women, yes. But I don’t feel I have to march, hold up a sign or label myself. I think the way I have conducted my life and my business and myself speaks for itself. I don’t think of it as being feminist. It’s not a label I have to put on myself. I’m just all for gals,” she said. Stella Parton, whose biggest hit was the 1975 anthem I Want To Hold You In My Dreams Tonight, now teaches domestic violence awareness courses to young women in Kentucky and in 2014 organised a women’s conference in Nashville called the Red Tent at which her sister Dolly was the headline speaker. But she believes her sister is betraying her celebrity status by not making a stronger stand against sexual harassment and misogyny in the industry. Last year publicist Kirt Webster – who used to represent Dolly Parton and many others – was accused of multiple sexual assaults. He denied all accusations at the time and has not been charged with any crimes. Stella Parton said: “In the same way that Jane Fonda and people who have been in Hollywood all these years and never said a word, like Meryl Streep was all big buddies with Harvey Weinstein until he got busted. “And then she kinda came around to say, ‘well, you know, that’s terrible’ … well, why didn’t you speak up when it came down? You knew it? All these women just didn’t speak up because they’re afraid they’re gonna mess with their fanbase. I think women would be more apt to respect you if you would speak up. “That’s why I was so happy to have people in our government like Michelle Obama, who has always been such an inspiration to the younger generation of women. “I believe we finally have a chance here. We have an open window. Don’t let it be closed by keeping your mouth shut.”