When the military seized power in Thailand in the 2014 coup, after months of political scandal and turmoil on the streets, it promised only a temporary measure designed to restore “love and peace”. But as easily as the generals took power, they found it much harder to let it go, despite endless promises of elections. Sunday will mark the first national election in eight years, but it will happen under a junta cloud. Far from handing the country back to a civilian-led, democratic government, the military rulers, known as the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO), are instead seeking to hold on to their power base through proxy political parties who want the military leader, Prayut Chan-ocha, to stay as prime minister. It’s been roundly condemned by some political analysts. “The country is stuck with a lacklustre military-authoritarian government under prime minister and junta leader Prayut Chan-ocha, unable to make a break for an effective democratic future,” said Thitinan Pongsudhirak, a political science professor at Bangkok’s Chulalongkorn University. It’s not free, it’s not fair and the military are playing by their own rules Thanks to strategic moves implemented during the past five years, the system is skewed heavily in favour of a continuation of military rule. A new constitution, drawn up by the junta in 2016, gives it the power to appoint all 250 members of the upper house of parliament, the Senate, which has a say on who becomes prime minister. The changes are designed to prevent the main pro-democracy and anti-military party, Pheu Thai, which has won every election this century, from taking power. They are also designed to allow an unelected figure to become prime minister, ensuring that Prayut is eligible for the job even though he is not standing for election as an MP. And it enshrines the continuation of the military’s “20-year plan” for Thailand. While few are optimistic that Sunday’s election will see the military relinquish power easily, the past few weeks have seen an increasingly vocal backlash against the junta, and specifically against Prayut. There has been lacklustre public support, at best, for the pro-military party Phalang Pracharat. Even with the support of all 250 seats in the Senate, the party would need to form a coalition with so-called “swing parties” to get the 376 seats needed to form a bicameral majority government. Yet even the political parties predicted to align with the junta have publicly turned against them. Last weekend, the leader of the Democrat party, Abhisit Vejjajiva – a pivotal ally for the pro-regime faction – released a video bluntly stating that his party would not support the return of Prayut as prime minister, though he did not rule out joining a pro-regime coalition. Even the leader of the non-partisan Bhumjaithai party, Anutin Charnvirakul, who may be a deciding factor in which faction forms a parliamentary majority, told the Guardian he did not want his party propping up Prayut’s return to power. “This election would be much better if the NCPO fully transition government over to a political faction, they should not be running at all,” Anutin told the Guardian, his strongest condemnation yet of the junta’s political manoeuvres. “I have no problem personally with Prayut but if he stepped in as prime minister, he would step in with no integrity and there is no way he could last long. After the election, his command will be blowing in the wind.” There are still swathes of support for the pro-democracy opposition parties, particularly Pheu Thai, the populist party which was formed under now-exiled former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, and ever-growing momentum behind Future Forward, a progressive party running on a radical agenda of constitutional and military reform. “I believe that if the election is free and fair, it will be a landslide for the anti-status quo parties,” said leader of Future Forward party Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit. “I have been to 77 provinces in Thailand already and all of the people I talk to on my campaign trail, they are sick of the NCPO and I find very very few people who support Prayut Chan-ocha. But we also know the military will use all the tricks up their sleeve to stay in power.” Even if Pheu Thai secure a landslide victory, most believe the military would do everything in its power to stop it forming a government. The military has staged 12 coups since 1932 and on Wednesday a pro-junta politician said another would be on the cards if opponents of the junta win. “Do you really think you can just ‘pick up a pen and kill the dictatorship?” asked Benya Nandakwang, who is running as an MP for the Action Coalition of Thailand Party, in a Facebook post. “Dream on…Personally, I think if the hell money democracy faction wins the election, eventually there will be another coup.” In power the junta has continued to use the full force of the law and of their military might to pressure the election in their favour, leaving few in the belief it will be a free and fair. Thai Raksa Chart, the newer pro-Thaksin, pro-democracy party, was forcibly disbanded this month for its failed attempt to nominate Princess Ubolratana as prime minister. Thanathorn has been hit with multiple criminal charges and soldiers raided the assembly of a pro-democracy group and the homes of several opposition candidates this week. Among those targeted have been pro-democracy activist Nuttaa Mahattana who is currently facing four sedition charges. Her phone and is monitored, her every move under surveillance and in what she described as “dirty tactic, even for them” her hotel room was bugged with a camera and sordid footage released of her and her partner, who is a Pheu Thai politician; the footage was branded with the logos of their respective political parties and democracy movements in an attempt to discredit them both. Yet despite it all, Nuttaa remained hopeful that the election could bring change to Thailand. “Maybe I am too romantic or too idealistic but I do believe the election could bring about change,” Nuttaa said. “It’s the worst possible election we could have – it’s not free, it’s not fair and the military are playing by their own rules – but I believe that if people know as much as we know and go out and vote, this country will never go back to being ruled by any junta again.” 