John McCain’s daughter, Bridget, hit back Thursday against Donald Trump’s repeated attacks on her father by calling the president “a child”. McCain, the late Arizona Republican senator’s youngest daughter, who rarely speaks out publicly, pled with Trump for decency after he went after the decorated war hero during an appearance in Ohio. “Everyone doesn’t have to agree with my dad or like him, but I do ask you to be decent and respectful. If you can’t do those two things, be mindful. We only said goodbye to him almost seven months ago,” Bridget McCain said on Twitter. John McCain died of brain cancer in August 2018. “Even if you were invited to my dad’s funeral, you would have only wanted to be there for the credit and not for any condolences,” his daughter said. “Unfortunately, you could not be counted on to be courteous, as you are a child in the most important role the world knows.” Trump has engaged in days of attacks against McCain, with whom he had a contentious relationship. “I have to be honest. I’ve never liked him much,” he said Wednesday during an appearance at a tank manufacturing plant in Lima, Ohio. “I really probably never will.” McCain made it clear before his death that he did not want the sitting president at his funeral, where former presidents Barack Obama and George W Bush delivered eulogies. “I gave him the kind of funeral that he wanted, which as president I had to approve,” Trump said in his latest remarks. “I didn’t get a thank you. That’s OK. We sent him on the way. But I wasn’t a fan of John McCain.” Trump has seethed against McCain for his vote against repealing the Affordable Care Act. The president also said Wednesday that McCain, known for his time as a prisoner of war in Vietnam, “didn’t get the job done for our great vets”. Elected officials in both parties and McCain’s family members have expressed shock he would launch unprompted attacks against a dead man, especially one considered by many Americans of all political views as a war hero. Former White House communications director Anthony Scaramucci also said the attacks were a mistake. “I don’t like it at all. I’m surprised that he’s doing it,” he said on CNN. Scaramucci said Trump was likely alienating veterans and other voters with his criticism. “It’s stupid,” he said. “When you are attacking dead people, it’s not good ... That is an unnatural social act, and it will turn people off.”