Eddie Jones has said England are still mentally scarred by their 2015 World Cup horror show after their second‑half capitulation against Scotland. Jones insists he can fix England’s psychological problems in time for the World Cup this year and believes his side are capable of winning the tournament, but thinks they are still haunted by their disastrous showing on home soil four years ago. Against Scotland on Saturday, England threw away a 31-0 lead, conceding 38 unanswered points, but with Jones taking the unusual step of hauling off his captain, Owen Farrell, George Ford’s last-gasp try salvaged a draw. It followed recent examples of England letting leads slip, to the grand slam champions Wales last month and to South Africa last summer. Jones, however, believes having more access to his players in the buildup to the World Cup – the squad will convene in June and be together for three months before the tournament starts – will enable him to cure what he perceives as England’s inability to perform under pressure. England also intend to enlist the help of an “expert” and Pippa Grange – the psychologist credited with helping the national football team to end their penalty shootout hoodoo at the World Cup last year – could be in the frame given Jones’s close relationship with Gareth Southgate. “It’s the way you think under pressure,” Jones said. “The team has probably had [the problem] since the 2015 World Cup, and we’ve been working on a process to fix it and we will get it right – but it takes time. Whenever you have a difficult tournament or difficult games, there’s always a lingering thought process there. It comes in when you get under pressure, a lot of pressure, and you can’t work out a way to get back to what you want to do. I’ve got one person that’s going to help us that’s a bit of an expert.” England finished second in the Six Nations table but scored 24 tries from their five matches – 10 more than their nearest rivals Ireland and Scotland. “We can play with power and precision, we can score a number of different ways and apart from the second half [against Scotland] our defence has been quite imposing,” Jones said. “Our set-piece and breakdown are pretty sound so that gives you a pretty good set of weapons to take into the World Cup. If we can get some consistency in the way we think on the field and that toughness and discipline about doing the right thing, we’ve got a team capable of winning the World Cup.”