Voters across Turkey have cast their ballots in local elections marred by sporadic violence that are being viewed as a crucial test for President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, as the country’s economic woes bite into his popular support. At least two people were shot dead in the east of the country and dozens injured in election-related clashes across the Kurdish-majority south-east. In Istanbul, police said one person was stabbed in a 15-person brawl that broke out between candidates in Kadikoy district. At least 57 million people were eligible to vote on Sunday in contests in 30 cities and more than 900 districts around the country. While the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) has won every vote since it first took office in 2002, for the first time the party is facing the prospect of significant defeat in several places, including the capital, Ankara. Erdoğan’s 16 years in office have been distinguished by consistently strong economic growth, but last year’s currency crisis has officially triggered a recession. Inflation is hovering at about 20%, sending the cost of living soaring for working-class AKP voters. The president is not on the ballot himself, but he has campaigned tirelessly over the last few weeks in an attempt to draw attention away from the economy. He has framed the local elections as a matter of “national survival”, accusing opposition parties of links to terrorism and blaming inflation on foreign powers seeking to undermine the country. Despite his efforts, in Ankara opinion polls suggest the main opposition bloc’s mayoral candidate, Mansur Yavaş, is on track to end AKP’s longtime control of the capital. The opposition also hopes dissatisfaction at inflation and rising unemployment will be enough to dissuade working-class AKP voters from turning out in other cities. Polling stations across Istanbul on Sunday morning had been quieter than expected, several vote monitors said. Initial results are expected late in the evening. “We keep showing up to vote. I think we’re a bit bored of it,” said 74-year-old Engin Yorulmaz, from Istanbul’s Trakya district. “But maybe we’re bored of change as well.” Critics have said Sunday’s elections are not being fought fairly, with several pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic party (HDP) leaders in the south-east of the country arrested on terror charges in the runup to voting day. Largely pro-government media coverage has also put opposition parties at a campaigning disadvantage. On Sunday, the Felicity party leader, Temel Karamollaoğlu, tweeted that two party members, a polling station volunteer and a party observer, were killed in eastern Malatya province by a relative of an AKP candidate. The killings were not caused by “simple animosity”, but happened when the volunteers tried to enforce the law requiring ballots to be marked in private voting booths instead of out in the open, Karamollaoğlu said. Turkey’s official Anadolu news agency reported the deaths were the result of a brawl. Speaking after he voted in Istanbul, Erdoğan said he was saddened by the deaths but did not want them to lead to “a questioning or a judgment between political parties”. For AKP supporters, Erdoğan’s strong leadership is exactly what will help Turkey weather its financial crisis. “Before, there were no services, no rubbish collection, we didn’t have insurance to visit the hospital. Now life is good for us,” said Havva Guney, 56. “Some people say there’s no money left but the markets are still open. People still leave with bags of food.”