Late-night hosts saw through a day of bad defenses, from “first-time” offenders to “fake news”. “I’ve met Donald Trump, but I would not say that we are friends,” Stephen Colbert admitted on Thursday’s Late Show. “And I thank the Lord for that, because today has been a rough one for those close to the president.” Colbert referred first to Trump’s former campaign chairman and “man with resting indicted face” Paul Manafort, who was sentenced on Thursday to 47 months in prison for bank and tax fraud as part of the special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russia’s role in the 2016 election. The nearly four-year sentence was considered by many to be surprisingly lenient – far less than the sentencing guidelines of 19.5 to 24 years. The shorter sentence is in part due to Manafort’s defense team, who “tried everything to get their client a reduced sentence – except representing an innocent man”, Colbert said. The defense requested leniency for Manafort as a “first-time offender”, though the prosecution pointed out that for over a decade, Manafort “repeatedly and brazenly violated the law”, such a continually hiding millions of dollars made from his work in Ukraine. Colbert suggested a slight rewording for the defense: Manafort “wasn’t so much a first-time offender as a first-time gettin’-caughter”. Thursday was also a rough day for former fixer Michael Cohen, whose spectacular congressional testimony last week is widely considered to be one of the more significant and stunning days of the Trump presidency. During his public hearing, Cohen, who has pleaded guilty to violating campaign finance laws, evading taxes and lying to Congress, assured Congress that he would not seek a pardon from Trump. “Checks reimbursing me for paying off a porn star? Yes. Pardons? No. I have my dignity,” said Colbert, mocking Cohen’s moral calculations. However, according to the Wall Street Journal, Cohen has instructed his personal lawyer to inquire after a presidential pardon. “This revelation is crucial because it undermines Cohen, a witness who has produced copies of Donald Trump’s checks reimbursing him for paying off porn star Stormy Daniels, which would be a campaign finance violation,” Colbert explained. Naturally, Trump responded on Twitter: “It was not a campaign contribution, and there were no violations of the campaign finance laws by me. Fake News!” In a day of weak court defenses, Colbert especially wasn’t buying Trump’s. “Sir, you’re passionate but just saying ‘It wasn’t me, it wasn’t what it was’, is not a strong defense. After all, Atticus Finch didn’t defend Tom Robinson by saying: ‘Oh no, he did-n’t.’” In other ineffective criminal defense news, Jimmy Kimmel returned on Thursday night to the second portion of disgraced R&B star R Kelly’s startling interview with Gayle King. The part of the interview during which Kelly – who has been accused of physical and sexual abuse – melted into tears and finger-pointing as he vehemently denied the well-documented charges; since then, he went “straight from Gayle to jail”, Kimmel joked, for failure to pay child support. Part two of the interview didn’t fare much better for Kelly. “It’s very interesting the way he speaks to Gayle King, because there’s one person interviewing him – Gayle – but he makes his case to everyone in the room but her,” Kimmel said of the tape, in which Kelly gesticulates wildly to the wall, the camera crew, and a plant, but not to interviewer Gayle King. “He cried, he yelled – it was like he was trying to get a spot on the supreme court,” Kimmel said. Kelly also bizarrely ranted about his marriage and, without context, flying in on a helicopter with a puppy. Kimmel wasn’t moved. “I don’t know who decided to trust this man with a puppy on a helicopter, but that person should be in jail today too,” he quipped.