The Premier League has reached the stage where fans of the two title contenders spend a large part of their days looking at the remaining fixtures. We are down to nine games each for Manchester City and Liverpool and it is possible to hazard a guess as to where points could be dropped. On Sunday Liverpool fell behind their rivals – with both having played the same number of games – for the first time since 7 December but the consensus seems to be that the Merseyside club have the easier run-in. Well, have they? Average current placing in league table of remaining opponentsMan City 11.89 Liverpool 13.33Advantage Liverpool Replicating results against remaining opponents from earlier in seasonMan City W7 D0 L2 F24 A7 21ptsLiverpool W8 D1 L0 F20 A4 25ptsAdvantage Liverpool Members of top six still to playMan City 2 (Man Utd, Tottenham)Liverpool 2 (Tottenham, Chelsea)No advantage Average points picked up by remaining opponents per game since 1 Jan (ie in form)Man City 1.31 Liverpool 1.21Advantage Liverpool Games remaining to be played at home groundMan City 4/9 44.4%Liverpool 5/9 55.5%Advantage Liverpool Quite possibly. Using a moderately scientific approach it shows, among many things, that the average table position of the teams Liverpool have still to play is 13.33 while City are up against teams with an average position of 11.89. This may not sound like a huge difference but add to that facts such as Liverpool having more home games than City (55.5% to 44.4% or, in simpler terms, one more) and that Liverpool picked up 25 points against the opponents they have left to play this season when they first met during this campaign compared with 21 for City, and a pattern emerges. Five of Liverpool’s remaining nine games are against the worst five teams in the league according to the current table: Huddersfield, Fulham, Cardiff, Southampton and Burnley. It does appear that Liverpool have the easier run-in. Which may be good news for Jürgen Klopp and his team but there are other factors and the first of them is form: since the turn of the year City have picked up an impressive 2.67 points per game while Liverpool are currently on 1.78. Then, obviously, there will be injuries, refereeing decisions, the impact of progress in the Champions League and the question of which of the two sides enjoys the greater luck. Liverpool 10 Mar Burnley (h)  17 Mar Fulham (a)  31 Mar Tottenham (h)  6 Apr Southampton (a) 13 Apr Chelsea (h) 20 Apr Cardiff (a)  27 Apr Huddersfield (h) 4 May Newcastle (a)  12 May Wolves (h) Manchester City 9 Mar Watford (h) 16 Mar Man Utd (a)30 Mar Fulham (a) 6 Apr Cardiff (h) 13 Apr Crystal Palace (a) 20 Apr Tottenham (h) 27 Apr Burnley (a) 4 May Leicester (h) 12 May Brighton (a) It is fair to say that City’s most daunting fixtures come towards the end of April, in particular the away fixture against Manchester United on the 24th. How will United perform in that game, knowing they can give either their neighbours or Liverpool a huge hand in winning the title? And what about the games on 4 May, when Brendan Rodgers faces City and Rafael Benítez Liverpool? Will they be decisive? Or will none of this matter and will it, in the end, come down to which team has to play on the most blustery days during this spring?