Mendelssohn was unforgettable on Dubai World Cup night in 2018. He did not win another race all year. Arrogate was exceptional too on the big night 12 months earlier. He shuffled into retirement three races later, also having failed to add another win to his record. Almond Eye, then, does not have an unduly high bar to clear as she attempts to build on a mesmerising victory in the Dubai Turf on Saturday, a performance that fulfilled every expectation. In truth, though, it will be a bitter disappointment if she does not merely raise the bar over the course of the season, but make a serious attempt to set a new record by securing a first win in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe for a runner from Japan. In terms of its visual impact, the “wow” factor, Almond Eye’s win in the Dubai Turf did not have the yawning gap to the runner-up of Mendelssohn’s UAE Derby, or the triumph-in-adversity of Arrogate’s World Cup. But what made her win special was its effortless efficiency. For the second race in a row, she sat behind a strong pace and then quickened on the bit to take control with a furlong to run. When a horse can cruise as fast, or faster, than anything else in the race and still find an instant turn of foot when required, it is a combination of shield and sword that can prove almost impossible to compete with. And this was her first race in four months, after a 5,000-mile journey, the launching point for the second phase of Almond Eye’s career on a global stage. What a future could now lie ahead. This year’s Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe promised to be something special from the moment Enable edged out Sea Of Class last autumn in a race that could well have had a different result had the two fillies’ swapped stalls. There is now every chance Almond Eye will join them at Longchamp in October and if the influx of fans from Japan is anything close to the thousands that accompanied Deep Impact in 2006, she will surely set off as the favourite to beat the pair of them. Having announced herself on Saturday, Almond Eye’s appearances in Europe before the autumn may now prove to be limited. A suggestion earlier in the week that she could run at York’s Ebor meeting in August, while hugely exciting, was perhaps as much to do with Sakae Kunieda, her trainer, being polite when presented with possibilities. If the Arc is the overriding target, a run on the trials day at Longchamp three weeks earlier would make more sense. But in many ways, she does not have a great deal more to do. Even at this early stage, Saturday’s win put down a marker that even Enable and Sea Of Class will do well to match before October. Other Arc contenders will emerge too – perhaps including Old Persian, whose win in the Sheema Classic could have been the highlight on another night. But Almond Eye already looks like the one they will all need to beat. Of course, any or all of the three market leaders could suffer the fate of Sea Of Class last year and end up drawn on the wide outside at Longchamp. But if there is one of the three that you might back from a high draw, it is surely Almond Eye, whose versatility is another of her strengths. Saturday’s race was over nine furlongs, while the Japan Cup is over 12. She travels and quickens regardless of the trip, which hints at a freakish talent. The best prices for Enable, Sea Of Class and Almond Eye on Sunday were 9-2, 5-1 and 6-1. If all three turn up on the first Sunday in October, Enable and Almond Eye will be running to make history and Sea Of Class will be attempting to frustrate the pair and set the record straight on last year as she does so. There is, of course, still so much that could go wrong but rarely has there been such a compelling conclusion to the season in prospect at such an early stage of the campaign. Greg Wood’s accommodation in Dubai was provided by the Emirates Racing Authority Chepstow 1.30 Fen Breeze 2.00 Klass Action 2.35 Maazel 3.05 Swiss Cross 3.40 Arctic Sea 4.10 Mustadun 4.45 Greyzee (nap) 5.15 Orobas Ludlow 2.15 Smackwater Jack 2.50 Fox Appeal 3.20 Thounder 3.55 Timoteo 4.25 Burn Baby Byrne 5.00 Delegate 5.30 Dieu Benisse Newcastle 5.45 Stargazer (nb) 6.15 Coup De Gold 6.45 Alkaamel 7.15 Blazing Dreams 7.45 Martineo 8.15 Klopp Tips by Greg Wood