Chelsea striker Gonzalo Higuaín has announced his retirement from international football, and taken a swipe at those who have criticised his performances with Argentina. “My time with Argentina is over. Thinking things through in depth, my time is up,” Higuaín said in an interview with Fox Sports. “To the delight of many people, now I will only look at it from the outside. I have spoken to [the manager, Lionel] Scaloni and told him my point of view.” The 31-year-old scored 31 goals in 75 Argentina appearances, with his last appearance coming in the 2-1 win over Nigeria in last year’s World Cup. Higuaín started that game but was dropped for the last-16 defeat to France, and has arguably been made the scapegoat for Argentina’s recent underachievement on the international stage. Higuaín, who has scored three goals in 10 games since joining Chelsea on loan from Juventus in January, added that he has taken the decision in order to focus on club football and spend more time with his family. “I’ve made the decision because I want to enjoy my family, I want to spend time with my daughter, and at the same time, I feel that I gave my country everything I could. “I’m fully focused on my commitment to Chelsea,” the forward added. “The Premier League is amazing and I really want to enjoy it. It’s very competitive indeed.” Higuaín opted to play for Argentina over France, the country of his birth, and made his debut in the 2010 World Cup qualifying campaign. He scored four goals in South Africa, but later gained a reputation for expensive misses, failing to score in the 2014 World Cup final defeat to Germany and the consecutive Copa América final losses to Chile in 2015 and 2016. Higuaín was put through on goal by a Toni Kroos error in the first half at the Maracanã, but rushed his shot and fired wide. Higuaín did score later on but his effort was ruled out for offside. Former Argentina coach Alfio Basile later said the striker 'soiled himself' and was to blame for the eventual defeat Chasing their first Copa América title since 1993 against hosts and fierce rivals Chile, Argentina had a chance to win on the break in the last minute, but Higuaín could not squeeze the ball inside the post. He went on to miss in the penalty shootout as Chile won their first ever title Higuaín had the chance of swift redemption in the tournament's centenary edition in the US a year later. Clean through on goal, he lifted the ball over Claudio Bravo but wide of the post. Argentina lost on penalties to Chile for the second year in a row “People remember the goals I missed and not the ones I scored. I’m sure everyone celebrated the goal against Belgium,” he said, referencing his only other World Cup goal in the 2014 quarter-final. “When you criticise someone maliciously, it hurts everyone,” Higuaín added. “I saw how much my family suffered, but I gave everything for the national team. It’s one thing to say that we did not achieve our objectives, but when people talk about failure it’s very hard.” Higuaín’s retirement comes less than a week after Lionel Messi returned from his post-World Cup international hiatus, featuring for Argentina in the friendly defeat against Venezuela in Madrid last Friday.