As the largest lake in England, running in a 10-mile ribbon through the Lake District national park, Windermere has long inspired a particular kind of ambition. It is where Victorian tycoons built their lavish holiday homes and entertained guests on the water in extravagant vessels, with fantastical gothic boathouses to match. Its great length made it the testing ground for the country’s first seaplanes, and, later in the century, it inspired daredevil racers to attempt world records in their souped-up speedboats, with sometimes fatal results. Not much of this dynamic past is evident if you visit today. In summer, the area teems with ice-cream-licking holidaymakers, either on the trail of Beatrix Potter, or enjoying sedate cruises around the lake (a 10mph speed limit has been in force since 2005). But the colourful history of life on the water now has the place it deserves in a handsome new home. Standing as a cluster of dark sheds huddled at the water’s edge, north of the village of Bowness, the £20m Windermere Jetty Museum of Boats, Steam and Stories is hard to spot at first. Viewed from the water – visitors will be able to arrive via ferry – its pitched-roof volumes blend into the surrounding trees, like a group of innocuous barns. As you get closer, their special quality becomes clearer. Great chunks have been carved out of their sides, leaving rooftops floating with surreally deep overhangs, while their black-oxidised copper walls shimmer with a faint verdigris patina. The architecture is at once workaday and quietly remarkable – like many of the things inside. “We’ve tried to balance the area’s picturesque and industrial histories,” says Andy Groarke, one half of Carmody Groarke, the London-based architects behind the project. He says the overhangs were inspired by Broad Leys, Charles Voysey’s celebrated arts and crafts house nearby, while the sheds – home to a gravel extraction plant for decades – are a nod to the site’s past. It’s a fitting language for the museum, which also operates as a boatyard, complete with a conservation workshop where visitors will be able to see the meticulous process of boat restoration in action. The iron hull of a Victorian cargo boat awaits its next coat of paint near the fractured wooden carcass of an 18th-century ferry, stored under the overhang of the workshop roof. “We want it to be a living, working place, celebrating the skills that have been part of the area for generations,” says Gordon Watson, former chief executive of Lakeland Arts, the charity that runs the museum. Originally founded in 1977 – by steam enthusiast George Pattinson, who amassed the 40-strong boat collection – the museum gradually declined until its closure in 2006, when Lakeland Arts took over. Carmody Groarke won the project in a competition in 2011 and, after a bumpy ride of over-budget tenders, additional fundraising (the bulk from the Heritage Lottery Fund) and storm delays, the final result is an impressive fusion of historic gallery and active attraction – a “coats-on” experience where the water is ever present. Visitors are greeted with a big picture window at the entrance that looks straight into the wet dock, a majestic wooden nave-like space where the lake comes right into the building – as, apparently, do swans and otters. Here you can admire Jane, a streamlined red motorboat imported from Florida in the 1930s and constructed in a sporty style that then became popular on Windermere. Through the boathouse door, wisps of steam emerge from the polished brass funnel of Osprey, a restored 1902 steam launch in which visitors will be able to enjoy a blissfully silent glide around the lake. The conjoined sheds have been composed to provide continual glimpses between the spaces, framing views from entrance to gallery to cafe and out to the lake, with the peaks of the fells beyond. The deep roof overhangs serve a similar framing purpose, as well as providing shelter from sun and the driving rain so characteristic of the Lakes. But the star of the show is the dazzling range of boats, housed in a light-flooded hangar, along with the paraphernalia of oars, anchors and astonishing Windermere kettles – copper tea urns that used the steam engines’ heat to boil a gallon of water in 10 seconds. The exhibition provides a fascinating window on to the lake as a place of genteel Victorian promenading, where each tea service outdid the next, a world of magical islands that inspired Arthur Ransome’s Swallows and Amazons stories, and insatiable speed conquests. In the centre of the room, nestled in a dry dock, stands Branksome, the finest example of a Victorian steam launch and the flagship of the collection. Built in 1896 by local boatbuilder George Brockbank, using 50ft lengths of teak, it is the Rolls-Royce of pleasure boats, kitted out with walnut panelling, velvet upholstery, carpets and leather seats, along with a marble hand basin and silver tea service. Nearby is an actual Rolls-Royce engine, taken from a wartime airship and bolted on to a hull in the 1920s to make the appropriately named Canfly. Branksome’s level of opulence gives you some idea of what the largest and most lavish steam yacht ever to have graced Windermere must have been like. Built in 1887, at a cost of £1m in today’s money, Britannia was commissioned by “King of the Lake” Colonel George Ridehalgh, who used his floating palaces for entertaining friends and crossing the water with his pack of hounds. All that remains is its teak skylight, glazed with stained-glass windows, and the monogrammed crockery set. As a humdrum foil to these waterborne fantasies, and the dashing fibreglass hydroplanes nearby, hangs Beatrix Potter’s rowing boat, a wonderfully crude thing knocked together out of old floorboards. The hard-edged exterior gives way to a warm timber world within The architects have channelled this mix of raw and refined. Their pleated copper buildings stand on a rugged concrete plinth, cast with coarse river gravel and sand-blasted to a gnarled surface, creating a workmanlike podium that steps and slopes down to a series of terraces by the water, with chunky wooden benches to enjoy the view. Local Westmorland slate chippings are brushed up to the edges of the sheds, like scree accumulated from the fells. The hard-edged exterior gives way to a warm timber world within, where walls of honey-coloured Douglas fir line the rooms, echoing the timber of the boats. Considering the area’s famously conservative planning regime, it is something of a miracle that the project has happened at all. As Groarke recalls, at first the planners “wanted drystone walls and slate roofs”. The architects originally imagined the sheds would be clad in shiny stainless steel, but soon realised that nothing stays stainless in the Lakes for long. The final result is an improvement, but if anything it is overly demure, particularly given the history of the area as a place of fanciful holiday architecture, before the conservation movement decreed that Cumbria must be confined to an eternity of slate. In time, natural weathering will add further character to what are, for now, rather stark black boxes. The museum marks the first substantial public building for Carmody Groarke, a practice that emerged out of David Chipperfield’s studio in 2006, and which deserves further success. When a publicly funded project like this can take almost a decade, it’s easy to understand the lag. Thankfully, the museum perfectly showcases the elegance and craftsmanship of the precious boats themselves.