Anticipation for a new Carrie Tiffany novel may hit a snag when readers learn that Exploded View is the story of a dysfunctional family narrated by a damaged adolescent girl. With the stench of domestic violence and child sexual abuse permeating daily news, even Tiffany’s keenest admirers might be forgiven for deciding they’ve had more than they can bear. The suffering of children at the hands of adults has also become a mainstay of Australian fiction, and Exploded View has similarities to novels by Sonya Hartnett and Sofie Laguna, Romy Ash and Mark Brandi, all outstanding observers of vulnerability and malevolence. At first, Tiffany seems to be heading down a deeply rutted road. But the distinctive qualities that made her two previous novels so successful – an original perspective, odd characters, earthy language – emerge quickly from Exploded View, like wildflowers cracking through bitumen. In the first pages of this concise, pungent novel, we are introduced to an unnamed girl who is obsessed with cars. She lives with her mother, brother and stepfather, known as “father man”, a mechanic who repairs cars in his home workshop, often shoddily, for the people of Perth’s outer suburbs. She skips school to help him, but she hasn’t spoken for 17 days. There is a vague foreboding. Tiffany’s novels draw their central metaphors from earlier texts rescued from obscurity. As a former park ranger in central Australia and as a long-time agricultural journalist, she reads the kind of arcane, practical publications she works into her fiction. Everyman’s Rules for Scientific Living, her 2005 debut, follows a train load of experts in the 1930s bringing dubious modern solutions to the struggling farmers of the Mallee district of Victoria. Extracts from earnest journal articles and harvest reports mock the characters’ disorderly lives. Her Stella Prize-winning second novel, Mateship with Birds, about a lonely dairy farmer’s love for his animals and a neighbour, with darker sexual undercurrents, takes its title from a 1922 book by naturalist Alec Chisholm. In Exploded View, the girl secretly studies Scientific Publications Holden Workshop Manual Series No. 51, stolen from father man and his prized blue car, and in its illustrated pages she learns about the miracles of car engines, human anatomy and means of escape. An “exploded view”, with its violent connotation, shows the engine parts separated by space for clarity, and sometimes a man’s hands at work. Her tangled feelings emerge in sensual and disturbing passages: The place where a part connects is specially prepared with a housing, a thread or a flange. One true surface against another. It’s not possible for the parts of the body to fit together like this. There’s skin and there’s the flesh under it. The flesh, the meat of the body, isn’t stable. There are three lines cut into the middle of father man’s belt. Tiffany writes this portrait of a girl on the brink of womanhood with great subtlety. The text is a mosaic of naivety, watchfulness, dissociation, insight, and fearless action. Many sentences have a dancing rhythm, or a warning drumbeat, and whole paragraphs could be set as poems. Tiffany’s black humour is there, too, in the girl’s half-understood fragments of knowledge and unfiltered commentary. This is a more abstract and even sparer novel than its predecessors, leaving the reader to fill in the spaces. There’s no doubt we are reading an artifice, too perfect to come from the mind of a teenager, but emotionally convincing all the same. Tiffany has described her own attraction to the workings of cars and the open road. She has said elsewhere that there was abuse in her youth and that this book, taxing to write, is her most autobiographical. We can feel that in the weight of the words. While its themes are timeless, Exploded View is precisely placed in the 1970s of Tiffany’s childhood, when children watched The Brady Bunch and Matlock Police on television, when traditional gender roles were starting to be overturned but not in the back blocks of Western Australia. Sometimes the girl is just like any other insecure teenage girl, listening to the top 10 and dreaming about boys: “Nobody is coming to get me, which is good because I wouldn’t have the right jeans if they did.” The girl’s mother sleepwalks through her daily life, fussing with cosmetics and imagining herself into the pages of Mills & Boon novels titled Sweet Compulsion and Stranger on a Beach, shrieking when father man chops off the girl’s ponytail at the dinner table, but wilfully blind to the worse assaults that we glimpse. Cars allow the girl to see outside her mother’s feminine trap, challenge father man on his own territory, and take some control over her life. Although father man locks the house at night, she sneaks out to fiddle with an engine or take a car for a spin. It’s both escape and revenge: “There’s no firm plan in my mind for sabotage, but after a few hours I climb out the window and go to the cars.” The middle section of the novel is a family road trip, a kind of relief from the claustrophobia of home, in which father man drives the Holden across the country and back again. In the car the girl is safe, sleeping on the hump of the floor beside her brother and looking out the window at landscapes littered with car accidents. Exploded View is not a plot-driven novel but it is a dynamic piece of writing. The girl’s thoughts are in constant motion and her eyes are always on the road that rears ahead and behind as a car hurtles along. The pace picks up in the final section towards a climax that, like much of the action, we see from the corner of our eye and will replay many times. It is a novel about child sexual abuse, an explosive reminder that children can be unsafe with the people who should protect them, and that they very often suffer in silence. Tiffany once told me she writes about the past because she finds the present perplexing, but she could not have written a more timely novel. Some might find Exploded View too much to bear, because Tiffany gives us an unflinching view from inside a child’s mind. But there’s much to learn from this girl and from the compassion, power and beauty of the author’s fine writing. Stay tuned on Saturday for an exclusive essay from Carrie Tiffany. • Susan Wyndham is a journalist, writer and former literary editor of the Sydney Morning Herald • Carrie Tiffany was the inaugural winner of the Stella Prize for her novel, Mateship with Birds (Picador, 2011). Exploded View is out now through Text