Manchester United players have backed Ole Gunnar Solskjær being appointed as the club’s permanent manager, with Romelu Lukaku asking “what else” the Norwegian needs to do to get the job. The forward’s stance has been supported by Luke Shaw and came after the memorable Champions League triumph against Paris Saint-Germain. Marcus Rashford’s late penalty at Parc des Princes made the last-16 tie 3-3 on aggregate and United progressed on away goals, having lost 2-0 in the first leg at Old Trafford. Lukaku, who scored United’s first two goals in Paris, is in no doubt Solskjær should be appointed the club’s permanent No 1. The Norwegian is employed on an interim basis until the summer, having replaced José Mourinho in December. “What else does he have to do?” the Belgian said on beIN Sports. “I think it has been decided. I think he is going to get it, he should get it. If you look at the games that we played [and won]. I know he’s going to stay, there’s no doubt about that. He wants to stay, the players want him to stay. We’re doing really well, we’re playing like Manchester United should play. He’s a young coach, he has young players as well so it’s the perfect environment to develop and hopefully win trophies in the future. “Everybody was talking I think after the first four games because we played, with all respect, against lesser opposition. But then when we won at Tottenham away, Chelsea away, then Arsenal in the FA Cup, now this game.” Shaw echoed that sentiment. “I don’t think I need to say much after all these results, it looks certain,” the left-back said. “We all love Ole and we love the job he’s done so far. We’re enjoying everything that’s going on at the moment and the results have shown that. We’ve had a couple of blips but that’s nine away matches [won in a row] now, they’re not easy games, but it shows what Ole and his staff have done. Long may that continue.” A further sign of the players’ support was them singing Solskjær’s name in the dressing room as Sir Alex Ferguson and Eric Cantona joined in. “Everyone was in there. We were all singing songs, singing the Cantona song,” Shaw said. “It was a really unbelievable experience.” Lukaku is impressed with Solskjaer’s man-management skills, pointing to how the 46-year-old has aided the striker in a six-goal burst in his last three outings. “He’s done a lot - when I came back in [to the XI], for me he had a plan. He wanted to me be really sharp in three or four weeks and that’s what happened,” Lukaku said. “We took three or four weeks, I did a lot of interval work and a lot of finishing and now I can say that I am fully fit. But then for the team, he made us play offensive football. He gives the young players confidence. Sometimes he’s tough but at the right time he knows also to give a compliment. “In training we do a lot of small games, a lot of focus on our offensive part of the game and that’s what the players like. So, we just try to come in every game and win the games.” While United’s stance remains that they are continuing to assess possible candidates to become the club’s permanent manager, Solskjær is planning for the future and reiterated after the game on Wednesday that he has no issue with not having been given the job already.