Since it’s rather difficult to know where to start on what happened on Wednesday, let’s begin in the future. I want to assure you that when the apocalypse has come, and you’re living in the bombed-out remnants of civilisation, clad in rags and distilling drinking water from your own urine, the one crackling radio in your resistance bunker will still be bringing news of Conservative party leadership contests. Even as your crew crawl over ghost cities, scavenging electronic equipment that some androgynous teenage savant is going to solder together to see if you can discover if there are Others Like You, you’ll be doing it to a soundtrack of the last radio announcer going: “Aaannnnd … Liam Fox has indicated he will not put his name forward for the next round of balloting. He will instead transfer his votes, so that whichever self-interested timebomb wins will make him minister of food spores.” Still, back to the present day, where it’s arguably not all good news. On Wednesday evening, Theresa May offered Tory MPs her pending resignation if her deal was passed, but the DUP trophy brides she spent a billion quid on have still declined to back it. Thus the prime minister crosses into the realm of philosophical paradox: she is too weak to resign. May has now surpassed C Montgomery Burns as Earth’s puniest big-hitter. Meanwhile, the Tories launch another competition to see who will be the next one of them to have their prime ministerial career curtailed by the issue of Europe. In the House of Commons, though, control of the legislative agenda had been handed to the cry-laugh emoji, and MPs rose as expected to the challenge of indicative votes by saying no to all options placed before them. As MPs waited for the Speaker to announce these results, the Independent Group’s Anna Soubry attempted to start a Mexican wave in the chamber. Hard to imagine a more appropriate gesture at a moment of national crisis, unless Anthony Eden announced his Suez ultimatum on kiss cam. As for where we go from here, it wouldn’t have been any more demeaning to have woken up and learned that Sam Allardyce had been appointed to manage the United Kingdom on a vote-by-vote basis. Instead, breakfast television featured quarterwittery from Mark Francois. Of May’s deal, the ERG vice-chair declared: “I wouldn’t vote for it if they put a shotgun in my mouth.” Plenty more where that came from, no doubt. When you think of all the ball-gags that must have been worn by Tory MPs down the years, it really is a tragedy that one couldn’t be found for Mark. So now, the country faces another gruelling 24 hours down the banter mine, as the government agonises over whether or not to table Meaningful Vote 3 for Friday. Given its dodgy prospects, and her own profoundly repressed relationship with the truth, it is unclear whether the prime minister has thrown herself under the bus, or whether she is still clinging on to its chassis, ready to claw her way back up when it stops at the next traffic lights. But what of Boris Johnson, who has spent months calling the deal “vassalage”, “slavery” and so on, culminating in a porphyric Telegraph column on Monday in which he channelled Moses in Exodus to demand: “LET MY PEOPLE GO”. Following May’s resignation promise, this same Boris Johnson announced he will now be voting for the deal. Yes – huge soz to the Israelite slaves, obviously, but it turns out Moses is going to try his luck on the Egyptian career ladder after all. Bum around court a bit, knock up a couple of the Pharaoh’s daughters, tell a few hundred off-colour jokes. But you guys go ahead and he’ll totally catch you up. Save him a place in the middle of the sea. If it helps, he’s written two opposing versions of the Ten Commandments. I know! Classic Moses. Lighter relief was provided by reports from the ERG meeting, where historical parenthesis Steve Baker ranted of the Commons: “I could tear this place down and bulldoze it in to the river.” Oh dear. As we keep seeing from the Brexit ultras, it’s such a short leap from the idealistic fetishisation of parliamentary sovereignty to wanting to bulldoze parliament into the Thames. (Later, it emerged that Baker and the other diehard objectors to the deal were calling themselves Spartans – a reminder that Baker simply has to be played by Gerard Butler in the TV adaptation. No other actor could summon the sheer volume of hammily deluded self-regard the role demands.) At the end of Baker’s speech, his colleagues – including Rees-Mogg – reportedly embraced him, even though “we are not a hugging group”. So in dark moments over the next few days – and it is going to get bleak – please just picture the spectacle of Rees-Mogg pulling Baker to the pinstripes and going: “C’mon. Hug it out, bitch.” I should stress those were not exact words that Jacob Rees-Mogg used, but given the ghastly things he did actually say in the Commons debate, no invention could be worse. If you missed this, Rees-Mogg spent much of his interjection making boastfully vulgar comparisons between his Etonian education (and that of Oliver Letwin), and the inferior schooldays of Nick Boles, who went to Winchester. Rees-Mogg is 49. Such a shame that no one ever taught him how to behave properly in public – it can’t all be Nanny’s fault, but I’m afraid Jacob really is parliament’s naffest man. Is there a real Rees-Mogg that this tellingly gauche Tom Ripley bludgeoned to death on a yacht off the Italian coast some time in the 1980s? Jacob seems to have been in character decades longer than Daniel Day-Lewis, yet never done anything remotely watchable. Anyway, let me conclude with a correction. A fortnight ago, I suggested the movie disaster Brexit was most like was Heaven’s Gate, simply because that notorious flop effectively collapsed a studio much in the way this crisis is threatening to collapse the UK. But I have since wondered whether the most closely analogous flop is Werner Herzog’s Fitzcarraldo (don’t worry, you needn’t have seen it), which even its director came to see as “the conquest of the useless”. Stop me if any of this feels familiar, but during the making of it Herzog claimed to have stopped sleeping entirely – “I just have brief, strenuous fainting spells” – while actors he accused of immense stupidity were required to do things like drag a steamship over a mountain. Everyone on the movie behaved appallingly. Indeed, when I look back over all the progressively insane and insatiable demands of the ERG and others during this sorry saga, I think of the story of Herzog’s leading man Klaus Kinski, who on the very day he arrived on set screamed: “Not even my hairdresser is allowed to touch my hair!” And things went downhill from there. One of the crew was bitten by a snake and sawed off his own foot. Some of the extras offered to kill Kinski. Herzog talked them out of it on the basis that the film wouldn’t be finished. Quite when Brexit and all its increasingly hallucinatory fallout will be done is less clear than it was even 24 hours ago. As one noted American TV news presenter inquired as the indicative vote results came in: “Is there a word for something that has passed through farce and tragedy like nine times already?” Well. None of us wishes to call this one too soon, but it is, perhaps, just beginning to feel like that word might be “Brexit”. See you for round 10 tomorrow. • Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist