A procession of leading Conservative Brexit supporters changing their minds and backing Theresa May’s deal at the last minute was not enough for it to pass. Here are what members of the ERG have said in the past about the deal they just voted for. As well as describing it as “woeful”, “lamentable”, “a deal that represents the worst of both worlds”, and full of “appalling defects”, Boris Johnson wrote of the deal: “I am afraid that, in legal terms, they will be our colonial masters, and there will not be a damn thing we can do about any of it. Will I vote for this backstop, as things stand? No way.” The Telegraph, 10 March 2019 A week later he described a constituency meeting where they were discussing the deal: “There was a chance, I said, that the government would ask parliament to vote for a third time on the prime minister’s EU withdrawal agreement. If such a vote took place, I had two options. I could either stick to my guns, or I could fold. I asked for a show of hands. I was struck by the near unanimity of the meeting. My constituents were strongly of the view that I should not compromise.” The Telegraph, 17 March 2019 Boris Johnson voted to pass the withdrawal agreement. “It will be no good trying to pretend to [voters] that this deal honours the result of the referendum when it is obvious to everyone that it doesn’t. We have gone from ‘no deal is better than a bad deal’ to ‘any deal is better than no deal’. I cannot defend this, and I cannot vote for this deal. I could not look my constituents in the eye were I to do that.”Esther McVey’s resignation letter, November 2018 Esther McVey voted to pass the withdrawal agreement. “She hasn’t so much struck a deal as surrendered to Brussels and given in to everything they want and tried to frustrate Brexit, that it’s not so much a vassal state anymore as a slave state.” Speaking to Sky News, November 2018 “The government has not helped itself with its withdrawal agreement, which has proved to be a rotten accord. It condemns the United Kingdom to at least 21 months of vassalage at a cost of £39bn and although fewer areas of British life would be affected than is currently the case, in several important departments there would be even less control than there is now.”The Somerset Guardian, 13 March 2019 Jacob Rees-Mogg voted to pass the withdrawal agreement. “The proposed withdrawal agreement is a terrible deal under which we won’t take back control of our money, laws and trade. The proposed deal is against our national interest and will harm our country.”Daily Express, December 2018 “Let’s be clear: the withdrawal agreement does not respect the referendum result.”The Telegraph, 2 January 2019 David Davis voted twice to pass the withdrawal agreement. “I cannot reconcile the terms of the proposed deal with the promises we made to the country in our manifesto at the last election. This is, at its heart, a matter of public trust. Ultimately, you deserve a Brexit secretary who can make the case for the deal you are pursuing with conviction. I am only sorry, in good conscience, that I cannot.”Dominic Raab’s resignation letter as Brexit secretary, November 2018 Dominic Raab voted to pass the withdrawal agreement. “British governments have lied about the EU for decades. This deal is the final deceit. We have been assured that the withdrawal agreement delivers on our manifesto pledges. “However, the agreement makes clear the plan is to lock ourselves in without an exit and to the EU’s customs union for goods and agricultural products and the ECJ. Furthermore, the deal, with its return to wet stamps at the border when customs procedures have for decades been automated, is unworkable. Even the civil servants admitted this to us at a meeting, and the EU we know recognises that this is so. Yet publicly the government continues to deny this.”The Telegraph, 3 March 2019 Iain Duncan Smith voted to pass the withdrawal agreement. “We haven’t even tried to negotiate a good deal. From the moment the calamitous Chequers proposals were published it’s been clear the government is seeking an arrangement that is too close to the EU, following EU rules and adhering to EU standards. The withdrawal agreement as it stands leaves us subject to Brussels’ laws but with no voice and no say in making them. That is the worst of all possible worlds.”Nadine Dorries’ blog, January 2019 Nadine Dorries voted twice to pass the withdrawal agreement.