Leonardo da Vinci’s “rediscovered” painting Salvator Mundi sold for $450,312,500 in 2017, setting a record for the highest price ever fetched at auction – one that is unlikely to be beaten any time soon. Yet the art world’s scepticism about it is virulent. So is the small terracotta sculpture known as The Virgin with the Laughing Child more or less likely to be a true Leonardo? Unlike Salvator Mundi, it’s not for sale. No one is playing the market; it feels more like pure love by the experts who believe in it. And the fact is, it’s a much lovelier thing. The terracotta is well preserved – fired clay is tough stuff – and you can practically feel the artist’s fingers shaping it. It’s clearly influenced by Verocchio, the sweetly graceful artist of tender Madonnas and frolicking cupids. But at the same time, it has a wild touch that’s different from his. So what makes more sense than for it to be the work of a student of Verocchio’s – who also happened to be a genius? Leonardo is the obvious candidate. The Virgin with the Laughing Child is a much more believable – and likeable – candidate for a rediscovered Leonardo da Vinci than the ghostlike Salvator Mundi. No one is making exaggerated claims that it rivals the Mona Lisa. On the contrary. It’s a student piece, his degree work if you like, completed as he finished his training under Verrocchio. It puts us in direct touch with the 20-year-old Leonardo just as he starts to find himself. Here he is, looking at life, making sketches of mothers and children, capturing that love and tenderness in a sweetly beautiful sculpture. He hasn’t mastered noses yet. Yet only Leonardo caught the flow and motion of life in the way this playful image of Jesus does. A laughing baby Jesus? You simply don’t see that in 15th-century art. After seeing it unveiled in Florence this month, I visited the Uffizi and looked at one serious-faced infant Christ after another. Leonardo was the artist who revolutionised how children were portrayed, who paid attention to play and fun in a new way. In his later paintings he showed Jesus playing with a lamb, or interacting with his playmate, a young John the Baptist. You can see the genesis of that naturalness here. The Virgin with the Laughing Child makes you believe that Leonardo really was a great sculptor, and that the Horse in Milan on which he spent so long was not just a fantasy but a genuine masterpiece. It’s a unique object that simply has not been paid proper attention until now. But it seems unmistakeable that this Virgin Mary’s delicate smile is the work of the same man who it was once claimed got musicians to play for the Mona Lisa so she would smile for him. Cheer up, says the young Leonardo, who’s already more interested in science than piety – it’s the Renaissance!