Labour’s tensions over Brexit look set to be exposed again this week, as the campaign for a second referendum reaches a moment of truth in parliament. Jeremy Corbyn appeared to signal on Sunday that his party would back an amendment aimed at securing a second Brexit referendum, set to be tabled this week – but also stressed that Labour had not ruled out tabling another vote of no confidence and still hoped to secure its own, softer Brexit deal. The Kyle-Wilson amendment was drawn up by two Labour MPs, Peter Kyle and Phil Wilson, who consulted the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, and the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, over the precise wording. If May’s deal were brought back to parliament this week, Corbyn suggested Labour was likely to support the amendment, in which approval of the deal would be made conditional on a “confirmatory ballot”. “I had a very good discussion with Phil Wilson and Peter Kyle last week and we went through what they’re trying to do, which is make sure people do have a say in the final matter, and that we agree with and support,” he told Sky’s Sophy Ridge. Asked if Labour would back it, he said: “If the amendment is as I’ve just set out, then we will be supporting it – but we’ve got to see the wording of it.” Starmer swiftly reiterated that he believed Labour should back the amendment, saying: “We must support the lock of a public vote.” .@JeremyCorbyn right to be supportive of the @PeterKyle and @MPphilwilson proposal. As I said in Parliament last week, we must support the lock of a public vote to prevent a damaging Tory Brexit or no deal being imposed on our country. However, the idea sparked an immediate backlash. Stoke Central MP Gareth Snell rejected the idea of a confirmatory referendum. “It’s an option we’ve already voted down twice and said it doesn’t deliver what leave voters voted for,” he said. “It stinks of establishment stitch-up and disenfranchises the growing band of ‘no dealers’.” An amendment calling for a second Brexit referendum tabled by the independent MP Sarah Wollaston last week was overwhelmingly defeated, by 334 votes to 85, after Labour opted to abstain. Seventeen Labour MPs rebelled against the whip to vote against the Wollaston amendment, with five, including Ruth Smeeth and Emma Lewell-Buck, resigning from junior frontbench roles to do so, underlining the strength of feeling among some MPs from leave-voting seats against another poll. Backers of the formal People’s Vote campaign were furious with Wollaston and her allies in the breakaway Independent Group for forcing the issue, as they saw it, too soon. But they are expected to throw their weight behind the Kyle-Wilson amendment this week. Corbyn hinted that if Kyle-Wilson was passed, Labour would not then whip its MPs to support the amended motion, which would be to approve May’s deal, subject to a public vote. “We’re not supporting Theresa May’s deal at all, because we think it’s a blindfold Brexit, which would do enormous damage to our economy,” he said. The amendment’s supporters nevertheless believe they could still mobilise enough Labour MPs to secure a majority and trigger a referendum. Kyle insisted his approach was the only way through the impasse at Westminster. “There’s no majority for anything. What we’re trying to do is bring two minorities together: MPs who want to secure a public vote, in one way or another, and MPs who support May’s deal.” Corbyn has, however, continued to stress Labour’s determination to press home its own alternative Brexit proposals. “This is ridiculous; this thing has been defeated comprehensively,” he said, of May’s deal. “She has got to do something different – and therefore our proposal of a customs union, market access and guaranteeing rights and environmental and consumer protections, are I think the credible ones that are serious, and that’s what we’re putting forward,” he told Sky. Asked if he was enthusiastic about a referendum, as Kyle has said, Corbyn replied: “I’m enthusiastic about getting a deal with Europe which guarantees our future trading relationship, protects jobs and industries in this country – and I do think people should have a choice on that.” “The priority is to make sure that we don’t crash out on 29 March. The priority is to protect jobs and industries in this country. The priority is to make sure that we have the right future trading relationship – and a real, credible choice that the people can make on their future relationship with Europe.” Corbyn declined to say how he would vote in a Brexit referendum. “It depends what the choice is in front of us,” he said. Labour later issued a press release saying that Corbyn would be holding a series of meetings this week with “colleagues across parliament ... to discuss our credible proposals of a customs union, market access and guaranteeing rights and environmental and consumer protections”. His message was echoed by Richard Burgon, the shadow justice secretary, who tweeted after Corbyn’s appearance that Labour’s preferred option is for “a Brexit deal that respects the referendum and demands jobs, rights and protections”. As Jeremy said today, Labour's preferred option is for a Brexit deal that respects the referendum and defends jobs, rights & protections.Labour has a credible Brexit plan which is the basis for our ongoing efforts to bring MPs together to build the consensus our country needs. https://t.co/kotQ2khfBM Some shadow ministers anxious about the impact of what they fear would be a divisive referendum on Labour’s electoral coalition would be likely to push for an alternative form of Brexit to be included on the ballot paper. Meanwhile, the leftwing anti-Brexit campaign group Another Europe is Possible claimed any Labour MPs who supported May’s deal should face deselection. Its national organiser, Michael Chessum, said: “The whole labour movement – from the leadership, to the unions, to the rank and file of the party – must do everything within their power to make it clear to MPs that if they fail to oppose May’s deal, they cannot represent the party at the next election.” A People’s Vote spokesman insisted that even if the Kyle-Wilson amendment is defeated this week, it would not mean the argument for a referendum could not be won in future. “There is a groundswell of support for the compromise plan of a confirmatory ballot being proposed by Phil Wilson and Peter Kyle, but it may not be enough to get them over the line if it’s tabled as an amendment to the next meaningful vote this week. “Instead, it’s likely that the best chance of making sure the public have the final say on Brexit will be in an extension period if and when parliament has finally decided what it means by Brexit. “Once MPs have decided on either a soft or hard version of a deal, the Brexit coalition begins to crumble because whoever has lost that argument will be suddenly a lot more persuaded that this whole vexed question should go back to the people.”  