Charles Leclerc claimed his first ever pole position taking the top spot for Ferrari at the Bahrain Grand Prix, with his teammate Sebastian Vettel in second. They locked out the front row with a dominant performance that their rivals simply could not match, the form that deserted them in Australia returning with ominous strength in Bahrain. Lewis Hamilton in the Mercedes was in third with his teammate Valtteri Bottas fourth. Max Verstappen’s Red Bull was in fifth with a good run for Kevin Magnussen in the Haas to take sixth. Leclerc put in a mighty lap to ensure pole under the floodlights of the Sakhir circuit, displaying once again the pace that Ferrari have had in spades in Bahrain. He took pole with a time of 1min 27.866sec, two-tenths clear of Vettel and a full three-tenths up on Hamilton. The lap was inch-perfect but the Scuderia had been on top all weekend, quickest in every practice session, and had form that Leclerc exploited ruthlessly. He was quickest on the first hot laps in Q3, exactly matching the track record of 1.27.958 before going even quicker on his final run. He is 21 years and 165 days old and only Vettel in 2008, at 21 years and 72 days, has been younger when claiming a first F1 pole. The first sector was the major differentiator; Ferrari has held a major pace advantage through the two straights and first four corners all weekend. Leclerc was quickest in both Q1 and Q2, looking confident and controlled across every lap. Vettel ran only once in Q3, saving his tyres for the race, and on that single lap had no answer to his teammate. Leclerc’s first career pole position is a hugely impressive start in only his second race for Ferrari. He had shown real talent in his rookie F1 year for Sauber in 2018 but did not have the machinery to challenge at the front. That he has managed to do so at his second attempt under the immense pressure of driving for the Scuderia and at such a young age only reinforces his credentials as a potential future world champion. The Monegasque was disappointed with making only fifth on the grid at the first round in Australia but went on to demonstrate real pace in the race. Leclerc could have challenged Vettel for fourth place but was told to hold station by his steam. Ferrari were left perplexed at their lack of pace in Melbourne, finishing down the field in fourth and fifth to a dominant Mercedes one-two led by Bottas, and Leclerc will be eager to prove he and the Scuderia can genuinely be title contenders this year by making his mark in Bahrain. He trails Bottas by 16 points in the championship. Mercedes had enjoyed an entirely unexpected advantage over Ferrari in Australia. The Scuderia were off the pace all weekend and they finished well back from Bottas and Hamilton. However they had found the grip and balance that were absent at Albert Park in Bahrain and had looked very strong in practice. They were more than half a second clear in the second session and, with Leclerc quickest, a massive seven-tenths up on Saturday. Hamilton had warned that he expected Ferrari to come back strongly in Bahrain and, with their car once again showing all the positive attributes it had displayed in winter testing, Leclerc took advantage. On this form Ferrari are once again on the front foot. Mercedes are attempting to secure a record sixth consecutive drivers’ and constructors’ championship double but the Scuderia would clearly like to deny them and in doing so end their own drought. They have not won the drivers’ championship since Kimi Räikkönen took it in 2007 and the constructors’ since 2008. Under their new team principal, Mattia Binotto, who has brought direction and harmony to the team, and with the car once again looking immensely strong, this is just the comeback they required after Australia. McLaren will be buoyed by putting two cars into Q3, with Carlos Sainz and Lando Norris in seventh and 10th, respectively. Romain Grosjean was in eighth for Haas but is under investigation for blocking Norris in Q1. Räikkönen, now at Alfa Romeo, was in ninth. Red Bull’s Pierre Gasly had another disappointing qualifying, going out in Q2 in 13th, lacking traction from his tyres. Daniel Ricciardo’s Renault was in 11th. The Toro Rossos of Alexander Albon and Daniil Kvyat were in 12th and 15th, with Sergio Pérez’s Racing Point in 14th. The Williams cars of George Russell and Robert Kubica remained at the back of the grid, out in 19th and 20th. Antonio Giovinazzi in the Sauber was in 16th in front of Nico Hülkenberg in the Renault and the Racing Point of Lance Stroll.