A fortnight ago the writer Candice Carty-Williams was talking to a man on a dating app. They began to discuss meeting up, then out of the blue, he announced: “I like really strong ebony women and I want them to dominate me.” “This has happened to me, like, 100 times,” Carty-Williams says with surprising cheerfulness. “He was a white man. It’s only now that I’m old and wise enough to understand my value that I didn’t take that forward. The younger me – the girl growing up believing that black girls are not desirable except for sex – would have entertained that for a long time.” Queenie, the eponymous heroine of Carty-Williams’ smart and funny debut novel, has similar issues with self-esteem. This is why she ends up on dates with a succession of creeps who call her “chocolate girl”, who drool over her curves or tell her they have “a thing” for black women. Blunt, engaging and frequently eye-opening, the book details Queenie’s experiences negotiating love, work and friendship in London. It opens, in no-nonsense style, with a gynaecological examination: as Queenie lies on the table fretting about her disintegrating relationship with her boyfriend, a doctor sits at the business end trying to find the cause of her abdominal pain. After a scan, it’s concluded that she is having a miscarriage. Things go from bad to worse after Queenie’s boyfriend asks that they take a break and she moves out of his flat. She slips into a downward spiral during which she has a series of bruising sexual encounters and struggles to keep hold of her job and her home. On hand for sympathy and occasional bouts of tough love are Queenie’s close friends Darcy, Kyazike and Cassandra, whom she calls her “corgis”, and her grandparents, who take care of her at her lowest moments. ‘I wanted to explore how, for lots of women like me, our sexual agency is defined by someone wanting something from us’ I meet Carty-Williams at the London publishing office where she works as a marketing executive. Like Queenie, she is warm and funny, though she is, she says, a lot tougher than her character – “when it comes to men: I don’t romanticise things and I don’t go into things blind”. The book isn’t exactly autobiographical; instead it depicts “a version of me if I’d let things get out of hand. I wanted to explore how, in the case of myself and lots of women like me, our sexual agency is still defined by someone else wanting something from us … When it comes to black women and interracial dating you get accustomed to men saying, ‘You’re pretty for a black girl’ or ‘You’re not usually my type’. And actually, when you’re told that’s what your value is, it’s hard to say no because you begin to feel grateful for the attention.” Before writing Queenie, Carty-Williams had no notion of who or what her first novel would be about. In her previous job at another publisher, she had created the Guardian and 4th Estate BAME short story prize in order to champion underrepresented writers, but, in debt and working full-time, she couldn’t imagine being able to write a book herself. In the autumn of 2016, she saw that the novelist Jojo Moyes was offering a free week-long writing retreat at her home in the countryside. “I was living in a really shitty shared house,” she recalls. “I remember being really cold and in bed. I thought, ‘Well, I’ve got nothing to lose.’” She applied in September, was accepted in October and, after borrowing a friend’s car, left London for Moyes’s home in Suffolk in early November. “I had never driven on a motorway before. I don’t think I’d driven since I passed my test the year before. But I’m of the mind that if you have to do something, you just get it done. So I did it.” By bedtime on the first day Carty-Williams had written 8,000 words, and by the end of the week she’d got up to 40,000. “It felt a bit like an outpouring. I think Queenie had been brewing for a very long time.” On returning to London, she went back to work but revisited the book during the Christmas break. By that point she had moved and was living in a tiny studio flat – “It had everything: mice, mould, slugs, damp.” What kept her going was her enduring frustration that there were no women like Queenie in contemporary literature, which she still finds baffling. It is, she says, part of a wider problem in a publishing industry that is largely run by white middle-class people, who have limited interest in those outside their own community and experience. “I have had to do a lot of work to educate people on why racism is bad. Just because you’re not calling someone the N-word doesn’t mean that the way you are talking with them isn’t racist. It’s completely exhausting.” Carty-Williams can’t remember a time in her life when she wasn’t subject to subtle forms of racism and “othering”. This has ranged from boys at school telling her they’d love to go out with her but their parents would never allow them to date a black girl, to women she’s never met before coming up and touching her hair. “I wear a headscarf all the time now because it’s too much,” she says. “I haven’t been to the Notting Hill carnival for two years because the last time I went my friends had to form a circle around me. These people just kept reaching out and going [adopts voice of braying posh girl] ‘Oh my God, I loooove it.’” One of Carty-Williams’s masterstrokes in Queenie is using humour and pathos to examine social and racial politics. Her style is stealth rather than sledgehammer. And so we get a glimpse of the housing crisis faced by millennials as Queenie views a series of flats, each one more depressing and overpriced than the last. (It’s with grim inevitability that one of the estate agents offers to bring down the price in exchange for sex.) And there’s the date who tells her she tastes of chocolate and laughingly calls her “one of those Black Lives Matter girls”. “People are always going to be on hand to say that you’re overreacting or you’re wrong when you get upset about these things,” she says. “It takes so much strength to say, ‘Look, this is bad’. Now we have #MeToo and Black Lives Matter, and these movements are amazing for me as a black woman because I don’t feel alone in this any more. I know that my voice is valid and is heard. I think to myself, ‘Thank God for social media.’ I know it has its drawbacks, but it has connected so many people and I think feeling alone and suffering in silence is one of the most horrible and destructive things.” There is a brief mention in the book of Windrush, a subject close to Carty-Williams’ heart. “These things are mine and my family’s lived experience,” she says. “The Windrush stuff knocked me for six. That’s my grandparents you’re talking about. You’re not taking my grandparents from me. My grandad was brought over here to work. He was brought here. And you’re telling me that he needs to go back home? Are you crazy? It actually leaves me speechless.” Before Carty-Williams was born in 1989, her mother worked nights as a hospital receptionist; a Jamaican taxi driver would pick her up after her shifts. They had an affair and she became pregnant. “My mum was ecstatic. She’d met this lovely man and she was having a baby. Life was good. Then two weeks after I was born, she was in Mothercare with me, and she’s, like: ‘Oh look, there’s your dad. Oh, and there’s a woman with him with three kids, and the woman’s pregnant.’ So my mum went home, handed me over to my nan, bought a bottle of wine and packet of cigarettes, and shoved all of his clothes in the toilet.” Carty-Williams says her childhood was “really shitty. I was lonely a lot of the time and I felt that I would never be able to achieve anything.” Her lack of confidence stemmed from her early years. “I have a cousin who is a bit older than me who is very beautiful, and I was always compared to her. Everyone in the family would say: ‘You’re smart but your cousin’s beautiful.’ I felt such an outsider because of it.” Raised in south London, she moved around a lot as a child. She and her mother started out in Clapham, and spent a few years in Norbury before moving in with her grandparents in Streatham. When she was 15 her mother had a second daughter, prompting a move to Lewisham with her stepfather. She struggled at secondary school where she was loud and was always put in the lower academic sets. “I was, like, ‘Well I know I’m not beautiful but what if I’m not smart? Then what am I?’” In her teens, an exclusion from school for a week turned out to be a godsend as her stepfather sent her to Lewisham library every day. Reading became her refuge. She plundered her nan’s collection of Catherine Cookson novels and furtively read Virginia Andrews’ Flowers in the Attic. She adored Louise Rennison’s Georgia Nicolson series and devoured Malorie Blackman’s books – “when I read Noughts & Crosses, it was, ‘Woah, what the fuck is this?’” Later, in her early 20s, reading Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s Americanah was a revelation: “I thought, ‘Wow, someone gets it! The hair stuff!’” Lately she’s been reading Bernadine Evaristo and Diana Evans, who she sees as important legacy authors celebrating black womanhood. But still, she observes, they are the exception rather than the rule. She points out that, in her book, Queenie’s best friends are a black Ugandan, a Jewish north Londoner and a white middle-class woman, a group who fairly accurately reflect her own friendship circle. “I’ve yet to read a book by a white woman where she’s written a diverse set of friends,” she notes. “Representation is important, because I need to read something that I recognise and my children, if I have them, will need that too … My plan at the start of this was that I wanted to do something that represents. That, ultimately, is why Queenie exists.” • Queenie is published on 11 April by Trapeze. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.