When Nish Kumar first made his mark as a solo comic, his material was mild-mannered, culturally engaged and political with a small “p”. It was also often, as the Guardian stated in a 2015 preview, “shockingly inoffensive”. Former homely topics included sleep, folk songs and his pessimistic mum. Scroll forward half a decade, however, and no one is accusing the former Edinburgh award nominee of being mellow. In a 2017 interview, he described a racist heckle he received while on stage. “Last year, on the night of Brexit, a guy told me to ‘go home’ while I was on stage, and that was, for want of a better term, a Falling Down moment for me where I thought: ‘Fuck this.’ The end of that show became quite anger-driven.” The fury has stuck with him since. Not that it is always easy. “There’s a Seinfeld episode, where he talks about why he can’t get angry, because his voice rises to a comedic pitch and no one takes him seriously – and that’s true of me, too,” says the Croydon-raised standup. “One of my friends said: ‘I don’t know how you maintain that level of anger every night.’ But everyone I know is as furious as me; I don’t know how the rest of them are coping. I’m lucky to have an outlet.” Now, as host of the slowburn TV hit The Mash Report, Kumar is the face of combative British satire, a regular on Question Time, and a constant concern to his mum, who “finds it very stressful that I’m upsetting so many people”. Leavers in particular don’t love Kumar: choice epithets directed at him on Twitter have included “the BBC’s fave #racecard playing liar” and (after a recent Question Time appearance), “Who gives a toss what Nish Kumar thinks? He should stick to the BBC funded anti-Brexit Mash Report propaganda show.” “I am absolutely guilty of the accusation levelled at me by furious people on the internet,” says Kumar, “in that I have not got over Brexit. “I wasn’t as cynical about Britain as a lot of friends of mine who are also people of colour,” he adds. He was convinced that after the Breaking Point poster and the death of Jo Cox that “surely we’ll put this genie back in the bottle?” he says. “So when we voted for it, it kind of broke my heart. That anger has not left me.” Kumar is on the second leg of the UK tour of It’s in Your Nature to Destroy Yourselves: a show that opens with a excoriating screed against the incompetence and bad faith of the movement towards Brexit. The self-mockery is still there: when we meet for coffee near Euston station before he travels to a regional gig, Kumar laughs often and loudly at his own expense. Onstage too, he is the butt of the joke: during a routine about losing his heroes (Louis CK included) to #MeToo, or the beautiful gag from 2014 that finds him admiring his own conversation so much he forgets what he’s talking about. The keynote, however, is outrage. But why use comedy – an art form designed to make people smile – as a vent for fury? And is laughing at outrage and injustice really a substitute for doing something about it? “Every day I wake up,” explains Kumar, “and think: ‘Am I part of the problem? Am I letting people think that by laughing at a joke they’ve participated democratically? And am I helping further entrench the political divide? All the raging mouthpieces of the right that I’m furious with, am I just the same but on the left?’ I have no easy answers to that.” And so, in It’s In Your Nature …, Kumar argues that we all have a responsibility – himself included – to engage beyond comedy, to be active in defence of the Britain we believe in. In Kumar’s case, that has led him (“and 100%, I did not see this in my trajectory”) to multiple appearances on Question Time. The most recent appearance saw him lock horns with rightwing opinionator Melanie Phillips over stop-and-search, with Phillips claiming the comedian wasn’t qualified to pronounce on police racism because he hadn’t read the McPherson report from cover to cover. “I should have been more calm and reasoned,” says Kumar now. “I should have taken a breath, and responded. But it’s very hard to do that.” As an onlooker, one can but marvel: how has his comedy career come to this? “I don’t know if I’m doing the right thing,” he says, ruefully, “I really don’t. But it’s hard to keep saying ‘no’ to those programmes and to be angry that they represent neither my point of view nor people of colour in the media.” It is fun to joke in his standup, says Kumar, about how “wildly underqualified” he is for Question Time, but it’s not fun at the time. “The two things I get texted after Question Time are: ‘Well done’, and, ‘Fuck me, I’m glad that’s not me.’” Then there’s his mum’s anxious trawls of Twitter after each broadcast. “She’ll call me up to tell me: ‘A couple of people really didn’t like this.’” But Question Time has helped secure parental backing for Kumar’s career after years of doubt. “They used to try to get me to stop. Constantly.” His brother – “the sensible one” – works for Deutsche Bank in Berlin. “My parents wanted me to be a lawyer,” says Kumar, a Durham University English and history graduate, “whereas now they think: ‘Well, at least he’s using his education.’” It must help with Question Time prep that Kumar has to pore over current affairs in his day job: first as host of Radio 4 Extra’s Newsjack, now in his high-profile gig helming BBC Two’s The Mash Report, Britain’s most successful effort yet to ape satirical US formats such as The Daily Show and The Late Show With Stephen Colbert. Which brings us to Kumar’s faith in comedy as a vehicle for political passion. He grew up watching Chris Rock “delivering absolute raw fury about race in America”, and Jon Stewart on The Daily Show. For years, delivering a workable UK version of the latter was British broadcasting’s holy grail. The pilot episode of The Mash Report was one of three formats trialled to meet that challenge. Kumar did not expect to get the hosting job (“I think they tried to get someone more famous and everyone else said no”), nor to progress to a full series. “It felt like there was a [curse] around that style of show, and the other two pilots,” he says. One of them, a light-ent format with Romesh Ranganathan and Katherine Ryan, “seemed more online with what’s on British TV”. That feeling has persisted, he says, through two full series. “At every stage, we’ve walked away going: ‘Lovely to work with you, we may never see each other again.’ None of us can believe it’s still here.” The early episodes – “I saw a clip from the first one and I can see sheer terror in my face” – were greeted sceptically by critics and audiences. “The freshness of a microwaved salad and the deftness of a sledgehammer to the face,” was one verdict online. But the series has grown in confidence, with several sketches (particularly Rachel Parris’s monologues about sexual harassment or Piers Morgan) going stratospheric online. For Kumar, that is about investment: “No one’s tried it on this scale before, with writers’ rooms and multiple correspondents. And no one has ever commissioned 10 episodes.” But it is also about not compromising on the politics. The show is not hamstrung by political caution or evenhandedness. As Kumar told one recent interviewer: “I think there’s a real appetite for the gloves to come off.” The Kumar of The Mash Report is no match, though, for his live standup persona, which is altogether wilder. Thanks to that TV profile, he is playing bigger theatres now, even if his demographic remains narrow. “On two occasions last week, I joked about being in a room full of people who donated to the Guardian. The percentage of people who laughed tells you everything you need to know about my audience.” Does that bother him? Not so much. “Stewart Lee said recently that if you’re doing comedy for anxious liberals – well, those people need a laugh right now. A couple of years ago, there was this sense that, if you were a leftie, you had to push your audience and challenge their assumptions. But the news is doing that now. So why not just let them have a fun night?” Onstage, I’ve seen Kumar laughingly contrast his niche appeal with that of Ranganathan, packing out enormodomes with a more mainstream act. Offstage, there is no envy, he insists. On the one hand, Ranganathan’s success – and that of Guz Khan, Sindhu Vee, Tez Ilyas, Ahir Shah and others – demonstrates the leap forward for British-Asian comedy since Kumar launched his career over a decade ago. “I once worked with Sanjeev Bhaskar,” he tells me, “and he expressed surprise that Goodness Gracious Me hadn’t immediately led to a wave of Asian comics. But now you’re seeing that generation filtering through. We were all 11 or 12 at the time, and that show gave us permission to be comedians.” It is the increasing diversity of comedy, and the teeming creativity he witnesses annually at the Edinburgh festival fringe, that makes Kumar question the current “comedy in crisis” line peddled mainly by middle-aged white male comics (and journalists). “Woke” culture, and the arguments laid out by Hannah Gadsby in her paradigm-shifting standup set Nanette, aren’t bad for comedy, he says; they represent progress. “I’m sure when alternative comedy started, before which – Billy Connolly aside – standup was essentially a person being racist and sexist onstage, there was also the sense that this was the death of comedy. But it’s just progress.” For Kumar, “the idea that Saudi Arabia can pressure Netflix to pull an episode of Hasan Minhaj’s show” – which happened at the turn of the year – “is a much more serious threat to comedy than people tweeting about something.” At any rate, Kumar claims no desire to follow Ranganathan into the O2 – nor John Oliver and James Corden to the US. Sitcoms are of more interest: “That might be cool.” But first he wants to savour what he’s done so far. “My goal,” he says plainly, “was always to do standup in theatres and to contribute to or host a topical show in the UK.” Mission accomplished, then. “‘Alexander wept,’” quotes Kumar, with a big laugh, “‘for there were no more worlds left to conquer!’ “But genuinely, I never thought this career would work out. You know that movie Inside Llewyn Davis?” It’s about an unsuccessful folk musician in 1960s New York. “That film is like a horror movie to me. You know the fork in the road at the end, where Bob Dylan becomes Bob Dylan and he’s stuck being Llewyn Davis, in his bad coat, and he’s cold, and his shoes are wet. If you substitute a Greenwich Village coffee house for a room above a pub in Soho, that was my life. And I really did not think I would ever get this level of success.” Wait – are you saying, Nish Kumar, that you are now comedy’s Bob Dylan? “Yeah, I am.” Another guffaw. “Print that!” Nish Kumar performs at M&S Bank Arena: The Auditorium Liverpool, Sunday 4 March; touring to 1 April