The pay gap between male and female graduates in the UK has widened over three consecutive years, according to new data that suggests a student’s future earnings are strongly linked to their family background and school. The figures from the government’s database of graduate employment and earnings reveal that pay for men continues to outstrip that of women after finishing their undergraduate degrees, and widened each year between 2014 and 2017. In the 2014-15 fiscal year, the gap in median earnings stood at £2,900, with men earning an average of £27,000 five years after graduation and women on £24,100. But the following year the pay gap widened to £3,300 and then to £3,600 in 2016-17, with men’s earnings increasing by more than double those of women. The data also shows that men earn more than women at all stages in the decade after graduation, with male earnings 8% higher after one year, 15% after five years and 31% higher at 10 years after graduation. The gap is partly caused by greater incidence of women in part-time work or staying on at university. For men the smaller proportion of school leavers going on to university is likely to have improved their average pay. The pay figures confirmed previous data showing that courses such as economics, medicine and dentistry were among the best paid, while humanities and creative arts and design were among the lowest. Chris Skidmore, the universities minister, said he was delighted that earnings had continued to increase for recent graduates. “We want students and their parents to have the best possible information about higher education. This data is an invaluable tool to help prospective students make the right choice and know what to expect from the course they choose,” Skidmore said. For men and women combined, average earnings were £30,500 after 10 years, compared with £23,300 after three years and £19,900 after one year. Pay increased at all points but nominal growth slowed as time went on, so that a decade after graduation earnings were just 1% higher than the equivalent graduates in 2014-15. Once inflation was taken into account, however, the degree premium appears to be shrinking for those who graduated in the midst of the global financial crisis in 2006-07: a decade later their earnings fell by £600 a year when adjusted for inflation. The figures also suggest that the trajectory of a graduate’s earnings are set by not just their gender but also their social background and family circumstances, as well as their exam results before going onto higher education. Pupils on free school meals, for example, earned £3,000 a year less than those not on free school meals five years after graduation. Among different ethnic groups, black Caribbean, Pakistani and Bangladeshi graduates all earned less than white, Chinese or Indian ethnicity graduates. Pakistani graduates earned £6,000 a year less than white graduates a decade after finishing their undergraduate degrees. Students with the best school results went on to earn the highest amounts after graduation, and their earnings grew at a faster rate than their peers. Those with three As or similar at A-level earned £5,000 more a year after graduation than those with B and C grades or less, and over £7,000 more than those with lower than three Cs. Nicola Dandridge, chief executive of the Office for Students, said: “It is good to see that in general graduate earnings continue to rise – although gaps remain between more and less disadvantaged groups.” The Department for Education noted that “financial outcomes are just one of the considerations for students when choosing a degree subject, as students will make career choices not solely based on a likely graduate salary”.