The government has conceded it is likely to hold the third meaningful vote on Theresa May’s Brexit deal next week, following intense pressure from MPs for more clarity on the next steps after the extension of the departure date. In an often difficult appearance in the House of Commons, the Brexit minister Kwasi Kwarteng initially rebuffed questions on when the vote might take place, saying the timetable would be outlined soon. But following repeated questioning from Labour and Conservative MPs, he eventually said it would be expected next week. Almost half an hour into Kwarteng’s response to an urgent question following the EU’s imposition of an extended Brexit timetable at a summit in Brussels, the Labour MP David Hanson told the minister there was “a world outside this chamber who would like to know what day we are voting on any meaningful vote”. Kwarteng responded: “The government fully intends to have a meaningful vote next week.” The secondary legislation needed to change the departure date would also be tabled next week, he said, but declined to give any further details on timings, adding: “On this Friday I’m not going to say the exact hour and time of when the meaningful vote will take place.” Separately, No 10 said the EU’s agreement to extend article 50 was contingent on holding the vote next week. The exact date has not been set, but it is likely to be on Tuesday or Wednesday, to give MPs and peers time to pass legislation to change the exit date before 29 March. “The consideration is to hold it when we believe we have a realistic prospect of success,” May’s spokesman said. “My understanding of last night is that the extension to 22 May was contingent on winning the vote next week.” May will meet cabinet ministers in Downing Street and spend the weekend working at Chequers, her country retreat. In the Commons, Kwarteng’s abrupt change followed mounting frustration from MPs at his refusal to answer any questions on what the government would do following the EU’s decision, particularly the next steps if May’s plan is again rejected, triggering a deadline of 12 April for the UK to find a new approach or leave without a deal. Opening the questioning, the shadow Brexit minister, Matthew Pennycook, began by condemning May’s TV statement on Wednesday in which she blamed MPs for being unable to make a decision on Brexit. “But we have made a decision – voting down her deal twice, by historic margins,” he told MPs. “It’s just that it’s a decision the prime minister is clearly incapable of accepting. It is her intransigence, her pandering to the hardliners in her party, and her refusal to compromise that has brought us to this point.” He asked Kwarteng to say when the third meaningful vote would happen, as well as how the government would comply with the ruling by the Speaker, John Bercow, that a new vote will only be allowed under Commons procedures if it is a notably different proposal. If it were defeated again, Pennycook said, Kwarteng should “set out the process by which the government will provide this house with an opportunity to properly debate the range of alternative options available to us, and to facilitate attempts to secure a majority for one of them”. He added: “Ministers have constantly told us that responsible governments prepare for all eventualities. With that in mind, can the minister tell us what contingency plans are being made for the distinct possibility that an extension beyond 12 April will be required.” In his initial response, Kwarteng said only that the timetable would be set out in a further business statement next week, and ignored the other questions, prompting shouts of outrage from some MPs. He then rebuffed requests from Labour’s Hilary Benn to say whether the government would work with MPs on the idea of indicative votes on a possible way forward. “The government’s focus at the moment is to make sure that we can potentially get a meaningful vote and secure the deal on the table,” Kwarteng said. But he later conceded that indicative votes were in fact likely. Asked by Labour’s Karen Buck if the government still planned to seek a consensus way forward if May’s plan fell again, he replied: “I think that if the meaningful vote is voted down then it would be reasonable to have a wide debate in the house to find what the house would tolerate and how it sees things going forward.”