Born in London, Yashere, 44, worked as a lift engineer before becoming a standup in the mid-90s. She appeared on The Lenny Henry Show and Mock The Week, and went on to win best female comedian at the Black Comedy Awards four times. In 2007, she moved to the US, where solo specials such as Skinny B*tch made her a star. The British correspondent for news satire programme The Daily Show, she returns to London to perform at Underbelly festival, Southbank, 21-23 June. What is the trait you most deplore in others?I hate stinginess – arguing over pennies at a restaurant drives me nuts. What was your most embarrassing moment?I peed myself in McDonald’s two years ago. I was on my water-drinking mission and drank a whole litre. Long story short, I tried to get to the toilet and realised I wasn’t going to make it. I slid into a booth and a member of staff noticed the pee running down the plastic seat. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?The diamond-encrusted Rolex I bought myself when I got my Netflix special. What would your super power be?Invisibility – so I can sneak into rooms and listen to conversations or be able to read people’s thoughts. But I must be able to switch it on and off. What is your favourite word?Fuck. What is your guiltiest pleasure?I can watch TV in bed for 15 hours. If you could go back in time, where would you go?I’d go back to Africa pre-slavery and say, “Be careful, they’re going to steal us.” If you could edit your past, what would you change?I’d move to America in my teens. What is the worst job you’ve done?When I used to work as a lift engineer, we repaired the council estate lifts and they’d be rusted from years of people pissing in them. We would be putting our hands on piss-rusted elevator parts. Is it better to give or to receive?I love giving but I love receiving even more. How often do you have sex?When I am home, all the time. I live with my girlfriend, who is a college professor, and every time I come back it’s like we are meeting again for the first time. What is the closest you’ve come to death?I remember working on top of a lift in London. I had my head over the side and one of the other lifts came speeding by. I got my head out just in time to not be decapitated. What keeps you awake at night?Worry about this world: I am glad I haven’t got kids because we are destroying this planet. How would you like to be remembered?As someone who went for it, and didn’t fuck anybody over on the way. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Don’t let anybody tell you that you can’t do it. Tell us a jokeNo: people pay for that. Tell us a secret.I cannot stand people brushing their teeth in front of me. You’d be amazed at the number of people brushing their teeth in movies. I have to turn off. It’s a real phobia.