You at the back, sit up straight. And everyone put their listening ears on. Here’s the list of all the things you’re going to need to understand series five of Line of Duty, which has returned to our screens after a fevered two-year wait. 1. OCG stands for organised crime group (or gang, depending on how formal you want to be). 2. UCO stands for undercover officer. 3. AC-12, as ever, refers to the beleaguered forms of DS Steve Arnott (Martin Compston), newly promoted DI Kate Fleming (Vicky McClure) and Supt Ted Hastings (Adrian Dunbar), the unit in charge of investigating police corruption. Who guards the guardians? These guys. 4. Kate used to be a UCO. 5. Last series, PC Maneet Bindra (Maya Sondhi) became a reluctant informer for ACC Derek Hilton, who turned out to be a veritable lodestone of police corruption before he apparently killed himself in the final episode. 6. Martin Compston is a Scot. You don’t need to know this, I just like to remind people occasionally that he is not only doing the same filigree acting work as the rest of the cast, but he’s doing it in an unnatural accent. Linguistically, he’s doing everything backwards and in high heels – the Ginger Rogers of AC-12. 7. A Regulation 15 Notice is, as I’m sure you will remember from its previous appearances on the records of DS Arnott (undeserved), DI Matthew Cottan (deserved), DCI Roz Huntley (very much deserved) and Supt Hastings (don’t get me started, but – TBS) since the show began in 2012, is found in part three of the Police (Conduct) Regulations and advises the officer that he or she is suspected of general or gross misconduct and will be investigated by the professional standards department – and also that if the recipient is Steve, Ted will be very disappointed in him. 8. The name of AC-12’s new case is ED905. And what a case ED905 is. It begins with an ambush, something we’ve seen plenty of in Jed Mercurio’s murky magnum opus. This time it is to capture £100m worth of heroin being moved from a police warehouse to an incinerator. It leaves three police officers dead and another wounded but spared by the woman in the balaclava-ed gang. It’s ridiculous, unbearably tense and instantly addictive. The two years we have waited to have AC-12 back seem suddenly like the bare minimum needed to prepare adequately for the onslaught. Soon, we are deep in the thick of the plot. Steve and Kate’s investigations into the ambush are stymied by the fact that a UCO is embedded in the gang as part of a super-sensitive ongoing operation authorised at the very highest levels. But they keep on snapping at it like the anti-corruption terriers they are and eventually discover that the UCO hasn’t been heard from for months. “WTF! The UCO’s gone AWOL? FML,” Ted doesn’t quite say when they tell him, although he does threaten to issue reg 15s to all and sundry unless they sort themselves out, PDQ. The information about the drugs’ route, it emerges, was leaked by Maneet’s cousin. Maneet’s professional life unravels from there and she swiftly becomes one of Line of Duty’s object lessons in its perpetually underlying subject: the tiny susceptibilities and decisions that make up a life, the incremental nudges that finally put you and your conscience somewhere you and it never planned to be. Double-dealing between the gang selling the drugs and the one buying them complicates matters further. The first episode ends with the jolt and double-jolt, the impact of which is somehow never softened by the knowledge that it is the signature move of Mercurio’s ongoing masterpiece. Beneath the A plot lie the Bs. We see Steve at home, still suffering from the injuries he received last series. He’s taking painkillers – is he hooked? Ted is getting divorced, living in a hotel and late with his rent. What cracks will appear into which other people can wedge their nasty ways? As ever, nothing is wasted; not a scene, not a line, not a beat. For every morsel of information gathered by the team and by the viewer, another turn reveals 100 hidden possibilities. It fits together flawlessly – you can imagine Mercurio sitting like a watchmaker at his table with the parts spread before him and fitting the loupe to his eye before assembling the whole thing and listening for its perfectly regulated tick. Good times await. OMG.