Sometimes you look at a possible photo and think: “I won’t bother taking that, it doesn’t seem important.” This was almost one of those. It just seemed like a normal scene at the time – men watching a football match. But the interesting thing about photography is that it lets you preserve a little sliver of time. You look at this now and it tells a whole story about how the game has changed: there are no women, no kids, no replica kits, and no seats. The men are all standing in the elements. The picture was taken in 1991 at the Bovril gate entrance of Chelsea’s ground, Stamford Bridge. They beat QPR 2-0. Back then, they would open the gate about 20 or 30 minutes before the end of the game for people to get out. But if you were skint and couldn’t afford the five quid you could sneak in and watch the last half-hour for free. I thought I’d try and shoot some of these people sneaking in but there were only a few of them. I turned the other way and suddenly saw this picture. With the line of people, the tunnel and the lights it made a very strong and brutal composition. I’d always been a Chelsea fan. Alan Hudson was my childhood hero. When I was studying at St Martins the teachers encouraged us to photograph whatever was on our doorstep. I was living in Battersea and you could hear the Chelsea crowd when a goal went in – so I started photographing the fans there. To take a camera along to a football game in the 70s was unusual. I’d get stopped by stewards and asked what I was doing. I had my Doc Martens boot laces taken off me, but never my camera. I've sat on the bench beside Didier Drogba and José Mourinho For years, it was just a personal project. The game was quite unfashionable in the 70s and 80s. Then suddenly Gazza cried and everyone was interested. My photos ended up being published in a book, A View from the Bridge, and shortly after that in 2000 the club asked if I would come and work for them. I did seven seasons, which was absolutely brilliant. I understood what it was to be a fan. I was photographing as a participant rather than an outsider. You don’t actually miss the match when you’re photographing because in a way you’re watching it through the fans. I’ve had some incredible experiences. I’ve sat on the bench next to Didier Drogba, and behind José Mourinho, just to get photos. And I was there at Bolton when we won the league for the first time in 50 years. I remember sitting in the bar with other photographers, smoking a cigar, and thinking this is as good as it gets. But the game had been changing so quickly by that time, especially at Chelsea. Suddenly, we had money and we were attracting players and managers from all over the world – Gullit, Vialli, Mourinho. I hear you want to photograph my mum? She's made a cake and is expecting you on Sunday The bad side of Chelsea fans is always overplayed by the media. One of the things I loved was capturing the whole range of people who went to see the club. Back in the 70s I photographed a lady called Pauline who was a badge lady – every club has a fan who wears badges on a big scarf. Forty years later I tried to track her down again. One day, I got a phone call saying: “I hear you want to photograph mum? She’s still in Clapham, she’s made a cake and she’s expecting you on Sunday.” They used my pictures of her in the club programme which was wonderful. I still go to the game with the same people I’ve been going with for 30 years, and I still take my small digital camera. Of course I miss things from the old days. You could be on the dole and still go to the football in the 70s. And the intensity of standing up was part of the experience too. But there were crowd surges and crushes, and the fact that everyone laughed it off now seems absurd. If a few people had fallen over, something awful could have happened. I like that it’s become safer and more of a family thing. I loved taking my children to the game. I’ve got pictures of my daughter sitting in the dugout wearing a Chelsea babygrow that I’d embroidered the club badge on. I love the idea of handing it on to the next generation. My son goes to every game now, home and away. He’s taken over the mad passion from me. • John Ingledew’s _______ for Life is published by Youth Club, thesubculture archive; youthclubarchive.com Born: Horsham, Sussex, 1960.Training: St Martin’s School of Art, London.Influences: Colin Jones, Paul Wombell, Red Saunders and my teachers at St Martins.High point: ‘The season Chelsea were first champions, I photographed a Premier League game sitting on the substitutes’ bench behind manager José Mourinho and next to striker Didier Drogba. I’d taken pictures of the team coming on to the pitch and thought none of the stewards would notice if I sat down with the subs.’Low point: ‘Not being sent on that day for my Chelsea debut!’Top tip: ‘Find a different view – always look for vantage points that no one else has thought of.’