World Rugby has insisted promotion and relegation will be a part of its proposed new world league despite opposition from within the Six Nations. The global governing body has also staunchly defended its proposal – described as “undercooked” by the Rugby Football Union – and responded to accusations it was planning to exclude the Pacific Islands. World Rugby came under considerable fire last week after reports that its Nations Championship would feature the Six Nations and the Rugby Championship sides, as well as the USA and Japan, and that there would be no promotion or relegation for 12 years. There was also a backlash from senior players including the England captain, Owen Farrell, amid fears their welfare was being ignored as well as the threat of Fiji, Samoa and Tonga boycotting the World Cup. In a statement issued on Wednesday however, World Rugby revealed its original proposal – made to the relevant unions last September – which includes relegation from both the Six Nations and a six-team Rugby Championship, also featuring Japan and Fiji (the next two highest teams in the world rankings), referred to as the Rest of the World. Under the proposal the competition would start in 2022, be held in its full form every two years – but not in World Cup years – and a truncated version in British & Irish Lions years. One team from the Six Nations and one from the Rest of the World would face relegation each time the competition is played in full, or every two years. World Rugby’s decision to go public comes before the emergency meeting next week in Dublin – called by the governing body’s chairman, Bill Beaumont - where representatives from all tier one nations, as well as Japan and Fiji, will be present. Support for World Rugby’s September proposal is far from unanimous – leading to a number of different suggestions including that which leaked last week – with promotion and relegation the main stumbling block. It remains to be seen if and how it can be overcome at next week’s meeting. “Contrary to reports our proposed competition provides opportunities for all teams to compete at the top level on merit, with promotion and relegation,” read World Rugby’s statement. “Under this model, the Pacific Islands and all teams outside the current Six Nations and the Rugby Championship would have a potential pathway. “With the proposed model incorporating competitions that are not owned or run by World Rugby, not all unions are presently in favour of immediate promotion and relegation. We continue to consider the feedback, but remain absolutely committed to an eventual pathway for all.” World Rugby is also seeking to address the players’ concerns and will meet the International Rugby Players Council, of which Farrell and Johnny Sexton are members, on Monday. The council has also said it will convene again next week to discuss World Rugby’s latest proposals.