Jeremy Deller, the Turner prize-winning conceptual artist, has created a print to commemorate “Brexit Day” which reads simply: “Farage in Prison”. One hundred copies of the artwork, which are printed on silkscreen, will be sold at £110 each. They will raise money for the crowdfunder to save central London bar The Social from closure. The Social’s co-founder Robin Turner said the idea for the print was “just a thought that popped into Deller’s mind one day”. Deller, 53, was a contemporary of Farage at Dulwich College school in south London, and told the Financial Times in 2018 that “me and [him] go back a long way”. “I know where he comes from. I know better than he suspects. I know the environment he grew up in and how horrible it was for a teenage boy – a tough, rightwing culture. He obviously thrived on it. He made it his life’s work in a way.” A beautiful artwork and a hopeful message for Brexit day. Print by @jeremydeller, printed by Make Ready. Available here: https://t.co/jX6ZcYfHyC #savethesocial pic.twitter.com/b2eUx1mZkN The artist has made explicitly political work in the past, staging a 2001 reenactment of the Battle of Orgreave from the miners’ strike, when police and miners clashed in the south Yorkshire village in 1984. In 2009, he drove across America with an artwork consisting of a vehicle that had been destroyed by an IED during the US occupation of Iraq two years previously. Deller’s Brexit artwork is the latest in a series of high-profile donations to keep The Social open. Fatboy Slim played a benefit DJ set there on 23 March, while the Chemical Brothers will also return to the venue where they made their name. The Guardian reported on the campaign to save The Social, which had to find £95,000 initially to make its landlords remove it from the property market. Turner told Laura Snapes: “No one will replace these spaces. What’s never acknowledged when you see stories of the kinds of rent rises and rates increases that take out more and more venues is that they are vital parts of the community – as vital as the BHS cafe on the high street or the public library. “They are places for people to meet, to let go, to come alive. People need to hug these places close, as they’ll miss them when they’re gone.”