Former Texas congressman Beto O’Rourke, who narrowly lost to Ted Cruz in last year’s Senate race, is running for president. And it’s about time he made it official, “because he’s been teasing us for months”, said Trevor Noah on Thursday’s Daily Show. O’Rourke has had a painfully slow rollout to the campaign, “but whenever we asked him if he was running, he’d answer like a coy southern belle: ‘I might, but a lady never tells’”, Noah joked. So yesterday’s confirmation wasn’t really news, Noah explained. “Obviously, we all saw this coming – this is the least surprising thing to happen since we found out Tucker Carlson said something racist.” Beto O’Rourke running for president is about as surprising as finding out Tucker Carlson said something sexist. pic.twitter.com/Lv3RjqsWqe Noah then approached a common criticism of O’Rourke: why should he run for president when he couldn’t even beat Cruz in Texas? The key, he said, is his small margin of defeat. “Yeah, he lost. But he lost by a little bit, which is what people love.” “You see, humans are weird,” Noah continued. “If you win easily, people hate you, like Tom Brady. And if you lose by too much, we just think you suck. But if you lose by just a little bit, people are like: ‘That’s my guy.’” Donald Trump, of course, wasted no time taking swipes at another Democratic candidate, mocking O’Rourke’s sweeping and frenetic hand gestures (“He’s like a polite version of Eminem,” Noah said). To be fair, “Trump is the last person to mock someone for overusing their hands”, Noah concluded. “Every single Trump speech looks like he’s conducting every orchestra in the world at the same time.” On Late Night, Seth Meyers also looked at O’Rourke’s campaign rollout, starting with the candidate’s Vanity Fair cover story, in which he gave some quotes ripe for parody. For example, when asked why he wanted to run for president, O’Rourke said: “I think I’d be good at it. I want to be in it. Man, I’m just born to be in it.” “I’m sorry, no one is born to be president,” Meyers countered. “Nobody is born to be anything. Springsteen said he was born to run and then he wrote 400 songs about New Jersey.” Meyers also took aim at O’Rourke’s “kinda weird”, out-of-body description of his first political speech: “Everything that I said, I was watching myself being like, ‘How am I saying this stuff? Where is this coming from?’” O’Rourke said. “In the run-up to 2020 we here at Late Night, we’re going to try really hard, and we’re going to ask ourselves: ‘Would we make fun of Donald Trump if he said that?’” Meyers explained. And after running the text through a Trump impression, he concluded: “Yeah, no, Beto, that was fucking weird.” On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert turned to a situation long overshadowed in the news cycle: Trump’s national emergency declaration, now in its 28th day. But on Thursday, in the latest installment of “National Emergency: Emergency Edition”, Senate Republicans “rolled up a magazine and spanked Trump right in the old Oval Office”, Colbert reported. Twelve Senate Republicans joined all Democrats in voting to overturn the president’s emergency declaration, 59-41. The vote was a harsh rebuke of Trump by many members of his party – “I mean, the last time Trump lost a vote that badly, he was elected president,” Colbert said. It was also the first time Congress has ever voted to overturn any president’s emergency declaration. “Congratulations, Mr President!” Colbert exclaimed. “Yet another thing to add to the list of your presidential firsts, along with siding with Nazis and misspelling hamburgers.” The Senate vote is unlikely to stand, however; Trump has promised to veto it, perpetuating a legal stalemate that Colbert called a “precedent established in the landmark case Nuh Uh v Yeah Huh”. Trump, meanwhile, was rising early in the morning to tweet complaints about the “three very weak and untalented late night hosts” who are “fighting over table scraps”, wondering what they will do when he’s no longer president. Colbert took this personally. “What do you mean, ‘What are we going to do when you’re not president?’ Well, first there’s the parade. Then, there’s the national orgy, then I’m thinking maybe a sandwich and a nap.” The point, he said, is that “there were late-night shows before you were president, there will be late-night shows after you’re gone. Just watch and see – if the warden gives you TV privileges.”