It’s become clear that the prime minister’s strategy has been to run down the clock on parliament – and the EU – to push through her Brexit deal. And not for the first time in our recent history, parliamentarians have been backed into a corner by government ministers – with the immense power and control they have in our political system – and forced to choose between two unpalatable foreign policy options with dire consequences for the country. The framing of the choice is similar to the one MPs were presented with in the run-up to the Iraq war: military action against Saddam Hussein, or the risk of an attack on this country. The prime minister’s version is a similarly artificial choice: her deal, or a chaotic and disorderly exit from the EU that we know will have severe consequences for our communities. MPs are effectively being asked to choose between the frying pan and the fire, in the hope they will choose the former and that can somehow be declared a victory. Even at this late stage it is vital that parliament does not blink. It must ignore the misleading cliche that the public “just want us to get on with it” – implying the outcome is immaterial. Brexit is an immensely complex national challenge encompassing issues from sovereignty and trade to security in an increasingly interdependent world. This week’s votes in parliament will have huge significance for the UK’s prosperity and its place in the world for decades to come. So our duty as representatives of the people is to be clear-eyed about the deal in front of us. In delivering the democratic will of the people we could well be signing up to rules and regulations over huge swathes of our economy on which we have no say. One point leavers and remainers agree on is that if there had never been a referendum, and this deal had been proposed as the basis for our country’s future, it would have rightly been rejected by parliament and the public. This is because at heart the deal is asking us to choose a third-rate future for our country. The temptation, however, is to let the deal pass so we can all declare “mission accomplished”, much like George W Bush’s premature victory speech on the USS Abraham Lincoln. In truth we will only be at the foothills of the most one-sided negotiations an advanced economy such as the UK has ever been involved in – because the prime minister’s deal does not settle anything and hands all the leverage to the other side. Parliament needs to understand that voting for Theresa May’s deal merely invites another prolonged period of political rancour that British people can ill afford. There is no plan or strategy for how we move forward as a country post-29 March, and there are profound issues still to be debated over which there are no simple compromises. The government has said it will consult parliament in drawing up the negotiating mandate for the next phase. Will we still stick to the red lines that do not command a majority in the Commons? Is the country ready to go cap in hand to the US, led by an “America First” president, which will be the consequence of a no-deal Brexit? These are the questions about our future the referendum did not answer, because leaving something and going somewhere are not the same thing. To leave and attempt to work this out in transition is the worst negotiating strategy. Parliament has to believe in and work for a better outcome for our country. The right thing for parliament to do is to have the courage of its convictions, and hit the reset button on the prime minister’s ticking clock. We need an extension to article 50 to provide the time needed to work out a path forward, possibly including putting the question back to the people if deadlock persists. I appreciate the drama of the article 50 timeline places psychological pressure on us all, but as one constituent said to me: “Even a humble neighbourhood plan can’t be done properly in just two years. Why should we expect a proper plan for the nation to be agreed in such a tight timeframe?” The PM keeps invoking the judgment of posterity in support of her deal. If her deal passes, the rear-view mirror of history will judge this moment as parliament’s darkest hour. • Sam Gyimah is Conservative MP for East Surrey. He resigned as a junior minister to fight against Brexit