Jordan Pickford Had to be sharp when Henderson flicked a cross in and denied Salah but some of his kicking was poor. 5 Séamus Coleman Marauded forward but was busy trying to stem Liverpool flow. Brave block to deny Henderson. 6 Michael Keane Back-header nearly let in Mané but was more solid in second half and superb tackle to deny Salah. 7 Kurt Zouma Crashed into tackles and was a key part of the Everton rearguard that left Liverpool scoreless again. 7 Lucas Digne Early error but then diligently helped to contain Salah, and a crucial intervention to stop Robertson cross. 7 Idrissa Gueye Quiet start along with rest of Everton’s midfield but became more formidable in the second half. 7 Morgan Schneiderlin Poor control allowed Salah the first clear opening and he offered little threat before going off. 5 Bernard Flitted in and out and will be disappointed at failing to find teammates with rare chances to cross. 5 Gylfi Sigurdsson His passing unlocked Liverpool, and there was also touch and trickery from game’s brightest performer. 8 Theo Walcott Booked inside 10 minutes then picked up a sore head before a wild shot summed up his day. Booked. 5 Dominic Calvert-Lewin Close to zero service for the No 9 in the first half, and it didn’t get much better for him after the break. 6 Subs Richarlison (for Walcott 59) 5, Cenk Tosun (for Calvert-Lewin 74) 5, André Gomes (for Schneiderlin, 76) 5  Alisson Did not make a save in a first half Liverpool dominated but denied Calvert-Lewin well after the break. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold The right-back’s pace gave the visitors extra dimension but his contribution was not always precise. 5 Virgil van Dijk Dutchman always looked assured and hit some sweeping passes forward to launch attacks. 7 Joël Matip Less confident when Everton came at him than Van Dijk, but was willing in possession and fought hard. 6 Andy Robertson Floated in a free-kick Van Dijk might have done better with. Booked during poorer second half. Booked. 5 Georginio Wijnaldum The more advanced of Liverpool’s midfield trio looked to get in behind and did the ugly stuff well. 6 Jordan Henderson Demanded the ball and, though clumsy at times, was Liverpool’s most prominent midfielder. 6 Fabinho Bad pass nearly led to an Everton goal in second half; earlier defence-splitter had Salah racing in. Booked. 5 Mohamed Salah Disappointing. Hit a curler at Pickford and should have beaten him when clear on two later occasions. 4 Divock Origi Started because of Firmino’s foot problem but the Belgian struggled to make any impact. 4 Sadio Mané Operated as centre-forward and was part of a fluid, speeding red-shirted attack but he was ineffective. 6 Subs James MiIner (for Wijnaldum 63) 5, Roberto Firmino (for Origi 63) 5, Adam Lallana (for Mané 84) 5