The Prodigy are routinely referred to as one of Britain’s best live acts, their brutish laser-blazing shows turning countless muddied fields into giant moshpits. And as part of that sensory overload, Keith Flint’s stage presence was untouchable. Decades before the inflatable gimmicks of EDM poseurs such as Steve Aoki, he rolled onstage at Glastonbury 1995 in a giant hamster ball and emerged with his hair spiked, foreshadowing the Firestarter video that would arrive a year later. His dancing was terrifyingly energetic, as if he was both human pogo and giddy rottweiler, embodying the slippery white-gloves-on moves of their early rave days and whirling his neck at such breakneck speed, it seemed to contain its own rotary engine. (There is a reason that a number of dance tutorials showing you how to “dance like Keith Flint” exist on YouTube.) He was the Prodigy’s comedian and its light relief, a counterpoint to the tops-off, chest-beating presence of Prodigy vocalist Maxim. This performance was a signal of the metamorphosis that was about to come. When the lead single from their highly anticipated third album, The Fat of the Land, arrived, the Prodigy’s evolution from rave renegades of east London’s hardcore scene to slick electro-punks was complete. For Flint, Firestarter was also the track that established him as the face and voice of the band, no longer the baggy, long-haired raver of Music for the Jilted Generation – and a 90s icon to boot. The Firestarter video cemented his image: chest out, eyes ringed with black, tongue waggling menacingly. His performance was mesmerisingly unhinged as he rattled around an abandoned London underground tunnel, snarling those immortal lyrics and scaring the nation’s parents; a dangerously exciting point where hedonism met nihilism. After The Fat of the Land, the Prodigy were at the height of their powers: headlining Glastonbury, Reading and Leeds and V festival, and supporting Oasis at Knebworth. Any one of Flint’s live shows during this time could be considered among his best, but the footage of Firestarter at the Phoenix festival in 1996 – a short-lived Glasto alternative in Stratford-Upon-Avon – captures just what a mesmerising frontman Flint could be. Far more than a dancing appendage a la Bez, Flint owned the stage like a maniacal jester: pretending to play-fight with Maxim, eyes wide and mouthing commands to the crowd. By 2012, UK dubstep had transformed from an underground sound emanating from south London bedroom studios into the latest craze to sweep America, where it became bigger, bolder and trashier. Flint was a genuine fan of this otherwise fairly controversial evolution, and the Prodigy’s 2015 album The Day Is My Enemy fell firmly under the retooled genre’s spell. This track, War, marks one of his rare guest appearances, with London dubstep producer Caspa, in which he plays the ringleader of an underground resistance. His vocal is such a perfect accompaniment to Caspa’s breezeblock-blasting breaks that you wonder why Flint didn’t lend his menace to more collaborations of this kind. Perhaps producers were treading carefully: Flint’s presence was so vast that he eclipsed everything around him. 2015’s The Day Is My Enemy is the first album where Keith Flint and Maxim wrote the music alongside Liam Howlett. This track, Nasty, is one of two tracks where Flint has a writing credit. It is, as you might ascertain from the title, classic Flint – or at the very least, sonically similar to Firestarter, as he yowls “nasty, nasty, nasty” in the same way that he did “I’m a firestarter” nearly two decades prior. While the Prodigy’s sound had become a little tired, Flint’s Essex bark remained as snarling as it ever was: the frenzied vocal attack of a true British original.