Of course rugby has an old law about what goes on tour. Which is why, 62 years later, we cannot be sure exactly what happened when Llanelli went off to play in Moscow at the height of the cold war. The Scarlets were “honoured guests of the Reds” one Welsh paper said, at the third International Friendly Youth Games in 1957. Only the competition seems to have been, at points, just a little less friendly than the name suggested. The Soviets did not have a national team themselves but Llanelli’s then chairman Handel Rogers explained: “They’re keen to learn more of it and already there are moves to translate the laws of the game.” After watching Llanelli, they must have assumed something got lost in the gloss. Llanelli played Romania twice. The first game, a 6-6 draw, was marred by such “hideous and appalling violence” that, according to one historian, “it hindered the development of the Russian game for a number of years”. Back home in Wales the Western Mail reported “the team became the target for some strong criticism in foreign newspapers”. And it’s true that one of the Russian papers said “some of the Welshmen seemed to have come to the wrong place, they ought to have been at a boxing tournament”, while another added that “the Romanians asked the WRU to hold an inquiry into the behaviour of the Llanelli players during the match”. Rogers explained in an urgent phone call home, it had “all been grossly exaggerated”, both teams “had thoroughly enjoyed the encounter” and if it got just a little heated it was more to do with the “quality of the referee and the sportsmanship of the Romanian side” than anything his side had done. “Iron curtain countries,” Rogers said, had a certain “grim determination when playing team games”, but the Romanians had since “apologised for certain incidents” and “fits of temperament”, and he would be quite happy to provide the WRU with “full details of the nature and approach of the opposition and the sending-off” when he was back home. So, yes, there was a sending-off. Two in fact, one on each side, after what Reuters described as a “10-minute argument” in which “fists were raised” when “both players refused to leave the field”. But, Rogers explained, Llanelli’s lad could hardly be blamed for that because really “in iron curtain countries such an action by the referee is regarded as an everyday affair and no importance is attached to it all”. In the meantime, he added, the west would be well advised to “send our best referees out there to educate foreign officials on the correct interpretation of the laws”. At the moment a forward could hardly so much as “lift a boot” without being penalised for it. The one and only Carwyn James was Llanelli’s starting fly-half on that trip, and he remembered the Soviet reaction a little differently. James learned Russian during his national service, when he worked decoding Soviet radio messages at the Joint Services School for Linguists. “After a fortnight in which the Russians made copious notes on everything Llanelli did,” James wrote, “their parting words were: ‘Come back here in 20 years and we’ll play you.’” It took a little longer than 20 years but in one corner of the USSR, at least, Llanelli’s tour seems to have done wonders for the sport, since, soon after it was over, rugby’s popularity exploded in Georgia. They had a natural affinity for the sport, because it so closely resembled their folk game, lelo burti. Between 1958 and 1962 10 clubs were set up there, and a new domestic competition, the Tbilisi Championship, was launched for them to fight over. Today, Georgia have what Eddie Jones calls “the biggest, ugliest, scrum pack in the world” and are 12th in the world rankings. At 3pm last Sunday, around the time Ireland’s game against France was just kicking off, the Georgians were wrapping up a 52-3 win against Germany in Kutaisi, a few hours’ flight and a few thousand miles away from Dublin. It was their sixth win in a row, and means they have already won the Rugby Europe Championship even though they still have to play Russia in Krasnodar next week. They have been so good that the result will not matter. They have scored 22 tries and conceded two, scored 140 points and conceded 28, and as the four other teams in the competition, Belgium, Spain, Germany and Romania, have all been beating each other, the Georgians have won the title with a week to go. It was a predictable victory. Georgia have won this next-six nations 10 times in the last 12 years now, and their record in the competition in that time reads P59 W53 L4 D2. It is not really clear what more they can do to show they’re too good to be playing at that level. But then Ben Morel, chief executive of the Six Nations, is adamant the tournament organisers have no interest in expanding the competition, or introducing a system of promotion and relegation, to allow Georgia in. And maybe he’s right – the last thing the schedule needs is another Test week, and the tournament depends on those traditional rivalries between the home nations. Besides, the last match Georgia lost was that head to head against Italy in Florence last November, 28-17. So for now Georgia are stuck and so, most likely, is World Rugby, since their plan for a new global league depends on there being a route up for the Tier 2 countries. For Georgia, the best way to press their case now will be to put together a good run at the World Cup in the autumn. They just so happen to be drawn in Pool A, alongside Wales, when we’ll see what fruits grew from the seeds planted by Llanelli all those years ago.