If it’s overdue (and it is) to crash the patronising, self-serving western narrative of the “white saviour” in Africa and elsewhere, then isn’t it also important to ensure that all charitable white-on-black endeavours aren’t automatically dismissed as condescending and offensive? The latest white saviour row is a rerun of what has become a cyclical, increasingly heated debate, turning on charity and race. Documentary maker and Strictly Come Dancing winner Stacey Dooley appeared in photographs holding a child in Uganda, for a Comic Relief film. David Lammy responded that the last thing the world needed was another white saviour. Lammy was then accused of turning down an opportunity to work with Comic Relief, which he denies. And so it goes on. The white saviour debate is complex and valuable, going far beyond, but also including, charity. Just as a gap-year stint in troubled areas shouldn’t be (only) a way for middle-class kids to boost their CVs, starvation and despair shouldn’t be “good PR” for halo-polishing celebrities. No one is arguing with that. However, in 2009, Ricky Gervais’s spoof of such visits (for Comic Relief) got widely slammed as tasteless. As far as I could tell, Gervais was making the point about how crass such appeals could sometimes be and Comic Relief was allowing him to do so. I thought then, as I do now, if even self-awareness ends up criticised, then where is any charity supposed to go from there? While it’s good to learn that experts and locals are to feature more prominently in on-the-ground charity appeals, in the UK and abroad, could cynicism about the use of celebrities be taken too far? It’s as though they must be kept away from affected regions in case they invalidate the appeal. The brutal truth is that celebrities are there for a reason. Presumably people are aware of how difficult it is for charities to raise awareness and funds. That, with someone such as Dooley, it’s about using a celebrity, black or white, to draw people in. Then there’s the issue of celebrity motivation. Sure, some celebrities might be egomaniacal monsters, whose only concern is that they look hot in cargo pants, but with most, the basic human instinct would be to want to help. If that’s your motivation, then why the grim rush to question theirs? That Africa needs white saviours is a dangerous, insulting, shabby narrative. However, there are also issues with the idea that white westerners visibly helping black people must be instantly slammed for… what, exactly? Colluding in the warped sociohistorical continuum? Is that always true, every single time – or is there a danger in being overly cynical? So, what was that Momo-hoax palaver all about? How did a fake story about a goth-looking internet character, supposedly urging children to commit suicide, gain traction to the point of widespread parental anxiety and schools issuing warnings? This being internet-based, the answer seems complex, encompassing everything from the startling ease with which panic spreads to understaffed news departments not properly checking out the story. Moreover, while everyone knows that children can be highly suggestible, perhaps you could also include some of the parents, by now so culturally groomed on all forms of horror (from vintage Stephen King to the modern Sky/Netflix output, where every second programme seems to be about the undead) that, arguably, it creates the perfect receptive conditions for an alarmist hoax such as Momo. All this in the context of not even the most protective parents feeling able to regulate everything their child might be seeing or doing on the internet. Maybe there’s your answer. Never mind some fakery about a straggly haired goth inspiring child suicide, Momo represented the true background dread of modern parental life – the mystery of exactly what their children could be getting themselves into online. Is it time to ban any future Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un sleepovers? As any parent who has organised a tricky playdate knows, it’s sweet when you get a couple of “difficult” personalities (that is, other kids don’t like them) and they end up getting along like a nuclear warhead on fire. Well, eventually, after some initial unpleasantness – Trump threatening war on North Korea and all that. But even that’s only like a buddy movie, where, like two mismatched cops, two worryingly similar world leaders don’t get on at first, but then they come to realise that their supposed differences (western democracy versus North Korean dictatorship) make them even closer, with many tears, laughs and high-level diplomatic tensions along the way. Donny and Kim became buddies, even old-fashioned pen pals – Donny receiving a “BFFs”-type missive from Kim that some of us like to think was secretly scrawled in scented gel pen under the bedcovers. However, when they recently met, the crazy kids instantly fell out! Donny thought he’d convinced Kim to unilaterally disarm. Kim thought that Donny was going to lift sanctions. A case of: “You say ‘potato’, I say ‘refusal to denuclearise’… Let’s call the whole thing off!” Let’s look through the round, square or arched window (doesn’t seem to matter which, when you’re half-expecting to spot mushroom clouds) to see what happens when two sugar-rushing world leaders fall out. The stakes seem a little higher than some kid on a regular sleepover smashing a train set or refusing to eat broccoli. One temper tantrum too far and angry little fingers could start scrabbling too close to big important buttons and …. KABOOM! So, perhaps no more sleepovers for Donny and Kim for a while. Those scamps need to be kept apart for their own good – and the world’s. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist