I spent nearly a decade in a part of London that was brimming with the most amazing grocers. The best ones were Middle Eastern, stocking huge bunches of herbs, every type of nut under the sun, flatbreads, exotic fruit, great hummus, even better veg – the shoppers here knew how to eat. My greatest pleasure was their baklava – I could polish off a tray in a sitting and still go back for more. This recipe is inspired by those nutty, honey-drizzled treats. These orange-scented pears are filled with honeyed nuts and covered in a crisp, golden pastry. Prep 20 minCook 35 minServes 6 3 large pears, peeled whole75g pistachios30g walnuts30g pecans75g honey75g golden syrup1 pinch salt2 tsp orange blossom water½ tsp ground cinnamon¼ tsp ground cardamom (from 3 pods)2 x 270g pack filo sheets (you might have some left over)140g butter, melted Heat the oven to 170C (160C fan/350F/)/gas 4. Cut each pear in half top to bottom, and cut a little slice off the sides so you can stably sit the pears cut-side-up like half an avocado. Use a teaspoon to scoop out the core, making a small, deep hole. Put the nuts, 45g honey, two tablespoons of golden syrup, salt, orange blossom and spices in a blender, and pulse to a breadcrumb texture (finer or coarser to taste). Stuff a heaped tablespoon of the nut mix into the centre of each pear, keeping a few tablespoons of the mix for decoration. Divide the filo into 18 squares (15-18cm, depending on the size of the pears). Melt the butter, then stir into this the remaining honey and golden syrup. Put a piece of filo on a floured board, brush with sweetened butter, lay another sheet on top, brush, then repeat with a final sheet, brushing the top sheet generously. Sit a pear half in the middle, bring the sides of the pastry up and squeeze around the top. Brush the outside with more butter and put on a lined baking tray. Repeat with the other pears, butter and pastry, reserving a little of the nut mix to decorate. Bake for 30-35 minutes, until the filo is golden, then leave to cool for five minutes, before serving with ice-cream, cream or creme fraiche and a sprinkling of the nuts. The nut filling is delicious folded into homemade ice-cream – try honey, saffron or vanilla to flavour a base mix. I also love it over yoghurt in the morning with pomegranate seeds. Make a chicory, pear, blue cheese and walnut salad with any leftover pears – I never tire of that classic.