The anti-Brexit rally on Saturday was probably the first central London demonstration in living memory that Jeremy Corbyn hasn’t attended – except for the last People’s Vote march, of course. Instead he was on a campaign visit to Morecambe. There was deliberation to all this; in a childishly provocative tweet, the Labour party chirpily asked last Friday: “Big weekend plans? Find an event near you.” In bitter spirits, I put in my postcode (Vauxhall, central London), and was invited to #rebuildbritain by attending a meeting in Swanley (15 miles away in Kent), on the day of the largest demonstration since Iraq. Corbyn’s motivation, in this steadfast abstinence from a swell of protest at which he should naturally be at the crest, is always put down to his Euroscepticism, which has morphed among commentators from “he’s not too keen on Europe” to “he hates Europe”. This is overstatement and a diversion; what’s really happened is that a strategy devised for 2017 has failed to update. Back then, Labour went into the general election with the stated policy of “respecting the referendum”, and the tacit policy of “strategic ambiguity” – keep remainers on side by being atmospherically remain, keep leavers sweet by never openly opposing Brexit. The bridge between these two contradictory positions was, “We have our minds on more important things: low wages; food banks; failing public services; creeping privatisation; the housing crisis; all those enraging, structural hardships that led people to want to poke Westminster in the eye in the first place, that’s what we’re focused on.” This has run out of road, brought into collision with reality by the same ticking clock that has undone the Tories. There is no magical government that can solve poverty, end food banks, revivify public services and execute a painless Brexit at the same time. We have discussed at great length the negative impacts of any Brexit on manufacturing and logistics; so far, we have largely ignored what Brexit would mean for public services, but unions know full well what the results would be of falling tax revenue. The fact that so many public service unions, from the GMB to the Royal College of Nursing, have come out for a second vote is not a coincidence. Whatever Corbyn’s personal foibles, the Labour party knows it cannot remain agnostic on this issue any longer. The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, was explicit on Sunday: the party remains committed to the policy as laid out at Labour’s conference – in an emergency, a public vote. And nobody could say this wasn’t an emergency. That would have been the case regardless of the demo and its numbers: yet the protest had other impacts, cracking open the options. First, it really exploded the myth that remainers are metropolitan-elite, politically middle-of-the-road, defenders of the status quo. If the elite is a million people, some of whom had to get up at three in the morning to reach the metropole, then these terms no longer have any meaning. If the political “centre” includes Momentum, and the Green party, and Labour MPs such as Clive Lewis and Marsha de Cordova, holding “Love Socialism/Hate Brexit” banners, then it is no longer the centre. Criticisms of the protest last year – that it was too polite, that there were people on it who had clearly never been on a march before, and had brought Chablis with them – simply do not stand up. A series of caricatures that were only ever half-true at best have been manipulated to dominate our understanding of what our divisions are, and how to knit us back together. It is so routine to understand the classic leaver as an angry man from the north, the classic remainer as a pampered southerner, that the reality of Brexit – a far-right fever dream – is completely obscured, even as its swivel-eyed princes arrive at Chequers with their bizarre props (sports cars, children, leadership haircuts). More significant still is the context of parliamentary disarray: even as we marched against Iraq, it was unthinkable that it would force a large number of MPs to change their minds; a plan was in place, and they were signed up to it. The reality of the current crisis is that many Labour MPs, and more Tories than have so far admitted it, have no plan; you cannot follow a leader who herself is ducking the issue; some fear a second referendum, and the sheer ugliness of it; some favour Norway until they think hard about what benefits, exactly, that would deliver. They have so far all been trying to leap into separate lifeboats, and last weekend crystallised one thing. There is no deal that inarguably delivers what the Brexit vote demanded; so any deal should be put to a public vote. The Kyle-Wilson amendment, which calls for a ratification referendum on May’s deal, was the existing preference for many Labour MPs, but some still balked at it. The Labour party, in contrast to the Conservatives, has the maturity and competence to cohere around its core principle – that of returning to the nation for a confirmation that this was, indeed, what it wanted. As for the petition to revoke article 50 altogether and remain in the EU: with 5.5 million signatures at the time of writing, this is unignorable. Revoke, once a niche idea, could in extremis (a revolt against further extensions by one state in the EU, for instance) be our only alternative to a catastrophic no-deal exit. The key – quite convincing – argument against it used to be that it would mean parliament overruling its people. This is considerably softened by the evidence that millions of those people, at the very least, would be fine with that. In short, we are the answer we’ve been waiting for: all those spontaneous expressions of public opinion that we grew up thinking would never make a difference are, in fact, making all the difference. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist