Michel Barnier has questioned whether the EU should offer the UK any extension of the Brexit negotiating period at all given the talks on the deal are “done and dusted”. Before a Commons vote on prolonging the negotiating period beyond 29 March, the EU’s chief negotiator cast doubt on Brussels’ willingness to respond positively to a request. “Why would we extend these discussions?” Barnier asked MEPs in the parliament in Strasbourg. “The discussion on article 50 is done and dusted. We have the withdrawal agreement. It is there. “President Juncker also said that there will be no further interpretations, no further assurances - we cannot go any further.” The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, is understood to be confident that her fellow leaders will at least back a three-month Brexit up until 30 June. But earlier on Wednesday, Barnier advised senior MEPs, during a private meeting, that at present there was no majority among the EU’s member states on offering any extension at all, let alone on what conditions Brussels should attach. Speaking in the chamber a few hours later, Barnier told MEPs: “The prime minister announced a vote on no-deal last evening and a possible extension. This will take place in the House of Commons. “After those votes it will be up to the United Kingdom government to tell us how to proceed, we hope in a positive way so they can eventually have a constructive majority on a proposal. “It is the responsibility of the UK, they have to tell us what they want it is they want for our future relationship. “What will their choices be? What will the clear line be that they take. That is the clear question we need an answer to now. That is the question that has to be answered before a decision on a possible further extension.” Barnier said the responsibility to break the current impasse lay “fair and square” with the UK. But the current withdrawal agreement, including the Irish backstop, which Brexiters fear will keep the UK in a customs union indefinitely, would not be revised. “If the UK still wants to leave the EU, and want to do so in an orderly fashion, if that is still the intention of the UK then this treaty that we negotiated with the government of Theresa May for a year and half, this treaty will remain the only available treaty. I want everyone to understand that fully.” Barnier told MEPs the process was at a critical moment and they should not underestimate the risk of a no-deal Brexit which had “never been higher”. He spoke of the challenge of avoiding a hard border on the island of Ireland, while protecting the single market from goods entering from Great Britain, in such a scenario. The Irish government has insisted that it will not prepare for any border checks, but the European commission is putting pressure on Dublin to be realistic about the need to ready itself for a cliff-edge Brexit. “In Ireland it is not is a question of theory or of dogma whether or not we will show flexibility, it is a very practical issue indeed that deals with peace in Ireland,” Barnier said. “That peace must be lasting and it also deals with protection of the single market. All goods, any living animals, that go into Northern Ireland after Brexit that comes from Great Britain could then go to Poland, Slovenia, Belgium to Germany, to any one of our countries because it is the single market and there will not be a border. So we do have to find a way, we will take time to do this, to ensure that these controls... are in place and we do not want to recreate a hard border.” Guy Verhofstadt, the European parliament’s Brexit coordinator, criticised the Commons decision on Tuesday night to reject May’s deal for a second time, claiming that the UK was “spinning out of control”. He added his voice to those who would be willing to reject an extension. The commission’s vice-president, Frans Timmermans, told MEPs: “Today we are in the hands of the British political system. They should tell us where they want to go now. The solution will have to come from London and we will take it from there.” Responding to heckling from Nigel Farage, he asked the former Ukip leader if he had asked those losing their jobs at the Nissan factory in Sunderland whether they were happy to sacrifice themselves for the Brexiters’ “pipedream”.