It duly turned out to be a repeat of the Calcutta Cup, but the 2017 version when England cut loose at Twickenham rather than this month’s Scottish revival. Saracens dominated after conceding an early try and will face Munster at the Ricoh Arena in the semi-final on 20 April. Glasgow scored after 70 seconds from a lineout just inside Saracens’ half. They moved the ball quickly left and Stuart Hogg drew David Strettle, a late replacement after Owen Farrell withdrew from the side when his wife went into labour, to free Rory Hughes who fed Ali Price with a quarter-back style inside pass. It marked their high point of the opening half for Glasgow who became worn down by the kicking game of their hosts, especially on the left where Hughes struggled to deal with Ben Spencer’s aerial assault, tackled into touch before twice dropping the ball. Saracens drew level from a kick. Advantage was being played when Alex Goode weighted a chip for Liam Williams. The Wales full-back jumped higher than Adam Hastings, who had his back to the ball, and fell over the line. An Alex Lozowski penalty gave Saracens the lead and Glasgow struggled for territory with their kicking inaccurate and Hogg the main culprit. Two tries in four minutes put Saracens in command. Strettle finished a move in the corner after Brad Barritt forced his way over the gainline and Jamie George showed the passing skills of a three-quarter and then Barritt finished a move he started after George again played a handling role. Glasgow trailed by 15 points but they finished the half with two Hastings penalties to make the interval score 22-13. As well as the difference in the sides’ kicking, Saracens attacked the line from rucks in contrast to Glasgow who stood deeper to try and defuse the blitz defence but too often conceded ground. Williams’s second try eight minutes after the restart following Goode’s long pass and Lozowski’s third penalty left Glasgow needing a Twickenham-type resurrection. England may have perceived issues when it comes to the big occasion, but Saracens very rarely crack. Strettle scored his second try when intercepting Stafford McDowall’s pass just inside Glasgow’s half and then the impressive George was at the back of a driving maul when it reached the line. George Horne reversed the flow after Hogg’s break, but Saracens passed the half-century when Barritt advanced over the gainline from a scrum and Nick Tompkins finished off. Matt Fagerson’s late try was no face-saver.