Newcastle, who are at the bottom of the Premiership despite winning their past three matches, face losing Calum Green for the rest of the season after he was cited for allegedly biting the Sale hooker Rob Webber last weekend. The incident occurred in the 22nd minute at St James’s Park when Green was held in a headlock by Webber, who has received a citing commissioner’s warning for that act, at a ruck. Sale claim that Green responded by biting Webber on the hand. Webber complained to the referee, Craig Maxwell-Keys, who reviewed the incident and did not find anything in the video evidence to justify a red card. Andy Blyth, the citing commissioner, who had access to more camera angles, did, and Green will appear for a disciplinary panel on Wednesday. The second-row has started all of Newcastle’s 17 Premiership matches this season and has missed only two league games in the past three campaigns. If found guilty he would face a minimum ban of 12 weeks, before mitigating factors, rising to 24 weeks or more if he was deemed to have acted with premeditation. Whatever, he would miss the Falcons’ last five games in their battle to avoid the drop. Worcester – the club immediately above them – have banned a fan who is being investigated by Avon and Somerset police for allegedly throwing punches in the South Stand at Ashton Gate during the match against Bristol last Saturday. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels It was reported on social media that the bearded man, who was wearing a Warriors training jacket, aimed several punches at a spectator sitting a few rows in front of him. Others tried to restrain him before he was led away by stewards and told to leave. “We are aware that police are investigating an incident at Saturday’s match against Bristol Bears at Ashton Gate in which a supporter wearing club replica kit was ejected from the ground for allegedly throwing a punch,” Worcester said in a statement. “We are cooperating with Bristol and Avon and Somerset police in their investigations. “We take a zero‑tolerance approach to anti-social behaviour. We are a family club and subscribe to rugby’s core values, one of which is respect for others.” The supporter has been banned from all Worcester home games while the investigation is being conducted.