The short answer is yes. Experts reckon there have been just over 600 referendums in the world since 1973. But they took a while to catch on in democracies. They were actually relatively rare in the immediate postwar period, with around a dozen a decade through the 1960s and 1970s, but took off in the 1990s as a spray of new post-communist states consulted their publics on what kind of countries they would be. According to Matt Qvortrup, professor of political science at Coventry University, the number of referendums roughly tripled in the 1990s and have persisted at that level. “The current decade is on track to become the most referendummed in history,” Qvortrup says, noting that there are still a slate of votes set to be held around the world before the decade closes out. He reckons that historically, referendums have always been more popular in times of political uncertainty, when politicians are not sure what their voters really want and do not want to risk all on an election. That certainly fits the bill today, with political landscapes splintering and traditional mainstream parties in decline almost everywhere. It also fits a more individualistic age: voters used to a plethora of personal choices, from music to shopping, may also now expect to “pick and mix” their politics too, rather than buy a long-term, all-inclusive package from a politician. Referendums have become increasingly popular in more recent times as a tool for independence drives, from Eritrea and Quebec to Catalonia, and Scotland to South Sudan, as national self-determination comes back into vogue and distant, centralised government fails to speak to the needs of provinces that feel marginalised. Switzerland has held some 300 referendums since 1848 (and about the same number of other public consultations), as its system of direct democracy gives citizens a voice in how the country is run by requiring any amendment to the constitution to be put to a referendum. To pass, a proposal must usually win a double majority: of voters, and of the 26 cantons. This means the Swiss generally vote in plebiscites – on federal, cantonal and local issues that can range from major foreign policy decisions to the building of a new school – about four times a year. The average Swiss referendum turnout is 40-45%, although red-button issues like migration draw far more. Italy, effectively united by referendums in the 19th century, ranks second, with about 70 national votes on everything from divorce to abortion, drugs, trade unions and the electoral system. Ireland also frequently resorts to referendums. After obtaining independence from Britain in 1921 Ireland’s fledgling state decided its 1937 constitution could be amended only through referendums. Since then there have been 35 constitutional referendums, on average about one every two and a half years. They range from momentous votes on Europe, divorce, same-sex marriage and abortion to the arcane, such as tweaking rules on cabinet confidentiality and parliamentary inquiries. Turnout varies widely depending on topic. A 1996 vote on tweaking bail restrictions drew just 29% of the electorate. A 2015 vote on children’s rights drew 33.5%. The 1972 poll on whether to join the European Economic Community, in contrast, drew a record 70% turnout. Some 68% of the electorate turned out in 1992 for three votes on abortion. Referendums transformed Ireland from a quasi-Catholic theocracy into a liberal beacon. The most notable example was a vote to repeal a ban on abortion in 2018. Turnout was 64%. Two-thirds of voters voted in favour. About half of all US states add referendums to ballot papers during presidential and midterm elections, covering all manner of social and economic policy, from gay marriage to taxation, the legalisation of marijuana and the death penalty. In Latin America, constitutional referendums are the most popular sort of plebiscite. In Mexico, the new president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, has put a succession of policy issues out to referendum at the start of his rule. There have been almost 50 separate referendums on the EU in its member nations, either on joining, staying in, approving a treaty or adopting the euro. Fully 70% of these have resulted in a yes vote. And for those in Britain wary of a second referendum, this would not be unprecedented. Ireland twice rejected EU treaties (2001 and 2008), won notable concessions and returned to the polls to approve the treaties the following year. In 1992, Denmark rejected the Maastricht treaty in a vote, only to approve it in a second referendum a year later. In short, constitutional matters and independence drives. But referendums have also been arranged on the widest array of issues, from whether to drive on the right (Sweden, 1955) to nuclear power (Sweden, Austria, Lithuania), immigration (Hungary, 2016 among others), external financial aid (Greece 2015), gay marriage, borders, airports, schools, language, female suffrage … No. The UK has only held three fully nationwide referendums: the 1975 vote on staying in the EU (yes), the 2016 vote on the same issue (no), and a vote in 2011 on electoral reform (no). Additionally, there were a succession of votes on devolution in the late 1970s (when they failed to pass in Scotland and Wales) and the late 1990s (when they passed in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and London). The Brexit controversy has raised the question of the utility of referendums, and yet many votes have resulted in clean, effective decision making. “The obvious pro is that you get a very direct sense of what the public mood is on an issue,” says Charles Pattie, professor of politics at Sheffield University. “When the referendum gives a clear result, as with the 1997 Scottish devolution referendum, it can pretty much settle a decision and can give legitimacy to potentially far-reaching changes. “The problem with referendums, though, is that they boil complex decisions down to simplistic binary either/or choices, and are not always a good way of getting at nuance or at the wider ramifications of a decision.” Actually, no. Subtlety can be built in. Some can offer multiple choices, such as Puerto Rico’s vote on statehood in 1998. Some can offer follow-up questions, such as New Zealand’s flag referendum of 2016. Some can build in checks and balances, such as a two-thirds majority being required to pass, or a certain percentage of eligible voters being needed to validate a yes vote (such as the Montenegro independence vote in 2006). And some, like the Irish abortion referendum of 2018, can be preceded by a useful fact-finding Citizen’s Assembly, to assure that the electorate is in possession of quality impartial information when they come to making their decision. Swiss referendums are even more carefully calibrated. So-called mandatory referendums are votes on constitutional amendments or certain laws that have already been approved by the Swiss federal government. They require a double majority and can often embarrass governments, as when the country voted in 1992 to reject membership of the European Economic Area. Optional referendums, which require just a simple majority of voters to pass, allow individual citizens, or a group of at least eight cantons, to contest a new or amended law as long as they can gather at least 50,000 signatures within 100 days. Finally, since 1891 Swiss citizens have also been able to demand constitutional changes by proposing so-called popular initiatives. These must be launched by at least seven voters and be backed by 100,000 people within 18 months, and also require a double majority to pass. A favoured recent tool of the far-right, nationalist and anti-immigration Swiss People’s Party, relatively few pass: about half of all Swiss referendum proposals win a majority, but only 10% of popular initiatives. Alas, the 2016 UK EU referendum deployed none of these subtleties. Pattie says there have been plenty of votes where referendums have created problems because they oversimplify. He points to a ballot proposition in California (several US states hold mini-referendums during the biennial November elections) in 1978 in which voters approved a move to limit the state’s ability to raise property taxes. A budget crunch ensued, with knock on effects on social spending and even state schools. Switzerland’s 2014 immigration referendum caused similar headaches when the people voted to limit immigration – in direct contravention of Swiss agreements and treaties with the EU. Qvortrup says referendums are a good idea if deployed sparingly and on issues that are of major significance. “Referendums are a good idea if used as a people’s veto,” he says. “You need to save people’s civic reserves for when it really matters. But when it really matters people should be allowed to have their say.” But he adds that in Britain, the few referendums that have been called have been done so not for reasons of national imperative but for party political reasons: a party leader, unable to brook compromise over a towering issue (usually Europe) effectively contracts out the decision making process to the people I’m glad you asked. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the plural of referendum is referendums. Referenda are the things being voted on, so one referendum could contain multiple referenda within it. The British parliament confirmed as much back in 1998, when the late Alan Clarke asked the then speaker Betty Boothroyd, to rule on the matter. “I’ve always preferred the use of the English language to any Latin form if that is of some guidance,” she said. Referendums Around the World. Matt Qvortrup Europe in Question: Referendums on European Integration Sara Binzer Hobolt