The decisive penalty kick from Jake Cooper had only just sailed over the bar when Millwall’s devastated supporters broke out into a stirring round of applause. An hour earlier they had been revelling in the idea of taking on Manchester City at Wembley, but the mood was rather more downbeat once this extraordinary contest was over. Brighton & Hove Albion, wretched for much of the afternoon, had battled back from the brink to reach their first FA Cup semi-final since 1983 and the only way for the locals to respond was with one last show of defiance. They did not have it in them to aim any anger at Neil Harris’s shattered players. Not after seeing the Championship strugglers come within a whisker of pulling off yet another shock on an afternoon that proved there is life yet in this famous old competition. Millwall, spiky and insubordinate, were on the verge of reaching the last four for the second time in seven seasons when they led 2-0 in the dying stages, but the manner of Solly March’s equaliser will haunt them for years to come. Even Chris Hughton, Brighton’s mild-mannered manager, was about to explode when March overhit one last free-kick in the fourth minute of added time. Yet the substitute’s harmless cross somehow floated beyond the grasp of David Martin, Millwall’s goalkeeper, and there was more drama when Shane Ferguson, who would have taken a penalty during the shootout, received a red card for a stamp on Lewis Dunk in the last minute of extra time. “The fourth official said it was a stamp,” Harris said. “If that is the case, he’ll be punished severely.” Harris offered more sympathy to Martin, who apologised after the game for letting his teammates down, but it did not help Millwall’s mood that the shootout began with Glenn Murray, Brighton’s leading goalscorer, sending his spot-kick against the bar. Even then, they could not take advantage. Millwall’s only consolation was how much they contributed to a thrilling game. It was barely possible to hear yourself think as the home fans heckled the visitors, howled at every tight refereeing decision and urged their team to demonstrate their giant-killing credentials. The ear-splitting din acted as a leveller and Millwall almost snatched the lead in farcical circumstances at the start of the second half. Mat Ryan’s clearance hit Shane Duffy, but the Brighton goalkeeper scrambled to gather the loose ball before Lee Gregory could capitalise. Beram Kayal tested Martin with a measured effort from the edge of the penalty area, but Brighton’s task became even more daunting when hail started to fall from the darkening skies. The treacherous conditions suited Millwall and they broke through in the 70th minute, Alex Pearce charging on to a corner from the left and nutting home a brilliant header. Nine minutes later, the outstanding Jed Wallace surged clear on the right and fired in a low cross for Aiden O’Brien to turn past Ryan from close range. “At 2-0 down, you’re out the competition,” Hughton said. “To get two back shows great character.” Brighton’s substitutes made a huge impact. Jürgen Locadia pulled one back with a venomous shot in the 88th minute and the crowd howled when the fourth official’s board showed four added minutes. With good reason, as it turned out. “I feel for Dave Martin because he was excellent throughout,” Harris said. “He made a slight error of judgement and cost us. He’s obviously devastated. He said he’s let the boys down. He hasn’t let the boys down.” Brighton dominated after March’s goal and were aggrieved when Locadia had a winner ruled out for an incorrect offside call against Martín Montoya moments after Ferguson’s red card. Hughton pointed out that VAR, which was not in use here, probably would have ruled out Millwall’s opener, awarded Brighton a penalty in the first half and corrected the decision to chalk off Locadia’s second strike. Penalties were required instead and Brighton were in trouble again after Murray’s miss. Yet Ryan’s save from Mahlon Romeo halted Millwall’s momentum, Dunk made it 5-4 in sudden death and Cooper’s aberration meant it was Hughton’s side who will get to test themselves against City next month.