The good times are back at Paul Nicholls’ yard, which has been celebrating the wins of Frodon and Topofthegame. Not since Kauto Star’s Gold Cup a decade ago has Nicholls won two Grade One chases at a single Festival but he has managed it this week and can crown the achievement in today’s Gold Cup with Clan Des Obeaux (3.30). For a long time this horse threatened not to make good on his big home reputation but he did so in thrilling style in the King George and his effortless lope around Ascot last month confirmed he is all class. Both those wins were at right-handed tracks but it will be a surprise if he has a real problem turning the other way here and he looks the one to be with in a hot race. Kemboy has a similar profile and is surely worth a saver. Possibly the value of his Christmas win does not quite match the worth of the King George form but there can’t be much in it. Presenting Percy has a bit to prove and his preparation has been unorthodox. Native River would prefer softer ground but Thistlecrack can reach the places. 1.30 There is no pretending that Sir Erec is a value price at the even-money on offer as I type but betting against him does not appeal in light of his storming Grade One success at Leopardstown last month. The stable has a good grip on the value of juvenile hurdle form just now, having won the Fred Winter on Tuesday. Sir Erec can be a second Triumph winner for Joseph O’Brien, or a first, depending on who you think was really training Ivanovich Gorbatov, which won in the name of his father, Aidan. 2.10 Gordon Elliott’s Eclair De Beaufeu, on his first attempt in a handicap, ran on well to be fourth after having rather a lot of ground to make up at Leopardstown last month. It was a promising prep run for this County Hurdle and not dissimilar to the previous outing of Elliott’s Sire Du Berlais before he won the Pertemps here on Thursday. 2.50 A wildly impressive winner at Clonmel last month, Allaho is clearly a really promising youngster in the care of Willie Mullins. His stamina is not taken for granted, given that he races freely, but the ground seems to be drying here and he will hopefully be able to outpace the likes of Birchdale and Commander Of Fleet. 4.10 A regular winner in points and hunter chases, Hazel Hill still seemed short of this class until an especially impressive win at Warwick in January. The veteran did enough there to suggest he may be able to hold off Stand Up And Fight, from the Enda Bolger yard that has won this prize three times. 4.50 Nicholls is the most successful trainer in Grand Annual history, with four wins since 2004, and it is hard to resist the claims of his ex-French youngster, Magic Saint. He showed something in a couple of starts in the autumn but had evidently taken a big step forward by the time he reappeared in February, winning comfortably at Wincanton after being well backed. He is surely still ahead of his rating. 5.30 Dallas Des Pictons is a worthy favourite but there might be a bit of value in the 16-1 about Daybreak Boy. A useful performer on the Flat, he has taken well to hurdles and was really eye-opening in victory at Clonmel in January. His mark for this handicap debut looks lenient. Fakenham 1.20 American Tom 1.55 Cap Du Nord 2.35 Swaffham Bulbeck 3.15 Sideways 3.55 Demopolis 4.35 Come On Charlie 5.10 Sir Jack Yeats Cheltenham 1.30 Sir Erec 2.10 Eclair De Beaufeu 2.50 Allaho 3.30 Clan Des Obeaux 4.10 Hazel Hill 4.50 Magic Saint 5.30 Daybreak Boy (nb) Lingfield 2.20 Cheerfilly 3.00 Osho 3.40 Unforgiving Minute 4.20 Distant Mirage 5.00 Petite Jack 5.40 Allocator Chelmsford 4.40 Zapper Cass 5.20 Time To Reason 6.00 Zipedeedodah 6.30   You’re Cool 7.00 Jack Berry House 7.30 Pheidippides 8.00 Irish Times 8.30 Pocket Warrior