The film collaborations of Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg – including Superbad, Pineapple Express and Sausage Party – have been successful and, in the case of The Interview, nearly triggered a war between the US and North Korea. The pair, who hail from Vancouver, have now diversified their business interests, launching a cannabis company called Houseplant that will supply the drug within Canada. “Houseplant is the result of years of experience and dedication, with each element and expression thoughtfully designed to make it easier for people to learn to love cannabis as much as Houseplant does,” said a statement released on Wednesday by Ontario-based grower Canopy Growth, with which the pair are working. Rogen said: “Houseplant is a passion we’ve brought to life through drive and dedication. Every decision we’ve made for the business reflects the years of education, first-hand experience and respect we have for cannabis.” Goldberg said: “We are so proud to be launching in Canada, our home. After spending five years diligently preparing for the launch of this company, we’re excited to be able to share our passion for cannabis with Canadians in this way.” The company’s first strain of cannabis is called Houseplant Sativa and will be available in early April through regulated retailers and online in British Columbia. Other strains, including Houseplant Hybrid and Houseplant Indica, as well as soft gels and pre-rolled joints, will follow later in the year. Canopy Growth is already working with business executive Martha Stewart on a range of hemp-based products. Its subsidiary brand, Tweed, has a long relationship with rapper Snoop Dogg. In 2016, they began selling three varieties of cannabis called Leafs by Snoop: Sunset, Ocean View and Palm Tree. Other celebrities peddling cannabis include Willie Nelson, Tommy Chong, Whoopi Goldberg, who makes a topical rub designed to relieve period pain, and Melissa Etheridge, whose range of cold-extracted cannabis-infused wines went on sale in 2014.