In the end there was a strange sense of symmetry about it all. A penalty from Luka Milivojevic and Patrick van Aanholt’s late goal sealed Huddersfield’s relegation at the ground where their adventure began a little more than 18 months ago with a brilliant 3-0 victory under David Wagner. Yet after a campaign that has already seen the departure of the man who achieved the impossible last season, by surviving the club’s first top-flight campaign in more than 40 years, this was a harsh lesson in the realities of the modern game as Jan Siewert’s side became only the second team in Premier League history to be relegated before the end of March. In truth this could have been even more embarrassing had Crystal Palace taken more of their chances in the second half as Huddersfield return to the Championship having lost 17 of their last 19 matches. At least Derby’s all-time points low of 11 was surpassed a few weeks ago, although Siewert also became the first permanent manager to lose his first five Premier League away matches since a certain Ole Gunnar Solskjær did so with Cardiff in 2014. The 36-year-old German has struggled to make an impact since replacing Wagner in January but at least his team had looked intent on putting up a fight in the early stages against opponents who have failed to sparkle in front of their own supporters for most of the season. Palace’s record of only 11 Premier League goals at Selhurst Park before this game was an awful return for a team that has managed 25 on the road by comparison. As if weighed down by that statistic, Roy Hodgson’s side looked ponderous until the 13th minute, when fans paid tribute to the former youth team player Damary Dawkins, whose death with leukaemia last week, aged 13, was also honoured by Raheem Sterling in England’s win over Czech Republic last week. A quick break created by the deftest of touches from Wilfried Zaha finally sparked Palace into life but neither Michy Batshuayi nor Jeffrey Schlup could test Ben Hamer thanks to some last-ditch defending. The goalkeeper had been preferred to Jonas Lössl, one of last season’s heroes, who was left out of the matchday squad entirely after conceding three goals in the last 15 minutes against West Ham before the international break. But it was Hamer’s opposite number Vicente Guaíta who had to be alert to save from Chris Lowe’s powerful header in the 26th minute after the industrious Alex Pritchard had dispossessed Schlupp on the edge of his own box. The Spaniard then did well to divert Lowe’s shot wide of his post after another Palace error with the ball. After the defeats against Brighton and Watford in their last two matches the home supporters will have been disappointed to see a lack of endeavour from their team. But besides one effort from Andros Townsend that was comfortably saved by Hamer, Palace could not find a way through and perhaps should have gone behind just before the break had Karlan Grant made more of Van Aanholt’s sloppy back pass. Hodgson withdrew the ineffective Max Meyer at half-time and replaced him with James McArthur in the hope of rousing his team, with Van Aanholt soon testing Hamer from the edge of the box following good work from Zaha. Tomkins was next to try his luck just as news of Southampton’s goal against Brighton filtered through but, thankfully for the travelling supporters, his volley following a corner went straight at the goalkeeper. Huddersfield’s Juninho Bacuna could count himself lucky not to be booked after two incidents in a minute that saw the Dutchman haul down Aaron Wan-Bissaka and then take out Batshuayi as the frustration around Selhurst Park grew. But that was nothing compared to the groans when Townsend and Zaha both managed to pass up one-on-one chances within the space of a few minutes, the former somehow missing the target with the goal gaping. “We’re going down,” sang the Huddersfield fans, perhaps more in expectation than anything else. A few minutes later, their prediction was realised when Bacuna brought down Zaha and Milivojevic made no mistake from the spot before Van Aanholt made absolutely sure.