Jeremy Corbyn has refused to rule out seeking to revoke article 50 to prevent Britain from sliding into a no-deal Brexit, as senior EU officials privately talked up the possibility before a crunch summit in Brussels. Speaking outside the European commission headquarters in Brussels, the Labour leader insisted his focus “at the moment” remained on trying to push the prime minister into a soft Brexit. “These are hypotheticals,” Corbyn said in response to reporters’ questions over cancelling Brexit. “So far as we’re concerned we think there’s an urgency in constructing a majority for an agreeable solution and that’s what we’re concentrating on at the moment.” Corbyn was holding talks with Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator, and Martin Selmayr, the European commission’s secretary general, before Theresa May’s arrival at a leaders’ summit in Brussels on Thursday. Selmayr privately suggested this week that the UK would end up seeking to revoke article 50 if the alternative was a no-deal Brexit. The EU official, a trusted adviser to the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, described May’s letter seeking an extension but ruling out European elections as “not pretty” in a meeting with ambassadors on Wednesday evening, according to a diplomatic note leaked to the Guardian. It is possible. European Parliament elections are due to take place between 23 and 26 May 2019, which falls into the short Article 50 extension period that Prime Minister Theresa May has requested. However, the Parliament formed by these elections is not due to sit until 1 June, after May’s proposed new date for Brexit on 30 June. In those circumstances there would therefore be no need to send British MEPs to the parliament. However, Reuters has reported that the European commission opposes extending British membership until then, citing a document that states 'Any extension offered to the United Kingdom should either last until 23 May 2019 or should be significantly longer and require European elections'. May arrived shortly after Corbyn’s comments in the EU quarter of the Belgian capital for a summit where she hopes to secure a three-month extension, which would come into force should she win over the Commons at the third time of asking next week. The prime minister, who will need to delay Brexit if the vote is successful next week in order to pass the necessary withdrawal legislation, told reporters: “I am here today to discuss with fellow leaders a short extension of article 50 until the end of June. “As I said yesterday, this delay is of personal regret to me. But a short extension would give parliament the time to make a final choice that delivers on the result of the referendum.” Asked if she would countenance the UK crashing out without a deal, May said: “What is important is that parliament delivers on the result of the referendum and we deliver Brexit for the British people. I sincerely hope that we can do that with a deal – I’m still working on ensuring that parliament can agree a deal so that we can leave in an orderly way.” The EU is poised to reject May’s request but instead offer an extension until 22 May, to avoid any risk of the UK remaining a member state but without MEPs. Donald Tusk, the European council president, has said he will call an extraordinary summit next week should the deal be voted down again in the Commons. But the prime minister’s insistence that she will not countenance holding European elections in the UK has raised concerns that a no-deal scenario is increasingly likely. Corbyn said the prime minister needed to engage with his vision of a softer Brexit and permanent customs union. “We think that what we’re proposing can be achieved in the British parliament; we do believe we can construct a majority that will prevent the crashing out and all the chaos that will come from crashing out and that’s what we’re absolutely focused on,” he said.