Peter Beardsley has left Newcastle saying he is seeking a new challenge but the club have not clarified whether the under-23s coach’s departure was linked to its investigation into allegations of bullying, which the 58-year-old former Magpies forward has consistently denied. A statement read: “Newcastle can confirm that Peter Beardsley is no longer employed by the club. We are grateful for the contribution Peter has given over the years as a player, coach and ambassador and we wish him well for the future. The club will make no further comment at this time.” Beardsley, who made more than 300 appearances for the north-east club in two spells and won 59 caps for England, said in a statement: “The time is now right for me to seek a new challenge and I wish the players all the best and the supporters the success they deserve. “I have always honoured my contractual obligations of confidentiality to the club and maintained my silence, which has in itself been very difficult. I am incredibly grateful for the tremendous support I have received and I look forward to the future.” Beardsley had been placed on gardening leave on 9 January 2018 by Lee Charnley, the club’s managing director, following accusations of bullying made by Yasin Ben El-Mhanni, a 23-year-old former Newcastle reserve winger. It later emerged that El-Mhanni, released by Newcastle last spring, was not the only under-23s player to complain about Beardsley’s behaviour. Beardsley, though, issued a strong denial of the allegations through his solicitor and is understood to believe he had done nothing wrong. Newcastle’s statement makes no reference to its investigation. Given the nature of the grievances and his status as one of Newcastle’s finest players, the situation was delicate and he spent more than a year suspended on full pay. His departure clearly leaves some unanswered questions. In his absence, Ben Dawson has been in charge of the under-23 side, assisted by the former Newcastle goalkeeper Steve Harper. Most of those who complained about the former regime are no longer at the club. Beardsley was in the second of two coaching stints with Newcastle’s juniors. The first ran from 2001-2006 and involved him being cleared of bullying complaints from three academy players by a Premier League investigation in 2003. In 2006 the then first-team manager, Glenn Roeder, instigated Beardsley’s switch into an ambassadorial role but Beardsley returned to coaching duties at the academy three years later, subsequently being promoted to take charge of the Under-23s. He spent part of his recent gardening leave attending FA coaching courses at St George’s Park, completing his Uefa A coaching licence.