Only 12 months ago, Flick Haigh pulled off an unlikely but outstanding victory on her debut in the British GT Championship. The win at Oulton Park was a bold statement and the start of something special as she went on to become the first woman to take the series title. Imagine Haigh’s frustration, then, at failing to secure the financial backing to build on that achievement and compete in a new series this season. Instead she will test for TF Sport and race in one meeting of the Le Mans Cup as a support race to the 24 Hours in June, far from what she had anticipated after the GT triumph. “My season hasn’t panned out how I had hoped,” says Haigh. “That is down to lack of sponsorship and funding. Sadly it’s an issue for all drivers that aren’t on a salary with a team or factory.” There is a limited amount of funding available in motor sport and with so few female competitors, the numbers are heavily stacked against them. But Haigh has no intention of giving in. “It’s the harsh reality of a sport that costs more than a house every year,” she says. “However, I will keep pushing towards my goals.” Haigh’s goal in the immediate term is using this year as a platform to a full season in the European Le Mans Series, with a drive at the 24 Hours still the target. It is a grand ambition and Haigh is pursuing it, even given her disappointment, with the zeal of someone who has found their calling, albeit in a roundabout way. If someone asked me when I was younger what I would be doing now, I would have said: ‘I would be on a farm milking about 400 cows’ From the age of 11, Haigh had been involved in the family’s organic dairy farm and, after studying agriculture and equine management at university, her plan was to return to run the business. However, in 2005, the family sold the farm and Haigh chose a new direction. “I decided to do something I wanted to rather than something that was mapped out and then taken away,” says the 34-year-old. “I went and did it because I was so angry at the world at the time. If someone asked me when I was younger what I would be doing now, I would have said: ‘I would be on a farm milking about 400 cows.’” Haigh had an aptitude for racing but had never considered it as a career having come to motor sport relatively late. An intensive course at Silverstone followed. She then raced Caterhams and the Ginetta GT4 Supercup but was still not fully committed, and not progressing. A key moment came when she joined Optimum for a full championship in 2016 and 2017 in an Audi in the Le Mans Cup, but it also almost ended her career. Bad luck and a poorly performing car took their toll. “I was disillusioned with everything,” she says. “The stress, fed up with giving your all financially, emotionally, for no gain. You can only take it for so long.” Beset by concern, she had almost given up before opting for one last shot in a new start in the British GT. Aston Martin Racing were keen and it proved to be an inspired decision. Haigh won the title last season alongside teammate Jonny Adam for the Optimum team driving an Aston Martin Vantage GT3 in a fiercely competitive sportscar championship. Through it all, one area where Haigh has not had a moment of doubt is whether, as a woman, she can compete in a male-dominated sport. She passionately believes gender is not an issue in racing and that once the visor comes down, the only strength that matters is mental. Haigh enjoyed the biting riposte the British GT championship issued to Carmen Jorda when she won at Oulton Park. Sent to the former driver Jorda, after she had said men and women could not compete on the same level, they tweeted: “Dear @CarmenJorda. Today @flickhaigh raced against 24 men in one of the world’s toughest GT championships. She won. After starting on pole. Regards #BritishGT.” With the new women-only W Series announcing its driver line-up on Thursday, including five British competitors, Haigh is unequivocally opposed to what she describes as unnecessary segregation. She believes they must compete with men rather than sending the message to potential young drivers that women need differential treatment. Haigh believes the way to inspire more women into the sport is by proving to be the best against the best, and she is determined to continue to do just that. “Motor sport has ups and downs and sometimes the downs are terrible,” she says. “But when you have a high like last season they are reversed. I love it. I can’t believe that getting up at 4am and milking cows would have bettered that.”