Christmas in south London, 1991, and a Brazilian father is getting to know his English son-in-law, a doctor. “So you are a scientific family.” He is scientific too, from the most competitive university in Brazil; so is his daughter. The conversation, like many in this book, is spot-on: the lack of English faux-humble obfuscation, the approval and relief. Yara Rodrigues Fowler’s debut proceeds in short flashes of dialogue, poetry and prose-poetry, lists and straight prose, in an English infused with Portuguese. There are lovely lines (a garden “regrowing untidy with the spring”) and adjectival pile-ups: “tall narrow nosed blue eyed corduroy Richard” waiting for the plane from Brazil that carries his in-laws. The style might seem precious and effortful, experiment-for-experiment’s sake, but in fact it just feels fitting, the textual embodiment of the novel’s not-wholly-English, not-wholly-Brazilian world. On Christmas day the new son-in-law, a socialist from Yorkshire, takes his parents-in-law on a walk around Tooting Common. In the flat his sister-in-law and his wife turn the heating up. Christmas henceforth occurs on a Brazilian beach. Time passes and their only daughter enjoys a London childhood that is warm and loving but not cloying. She learns to “mix up the words in both languages to make sure you are always understood”. Anyone who grew up doing this will recognise the composite music: “What even is a gooseberry? Only when she was older did she realise … some of these fruits had been living double named double lives one soft and wet and café da manhã the other shrivel sour and in Sainsbury’s.” Her parents, well rooted in their own backgrounds, able to laugh at themselves, make an impressive go of their mixed marriage. Their daughter (never named) is clever and well read, at one point participating in a hilariously subversive rereading of Pride and Prejudice. But increasingly, along with the usual landmarks of growing up she must navigate something else: the question “Where are you from?” Here. But also, there. All children are, of course, an idiosyncratic amalgam of their parents, but when two different cultures are involved neither parent can necessarily lead the way, or predict the objectifications to come. “I had a thing for Brazilian girls,” says a boy she loves, after they start going out. “Yeah? / Used to love Brazilian porn / Oh my god! … / Is that bad he said, touching her”. After they have broken up, so do her words; sometimes there are just six words to a page. We are being shown a mind sidling up to pain, touching it briefly, retreating into silence; the white space also giving the reader a little room to breathe. She is acute about sexual politics; about long marriages; about being smashed and putting oneself together again Where are you from? No, where are you really from? Well, London, and Brazil, but also other, in-between places: Heathrow Terminal 3, or planes. Rodrigues Fowler notices how on long-haul flights people begin to shed English carapaces and settle into Portuguese (or Arabic or Amharic or Creole); to recognise, above “the big open-bellied loneliness of the Atlantic”, usually obscured aspects of themselves. The childhood bed the daughter retreats to after her relationship ends is another space where the Venn diagram of her identity interlocks and it all makes sense. In this, and in the form she has chosen, Rodrigues Fowler owes an acknowledged debt to Sandra Cisneros – a quote from Cisneros’s The House on Mango Street is one of her epigraphs: “Only a house as quiet as snow, a space for / myself to go, clean as paper before the poem”. Again, in Cisneros’s 2002 novel Caramelo, a girl caught between the US and Mexico yearns for “a bathroom where I can soak in the tub ... A lock on my door. A door. A room. A bed.” The bed, here, is in London, and Stubborn Archivist is a pleasurably London novel, London in 1991 but also in 2015. The daughter works as a researcher on TV programmes about Brazil, or, at least, Brazil as the English see it – cosmetic surgery, bikinis, beach volleyball. Rodrigues Fowler is lacerating about liberal cluelessness – “Nathan texted her asking if she wanted to go to a Peruvian restaurant in Hackney? And also, he’s just finished Love in the Time of Cholera ... and he’d love to know what she thought?” She is acute about sexual politics; about long marriages; about being smashed and putting oneself together again. Sometimes it feels as if the plot is a slim excuse for working out a mixed identity, but Rodrigues Fowler does it so well, so warmly, with such a lived sense of how nothing is one thing or another, but probably both and neither. The challenge, as it is for everyone, is to betray none of the aspects of self – to know and honour, for instance, “this broken body / this broken up body”, but also to “be honest with yourself / There were good times / (yes)”. Tender, sharp, generous, she holds all these things lightly, up to the light. • Aida Edemariam’s The Wife’s Tale is published by 4th Estate. Stubborn Archivist is published by Fleet (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.