Two New Zealand police officers who were visiting from a rural Canterbury station have been praised as heroes for pursuing and arresting the Christchurch shooting suspect. The pair, who were in the city for a training session on dealing with armed offenders, represented the professionalism of the police force, said Chris Cahill, the president of the New Zealand Police Association. “The ability to make quick decisions to go forward and act made all police officers in New Zealand and around the world incredibly proud,” he said. Police commissioner Mike Bush, said on Sunday the suspect was “non compliant”, and the officers – who remained unidentified – “had to use some force and tactical options”. “They put themselves in harm’s way to stop any further attack and I do believe they did prevent further attacks.” Senior Sergeant Pete Stills told the NZ Herald the two officers had correctly suspected the suspect would use routes which skirted the city. Coming across the suspect’s car, the officers pursued and rammed the vehicle, immobilising it. Cahil said: “Once they heard this happening they took a really good approach, knowing the scenes were covered they went a bit wider than that.” Footage of the arrest showed the police car jammed into the driver’s side of the car, a spinning wheel held aloft. The officers dragged the suspect out of the passenger side door of the car, and held him on the ground. The Herald reported they warned the public and other officers to keep clear after they spied “high risk” items on the back seat of the car. Cahill said New Zealand officers received regular training in dealing with armed offenders and high-risk pursuits, but it wasn’t required to be put into practice very often. “To be able to achieve what they achieved is a testament to those officers,” said Cahill. “It’s early but I think it’s pretty obvious that their actions require recognition down the track.” Brenton Tarrant, a 28-year-old Australian, has been charged with one count of murder over the terror attacks on Al Noor and Linwood mosques during Friday prayers in which 50 people have died, with more than a dozen still in a critical condition. • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day. In New Zealand, the crisis support service Lifeline can be reached on 0800 543 354. In Australia, Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the UK and Irish Republic, contact Samaritans on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.