Nicolás Maduro’s embattled government has declared the German ambassador persona non grata and ordered him to leave the country within 48 hours as Venezuela’s political crisis intensified on Wednesday. The decision to expel Daniel Kriener – who has been based in Caracas since last year – was announced on Twitter by Venezuela’s foreign minister, Jorge Arreaza. Arreaza said the decision was based on Daniel Kriener’s “repeated acts of interference in the country’s internal affairs”. In a statement, Maduro’s administration accused Kriener and the German government – which was among those to recognize Maduro’s rival Juan Guaidó as Venezuela’s legitimate leader last month – of “crass” and “unlawful” meddling in Venezuelan affairs. “As a result, Mr Kriener is given a deadline of 48 hours to leave the territory of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,” the statement added. The German foreign office said: “We can confirm that ambassador Daniel Kriener has been declared ‘persona non grata’. We are currently in deliberations on further steps, including with our partners on the ground.” Kriener, 58, was among a group of foreign diplomats who travelled to Venezuela’s main international airport on Monday to greet Guaidó, as he returned to the country following a tour of South America. “We believe that at this moment we can help for there to be a negotiated political settlement to the crisis here in Venezuela,” he told reporters at the Simón Bolívar airport to the north of Caracas. Friction between Maduro and European diplomats has been growing since 10 January when Caracas-based ambassadors, including Kriener and his British counterpart, Andrew Soper, boycotted the inauguration ceremony for Maduro’s disputed second term. Tensions intensified last month when European countries including the UK, Spain, France, Germany, Sweden and Denmark officially recognised Guaidó as Venezuela’s interim president after Maduro ignored calls for fresh presidential elections. Addressing a sitting of Venezuela’s opposition-controlled national assembly on Wednesday, the opposition lawmaker Omar Barboza said the decision reflected “the deepening of the totalitarian behaviour” of Maduro’s government and deserved condemnation. The United States – Guaidó’s most important backer – stepped up its pressure on Maduro on Wednesday as Donald Trump’s national security adviser, John Bolton, warned foreign banks and financial institutions not to do business with the Venezuelan strongman. “The United States is putting foreign financial institutions on notice that they will face sanctions for being involved in facilitating illegitimate transactions that benefit Nicolás Maduro and his corrupt network,” Bolton said in a statement.