Viewers, it is often argued by TV executives, need warm and sympathetic characters to draw them into a story. But this theory seems spectacularly challenged by the 2019 Bafta TV nominations. Four dramas gain 36 nominations between them for plots involving a politician who seeks to have his secret lover murdered; an assassin who likes to kill in cruelly comical ways; a bigamist spy who sustains a life of multiple parallel deceptions; and an aristocratic coke addict devoted to finding new ways of being rude. A Very English Scandal, Killing Eve, Mrs Wilson and Patrick Melrose also share other ground. All are set in the upper reaches of the British establishment and feature staggering levels of lying, both self-deceit and deceiving others. The shows also apply a jaunty tone and style to very dark material. (A similar game takes place in Lisa McGee’s Derry Girls, the Troubles sitcom, which should surely be the backstop option for the jury in scripted comedy.) Future historians will doubtless conclude that the popularity of tragi-comedy about delusional people reflected the fact that producers and viewers have been living through the dark farce of Brexit. And the fact that so many characters in the top four dramas were liars and/or spies surely also reflects a time of deep scepticism about those in charge. Bodyguard, which was also full of lying spies and spying liars, takes to 41 the nods for shows in which no one in authority was to be trusted at all. The drama frontrunners also intriguingly span traditional and newly fashionable forms of storytelling. Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Killing Eve, with an episode length (43 minutes) unusual for UK broadcast TV, feels made to be streamed, viewers hungrily accepting the message that the next episode starts in however many seconds, until suddenly it’s after midnight. In contrast, Jed Mercurio’s Bodyguard deserves way more credit than it has had for saving the once-a-week series, long declared dead, with the seven days of tension and speculation between episodes, escalated by social media, becoming part of the narrative experience. And, by choosing to tell the long, rich story of Liberal Party leader Jeremy Thorpe’s fall over a mere three episodes, A Very English Scandal is a powerful representative of a vanishing form of really mini mini-series that exists only in British TV. In the performance shortlists, it’s good to see Alex Jennings, one of the finest character actors, finally recognised for an extraordinary turn as a murder suspect under interrogation in ITV’s Unforgotten, although he could just as easily have been honoured as someone suspicious of murder, Thorpe’s raffish colleague Peter Bessell, in A Very English Scandal. Because, even in the most mediocre periods of TV, there are more than four great performances, these sections draw a lot of sulking about snubs. But it seems harsh for Lennie James not to be nominated for his portrayal as a father accused of abducting his daughter in Save Me, although his work as the show’s creator and writer is at least recognised elsewhere. A certain cultural snobbery also shows in the omission of Richard Madden’s traumatised bodyguard and Jodie Whittaker’s first female Tardis-driving time lord from the acting categories. Leading a populist franchise, especially one as famous as Doctor Who, is a much harder acting task than it can look. The entertainment electorate has been notably loyal to Anthony McPartlin, continuing the long Bafta tradition of nominating him with presenting partner, Declan Donnelly, for two more major trophies for Ant & Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway, even though the last two episodes of the series were hosted by Dec alone, following Ant’s arrest for a drink-driving offence to which he subsequently pleaded guilty. However, if all this year’s nominees attend, there may be tensions at the ceremony as McPartlin’s estranged wife, Lisa Armstrong, is nominated in the makeup category for her work on Strictly Come Dancing. It will also be interesting to watch the faces of Prince William, Bafta’s president, and his wife the Duchess of Cambridge, if the news category is won by an interview with the controversial father of their sister-in-law, the Duchess of Sussex – Good Morning Britain: Thomas Markle Exclusive. In general, the 2019 lists reflect Bafta’s recent drive for greater diversity of nominees. If the awards have a problem, it is that these remain recognisably the judgments of a British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Because the entry process is still dominated by traditional UK broadcasters – and there can be a suspicion of anti-American and anti-streamer feeling among some jurors – there is almost no recognition for Netflix, even though it is the primary cause of sleepless nights for the British TV barons who will be in the room at the awards ceremony on 12 May.