As Australians, our biscuits are a part of our history, both collective and personal. Childhoods are full of biscuit-related memories – squeezing margarine and Vegemite “worms” from the holes in Vita-Wheats, smearing Bush Biscuits with butter and strawberry jam, and dunking Yo-Yos into glasses of milk. Never ones to shy away from the big issues in Australian culture, the crocodile-obsessed lunatics at the NT News have kicked off one hell of a Twitter debate on the topic of Aussie biscuits, and have even launched a survey to determine which is the most-loved. TOP TEN DEFINITIVE BISCUIT LIST: 1. JATZ.1A. CHICKEN IN A BISCUIT2 TRIPLE WAFER - CHOCOLATE ONLY 3. TIM TAM - ORIGINAL 4. MALT 'O' MILK5. DELTA CREAM6. SHORTBREAD YO-YOS MADE BY OUR NANA7. TEDDY BEAR8. KINGSTON9. SCOTCH FINGER10 SALADA It’s a fool’s errand. A single biscuit can hardly capture the heart of a nation. The boffins at the biscuit factories want us to embrace the Tim Tam as our national biscuit, and to be fair they have a reasonable case. Can any child of the 90s forget the wish-granting genie from the commercials who bestowed upon a fortunate lamp-rubber “a packet of Tim Tams that never runs out”? An unforgettable moment in Australian advertising made only more iconic when you realise that the lady of the lamp was none other than our own Cate Blanchett. But the deep pockets of Big Biscuit is not the will of the people. Ask yourself, does a Tim Tam really hold a place in your heart as dear as fighting over the Scotch Fingers in the Family Assorted selection, or the avoiding the Orange Slice in the Assorted Creams? If your family was anything like mine, the sight of the blue Royal Dansk Danish Butter Cookie tin being broken out of the cupboard meant either a family friend was popping around for a cup of tea, or you had a hole in one of your school socks. If the contents of the tin turned out to be biscuits instead of needles, that was a good day. But which of the smorgasbord to go for? The sugar-crusted one that looked like a pretzel (actually officially called a “kringle”)? Or the rectangular one (a finskbrød or Finnish bread)? Maybe even the piped ridged one (a vanille kranse or vanilla wreath) or the dark rounder one (a kanelkage or cinnamon cake). My favourite was the eponymous butter cookie, rich and sweet with a hint of saltiness. But the greatest feeling of all was reaching the bottom of the little paper cup and then removing it, revealing a whole extra layer of cookies awaiting consumption. Maybe you’re more of the kind that swears allegiance to Jatz, or signs petitions to return to the original flavour of Barbecue Shapes? The divide between savoury and sweet biscuits goes far deeper than you might think. It’s a story of both survival and prosperity. The savoury Sao, Salada and even Dixie Drumstick are the legacy of seafaring explorers pushing the British empire around the world. Hardtack was a vital food for both sea voyages and incursions into the unforgiving Australian bush, and its evolutions are still with us today. Sweet biscuits, however, are a product of more prosperous times. By the 19th century the coffee and tea trade had produced financial and cultural booms, and sitting down to share a cup of tea or coffee required a snack to go with it. A blue tin of butter cookies or tray of Assorted Creams shares heritage with the Scandinavian tradition of sju sorters kakor or “seven kinds of cookies”, where a guest was served seven different kinds of biscuits to show the effort of the host in providing hospitality to the guest. Whatever your preference, our biscuits hold a place both in our history and our hearts. A much-loved biscuit being discontinued from production is like a part of your childhood being ripped away. Another signpost on the long march towards death and the anonymity of the forgotten. It comes for us all. And you can tear my Raspberry Tartlets from my cold, dead hand.