Apple has launched a new version of its hugely popular wireless earbuds, the AirPods, with long-anticipated wireless charging and longer battery life. The second-generation AirPods look identical to the previous version, complete with a white stalk that looks like a set of earphones with the cables cut off. But now the earbuds last longer when used for phone calls between charges and support hands-free access to Apple’s Siri voice assistant. The updated AirPods contain the new H1 chip, which is designed to ensure a stable connection to the smartphone, says Apple, something that still proves difficult for many manufacturers of truly wireless earbuds. Phil Schiller, Apple’s senior vice-president of worldwide marketing, said the new Airpods offered “an extra hour of talk-time, faster connections, hands-free ‘Hey Siri’ and the convenience of a new wireless battery case”. pic.twitter.com/x3OGOekxc0 The latest Apple AirPods are on sale for £199 ($199) with a wireless charging case, which closely resembles the previous Lightning cable-only case from 2017 but with an exterior charging indicator light. The case can be charged via any standard Qi-compatible charger in the same way as Apple’s recent iPhones. For those not interested in wireless charging, the AirPods are also available with a cheaper cable-only charging case for £159 ($159). Either version of the earbuds gives up to five hours of continuous music playback, or three hours of phone calls, and can be charged just under four times by the battery in the case. The wireless charging case can be purchased on its own as an accessory for existing AirPods for £79 ($79). Apple’s original AirPods prompted ridicule from some quarters over their appearance, with some describing them as “like a tampon without a string”. But two years later they have become a hit, visible in the ears of millennials everywhere, generating four times more sales than the iPod did at the same time in its lifecycle, according to Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook. The second-generation AirPods are expected to continue that trend. The launch follows updates to the company’s iPad Air and iPad Mini lines, as well as the iMac, and precedes Apple’s media event next Monday in Cupertino, California, where the company is expected to unveil a series of subscription services, including TV streaming.