That Ferrari have a good, potentially great, car this year was clear by the end of the first day of testing when Sebastian Vettel was positively purring at how the SF90 had performed. By the end of day eight, his optimism had been entirely justified and they must be considered favourites going into the first race in Melbourne on 17 March. Definitive judgments from testing are dangerous but the Scuderia’s form is impossible to ignore. Vettel set the fastest lap, with a time of 1min 16.221sec. They completed 997 laps in total, second only to Mercedes, while their engines look rock solid, with 2,790 laps (8,069 miles) from across the grid – the highest of any power unit. The car looks supremely well balanced, has great grip, is planted out of the corners and handles with ease. Crucially, where it really counts in comparable race simulations – where Mercedes had the edge this time last year – Ferrari were quicker. They are playing it down of course, but the spring in Vettel’s step is justified. Lewis Hamilton said he believed Ferrari had a five-tenths advantage at the end of testing but, given fuel, tyre and climate adjustments, it looks more like two to three-tenths at best. Indeed, on a qualifying run on the same soft rubber Hamilton’s best lap was only three-thousandths off Vettel. Mercedes did successfully rack up the miles, top of the table with 1190 laps, but the car does not have the air of invincibility they have shown before in pre-season. It looks harder to drive, is less compliant and Valtteri Bottas admitted they were still looking for better balance, grip and stability. Yet there is no sense of panic at the team, with technical director James Allison confirming they were “reasonably pleased” with how the car performed in its spec for Melbourne. Last year they had to unlock their car’s potential and while Hamilton acknowledged that “we have a hill to climb but we know how to do it”, he warned against expecting a drastic improvement before Melbourne. Pierre Gasly’s crash in week two followed by a gearbox problem curtailed Red Bull’s running, preventing realistic comparative hot lap or race-sim times. But they, too, look strong and their new engine partner Honda appear to be in their best shape since returning to F1 in 2015. They have been reliable and shown the potential to be quick, with suggestions that Honda have even more to come in a qualifying mode on their engine. The team remain behind Ferrari and Mercedes but look at least as good as they were with Renault last year. That there is real promise was confirmed when British-born Thai driver Alexander Albon set a time just six-tenths slower than Vettel in the Honda-powered Toro Rosso. Better still for Max Verstappen, their high-rake chassis has a hugely responsive front-end, giving him the grip on corner entry that plays to his driving style. If they develop as strongly as usual, the potential to bridge the gap to the leaders is real. The hotly contested midfield scrap last season looks set to be even more competitive in 2019. The gap to the front three remains, although perhaps slightly reduced, but behind them the majority of teams look intriguingly well matched. Haas finished last season strongly and with Ferrari parts and engines have unsurprisingly returned in good form. But Renault are ominously confident of how far their engine has come over the winter and began to show times to prove it, while Alfa Romeo (formerly Sauber) have once again brought an aggressive design that looks very strong in fast corners, which has put them firmly in the mix. Toro Rosso’s partnership using Red Bull parts has also paid dividends and they could prove an early surprise player. Equally, McLaren enjoyed their best test for five years. They put in 873 laps, hitting all their testing targets and setting some quick, soft-rubber, low-fuel times. They admitted there is a way to go still but this was just the start required in their rebuilding process. Racing Point (formerly Force India) were behind the midfield but not overly unhappy given they were testing a basic version of their car and expect major developments for Australia. Yet they still put Williams in the shade. Williams missed two and a half days of testing because their car was not ready. By day eight their running was curtailed due to a lack of spare parts and wear and tear. Worst of all, already behind after a disastrous season last year, their pace was nowhere, half a second back to Racing Point and further to the midfield, although George Russell and Robert Kubica did put in a reasonable number of laps, with 567. Unfortunately for Kubica, returning to F1 after his accident in 2011, the longest single run he was able to complete was 15 laps – far from ideal preparation for the Polish driver. It was painful enough to watch the once great team’s struggle last season, but after testing an ominous sense of foreboding already hangs heavy over them for 2019.