Michael Jackson’s estate is engaged in a campaign of adverts, lawsuits and interviews in an attempt to salvage his image after the screening of Channel 4’s documentary Leaving Neverland, which details years of alleged grooming and child abuse. The documentary, shown on Wednesday night and continuing on Thursday, features detailed testimonies from Wade Robson and James Safechuck, who allege the pop star abused them for years while they were children. It prompted a campaign to shore up Jackson’s legacy and save the multimillion-pound empire he left behind. Jackson’s estate – which has made $2.1bn (£1.6bn) since his death in 2009 and is run by John McClain, a co-executor with Jackson’s former lawyer John Branca – originally tried to block the release of the documentary by contacting Channel 4 and issuing a $100m lawsuit against HBO, which broadcast Dan Reed’s film last weekend in the US. The estate said the documentary, which premiered at Sundance in January, is “the kind of tabloid character assassination Michael Jackson endured in life, and now in death”, and added that “the film takes uncorroborated allegations that supposedly happened 20 years ago and treats them as fact”. Eamonn Forde, a music industry expert, said the estate was engaged in an unprecedented containment and damage-limitation exercise to attempt to preserve the most lucrative posthumous fortune in the history of music. “This is a new era for artist estate management, because this is about containment rather than maximising the profile of a deceased artist,” said Forde. “To an extent, estate management is about building a narrative around an artist; they are the directors of the narrative.” The estate’s response to the documentary has been to question the credibility of Robson and Safechuck – claiming they are “opportunists” and “admitted liars” – and to offer alternative Jackson content. It released two concert films, Live in Bucharest: The Dangerous Tour and Live at Wembley July 16, 1988, on YouTube at the same time as Leaving Neverland aired in the US. The Jackson family has also been vocal in support of the pop star and his legacy. Taj Jackson, one of the singer’s nephews and a member of the 90s boyband 3T, headed a crowdfunded advertising campaign that bought bus stop ads in London for the website MJinnocent.com, with the tagline: “Facts don’t lie. People do.” Taj Jackson also appeared with Tito, Marlon and Jackie Jackson on CBS to defend their brother’s legacy, claiming that despite not watching Leaving Neverland, there was “not one piece of evidence” to support its claims. Reed compared Jackson’s fans, who he claims have sent him dozens of emails denouncing his film, to religious fanatics. The pop star’s supporters held a small protest outside Channel 4’s headquarters in London on Wednesday before Leaving Neverland was broadcast. But they have not been able to prevent a backlash, as Jackson’s music has already been pulled from dozens of radio stations in Canada and New Zealand, and does not feature on the playlists of BBC Radio 2. Last summer, the station celebrated Jackson as one of its “legends of pop”, along with Madonna and Prince. A new Jackson biopic-musical, Don’t Stop ‘Til You Get Enough, due to start a Broadway run, was postponed last month, but there are no plans to scrap the jukebox musical Thriller Live, which is in its 10th year at the Lyric Theatre in the West End of London. Forde believes Leaving Neverland will inevitably affect the Jackson estate’s revenues, but the long-term prognosis depends on the reaction of casual fans. “With this stuff, it comes down to the consumer,” he said. “Will they want to keep on listening to his music? “There will be the loyal fans who think everything is a smear campaign, but will the casual fan be willing to see a musical? There are only so many hardcore fans who will ignore what this documentary is saying. It’s the floating punters who make these things profitable.”