Jordan Pickford 6 Had no chance with the goal but just when he thought he might be in for a busy night the Everton man was a spectator for much of the rest of the match as Montenegro rarely threatened again. Kyle Walker 6 Will have been disappointed the home side’s goal came down his flank but patrolled it well thereafter and kept a close eye on the tricky Marko Vesovic. One of the key senior heads now for this England side. Harry Maguire 7 Not many people agreed with Matej Vydra’s assertion last week that Maguire was England’s ‘weak link’ at the back – and he has not looked it in these two games. Combative and utterly dependable. Michael Keane 6 At fault for the goal when his poor header was compounded by allowing the ball to ricochet off him but atoned soon afterwards with good leap for equaliser, a first England goal for the Everton defender. Danny Rose 6 A surprise starter ahead of the rested Chilwell and although he gave the ball away badly trying to play out early in the second half the Spurs man, who is no longer first choice for club or country, stood up to the challenge well. Booked late on. Declan Rice 7 First start for the West Ham man and he did not get it all his own way as England found themselves exposed at times in the first half. But his positional sense was good and he showed enough to suggest he will be a long-term rival to Eric Dier for the holding position. Ross Barkley 8 Set up the equaliser and scored the second and third, this could prove a breakthrough performance for the former Everton man who, after a difficult first year at Chelsea, looks to be returning to somewhere near the player he used to be. Dele Alli 5 The Spurs man seemed a little below par for this one and could not find the spaces between the lines he usually inhabits. Made way for Jordan Henderson just after the hour-mark, a timely rest perhaps as he will face the Liverpool captain at Anfield on Sunday. Callum Hudson-Odoi 7 Showed his inexperience with a weak challenge that led to the home side’s early goal but any ideas that would affect him were soon forgotten. Switched from right to left flank and gave Filip Stojkovic a torrid night from then on, set up the second goal and never stopped running at the Montenegro defence. Fast, fearless, and at 18 there is no limit to his potential. Now can he get a Premier League start at Chelsea? Harry Kane 7 The captain rallied his team when they were briefly behind and was full of tireless work and selfless running as usual, getting his customary goal when he tapped home Sterling’s cross for the fourth. Raheem Sterling 8 Didn’t get the all the glory as he had on Friday at Wembley but was hugely influential again, swapped flanks with Hudson-Odoi and set up the killer third goal and the fourth for Kane before helping himself to the fifth. Montenegro had no answer to his pace and invention on the ball. Substitutions Henderson 6 for Alli 64 Superb pass for Sterling’s goal but silly booking. Ward-Prowse for Barkley 82 Wilson for Kane 83