In the end it was the money-men who made Richard Burton give up rugby. The film company put a clause in his contract banning him from skiing, piloting a plane and playing the game he had loved since he was kid, “The inference being,” he wrote, “that it would be all right to wrestle with a Bengal tiger 5,000 miles away, but not to play against, shall we say, Pontypool at home.” But Burton never stopped following the game. Anthony Hopkins tells a story about the time Burton asked him whether he was going to Cardiff Arms Park that weekend. “I said: ‘Who’s playing?’” Hopkins recalled, and Burton replied: “What do you mean who’s playing? You’re not a true Welshman if you don’t know who’s playing.’” True Welshmen will know who they are playing on Saturday. A grand slam match is a national event. They say 250,000 people, a 12th or so of the population, came to the city for the grand slam game against Ireland in 2005. There will not be so many this time because the forecast is poor and that one was the first in almost 30 years, but there will be enough so you will not notice the difference around Westgate and St Mary streets, where it will seem as if the entire country is contracted into the square mile around the ground. Warren Gatland says this is what he will miss most, “That bus ride down Westgate Street, and the fans when you go along there into the stadium, they make the hairs stand up on the back of the neck.” Gatland did not always feel that way. In Calon, a book about Welsh rugby, Owen Sheers wrote about Gatland worrying the fans would turn on the team. “For some reason, the Welsh fans love the agony of their support as much as the ecstasy; that after the pleasure they seem to crave the pain. And that is why his biggest fear is still the thought that one day, as this bus drives into town, the crowd spread through the streets before them might turn. That one day, as they make this slow drive in towards the stadium, it might not be cheers that fill the air, but boos.” Gatland comes from New Zealand, the one country where people feel similarly strong about the sport, but even he was unsettled by how intense it was. That emotion, that expectation, can affect a player in two ways, it can be a spur or a strain. There have been times when it all got too much, there have been teams who could not handle the pressure. Gatland understands that, and over the years he has been able to teach his players how best to channel it. “We’ve spoken all week about embracing it and not running away from it,” Gatland says. “I never seen a group of players this excited about playing in a grand slam game. They want to win, they want to put that jersey on and play for themselves and their families and for Wales as a whole. We know what it means to the country. And these guys are incredibly motivated by that.” Professional rugby is so precisely calibrated – analysts count every metre gained, every tackle made, every ruck hit – but underneath it all that emotional energy, impossible to measure or track, is still what drives a team on. It is the tinder that fuels the fire. And when matches are as hard-fought as they have been in this Six Nations, it can make all the difference. You could feel it working for England when they beat Ireland in Dublin, and against them when they lost to Wales in Cardiff. And of course Ireland will have their own motivations on Saturday. They will want to prove they are still the best team in Europe, that they are better than they have shown themselves to be so far. “Often you get one team that wants it just a little bit more,” says Gatland, “and that’s kind of the position we’ve been in in the past, if you want something bad enough, and you really believe it can happen, it often does.” Gatland has a way of stoking that without ever letting it burn so hot that it becomes self-destructive. “Emotional energy,” he has said, “can catch a team out”. Gatland does not scream or shout, he believes coaches have to “stay level-headed” and “not get too emotional”. Perhaps he knows the players have enough of it already, without him piling more on top. “It’s not just for one person,” Jonathan Davies said when he was asked if the players wanted to win the game for Gatland’s sake. “It’s for everything you represent, your nation, your family, your friends, and what’s important is making sure that when you go out on the field you do everything you can to represent them.” “A 21st-century Welsh player can’t escape the traditions they pull on with their jersey,” Sheers wrote. “Their minds might be occupied with video analysis, nutrition, team policy, tactics and preparation, but however diffuse the hinterland of Welsh rugby’s earliest days might be, it’s still part of what fuels the modern player, even those who play with individuals rather than a nation in mind, those who take the field for grandfathers, mothers, coaches, who helped them on their way, those individuals will all, in some way, have embodied the national ethos of the game. It’s never just a country that runs out on to this pitch at the Millennium Stadium, but a culture, a way of being.”