There is not much logic in supporting a plan on the condition that the one person who thinks it a good plan resigns – except in the Conservative party. In a bid to win hardline Eurosceptic support for her Brexit deal, Theresa May has signalled that she will stand down before the next phase of negotiations with the EU begins. The prime minister’s calculation is that the most zealous Brexiters will only support her in a third meaningful vote if they think there will be a leadership race soon afterwards. That way, Mrs May might get a legacy of sorts and the hardliners would have a chance to install one of their own in Downing Street. But nothing about this bargain would serve the wider interests of the country. The deal itself is unchanged. The prospect of a different Tory leader would not fix its deficiencies and its opponents would not really have changed their minds. Their support would be dishonest, given only with the intention of reneging on commitments made by Mrs May in the Commons and in Brussels. And since the DUP is still withholding support, a third meaningful vote looks futile in any event. It is grim to see vital questions about the UK’s future yet again submerged in the fetid water of internal Tory politics. No further proof of that is needed than Boris Johnson indicating sudden readiness to support the deal on learning that a vacancy might open in No 10 if he does. The Brexit radicals are not interested in creating a legacy for Mrs May but in bundling the UK out of the EU, then burning all bridges. From a European perspective this is appalling. An agreement that is meant to serve as the foundation for a long-term UK-EU relationship is being offered up as a stepping stone for anti-Brussels zealots to complete their capture of Britain’s ruling party. Opposition MPs who have considered voting for the deal will surely reconsider. To lend support for something that Tory hardliners back purely so they can later sabotage it would be unconscionable for a Labour MP. The manner of Mrs May’s latest gambit is in keeping with her habit of putting the demands of her party ahead of the national interest. An announcement relating to the tenure of a serving prime minister should not have been made behind closed doors, to the backbench 1922 Committee. But she came to office in similar fashion, as the only candidate still standing in a leadership contest that had descended into self-destructive farce. When she tried for an electoral mandate, she failed. Not once has she moderated her Brexit approach in recognition of that humiliation. She has taken dictation from an extreme faction in her party and thereby widened divisions in the country. A contrast with the way things might have been done was evident in Wednesday’s parliamentary debate ahead of indicate votes on potential Brexit models. A number of MPs noted that the civil, thoughtful discussion showed the constructive spirit in which the whole enterprise should have been undertaken from the start. The votes did not yield a majority for any single course, but softer Brexit models and a referendum on any final deal trumped more severe rupture from the EU. And the method itself demonstrated a way to drain poison from the process. Yet, in nearby corridors, the Tory party was cooking up more noxious solutions. Many Conservatives would clearly rather terminate EU membership with a deal they know is bad purely because they fear the consequences of parliament weighing Brexit honestly, and on its intrinsic merits. The Eurosceptic ultras like to invoke democracy when dictating terms to Mrs May. They are less keen on democracy when it involves parliament expressing views they do not share. They bullied the prime minister into doing most of their bidding and when she failed to deliver the full package of their unreasonable demands they set her resignation as the price of support. Even when she offers it, many are not satisfied. While serious MPs were engaged in a discussion of realistic Brexit options in the Commons chamber, the cockpit of British democracy, Tory backbenchers and their failed leader were trying to stitch up the country’s future and democracy was nowhere in the room.