Not yet, remarkably. Downing Street was clear after the vote that the prime minister was prepared to bring her deal back to parliament next week. But in a new context. May will allow the indicative votes process to continue on Monday, which will aim to focus on the most popular options, and this time could produce something that commands majority support – the realistic contenders are a customs union and, or possibly combined with, a second referendum. The initial indication was that two options might then be put to parliament later next week: May’s deal and a customs union/second referendum variant, or whatever emerges from MPs on Monday. It would amount to a final runoff, a last-ditch attempt to scare or bring rightwing Tory holdouts onboard. The Commons arithmetic is still formidable. There are three groups who remain opposed to her deal, despite Boris Johnson and others backing it. There are 28 hard-Brexit MPs – who have dubbed themselves “the Spartans” and who voted against May on Friday – but there are also 10 DUP MPs – and a further six Conservative MPs who support a second referendum. If she somehow got all of them onside May would have 323 MPs – a bare majority, when 320 are needed to win. But they are groups with disparate interests and it would take only a handful of holdouts to kill off May’s chances. The alternative would be for more opposition MPs to switch sides, but only five Labour MPs and two former Labour MPs have done so (plus a former LibDem). But May has failed to offer would-be defectors anything credible so far. The rejection of the deal means that as it stands the UK will crash out of the European Union without a deal on 12 April unless something emerges. Downing Street insiders were saying after the vote that while there had been a lot of talk of crunch weeks before, next week really was decision time. That suggests that any fourth meaningful vote next week would be the last. As May herself admitted: “We are reaching the limits of this process”. Probably not, because if parliament has made one thing clear, it is that it is not prepared to leave the EU without a deal. And MPs are prepared to seize control of the Commons agenda to ensure that doesn’t happen. So if May can’t get a her deal through next week, the UK will have to seek a long extension from the European Union, of nine or 12 months, at the emergency Brexit summit on 10 April. The EU is likely to allow this, and will set conditions. There are EU elections due in May in which the UK would have to take part. Also, the UK would have to indicate that something would change significantly to justify the EU allowing a long extension. Very possibly. A lot can happen in British politics in a year. May might resign if she gets a long extension, allowing for a new prime minister to emerge who may in turn want to call an election. But while Jeremy Corbyn, in his remarks immediately after the vote result, said Labour wanted an election, the opposition might not want to fight against a new leader. Meanwhile, the Conservatives are very, very unlikely to allow May to fight an election as their leader. That could point instead to a second referendum, although that was voted down last week by 295 to 268 votes. But if it were to pass on Monday, it could be a viable, last-resort option. If it didn’t, the Brexit standoff would become more acute.