March spoils us with its shots of colour, from neon-pink rhubarb and scarlet-stained blood oranges, but it will be a while before the waves of bejewelled summer fruits emerge. Not all is lost. There are varieties of apples still in great shape, especially when paired with the scent of brandy and vanilla-soaked prunes, and enrobed in brown butter custard. Happy baking. Nutty, salty butter, vanilla-scented prunes, and creamy apples, all in a shortcrust case. Prep 30 minChill 45 min Cook 1 hrServes 8 12 prunes, roughly chopped1 tsp vanilla extract160g caster sugar75ml brandy3 small or 2 large braeburn or pink lady apples, peeled, cored and cut into 2-3mm rounds80g butterSalt2 eggs1 tsp cinnamon3 tbsp double cream3 tbsp plain flour For the pastry190g plain flour, plus extra for dusting30g icing sugar1 pinch salt100g chilled butter, chopped, plus extra for greasing 1 egg, separated, the white lightly beaten First, make the pastry: blitz the flour, icing sugar, salt and butter in a food processor for 20-30 seconds. Add the egg yolk, blitz again until mixed, then add just enough egg white to bind it all together (reserve the rest for later). Roll the dough into a ball, flatten slightly, wrap in clingfilm and leave to rest in the fridge for 45 minutes. You can do this a few days in advance if you wrap the pastry well. Once rested, coarsely grate the pastry into a 25cm tart tin. Press evenly into the base and sides with your fingers, sprinkle with a little flour and use a small glass to roll it flat. Prick the base all over with a fork, then freeze for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put the prunes, vanilla, two tablespoons of the caster sugar and the brandy in a saucepan, and warm gently. Turn off the heat, and leave the prunes to macerate. Remove the pastry from the freezer, cover with baking paper and baking beans, and bake for 15 minutes. Remove the beans and paper, brush the base with the remaining egg white and return to the oven for five to 10 minutes, until the pastry is golden brown. Remove, leave to cool and turn down the heat to 170C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Once the pastry is cool, scatter the apples evenly on top. Fish the prunes out of the brandy and sprinkle them over the apples. Melt the butter in a small saucepan and add a few pinches of salt. Cook over a medium heat until it turns toasty brown and smells nutty, then take off the heat and pour in the prune brandy. Beat the eggs and remaining sugar with an electric mixer until thick and fluffy. Lightly and quickly, fold in the cinnamon, cream, flour and brandy butter, then pour the mixture over the apples. Bake the tart for 30-35 minutes, until golden and just set. Leave to cool a little, then serve with creme fraiche. Make a gratin with celeriac and floury potatoes and top with burnt butter for a delicious alternative to the classic. Or whisk leftover creme fraiche with olive oil, parmesan and lemon juice to dress a salad of grilled Jerusalem artichokes, blue cheese, watercress and spring onion. Make a prune puree with leftover prunes – delicious with yoghurt for breakfast.