Theresa May is like the knight in Monty Python and the Holy Grail who loses his arms and legs in a duel and calls it a draw, the Dutch prime minister has said. Mark Rutte, who appeared visibly irritated last week at the failure of MPs to pass the Brexit deal, admitted feeling “angry” at the impasse in Westminster. He said his frustration was focused on the posturing of those seeking to make party political points during a major national crisis but praised May’s “incredible” resilience in the face of repeated knock-backs in the House of Commons. “Look, I have every respect for Theresa May,” Rutte said in an interview with the Dutch broadcaster WNL on Sunday. “She reminds me occasionally of that character from Monty Python where all the arms and legs are cut off but he then tells the opponent: ‘Let’s call it a draw.’ She’s incredible. She goes on and on. At the same time, I do not blame her, but British politics.” The black knight sketch in the 1975 Monty Python film had John Cleese playing the role of the deluded swordsman who could not admit defeat, even as Graham Chapman’s King Arthur cut off all his limbs. Rutte said of the prime minister’s predicament: “You can see what happens when a country puts everything on the roulette wheel and takes a risk, and the whole thing collapses. That is what is happening. Economic, financial, politically, England is in a very bad position right now.” On Sunday, the British chancellor, Phillip Hammond, admitted the third attempt at getting the deal past MPs might not take place this week if the numbers continued to be stacked against it being voted through. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, meanwhile said if May’s deal were brought back to parliament this week, Labour might support an amendment, which would make approval of the deal conditional on a “confirmatory” referendum. Rutte accused Labour and the Tory MPs in the European Research Group of putting party politics above the national interest. “They continue to play games internally,” he said. “That faction within her own party; Labour, everyone is only concerned with party politics and who can win the next election. There is a country currently at stake. A whole country with 75 million people. I can get very angry about it.” He added: “This is the only deal on the table. And then they say, yes, but we don’t want it because we found hair in the soup. Yes – but what is it you want? They ask for a postponement. Yes – but for how long and what do you want it for?”