Dozens of radio stations around the world have removed Michael Jackson’s music from their playlists after allegations that the late singer abused children aired on Sunday in the documentary Leaving Neverland. In New Zealand, the public broadcaster and its major commercial rivals – whose listener base covers more than half the population – united in opting not to play Jackson’s hits. State-owned RNZ said it applied “editorial judgment” to any music it played, and Jackson did not currently feature. MediaWorks, which owns nine major commercial radio stations, confirmed the artist had been pulled from all playlists at all its stations as “a reflection of our audiences and their preferences”. Rival NZME followed suit, with director Dean Buchanan saying: “Playlists change from week to week and right now Michael Jackson does not feature on them.” Earlier, three major Canadian radio stations ditched Jackson’s songs. The owner of the Montreal French-language stations CKOI and Rythme and the English-language The Beat said his music was pulled on Monday morning. Christine Dicaire, a spokeswoman for media company Cogeco said the move – which also applies to 23 smaller radio stations – was a response to listener reactions to the documentary. Other major broadcasters, such as the BBC have denied reports that it has banned Jackson, saying each piece of music was considered on their merits by each network. In New Zealand, it is unclear how long the ban will last. MediaWorks said “we will be guided by our audience” on whether the deletion is permanent. RNZ – which has more than 600,000 listeners a week – said at present the only exception would be if songs were played “as part of a news story or to provide colour around a commentary piece”. The documentary Leaving Neverland began airing on HBO on Sunday. It details the abuse allegations of two men who had previously denied Jackson molested them and supported him against authorities. In the four-hour documentary two men accuse Jackson of graphic and extensive sexual abuse, and even participating in a mock marriage to the pop star. The singer’s estate has criticised the documentary as “an outrageous and pathetic attempt to exploit and cash in on Michael Jackson” while fans have reportedly levelled threats against the film’s director, the Bafta award winner Dan Reed, as well as death threats at the two men. In an interview with the London Telegraph, Reed said pop fans needed to reassess if they were comfortable listening to Jackson following the allegations. “People will have to listen to his music in the knowledge that he was a prolific child rapist. If they’re comfortable doing that, fine. If they’re not, well perhaps listen to something else for a while,” Reed said. MediaWorks group content director Leon Wratt told Magic FM: “The audience has always been pretty split over Michael … you’ve got 500 songs on a playlist and you have to make the decisions which 500 are the ones people will want to listen to.” “We [MediaWorks] aren’t deciding whether Michael Jackson is guilty of paedophilia, we’re just making sure our radio stations are going to play the music people want to hear.” Associated Press contributed to this report