This week Guardian Cities is investigating the impact of concrete, revealing the terrible destruction it causes to the planet: • Concrete is responsible for up to 8% of the world’s emissions of carbon dioxide, more than any material after fossil fuels. • Concrete in cities exacerbates flooding that kills thousands of people every year. • Its dust can be toxic. • It uses a tremendous amount of fresh water, roughly 10% of the global supply, often in communities where water for irrigation is in short supply. • It contributes to the heat island effect, raising temperatures in some already dangerously hot cities. • It clogs landfills around the world, as much of it simply dumped when we’re finished with it – less than 1% of concrete in Brazil is reused, for example. • It requires huge amounts of a kind of sand that is short supply, damaging natural environments, and that is mined under often deadly circumstances by “sand mafias”. • If the concrete industry were a country, it would be the third worst emitter of CO2 after China and the US. Fun concrete fact. And yes, I'm a hit at parties #GuardianConcreteWeek pic.twitter.com/X6s335k1jK To round out our coverage, we also published articles about the history of concrete, including its use in Roman times and now in 3D printing; its popularity in architecture; its social history; its use in modern day China and postwar Italy; and many of the various alternatives and innovations currently being developed. And we called for engagement and action from the industry. Several industry figures did respond to our coverage. In an email, the Global Cement and Concrete Association said they were “wholly disappointed” not to have been consulted on “the thrust of the articles”. In a statement on their website, the association responded further: The Guardian’s ‘Concrete Week’ is a great opportunity to look at a range of important issues associated with concrete, and it is right to examine some of the important challenges the world faces. However, inadequately covering the significant work already underway by the sector, as well as underplaying concrete’s critical benefits, gives an incomplete picture. We recognise there are challenges in cement and concrete production and have been working hard over many years to find solutions. There are some important innovations already underway and by collaborating with partners in the built environment we can make an important contribution to reducing global emissions. We are fully committed to continuing to take climate action and to move towards a sustainable future. Concrete’s contribution to society over its whole life should always be considered. It has many important benefits such as its ability to reabsorb CO2 from the atmosphere, as well as its thermal mass properties which means that it can reduce the energy needs of buildings. Only putting across one side of the debate is narrow and fails to address the realities of the needs of a significantly growing global population and increasing urbanisation. Safe homes and buildings, clean water and resilient infrastructure will be needed in the future world – all of which concrete can provide.” Other industry figures tweeted. Several of them claimed that, rather than contributing to climate change, concrete is actually “part of the solution”. Others said they were “disappointed” in us and were “looking forward to positive stories” about concrete. Guardian article https://t.co/6GrZxVAUXY makes some good points. However, the industry is taking significant steps: See 2nd Future Cement Conference (22-23 May, Brussels) on cement/concrete CO2 mitigation strategies: https://t.co/6HAHJBegPW #GuardianConcreteWeek #FutureCement Too bad science & facts take a back seat to opinion in this @jonathanwatts #TheGuardian #Concrete story https://t.co/bMyFX4PeTp. Decisions about making communities more sustainable should be evidence based. Facts show Concrete is part of the solution to fight #climatechange Ongoing innovation and research is cutting CO2 emissions and this was completely missed in the article. All the facts need to be presented and the fact is that concrete is part of the solution to fighting #climatechange.#GuardianConcreteWeek#ConcreteBuildforLife https://t.co/Hma73AjMdy Disappointing start #GuardianConcreteWeek with unbalanced coverage of the sector. Looking forward to positive untold stories #madewithcement, #energyefficient housing, 100% recyclability, concrete as carbon sink and key enabler for #lowcarbontransition (waterdams, windmills). Let’s hope the rest of the #GuardianConcreteWeek is positive. Pace of impact per tonne improvement must be accelerated to actually reduce the gross global emissions from concrete. Nothing else will do. https://t.co/6Y9vdHp0k7 Guardian Concrete Week continues. Guardian Concrete Week investigates the shocking impact of concrete on the modern world. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram and use the hashtag #GuardianConcreteWeek to join the discussion or sign up for our weekly newsletter