When the US standup Mo Amer first toured the UK, it was on the Muslim comedy bill Allah Made Me. There are echoes of that show in Persons of Interest, which isn’t about religion, but is about being brown and viewed askance by the white mainstream. On this tour, Amer teams up with the UK comic and Man Like Mobeen star Guz Khan. They are supported by New York DJ/standup Cipha Sounds and American-Indian-Iranian comic Omid Singh. Perhaps unsurprisingly, most of the laughs derive from cultural difference, from Cipha Sounds’ gags about big Puerto Rican families via Khan’s primer in South Asian stereotypes to Amer’s uptight set piece about how to prepare hummus. That familiar brand of humour is deployed with an expert touch here. Additional heat is supplied by Sounds’ hip-hop atmospherics – all hype and honking klaxons – throughout the show. Khan appears first, his bug-eyes and boyish humour immediately tickling the audience’s funny bones. You wouldn’t initially guess the Coventry man was a standup novice: he exudes authority as he teaches “educated racism” (Gujaratis are tight-fisted; Bangladeshis are “massive fans of the aquatic animal”) to a white man in the front row. Later sections on his time as a schoolteacher – albeit one as delinquent and conspiratorial as his pupils – recall fellow Midlander Greg Davies’ jokes on the same subject. A closing shaggy dog story about his nephew’s sexting tantalises, then suffers from an overexplained punchline. Amer is the slicker act, even if he can’t match Khan’s mischievous charisma. His Netflix hit The Vagabond was about his experience as a refugee; tonight’s new material focuses on his Arab heritage, with familiar jokes about favours and family networks, and a set piece about chaotic traffic during a visit to Egypt. It’s not adventurous, and not all of it flies: a routine about selling US flags after 9/11 is over-attenuated. But Amer is a skilful standup technician. As in The Vagabond, he leans heavily on his repertoire of funny voices. I liked his imitation of pampered white girls complaining when Mexico erects a wall between them and Cancún. And his Middle Eastern cookery masterclass is a lesson in comic timing, facial expressiveness and – as he furiously demonstrates how to scoop hummus in the right direction – in mime, too. • At Leicester Square theatre, London, on 29 March and 5 April. Also touring until 13 April. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.