Late-night hosts dissected Donald Trump’s rambling two-hour speech at the Conservative Political Action Conference. After a week-long hiatus, Stephen Colbert returned to The Late Show Monday night to recap Trump’s “historically long and epically weird” speech from the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) on Saturday. Trump’s address clocked in at two hours and two minutes, making it, according to the Atlantic, the longest presidential oration in history, “which is impressive,” Colbert said, “because some of Obama’s pauses were almost an hour”. The whole affair was weird from the start, Colbert observed – before launching into two Game of Thrones episodes-worth of rambling, improvisations, tangents and crowd pandering, Trump tenderly hugged the stage’s American flag. “I believe that is the first time a flag has ever volunteered to be burned,” Colbert joked of the gesture. The rest of the speech was filled with the usual potpourri of Trumpisms. He referred to the Russia investigation as “bullshit” – “Very presidential,” Colbert panned. “I’m reminded of Abraham Lincoln’s famous declaration: ‘Hey Robert E Lee, fuck you!” “It was toward the end of the Gettysburg address,” he riffed with bandleader Jon Batiste. The president also added more entries to the highlight reel that Colbert calls “Donald Trump’s Campaign Bloopers and Practical Treason”, such as denying previously televised comments from 2016, in which he said he would welcome Russia’s hacking of Hillary Clinton’s emails. And finally, Trump slipped in a latent product endorsement, for one of the “great inventions in history: it’s called TiVo”. “TiVo has been around for 20 years,” Colbert observed. “I know, because I’ve still got 30 unwatched episodes of NYPD Blue.” Over in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel also examined the president’s marathon address from the weekend, and also attempted to explain what, exactly, CPAC is. CPAC is “basically what would happen if Judge Jeanine Pirro headlined the Fyre festival”, he said. “It is a lot of very angry white people. It is the largest gathering of people who believe vaccines are witchcraft in the world.” The crowd was ripe for the president’s politics, and “for two hours and two minutes, Donald Trump gave what I believe we may look back on as his I Have a Dream speech”, Kimmel said. To start, Trump went to “one of his signature moves” – hugging the flag while feigning affection, a habit that “might be the dumbest thing he does”, Kimmel commented, though “I know there’s a lot of competition”. “Donald Trump shows more affection to flags than Eric and Don Jr have ever gotten in their whole lives,” he added. The content of the speech, Kimmel summarized, stitched together the usual Trump vagaries. “Trump lashed out at Robert Mueller, the Democrats, he made things up, he made new things up – it was a very potent combination of dementia and Adderall.” As for CPAC, Kimmel concluded, “it’s not conservative, there’s no action. “They really should call it what it is: it’s an organized gathering of people who would be very comfortable standing at intersections shouting at cars.”