Donald Tusk has called an emergency summit of EU27 leaders after British MPs rejected Theresa May’s Brexit deal for a third time. The European council president announced his intention to bring the heads of state and government back to Brussels moments after the Commons voted down the deal by 58 votes despite the prime minister’s warning that such a move would “break Brexit”. As it stands, the UK will remain a member state until at least 12 April, with the option to request a lengthy extension if the prime minister is able to persuade the EU before then that there is a new Brexit plan. Sources suggested Downing Street would need to advise Brussels of the way forward by 8 April to allow member states to prepare for the summit. Tusk tweeted: “In view of the rejection of the withdrawal agreement by the House of Commons, I have decided to call a European council on 10 April.” In a statement, the European commission said a no-deal scenario was now likely. The EU’s executive also sent a message to British MPs who believe the government could pay for a transition period to allow for a managed no-deal Brexit, a proposal made in the “Malthouse agreement” proposal put together by a group of Conservative backbenchers. The Malthouse Compromise is named after housing minister Kit Malthouse, who brokered cross-party talks between Brexiters and former remainers on a possible way out of the Brexit impasse. The result involves redrafting the backstop arrangement for the Irish border which is so unpopular with Conservative Eurosceptic MPs and the Democratic Unionist party, which props up the government. It would also extend the transition period, set out under the previously negotiated withdrawal agreement, until the end of 2021. The extension is designed to give extra time to agree a new trading relationship. Under the plan, the backstop would be replaced with a free trade agreement with as yet unknown technology to avoid customs checks on the Irish border. If the attempt to renegotiate the backstop fails, the Malthouse compromise proposes what amounts to a managed no deal. The PM would ask the EU to honour the extended transition period, in return for agreeing the £39bn divorce bill and its commitments on EU citizens’ rights. This would give both sides time to prepare for departure on WTO terms at the end of 2021 – or to negotiate a different deal. The compromise is backed by the DUP, the European Research Group of hard Tory Brexiters, and former remainers including Nicky Morgan. However, the EU has repeatedly stated that the terms of the Withdrawal Agreement are not open for renegotiation A commission spokesman said: “The commission regrets the negative vote in the House of Commons today. It will be for the UK to indicate the way forward before [12 April], for consideration by the European council. “A ‘no-deal’ scenario on 12 April is now a likely scenario. The EU has been preparing for this since December 2017 and is now fully prepared for a ‘no-deal’ scenario at midnight on 12 April. The EU will remain united. “The benefits of the withdrawal agreement, including a transition period, will in no circumstances be replicated in a ‘no-deal’ scenario. Sectoral mini-deals are not an option.” The European commission’s most senior official, Martin Selmayr, tweeted: “12 April is now the new 29 March”, in reference to the original date for the UK to leave the EU. In recent weeks the EU has set out contingency measures that would last between six and nine months, including legislation to keep planes in the air and haulage routes open. Further measures to keep the City of London operating have a 12-month lifespan. Brussels will not open negotiations with the government on extending such measures until it has accepted the central tenets of the withdrawal agreement : the Irish backstop to avoid a hard border, the £39bn divorce bill and a package on citizens’ rights. An official in the council, which represents member states, said Theresa May would probably be asked to address the other EU leaders on the chosen way forward at the summit on 10 April. But, the source said, parliament needed to make its intentions clear days before the summit to allow Brussels to prepare for leaders to debate the issue. “We expect the UK to indicate a way forward before then, well in time for the European council to consider,” the official said. “The exact timing and modalities of the European council are still to be decided but, like last week, the UK prime minister can be expected to participate in the beginning of the meeting.”