I am talking to the top man. Not the actual Top Man, as far as I know, although whether Superintendent Ted Hastings could also be H, the ultimate corrupt police officer who has been behind every murderous conspiracy running through Line of Duty to date, is still a matter for speculation. “I used to feel sorry for some of the guys who were in EastEnders, who had done something terrible to somebody, and people were shouting at them in the street. I’d think: ‘God, I’d hate it if that happened to me,’” says Adrian Dunbar, who has played Hastings since the series began in 2012. He laughs. As it returns for its fifth series, Line of Duty is very much the kind of drama that now inspires people to stop him in the street. “But it’s wonderful, the public reaction to it. You have to acknowledge that it’s firmly in the consciousness of everybody who watches it.” Jed Mercurio’s breathlessly tense thriller has torn up the rulebook on what police procedurals can and should look like. Its shock-horror twists, gasp-inducing cliffhangers and willingness to bump off any character at any moment have turned it into one of television’s most gripping blockbusters. Over the course of seven years, it has provided the nation with some spectacular TV talking points, from the front page did-she-or-didn’t-she saga of Lindsay Denton, played with memorable ambiguity by Keeley Hawes, to the rotting arm of Thandie Newton’s increasingly desperate DCI Roz Huntley. “You’re watching brilliant actors come in, and watching them die,” says Dunbar. “Daniel Mays, Jason Watkins, Jessica Raine, coming in and doing really intense stuff for one or two episodes – it’s an incredible show for that sort of thing. You just hang on for the ride, and it’s been amazing.” Lennie James was in on the ride from the very beginning. During the debut series, he was front and centre as Tony Gates, the first conflicted cop facing the scrutiny of AC-12. “It was just a great thriller,” he says. “And Jed knows how to put a thriller together. It was one of those rare opportunities where I was sent the first three episodes, and I just wanted to find out immediately what happened next.” It stood out from other police dramas for many reasons, from its breakneck pace to its unflinching approach to violence, but Mercurio’s ability to pull off a showstopper of an ending particularly impressed James. “Jed knows how to end an episode, probably better than any other writer I’ve worked with. He knows how to make you go: ‘Oh my God,’ and want to come back.” During the first series, Mercurio established that traditional rules did not apply when Gina McKee met an untimely end during only the second episode. “I thought that was brave and risky and fantastic, and then to shove Gina McKee in the fridge was epic,” says James. “But the one that really got me as a surprise, watching it as a punter, was Danny Mays [in series three]. I thought that was fantastic, just a brilliant piece of storytelling. You bring in an actor of Danny’s calibre and then blindside the audience by taking him out in episode two. I was like: ‘Wow, really?’ For the rest of the series, I kept thinking it was all a bluff and he was going to show up again.” Discovering what will happen during any series of Line of Duty is a task that AC-12’s finest might balk at. The cast often don’t know themselves: Mercurio usually writes the scripts in two blocks of three episodes, which means that everyone is left waiting to find out what’s going to happen, even to their own characters. Along with Dunbar and Vicky McClure, Martin Compston is one of the core trio who have managed to survive all four series. But for his character, Steve Arnott, there were moments when it started to look a little bleak. “Jed has done pretty much everything to me. My fingers have been in a vice. I’ve been framed for murder. I was thrown over the stairs,” says Compston, who has certainly been through the wringer, and has done so with admirable devotion to waistcoats. (“As long as I get my waistcoats, I’m happy,” he says.) “I love playing Steve, but he’s an arrogant little so-and-so. That’s one of the things that’s so good about Jed’s writing. At times, you are rooting for the bad guy, because you get to see their personal backstory and what they’re fighting against.” In that Line of Duty spirit of nobody being safe, does he ever worry that he’s not going to make it? “Yes, but me, Vicky and Adrian have had five good series, or the start of five good series [in terms of spoilers, the cast are careful to cover all bases]. And knowing Jed, he wouldn’t do it for the shock value. If he decided it was your turn, you couldn’t have any complaints, but you would be gutted, because it really is the job of a lifetime.” Although the first series was shot in Birmingham, and the setting is a sort of Generic Midlands Town, every series since has been filmed in Northern Ireland. When the show is in production, Dunbar, McClure and Compston all live in the same block of flats. “We literally live next door to each other. We love it,” explains McClure, who plays Kate Fleming. Most days, they have breakfast together. “There’s genuine friendship there that means we can sit and have dinner at night, and we can help each other learn our lines and just hang out and watch telly.” During series five, they broke the tension of the dark subject matter by, well, trying to make each other jump. “Martin was the best, to be fair,” McClure says, solemnly. When Line of Duty began on BBC Two, it quickly became the channel’s best-performing drama in 10 years. When it moved to BBC One in 2017, it piled on even more viewers, with more than 10 million tuning in for the series four finale. “I was never concerned about how many people were watching,” says McClure. “But then when you were getting figures like that, I could appreciate the enormity of it. When it moved to BBC One, it became very mainstream. People are rewatching, even though they’ve already watched it, to prepare for this new one. Their dedication is incredible.” McClure puts this down to the show’s refusal to make it easy for viewers. With its dense language, whipsmart pace and complex plot, it is a show that demands viewers’ complete attention. Don’t even think about checking your phone, in case you miss a suspicious look between two minor characters that turns out to be the key to cracking the whole case. “We’re not spoonfeeding anybody,” says McClure. “I hear some brilliant theories where you just go: ‘Well, you know, you’re probably not far off, or you might be miles away.’ It’s fun to be able to work it out for yourselves.” Like her castmates, she has become very good at keeping secrets. “I just say nothing now, to everybody, to my family, to anyone that asks me. I try and do a blank face and keep shtum, because I do not want to be the one to let anything go.” Both McClure and Compston say that the third series, which saw the action movie-dramatic culmination of the long-running storyline involving Matthew “Dot” Cottan, AKA the Caddy, was a particular highlight for them. “I remember saying to Jed that he’s ruined any other job for me,” says Craig Parkinson, the Caddy himself. “The scripts are so smart and they’re clever, and they’re complex and they’re really unpatronising to an audience. It makes you sit up and work. If you switch off or your mind wanders for a bit, it ruins it.” When people started calling him bad names in the supermarket, Parkinson knew that it had become something huge. “That still happens now!” he laughs. Towards the end of his time on the show, Parkinson had one of Line of Duty’s infamous interrogation scenes, those long, unbroken confrontations between AC-12 and their targets, although in his case, it was AC-12 on AC-12. “In the final two episodes, I had a 28-page scene with two other people, and then a 32-page scene. You’ve got to do your homework. Vicky always calls it ‘lines of duty’.” (“Well, it is!” she laughs. “I think everyone would agree that there are a lot of lines.”) Even though Dot’s time on the show is over, Parkinson still considers himself to be part of the family. “Line of Duty means more to me, still now, than anything. But I remember switching on to watch series four, and it was so odd. Aidy’s there, Vicky’s there, Martin’s there … wait a minute, I should be there! It was really hard for me to compute, so I had to stop and go and have a cup of tea and chill out for a minute.” Still, the pull of the show is too great to ignore, even for former cast members. “The next night I was more prepared, and it was fine after that. I totally got into it.” In every Line of Duty there is a new person of interest on whom AC-12 can focus their attentions. For series five, make that persons of interest: instead of suspicions falling on one new guest star, Mercurio has set his sights on organised crime (that’s “OCG”, in LoD speak) and its links to police corruption at the highest level, which means viewers may be closer to finding out who H really is. Although when I try to get something out of Rochenda Sandall, who plays newcomer Lisa McQueen, she is sure to toe the party line. “It’s a bit of a no-comment situation,” she laughs. “I haven’t actually seen it yet, so I don’t know anything about the edit.” That sounds like the perfect foil. “I can’t trip up then, it’s a perfect scenario.” In the action-packed, gun-toting trailer, another newcomer, John Corbett, peels off his balaclava. He’s played by Stephen Graham, an actor whose knack for simmering, sinister violence is unparalleled. Does that mean the mysterious Balaclava Man, who shoved Arnott down the stairs, has finally been unmasked? “I can’t tell you anything,” Graham says. “I haven’t even told my mother. You’re talking MI5 shit here, aren’t you? I could tell you, but I’d have to kill you.” When he started writing series five, Mercurio called Graham and asked him to look at the script. “He’d written it with me in mind, he said, which was a lovely compliment.” Graham had worked with McClure on This Is England, but he also knew Compston from when they both starred in The Damned United, and he was friendly with Dunbar, too, so it was an easy fit. “For me, it was like going to your auntie’s house and staying with her for a few months. My Auntie Vera in particular,” he says. “It was like going to my Auntie Vera’s house and staying with her for a few months while our house was getting redecorated. It was really lovely, really nice.” That’s about as much as he can say. “It’s dead hard, you know!” he protests. “I feel really snide. I feel like I’m trying to tell you what I’ve got you for Christmas, but I can’t tell you because your mum will kill me, but you’re asking me loads of questions, and I’m like: ‘Well, it’s kind of like this, but like this …’ I just want to tell you, but I can’t tell you. I’m so sorry.” It’s hard to feel too aggrieved. Line of Duty is at its best when those jaw-dropping twists come out of nowhere, and who would want to get to the bottom of the story before AC-12? Series five of Line of Duty starts on 31 March, BBC One