Ashleigh Barty came through another rain-interrupted match at the Miami Open to book a place in the biggest final of her career with a 6-3, 6-3 win over Estonia’s Anett Kontaveit. Australia’s No 1 player did not allow two rain breaks during play at Hard Rock Stadium distract her and she wrapped up victory with an ace after breaking Kontaveit’s resistance in the second set. “It’s been a very long day,” she said on court afterwards. “You can’t control the weather. It was an opportunity for me to drink coffee and watch a bit of the golf. I was able to reset and come back out and do what I wanted to do.” Barty trailed 0-2 when play was first halted just six minutes into the centre court match. Upon the resumption, the Queenslander broke Kontaveit’s serve to get back to 2-2 before the players were again forced off the court. Barty handled the prolonged absence much better and, after going ahead 5-3, she broke Kontaveit’s serve to love to claim the opening set, aided by a double fault on set point. Trailing 1-3 in the second set, Barty stuck to her game to win the next five games as Kontaveit’s errors mounted. Barty will enter the top 10 at No 9 when the latest world rankings are announced next week, having enjoyed a impressive run in Florida which has included wins over compatriot Sam Stosur and world No 2, Petra Kvitová. It caps a remarkable return after she turned her back on the game to play cricket late in 2014. She returned to tennis three years ago, and now has a chance to claim the biggest singles title of her career to date. “I’m a much more mature person,” she said of her return to tennis. “When I came back it was on my terms. I was able to surround myself with good people.” Barty will meet either world No 3 Simona Halep or Karolína Plíšková, who play later in the day, in the final. When asked how she will approach the decider, she said she will just try to enjoy it. “You have to go out there and embrace it. Play with freedom and play my best tennis. “I played Sim in Sydney earlier this year. She’s finding some of her best tennis again. Both of them have qualities and I’ll certainly have to play my best to beat them.”