We are entering the hungry gap – that time of the year when the winter roots and bright citrus that have kept us going through the cold months run low and the green of spring is still a little way off. Time to reach into my freezer for fruit I froze at the end of the summer – or for pleasingly affordable bags of frozen fruit from the shops – to brighten up sweet stuff until the first of the berries arrive in spring. Arguably, a few recipes actually suit frozen fruit better than fresh – the cherries for this clafoutis seem softer and sweeter, as do the berries for the instant ice-cream. In this case, necessity truly is the mother of invention. This is a quick-as-a-flash dessert. I use creme fraiche for richness, but good, thick, full-fat yoghurt will work, too. I’ve even made a vegan one with oat creme fraiche. While this serves just two, you can easily double or triple it (as long as your blender is big enough). Prep 5 minServes 2 100g full-fat creme fraiche200g mixed frozen berries1 tsp honey1 tsp vanilla extract Put all the ingredients into a blender, and whizz on high speed until smooth and the consistency of ice-cream. Serve immediately, scooped into glasses. However, if you do have leftovers, transfer to freezer-proof tubs and keep in the freezer for up to two days. Take the ice-cream out of the freezer 10 minutes before serving. The smoked salt adds a brilliant flavour note, but normal sea salt will work well, too. The frozen cherries are already softened, so are perfect for a clafoutis. For a boozy version, soak the cherries in a little kirsch and sugar for an hour before you make the dish, then drain and follow the recipe. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 6-8 30g unsalted butter, plus extra for greasing350g pitted frozen cherries, defrosted75g plain flour100g golden caster sugar2 large eggs½ tsp vanilla extract or 1 tsp vanilla paste150ml whole milkFlaked smoked salt, to serve Heat the oven to 180C (fan 160C)/350F/gas 4 and grease a 23cm flan tin or pie dish with half the butter. Lay the cherries in the base of the pan (they can be layered in places). Melt the remaining butter in a saucepan over a medium heat. To make the batter, whisk together the flour and sugar, then whisk in the eggs one by one, followed by the vanilla extract, milk and melted butter. Pour the mixture over the cherries and bake for 40-45 minutes, until puffed and lightly golden. Sprinkle with the smoked salt and serve warm with cream or creme fraiche.