And so the Brexit options facing Theresa May tighten again, remorselessly and painfully, and with more pain to come. A day after a second decisive defeat for her withdrawal deal with the EU, and amid threats and chaos in the Westminster lobbies, MPs narrowly wrested control from May by four votes over the possibility of no deal. Then in a second vote they drove the message home again, this time by an unambiguous majority of 43. We are witnessing a watershed in the Brexit process, as power passes from May’s government to shifting coalitions of MPs on individual issues in front of our eyes. But the passing from one chapter of the story to another is unmistakable in spite of the confusion in the lobbies last night. The government that had first promised a free vote to Conservative MPs ended the evening by vainly trying to whip its MPs against the toughened no-deal motion, and still lost – lost badly. May’s loss of control this week does not automatically mean that control passes seamlessly and wholly to someone else. It doesn’t. This remains a fluid and volatile process. But it vastly strengthens the possibility of other coalitions taking some control over Brexit. Lenin, who knew a thing or two about control, called this dual power. That’s what we are now seeing on Brexit. It means there is a unresolved contest. It will be messy, because there is not a reliable majority in the Commons for anything yet beyond opposition to no deal. The public is nervous and suspicious. And there isn’t all that much time to resolve it. Bismarck, who knew about politics with the same clarity that Lenin knew about control, once observed that human beings cannot create the current of events. All that politicians can do, he said, is float along with them and try to steer. The attempt to steer was palpable at Westminster this evening, with the Brexit crisis getting sucked ever closer to the thundering rapids of no deal. It was a day that called for a Bismarck at the helm of the ship of state. Instead it briefly got Philip Hammond. It had been said in advance that Hammond’s spring financial statement would be relegated to today’s parliamentary undercard. It would be little more than the succinct discharge of the chancellor’s legal obligation to make a six-monthly report to MPs. As events were to prove, the big story of the day would indeed come later. Nevertheless, Hammond seized his chance, giving a foretaste of the power shift inside the government that was to come in the evening votes. Chancellors get only two moments in the limelight during the year. Hammond knows he may not still be in the job by the autumn. So he was not going to let this one slip. Brexit dominated the beginning, middle and end of his statement. Just before he sat down, Hammond summoned up his inner Bismarck. It was time, he said, “to start to map out a way forward towards building a consensus across this house for a deal we collectively support to exit the EU in an orderly way”. This may not sound ringing stuff. Yet in terms of the conventions of cabinet collective responsibility on central issues of policy, it was practically a call to storm the Winter Palace. After the government’s 149-vote defeat on Tuesday, “building a consensus” means reaching out to Labour. But May does not do reaching out on Brexit. In her mind, reaching out means a softer Brexit; a softer Brexit means splitting the Tory party; and a split Tory party means a Corbyn government. In May’s political cosmology, she is prime minister to deliver Brexit on the back of Conservative and DUP votes. That’s why she remains determined to try a third time, probably as soon as next week. She may even pull it off. So Hammond’s very public advocacy of a wholly different Brexit route, delivered with May glowering stony-faced and silent on the benches behind him, showed the shift that was taking place in the government, in the Tory party and in parliament. It announced, in effect, that the national interest matters more than the party interest, because an agreed Brexit deal that passes is a higher priority than May’s deal, which has now been twice defeated. It therefore has to imply that Hammond thinks that May may have to go. MPs may get the chance, as early as tomorrow, to hold the indicative votes that Michael Gove appeared to trail today, as well as voting on extending article 50. That makes logical sense. The country, especially those alarmed by delay – and the EU27 – will want to know the purpose of any extension. Indicative votes may be a government ploy to stifle the second referendum movement early on in the new conditions. But they also surely mean that a softer Brexit becomes the issue of the hour. Supporters of the package that is sometimes called Norway plus or common market 2.0 say they have never been more optimistic that things are going their way. And events are moving their way. But they don’t yet have a majority, even with May’s red lines abandoned. Achieving that, if it is achievable at all, depends on Labour being willing to do a deal. That is far from certain. In the abstract, Corbyn’s position is for a soft Brexit of this kind. In reality, Corbyn doesn’t want responsibility for a soft Brexit that gets the Tories out of a hole. May’s position is increasingly precarious, made worse by this week’s votes. Her lost voice is a metaphor for her lost authority. Her party is increasingly consumed by the succession issue. Literally dozens of Tories fancy their chances. She could go in days or weeks, and almost certainly by the autumn. Tory backbenchers cannot force her out until the year’s end. The cabinet probably possesses the political muscle to do it sooner. Tonight’s Tory disobedience towards May over Brexit is part of a new party instability with immense potential implications. The contest that will follow May’s departure could reshape British politics. It will not just decide the next leader of the party but whether the modern Conservative party, in which the grassroots are overwhelmingly anti-European, has a serious future as a majority party of government. If the Tories elect someone from the rightwing nationalist wing, running on a hard Brexit ticket, it would complete the capture of the party by what, not so long ago, was a tiny sect. That would also mean it was make-your-mind-up time for liberal or modernising Tories – and certainly for Scottish ones. It is not impossible to see some of these Tory MPs – and current ministers – crossing the house to sit with the independent group of MPs under, say, a Boris Johnson premiership. If that happened, May’s successor could be one of the shortest-serving prime ministers in history. These speculations have suddenly been made more real by what happened tonight. May’s three defeats in 24 hours have recast the balance of power in the Tory party and in parliament. But it remains unclear who will step into the breach. Bismarck also once said that a leader “must wait until he hears the steps of God … then leap up and grasp the hem of his garment”. It still isn’t clear that any new leader has that most enviable of political talents. But the country certainly needs one who can hear, leap and grasp. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist