Special counsel Robert Mueller found that neither Donald Trump nor any of his aides colluded with Russia during the 2016 election, according to letter delivered to Congress by the US attorney general. The letter, authored by William Barr, also revealed Mueller was unable to draw a conclusion “one way or the other” on whether Trump or anyone in the White House obstructed justice during the investigation. Mueller has filed no further indictments following an almost two year-long investigation that has seen some of Trump’s closest advisers criminally prosecuted and convicted. The special counsel was also unable to draw a conclusion “one way or the other” over whether Trump or anyone in the White House obstructed justice during the investigation. As Mueller was unable to draw a conclusion on whether Trump obstructed justice throughout the investigation, it was left to Barrand deputy attorney general Rod Rosenstein, both appointed to their positions by Trump, to decide not to pursue charges. Barr described the evidence for obstruction as “not sufficient to establish that the president committed an obstruction-of-justice offense”. Furthermore, Barr insisted in his letter the decision not to prosecute was not made based on any limitations related to the indictment of a sitting president. The letter from Barr, at just four pages long, offered just a small snapshot of Mueller’s extensive investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 campaign, which the letter reveals involved more than 2,800 subpoenas, almost 500 search warrants and interviews with around 500 witnesses. The attorney general faces increasingly bipartisan calls to release Mueller’s report in full, as well as the evidence underlying it. Some Democrats have signaled they will use subpoena powers to obtain the full document, and may also call Mueller to testify before Congress. The summary was immediately seized on by Trump and his allies to claim victory. In a statement, White House press secretary Sarah Sanders characterised the letter as a “total and complete exoneration of the President of the United States”. In an emailed statement to the Guardian, the president’s son, Donald Trump Jr, himself at the centre of the investigation after accepting a 2016 meeting with a Russian lawyer promising “dirt” on the Clinton campaign, said Barr’s letter proved “what those of use with sane minds have known all along, there was ZERO collusion with Russia”. Trump Jr continued: “Sadly, instead of apologizing for needlessly destabilizing the country in a transparent attempt to delegitimize the 2016 election, it’s clear that the Collusion Truthers in the media and the Democrat [sic] party are only going to double down on their sick and twisted conspiracy theories moving forward.” It seems likely the president will now seek to turn the Mueller investigation to his advantage in the 2020 presidential election, suggesting it shows he won the 2016 election fairly and that desperate opponents will do anything to thwart him. But the decision by Barr and Rosenstein that the president did not obstruct justice – and their decision to make any such conclusion rather than leave this to Congress – is likely to cause intense controversy for years to come. Barr was nominated by Trump to be attorney general after he sent the justice department a private memo sharply criticising Mueller’s investigation and arguing that Mueller should even not be allowed to question Trump about potential obstruction. Trump did not sit down for an interview with Mueller, instead providing written answers to questions. In May 2017, it was Rosenstein who wrote the memo to Jeff Sessions, then the attorney general, justifying the firing of James Comey, the FBI director. Trump’s firing of Comey was central to allegations that he may have obstructed justice. Fired FBI deputy director Andrew McCabe has claimed Rosenstein said he was ordered to write that memo. Jerrold Nadler, the chairman of the House judiciary committee, said on Sunday he would be calling Barr to testify to his committee about what Nadler called the “very concerning discrepancies and final decision making” described in the attorney general’s letter. Additional reporting by Ben Jacobs in Washington 