The EU has moved into full crisis mode, with officials now setting the terms the UK will have to meet for Brussels to open talks on avoiding an economic meltdown in the weeks after a no-deal Brexit. In anticipation of a no-deal outcome on 12 April after MPs voted down eight Brexit options, and the likely rejection of the withdrawal agreement on Friday, EU ambassadors opened discussions on the terms to be set for the bloc to return to the negotiating table. The EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, told the diplomats of his heightened concern during the meeting on Thursday morning, and the urgent need to war-game the bloc’s response to it. The EU is to step up its “full on crisis” preparations, according to a diplomatic note. It was agreed among the member states that for there to be any talks after the UK has crashed out, the bloc’s 27 capitals will expect Downing Street to agree to signal by 18 April that it will pay the £39bn Brexit bill despite the failure of the Commons to ratify the withdrawal agreement. The terms of the Irish backstop, keeping Northern Ireland in large parts of single market legislation and the EU’s customs territory, in order to protect the Good Friday agreement would remain as the bloc’s solution for avoiding a hard border on the island of Ireland. The EU has in recent weeks set out a series of contingency measures which would have a lifespan of between six and nine months, including legislation to both keep planes in the air and haulage routes open. Further measures to keep the City of London operating have a fixed 12-month lifespan. The 27 ambassadors posed the question of “when the contingency measures expire or, even before that, and the UK approaches the EU for deals to mitigate a no deal, what are the conditions on which we are prepared to talk?”, according to the note. Ambassadors agreed that they would expect the UK to come back to the negotiating table “pretty soon with an ask to ensure the vital lines and procedures needed for the UK economy to survive”. “The EU is now already discussing what their price is for entering those discussions”, one diplomat said. Emerging from the meeting of ambassadors, Barnier said: “We are working, we are prepared. Yesterday, we had many noes and now we are waiting for a yes.” The EU has agreed to extend the article 50 period until 22 May if the withdrawal agreement is ratified this week. It is offering an extension to 12 April, if it fails again, but will expect the British government to offer a new way forward, such as a towards a soft Brexit, second referendum or general election, to secure a longer extension and avoid a no-deal exit from the bloc. Earlier on Thursday, Nathalie Loiseau, the former French minister now spearheading Emmanuel Macron’s European election campaign, warned against a second referendum. “There is chaos, there is confusion,” Loiseau told the French channel, BFM TV. “I’m against a new referendum because it would be a denial of democracy. Britain must leave.” The European commission’s chief spokesman said: “The commission takes note of the indicative votes of the House of Commons last night. This is part of an ongoing political process in the UK which we fully respect. “We counted eight noes last night, now we need a yes for the way forward. “If the withdrawal agreement is not ratified by the end of this week, article 50 will be extended to 12 April. This is now for the UK government to inform us as to the next steps.” Asked about May’s promise at a meeting of MPs on Wednesday to resign before a second stage of Brexit talks on the future trade deal, the spokesman added: “President Juncker has repeatedly had the occasion to repeat his support and respect for the prime minister who he worked with during this long process.” Downing Street is expected to put only the withdrawal agreement, and not the political declaration on the future relationship to MPs. Should it be passed this would be sufficient to trigger the extension to 22 May. But the UK’s domestic withdrawal act would require the political declaration to be passed in order for the draft treaty to be regarded as ratified. The commission spokesman said: “I am not going to position the commission on the basis of rumours. For us it is clear what is on the table and lets leave it there.”