It had to be him. Dumped and disciplined, publicly accused of being out of shape, unprofessional and letting down his teammates, ostracised since October. On the day Zinedine Zidane returned Isco returned with him and scored the goal that set Real Madrid on course for a first home victory in five. Not given a single start by Santiago Solari, there was something symbolic in how central he and the rest of the old guard were here. There was something symbolic too in Gareth Bale getting the second: a man most assumed to be on his way, perhaps getting a new start. It is early to say that, but there was something in this that seemed to speak of a recognition of the glory days and a hint that the future at the Bernabéu might look a little like the past. The starting XI alone was striking. Zidane got back to what he knew and his return ended in victory, although on what was often an underwhelming afternoon that success did not look certain until Marco Asensio and Karim Benzema created the goal for Isco just after the hour. When Bale steered in the second 15 minutes later, it was done. After all the defeats, all the disappointment, there was something to cheer. The return of Zidane, for a start – and that mattered almost more than anything else, the game occasionally feeling incidental. Applauded as he sat down on the bench, a banner was unfurled at the south end of the stadium, replicating Zidane’s line on Monday night: “I love Madrid … and here I am.” The fans sang “Zizou” to the tune of Hey Jude. Over the last few days it has sometimes felt as if Zidane had never been away. When the team was revealed, that feeling deepened. Of the starting XI, only Álvaro Odriozola was not here last season and there had been no other choice there given Dani Carvajal’s injury. While it is true that absentees conditioned Zidane’s other decisions too – Vinícius Júnior, Lucas Vázquez and Casemiro were all unavailable – the team was startling. Perhaps not a statement of intent – just the first of 11 lineups – but certainly a statement: he would decide. Some of those he decided to include had appeared set to fill lists of likely departures, victims of the purge. Here there was a revolution instead, or perhaps a counter-revolution. Thibaut Courtois, signed for €40m in the summer, was left out. Keylor Navas, who Zidane had publicly supported, vetoing a move for Kepa Arrizabalaga, started only his fourth league game this season. Isco, dumped by Solari and disciplined by the club, began his first since Julen Lopetegui’s final game. And Marcelo, who had definitively lost out to Sergio Reguilón, started his third league game in 2019. Bale started too. Zidane’s return appeared bad news but Bale was offered an opportunity, a player invited to respond and prove a point, while others were invited to return the loyalty. He and Isco marked the occasion with goals. Navas marked it with a superb save from Maxi Gómez’s header early on. And it was Marcelo who drew the first stop from Rubén Blanco. But that chance came after 35 minutes and in truth little was happening. Worse, the feeling emerged that maybe Celta, down in the relegation zone, could cause Madrid problems. Maxi bent one wide and Raphaël Varane blocked Sofiane Boufal’s shot. Ultimately, though, Madrid found their way back to victory, the pace quickening in the second half, the game tilted in their favour now. Isco came off to a standing ovation having just scored the opener and Bale added the second. As the final minutes ticked away, they started singing again, serenading the man who walked back in as if he had never walked away.