Kazakhstan’s president has announced his retirement after nearly 30 years as leader of the central Asian nation – but he will likely remain a power behind the throne, analysts said, as he retains key posts in Kazakhstan’s military and political bureaucracy. Nursultan Nazarbayev has led the oil-rich country since the fall of the Soviet Union, first as its Communist leader and then as president after independence. The 78-year-old leader announced his resignation in a surprise public address on national television on Tuesday evening. “I have taken a decision, which was not easy for me, to resign as president,” Nazarbayev said, noting he was the “first president of independent Kazakhstan”. But he would remain the chairman of the country’s powerful security council, the leader of the Nur Otan party, which dominates parliament, and his legal title as “leader of the nation”, he said. While Nazarbayev’s resignation “comes as a surprise, it does not signal any immediate major policy shifts,” said Kate Mallinson of Chatham House. His control of the security council, which sets guidelines for foreign and security policies, would enable him to “continue to rule Kazakhstan as the power behind the throne”. In his speech, Nazarbayev said he saw his task now as mentoring a new generation of leaders. He is expected to hand-pick a successor. “I am staying with you,” Nazarbayev said on television. “Caring for the country and its people will remain my concerns.” The manoeuvre may answer a key question for ageing post-Soviet autocrats, including Vladimir Putin: how to safely relinquish power in the winner-takes-all political systems that they have created. Nazarbayev led the country through the economic turbulence of the 1990s while consolidating his hold on power in a series of elections that began to resemble coronations. He was last elected in 2015 with 97.7% of the vote. Though credited with maintaining stability and ethnic peace in Kazakhstan, he has faced criticism for suppressing dissent and sidelining the opposition. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, the speaker of the upper house of parliament, will take over as the country’s acting president for the remainder of his term in line with the constitution, Nazarbayev said. “Tokayev is a safe pair of hands; he is a loyal presidential lieutenant,” Mallinson said. Presidential elections are set for 2020 but could be moved up to install a successor sooner, she added. Kazakhstan, despite having a population of only 18 million, is the ninth largest country in the world with an area of about one million square miles. It borders Russia to the north and China to the east and has extensive oil reserves that make it strategically and economically important. The resignation comes just weeks after the strongman dismissed the country’s government. Last month Nazarbayev announced a spending package of several billion dollars on social programmes and state salaries. He also promised major investments in infrastructure. As head of Kazakhstan, Nazarbayev pioneered a softer authoritarianism than his neighbours, eschewing the golden statues of Turkmenistan’s Saparmurat Niyazov or some of the brutal excesses of Uzbekistan’s Islam Karimov. But he grew eccentric in his 29 years in power, and his security forces committed atrocities, such as a bloody crackdown on striking miners in the city of Zhanaozen in 2012 that left at least 15 dead. He also ordered the construction of Astana, a futuristic capital city built from scratch in 1997 at exorbitant cost. The city now boasts a Norman Foster-designed shopping centre and an artificial beach, with sand specially imported from the Maldives, but lacks the culture and class of the country’s former capital, Almaty. Putin spoke with Nazarbayev by phone shortly before he announced his resignation, a Kremlin spokesman said. He declined to release details of the call. Mark Galeotti, a security analyst and the author of We Need to Talk About Putin, said that Nazarbayev’s exit strategy could provide a preview of a similar plan in the Kremlin. “[Putin] needs to guarantee the security of his person but also his legacy,” Galeotti said. Without a successor, he would seek a “constitutional position giving him both protection and the scope to intervene in politics if he feels he has to, without keeping him responsible for the tedious duties of day to day governance.”