Sixteen dazzling and diverse novels make the longlist for the 2019 Women’s prize for fiction, an award whose illustrious literary alumnae include Ali Smith, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Zadie Smith and the late Andrea Levy. This year’s writers, announced today, range across continents, ages and backgrounds. For the first time a gender-fluid novelist is among them. Akwaeke Emezi is Nigerian-born with Malaysian heritage who identifies as non-binary. Should we put our hard hats on? As one of the prize judges, I hope the book will be seen for what it is and the discussion not hijacked by gender politics axe-grinders. The prize is about judging the books, not the authors, so when I and fellow panellists read Emezi’s debut, Freshwater, we were struck by its voice, its story and its innovations. It is an edgy coming-of-age story about cultural alienation, sexual violence and identity. Its central character, Ada, is a Nigerian college student in the US whose inner world is inhabited by ogbanje or trickster spirits; Asughara, a female, and Saint Vincent, a male. Last year I interviewed Emezi, who was born a woman, and they (the pronoun Emezi prefers to use) spoke of the ogbanje as being rooted in a pre-colonial African belief system. “I think multiple realities exist,” they said, but “most colonised countries had their cosmology, their ontology, their metaphysics colonised too”. Emezi’s novel takes the conversation about female-only spaces and non-binary identities out of an often inward-looking, white, western enclave, to give it new meaning. Ada begins the book as a “she” and ends as a “they”. Non-binary identity, in this book, is subtly tethered to finding freedom from western definitions of “male” and “female”. It feels radical to read a story that puts pre-colonial, African subjectivity at its centre, even though it probably shouldn’t. I began reading fiction by women as a teenager in the 1980s, and it marked me – inviolably – with its exploration of freedom and its demand for self-definition. Yet, as a child of impoverished, Muslim, Pakistani immigrants, my reference points and struggles were far removed from the fictive worlds of, say, Marilyn French’s The Women’s Room and Margaret Atwood’s The Edible Woman. However much I loved, and still love, these books, their feminism embodied a certain privilege and self-regard. Emezi’s book back then could have shown me that there is more than one way to be female and feminist. Of course, fluid subjectivity is not an African invention. Angela Carter was writing about gender as a performance in the 1980s. Her fiction is full of women who transform and shed their outer “female” beings to morph into great big hairy animals in books such as The Bloody Chamber. There is liberation in this fluidity for Carter’s characters, just as there is for Emezi’s. If we believe in true diversity and inclusion – and the publishing industry has banged on about this for long enough without anything shifting at all – then we should feel thrilled by a Nigerian, gender-fluid writer, living in the US, on this longlist. Freshwater is among seven novels out of the 16 written by women of colour. This range reflects the judging panel. Pick diverse judges and you get diverse outlooks, though in the case of Emezi’s book, it was not just the two BAME judges (including me) who championed it passionately. True, you don’t have to be Nigerian or gender-fluid to see this book’s merits, but a broader judging panel somehow, alchemically, sets a certain tone in the room. There are those who will see Emezi’s inclusion as a threat, or the beginning of the end of a prize devoted to women. Its founder, Kate Mosse, set up the prize more than two decades ago because she saw women’s fiction being systematically overlooked. Things have improved, but we know that even now, men tend to buy fiction written by other men, not women, and wider in the publishing industry men are filling the jobs at the top. Some might worry that this preciously carved-out space is now set to be ambushed, even if the women’s prize has made clear that it will always seek to showcase the best of women’s imagination. Welcoming a gender-fluid author into these ranks is not tantamount to opening the floodgates to those who bowl out of bed and decide they will identity as “she” that day. Such characterisation is, in any case, a deeply cynical and defensive way of regarding identity. We all have to value gender as something more elemental than a protean tool for prize submissions. Faber, the UK publisher of Freshwater, entered Emezi’s book for the prize only after permission from the writer. The book jacket, at the time of original publication, used the “she” pronoun in describing the author, when they still identified as female. For their part, Emezi has said they are happy to be on the longlist, and this, above anything else, should go to show that we can be more than one thing. Emezi has nothing to worry about and neither does the women’s prize. Together, we are gloriously multiple. • Arifa Akbar is an arts journalist and critic