An exultant Donald Trump declared a political victory and himself vindicated on Sunday, after the special counsel found that his election campaign did not collude with Russia. It appeared to be a death blow to those who had pinned their hopes on Robert Mueller chasing Trump out of office in a replay of the Watergate scandal. But Democrats refused to concede defeat, arguing that the American public deserves to see the full report, not a Trump-appointed attorney general’s four-page summary of it. The president, who long derided the investigation as a “witch hunt”, led a chorus of Republicans in gloating over the failure to find a smoking gun. “After a long investigation, after so many people have been so badly hurt, after not looking at the other side where a lot of bad things happened … it was just announced there was no collusion with Russia,” Trump told reporters in West Palm Beach, Florida, before flying back to Washington. “The most ridiculous thing I’ve ever heard.” This was an illegal take-down that failed and hopefully somebody is going to be looking at the other side He added: “It was complete and total exoneration. It’s a shame that our country had to go through this. To be honest, it’s a shame that your president had to go through this before I even got elected … This was an illegal take-down that failed and hopefully somebody is going to be looking at the other side.” Trump’s claim of “total” exoneration was not accurate. In his summary of the obstruction of justice issue, Barr wrote that that while Mueller did not conclude that the president committed a crime, his report “also does not exonerate him”. This leaves open the question of whether Trump obstructed justice by firing FBI director James Comey and drafting an incomplete explanation about his son’s meeting with a Russian lawyer at Trump Tower. However, on the charge of collusion with Russia, which has hung over the White House and intrigued the world for two years, the president was cleared. Barr noted: “[T]he investigation did not establish that members of the Trump campaign conspired or coordinated with the Russian government in its election interference activities.” Trump’s family and supporters joined him in a victory lap and, far from seeking to heal divisions, wasted no time in jeering. Sarah Sanders, the White House press secretary, tweeted: “A great day for America and for President Donald Trump. After two years of wild anti-Trump hysteria, the president and his millions of supporters have been completely vindicated.” Donald Trump Jr, whose June 2016 meeting with a Russian lawyer was seen by many as collusion in plain sight, lamented “more than 2 years of non-stop conspiracy theories from CNN, MSNBC, Buzzfeed and the rest of the mainstream media, as well as daily lies and smears coming from Democrats in Washington”. The Trump 2020 campaign sent out an email with the subject heading “COLLUSION HOAX!” and a video about what it described as “Democrats’ reckless, false charges”. Brad Parscale, the campaign manager, offered a preview of how the president is likely to use the investigation during the election next year. “Today marks the day that President Trump has been completely and fully vindicated by special counsel Robert Mueller, exposing the Russia collusion conspiracy theory for the sham that it always was and catching Democrats in an elaborate web of lies and deceit,” he said. For Republicans in Congress, there was cause to breathe a sigh of relief. Mitch McConnell, the majority leader in the Senate, welcomed Mueller’s contribution to understanding Russian attacks on American democracy. Trump has questioned even this premise, suggesting that he is willing to accept Vladimir Putin’s word over his own intelligence agencies. Good day for the rule of law. Great day for President Trump and his team McConnell’s words may also have provoked mirthless laughter among advisers to former President Barack Obama who have said the Kentuckian refused to join a bipartisan condemnation of such attacks in the run-up to election day 2016. Some of Trump’s loudest supporters weighed in. Lindsey Graham, chair of the Senate judiciary committee, tweeted: “Good day for the rule of law. Great day for President Trump and his team. No collusion and no obstruction. The cloud hanging over President Trump has been removed by this report. Bad day for those hoping the Mueller investigation would take President Trump down.” Jim Jordan of Ohio, top Republican on the House oversight committee, said: “There was no collusion, coordination, or cooperation with Russia. All the special counsel’s prosecutions of US persons in the course of this investigation were wholly unrelated to collusion. I hope this will put an end to the partisan and political investigations in Congress aimed at undermining President Trump.” Democrats, who have long said the question of impeachment should wait for the Mueller report, were forced to regroup. Some suggested that since Barr is a Trump appointee, his impartiality may be open to question. They urged the justice department to release the full report. Given Mr Barr’s public record of bias against the special counsel’s inquiry, he is not a neutral observer Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi released a joint statement that said Barr’s letter “raises as many questions as it answers. The fact that special counsel Mueller’s report does not exonerate the president on a charge as serious as obstruction of justice demonstrates how urgent it is that the full report and underlying documentation be made public without any further delay.” Referring to a memo written by Barr before he returned as attorney general, they wrote: “Given Mr Barr’s public record of bias against the special counsel’s inquiry, he is not a neutral observer and is not in a position to make objective determinations about the report. And most obviously, for the president to say he is completely exonerated directly contradicts the words of Mr Mueller and is not to be taken with any degree of credibility.” Schumer and Pelosi called for the release of “the full report and the underlying documents”. Jerrold Nadler, chair of the House judiciary committee, issued a series of tweets that said he wanted Barr to quickly testify before Congress. Nadler said Mueller “clearly and explicitly is not exonerating the president, and we must hear from … Barr about his decision-making and see all the underlying evidence for the American people to know all the facts.” Democratic candidates for president added expressions of concern. Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey tweeted: “The American public deserves the full report and findings from the Mueller investigation immediately – not just the in-house summary from a Trump administration official.” Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts posted: “Congress voted 420-0 to release the full Mueller report. Not a ‘summary’ from his handpicked attorney general. AG Barr, make the full report public. Immediately.” The Mueller investigation led to charges against 34 individuals, including six in Trump’s inner circle. The special counsel was not able to interview Trump in person. The lack of a collusion finding may fire up Democrats to go after the president even more aggressively in House investigations into his family and businesses, using subpoena power where necessary. The results may still prove damaging to Trump’s re-election hopes.