The Dirty John universe just got ever more strangely sprawling, with a second season of the Connie Britton-starring Netflix show announced – plus a bonus documentary about the case released by the streaming service this week. Dirty John: The Dirty Truth shares the stories of other women who were targeted by the sham anesthesiologist, plus his daughters. BBC Three have announced their first documentary series that will come with a bolt-on podcast. Galdem Sugar will head into the world of women grime MCs, and the podcast will bring them together to discuss their tunes, their community and the issues they face in such a male-dominated scene. Strong Black LegendsAs one half of the brilliant Another Round podcast, Tracey Clayton brought snappy one-liners, a knack for conversational interviews and a load of warm humour to the party. Now she is back to “give flowers” (figuratively and literally) to her film and TV favourites in Strong Black Legends. Clayton is a delight as she salutes Lynn Whitfield, “who has been in the greatest black things ever made”, and listens as Oscar-winning Black Panther costume designer Ruth Carter gives good anecdote. Hannah VerdierFatwaA 10-part BBC documentary recalling February 1989, when Iran’s leader Ayatollah Khomeini demanded the assassination of the Satanic Verses author Salman Rushdie. As the background to the controversy both here and in Iran is filled in, the short episodes and matey presenting style of Chloe Hadjimatheou and Mobeen Azhar threaten to cheapen a complex issue. But they don’t, quite, and among many knotty talking points is the idea that here was the birth of modern Islamophobia. Jack Seale In December 2017, Guardian Australia launched The Reckoning, an excellent yet harrowing exploration of Australia’s unprecedented royal commission on institutional responses to child sexual abuse. The three-part investigation, voiced by journalist David Marr, took us on a journey from the past towards the future of the commission. A future now realised, in part, with the conviction of Cardinal George Pell. Despite reporting being non-existent thanks to a suppression order, Pell’s guilty verdict has led to the order being lifted. Marr has returned with a special episode of The Reckoning that takes us inside Pell’s trial. Offering incredible insight, Melissa Davey – the Melbourne bureau chief who sat in on the trial – brings us the shocking testimony from Pell’s accusers and describes how, despite hiring one of the top defence barristers in the state, he was eventually found guilty of all charges. Chosen by Brenna Daldorph, freelance audio producer (Today in Focus) Julie: The Unwinding of the Miracle opens with Julie Yip-Williams, a mum living in Brooklyn, giving a tour of her home – complete with a master bedroom that has a golden wall – to a radio producer. Julie admits she splurged on the decoration, but only because this is the room she is going to die in. At the time of recording, Julie had stage five colon cancer. The resulting series is a delicate collection of snapshots detailing Julie’s exceptional life and final moments. The listener sits ghost-like in the room as Julie’s friends and family gather to say their goodbyes. Her daughter flits in and out, showing off her new roller shoes. Her cousin blames her for pulling the “cancer card” to try and meet actor Gael García Bernal. And, in another magical conversation, Julie promises an old friend she will come back to him one day … as a fidget-spinner.