Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s permanent appointment as Manchester United manager has yet to be confirmed, but that minor detail hasn’t stopped the Norwegian identifying a whole host of potential signings for next season. The Mirror say Ole wants to create a little Portuguese enclave at Old Trafford by bringing in teenage playmaker João Felix and 21-year-old centre-back Rúben Dias from Benfica, along with midfielder Bruno Fernandes from Sporting. Combined, the trio would cost United about £250m, but the club are unlikely to have it all their own way considering a host of the usual European big guns also have their sights set on these players. United are also continuing their courtship of Leicester City defender Harry Maguire, but have been told they will have to make a record-breaking offer to get him. Zinedine Zidane looks to have put the kibosh on Liverpool’s plan to get Marco Asensio on to their payroll. Out of sorts since Zidane left the club last summer, the left winger was up for sale but looks likely to be staying put now that Zidane has been reappointed. “I have spoken to him and told him that he will be fundamental to the team,” said Zidane. “And I want him here with us.” So that’s that, it seems. Meanwhile at Anfield, Naby Keita has proved a little less fundamental to Liverpool’s team since arriving from RB Leipzig last summer and weekend reports suggest the club are ready to accept a loss on their £52.75m investment and move him on to Borussia Dortmund or Bayern Munich. Famously patient with his new acquisitions, Jürgen Klopp has made plenty of encouraging noises about Keita’s progress and it would come as something of a surprise if he was prepared to give up on the Guinea midfielder so soon. Central defenders are proving in particularly high demand, with Sampdoria’s 22-year-old Dane, Joachim Andersen being scouted by Manchester United, Tottenham, Liverpool and Arsenal. United are also prepared to break the bank to bring long-term target Kalidou Koulibaly to Old Trafford from Napoli if he’s of a mind to join them. In Spain, Raphaël Varane has tired of life with Real Madrid and may move to Juventus. A Rumour Mill staple, Inter’s Slovak stopper Milan Skriniar is is currently being courted by Liverpool and Manchester City, among others. Salomón Rondón has proved a big hit at Newcastle since arriving on loan from West Brom last summer, but club owner Mike Ashley is reluctant to make the move permanent because he thinks the 29-year-old is too old. With nine goals and five assists for Newcastle to his name this season, Rondon’s prodigious appetite for gadding about football pitches like a man possessed has helped him become a firm fan favourite and Geordies are likely to be extremely displeased if Ashley refuses to sanction a transfer fee likely to be around the £16m mark. Olympiakos left-back Leonardo Koutris will be able to take his pick of mid-table Premier League sides this summer, what with West Ham, Leicester, Everton and Newcastle falling over each other in the rush to secure his scrawl. Everton are also interested in bringing Birmingham City striker Che Adams to Goodison Park, but will face competition from Burnley and Southampton, who are also hitching their skirts at the £15m-rated 22-year-old. And finally, Swansea City striker Oli McBurnie could find himself swapping one idyllic coastal paradise for another in the coming months if rumours linking him with a move to Ligue 1 side Nice are based in anything resembling reality.