Burials for the 50 people killed the New Zealand terrorist attack began in Christchurch on Wednesday as the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, returned to the city and spoke at a school that lost two students in the shooting. The New Zealand police commissioner, Mike Bush, told reporters most of the bodies of those killed when a gunman opened fire during Friday prayers at two mosques would be released by Wednesday evening. Six were released on Tuesday night and prepared for swift burial. Grieving families had complained of the five-day wait, saying it prevented them from being able to conduct the burials within 48 hours in accordance with Islamic custom, but Bush said the identification and post-mortem process had occurred as quickly as possible. “We must prove for prosecution the cause of death to the satisfaction of the judge,” he said. “You cannot convict for murder without proving that cause of death ... to get it wrong is unforgivable and you cannot come back from that.” Ardern told students at Cashmere high school, who lost two classmates in the attack and had five others directly affected, that tougher gun control laws would be introduced fasterthan they had been in Australia, which pushed the bulk of its gun control laws through within 12 days of the 1996 Port Arthur massacre. She implored the students to reject messages of racism and hate. “This is my request, I alone cannot get rid of those things, I need help from every single one of us,” she said. “So yes, gather together, show those outpourings of love, but also let New Zealand be a place where there is no tolerance for racism ever. That’s something we can all do.” It was Ardern’s second visit to Christchurch since the attack. The crowd of 400 students performed a haka and took the opportunity to question Ardern over the attack. One student asked the prime minister how she was feeling, to which Ardern replied: “I am very sad.” As she promised on Tuesday, Ardern did not say the attacker’s name. The Australian alleged gunman has been charged with one count of murder. Bush said he expected a “considerable number of the most serious charges” would be added to the prosecution before his next court appearance. Twenty-nine people injured in the attack remain in hospital, with nine of them in intensive care. A multinational investigation team comprised of officers from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Australian Federal Police and New South Wales police has assembled in Wellington to trace the background of the suspect, Brenton Tarrant. Bush said intelligence agencies from other Five Eyes countries were also helping to “build a comprehensive picture of this person that we will put before the court”. “What I can say at the moment most positively is there was only one attacker,” he said. “The investigation focus is to work out if anyone else was involved in supporting or in any other away and we are still conducting that part of the investigation.” An independent investigation has also been ordered into New Zealand’s intelligence agencies, following reports that it received tip-offs from the Muslim community and a gun seller about an apparent increase in white supremacist activities. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has called in the Turkish ambassador to Canberra over comments made by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who said that anyone who visit Turkey with anti-Muslim views would be sent home in a coffin “like their grandfathers were” after the Gallipoli landing in the first world war. Authorities in New Zealand said they were “alert” to the risks of reprisal attacks. The country’s peak hunting body, Fish and Game NZ, said it would support a ban and buyback of military-style semi-automatic weapons and restrictions on high-capacity magazines.