Two more British women who are being held in Syrian camps with their young children have reportedly had their citizenship removed. The move comes as the home secretary, Sajid Javid, faces increasing criticism over the case of Shamima Begum, the 19-year-old Londoner who was stripped of her British citizenship on his orders, after the death of her three-week-old son. The other women were named by the Sunday Times as two sisters, Reema, 30, and Zara Iqbal, 28, who are said to have five sons under the age of eight between them and have been widowed after their husbands died fighting for Islamic State. The sisters, from Canning Town in east London, are believed to be living in separate Syrian camps, where tens of thousands of people have have flocked amid the disintegration of the “Isis caliphate”. A Home Office spokesperson said: “We do not comment on individual cases. Any decisions to deprive individuals of their citizenship are based on all available evidence and not taken lightly.” In response to reports of the latest two cases, sources at the department briefed that any “deprivation decision” had been judgments taken on the facts of each case. While Britain did not have consular services in Syria, the sources added, outside of the country the British government would work with local and UK authorities to facilitate the return of children where their parents had given consent. Javid, during a weekend of criticism, was accused of moral cowardice and “treating the UK as a banana republic” in pursuit of his leadership ambitions after the death of Jarrah, Begum’s son. A Church of England bishop and a former director of public prosecutions criticised the home secretary as demand grew for Javid to review his controversial decision to strip the 19-year-old of British citizenship – a move that left her stateless with her child in legal limbo. Begum, from Bethnal Green, east London, was 15 when she and two other schoolgirls went to join Isis in February 2015. She gave birth in a Syrian refugee camp in February. She had already lost two children. News that a third child had now died has left her relatives in London distraught. The Begum family’s lawyer, Tasnime Akunjee, said: “They are utterly crushed and despondent at the moment.” Javid’s decision to strip the teenager of her British citizenship triggered a ferocious debate over whether she should be allowed to return and raised questions about the legality of his decision. The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, tweeted: “It is against international law to make someone stateless, and now an innocent child has died as a result of a British woman being stripped of her citizenship. This is callous and inhumane.” A woman named as Reema Iqbal spoke briefly to Sky News in the Roj camp in north-east Syria, where she was said to be held under armed guard. “I don’t trust anyone. I’m sorry. I’ve been burned before,” she said. Iqbal was also quoted earlier this year in the Daily Telegraph, which identified her as one of a number of British women who wanted to return. “The security services came to speak to me and I was honest, I told them my whole story so now it’s up to them to judge,” she said.