There aren’t many people who can count “working in the White House” and “having sex with a bag of weed” among their career highlights, but Kal Penn’s path hasn’t exactly been routine. The 41-year-old found fame in the stoner film series Harold & Kumar (where his character hallucinated the aforementioned encounter with a bag of marijuana), before taking a brief sojourn into politics for Barack Obama. Now, Penn has added yet another unique job to his CV, taking on the role of TV host and touring a dildo factory as part of a documentary about the inequities of capitalism. The sex toy production line is just one of the stops he makes in This Giant Beast That Is The Global Economy, an Amazon docu-comedy series that sees him delve into the darkest corners of finance, learning the easiest way to launder money and how to establish a shell company. “I don’t know anything about the economy,” Penn admits, but contends that producers Will Ferrell and Adam McKay selected him for his natural curiosity. “I have a sophomoric sense of humour, but I also read the New York Times cover to cover. I’m not always the best at the traditional ‘sit down and absorb what’s on the page’.” This series allowed him to travel to different countries and explore what he calls the “shadier” parts of the economy. Penn bumps up against outsize personalities like one-time mobster and Trump associate, Felix Sater, who educates him in the most efficient way to smuggle diamonds (“Put them under your scrotum”) and rubber factory owners who bristle at the suggestion that upping their workers’ salaries by 35 cents would improve their lives. The one sympathetic multi-millionaire he meets is the owner of the dildo factory, the only employer who shows any interest in the welfare of his workers. Rather than raging or weeping with despair, the show maintains a tone of bemused curiosity. One episode may be titled Are Rich People Dicks Or Do Dicks Get Rich?, but Penn is less interested in demanding his interviewees repent for their sins than trying to fathom what drives them. The experience of meeting people whose sole existence seems to be the exploitation of the poor did confirm Penn’s worst fears. “Ten years ago, you would have conversations about people pulling puppet strings, about the billionaire class and the struggles of working folks and people would say: ‘You’re such a conspiracy theorist’,” he says. “Now, we’re acknowledging that this has never been a conspiracy theory. This is how the economy works.” But how does the host of a show featuring billionaires who routinely flout the law without consequences reconcile that with being part of an Obama administration that allowed the bankers responsible for the 2008 financial crisis to largely go unpunished? “I decided to let them all off the hook,” Penn laughs. “No, look, I’m as curious about that stuff as anyone else. We’re a country that locks up kids for possessing small bits of marijuana for years, and we’re allowing the financial industry to write their own rules. It’s insane.” Although Penn’s work in the White House was intended as a short sabbatical from acting, he speaks of his time in government with obvious pride. After campaigning for Obama in 2006, Penn, who taught at the University of Pennsylvania as a visiting lecturer, spoke to the newly elected president about whether there was a place for him in the administration. When the post of associate director in the Office of Public Engagement came up, Penn promptly bailed out of the long-running medical drama House (his character, Dr Lawrence Kutner, suddenly and with no prior warning took his own life). He became Obama’s point person on outreach to young Americans. He worked on the Affordable Care Act, the repeal of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, grants and student loans. But the position no longer exists in the current administration, after the department was changed back to what Nixon called it: Public Liaison. “The Obama vision was that we should all have a seat at the table,” says Penn. “I hope that still exists … but there doesn’t seem to be any evidence it does.” Penn’s boss in the White House was Valerie Jarrett, subject of the racist tweet that got Roseanne Barr fired from her rebooted sitcom. “Ugh,” groans Penn when asked for his reaction to Barr’s outburst. “I thought what everyone else thought. This is disgusting. You almost feel bad for someone who’s that small-minded in this day and age, who lacks the capacity to have conversations about things that rational people can disagree on.” Prior to the Harold & Kumar trilogy, which took the revolutionary step of putting the spotlight on two characters who would previously have been relegated to butt-of-the-joke status in the stoner genre, Penn enjoyed regular employment as an actor but rarely in memorable roles. He was a Muslim terrorist in 24, Ryan Reynolds’ sidekick in the dumb college comedy Van Wilder, supporting characters in the unfondly remembered Malibu’s Most Wanted and Son of the Mask, and a character simply credited as Young Man in Fez in the Buffy spin-off Angel. After Harold & Kumar’s success, Penn’s profile was sufficiently large that he played the lead in Mira Nair’s 2006 adaptation of Jhumpa Lahiri’s The Namesake. In 2017, when he returned to acting full-time, Penn took to tweeting out screenshots of scripts he auditioned for when he was still a fledgling performer. The parts, for everything from unsold pilots to long-running shows such as Sabrina the Teenage Witch, veered from the mildly stereotypical (“Pakistani computer geek … in a perpetual state of perspiration”) to the outright racist (“snake charmer”). But in an era when the likes of Kumail Nanjiani, Mindy Kaling, Aziz Ansari and Priyanka Chopra can star in vehicles that don’t make a joke of their ethnicity, Penn finds cause for optimism. “I’m of the belief that audiences want to see compelling characters and they don’t care what those characters look like. There are so many shows out there now with strong people of colour that don’t rely on identity as a crutch but don’t shy away from it. That didn’t exist when I was starting out.” As evidence of the racial strides the US’ previously timorous entertainment industry has made recently, Penn recounts a story from his formative years. “Back in the day, I worked at a small production company. It was a college internship. One of my jobs was to come up with a list of actors who were not too expensive and were currently on TV, for a horror movie my executive boss was making.” Penn shortlisted 10 potential headshots, one of whom was Joseph Gordon-Levitt. “He was on Third Rock from the Sun. I was like, ‘This guy’s really funny and he’s probably not too expensive.’” Penn’s boss went through the headshots and stopped at Gordon-Levitt. “He said: ‘What the fuck is this kid? Asian? He looks Asian. We can’t hire him.’ When I asked why, he said: ‘Because I want good, white American kids.’ Later, because I’m working for free and had nothing to lose, I asked him, what does it matter if he’s Asian-American? He said: ‘Because Asians don’t see movies.’” For Penn, this was yet another example of an old powerful man who didn’t want to listen to reason. “If you look at the way things get made, strictly in a business model, people are very risk averse. They’re like, this is how it was made in the past so this is how we’re going to make it again.” Penn brightens, then adds: “But that’s an attitude from an archaic, thankfully changing, world.” This Giant Beast That Is The Global Economy is available on Amazon Prime now.