Florence Fang is a hero. In 2017, the former publisher of the San Francisco Examiner purchased a William Nicholson-designed house in Hillsborough, California for $2.8m (£2.1m). She has spent the interim period filling the front garden with dinosaurs, much to the chagrin of her neighbours. They claim that the giant metal dinosaurs – and the Flintstones figurines, and the sign that reads “Yabba Dabba Doo” – were erected without the proper permits and that her home is a public nuisance. Now they’re suing her. This, I believe, is a tremendous mistake. Were it not for Fang, visitors would drive through Hillsborough without a second thought; her Flintstone House makes it a landmark. It might be a nightmare to look at, but it’s a delight to see. Oversized, ostentatious garden figurines could be considered a red flag – but surely it’s better to see them as a grand expression of ambition. You might be content to confine your outdoor ornamentation to a pond and a couple of gnomes, but those who fill their space with giant animals – such as the Megaupload founder, Kim Dotcom, who kept a couple of life-sized, corrugated-iron giraffes in the grounds of his Auckland mansion – cannot be shackled by the puny laws of man. They strive for bigger and better things. So when John MacMurray, a care-home maintenance worker in County Durham, chooses to fill his garden with colossal scrap-metal sculptures of his own creation – including a scorpion, an alien and one of the evil purple Minions from Despicable Me 2 – he does it to rage against the stifling anonymity of suburban life. And when the Louisiana author Diana Rowland erects five huge illuminated dragons in her yard every year for Christmas, she does it because she cannot bear the possibility of being forgotten – certainly not by her neighbours, one of whom left an anonymous note accusing her of being part of a “demonic cult”. This is a primal instinct. We all want to prove to the world that we exist, and what better way to do this than to put some massive animals in your garden. The good news is there are so many options to buy off-the-shelf online. The wealthy among you might be inspired by Dotcom to buy a 14ft metal “Geraldine giraffe” for £6,000 (plus £4.99 delivery) or, for more than £4,700, a 7ft 7in dragon. You could buy a 6ft gorilla for £1,250, or – if money is an issue – a life-sized resin wolf perpetually howling at the moon for just £200. You could, and you should, because you wouldn’t just be cluttering up your garden. You would be participating in a show of solidarity with Fang. She is the hero we need right now, though, that being said, I really don’t want her to move next door to me.