The sun shone, a gigantic banner sporting Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s face swirled in the Stretford End, and Manchester United claimed victory. This was the perfect way to herald the Norwegian being made full-time manager and to respond to the last two defeats. It was hardly pretty: United were stuck in second gear, the goals apart, but as winning while underperforming is a yardstick of a team it was a satisfactory afternoon, Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial the home scorers, with Abdoulaye Doucouré producing Watford’s late response. Solskjær made four changes from the league defeat at Arsenal, drafting in David de Gea, Juan Mata, Martial and most notably Phil Jones for Victor Lindelöf, who was not injured but had “issues”, according to the manager. Watford’s Javi Gracia brought in the same number: Troy Deeney, Gerard Deulofeu, Will Hughes and Étienne Capoue. At the start a slumbering United rearguard allowed Doucouré time to scuff a shot wide of De Gea’s right post, as Watford dominated the early exchanges, with Deeney the next to take aim. A concerned Mick Phelan prowled the United technical area, though he will have been happier when Paul Pogba finally had United moving. His long, arcing pass put Rashford in behind and Watford had to scramble to clear. When they found high gear United gave Watford a warning. Martial slid a pass into Luke Shaw and he burned to the right byline but, as Rashford tried to stay onside, the left-back failed to find him. When next Martial went flying inside Daryl Janmaat the latter’s touch took the ball back to Ben Foster; United appealed for a back-pass but Stuart Attwell adjudged it inadvertent. The referee did the same when the ever-more influential Martial went down after Miguel Britos touched him in the area: the home crowd were indignant but it would have been harsh. Now came the contest’s supreme moment from Shaw. First, he dispossessed Deeney just outside United’s area. Then, the No 23 glanced up and let go a 30-yard pass that arced precisely into Rashford’s path, removing Watford’s defence. From here the centre-forward did the business, sliding the ball home. Watford were shellshocked and had their keeper to thank for still being only one behind moments later. Martial’s close-range effort had him about to celebrate before Foster’s reflexes saved Gracia’s men. Rashford had equalled his best of 13 in a season for the club and he soon came close to a 14th. He left Foster grounded but instead of pulling the trigger he hit a misplaced pass; Phelan, again on the touchline, wheeled away in disappointment. The second half started with a Deulofeu shot De Gea gathered easily. At the other end Ashley Young’s pass to Martial was hit out for a corner and Watford subsequently escaped. Solskjær had switched his front-three around, placing Mata in the No 9 berth, Rashford on the left and Martial the right. United’s problem was in defence, though, as this 45 minutes began as the first did with a concerningly soporific approach. It allowed Janmaat and Roberto Pereyra to threaten as Watford had a real go at United. Pogba was having an afternoon when he would lose the ball and remonstrate with himself, rather than try to win it back. After Gracia brought on Kiko Femenía for Janmaat, Solskjær introduced Andreas Pereira and Jesse Lingard for Ander Herrera and Mata. Initially, it made scant difference as the contest had become Watford’s attack versus United’s defence. Solskjær’s side just could not remove their opponents from their half. When they finally did they struck to again. This came, in part, from a comedy of Watford errors. Martial tried a one-two with Rashford and Britos failed to clear. When the ball broke back to the Frenchman from Lingard, Martial somehow forced it past Foster. Solskjær’s pre-game comments were all about how the hard work was started now he had been confirmed as the permanent manager. This game was, indeed, attritional for his team but despite Doucouré’s late strike they managed to win: always the bottom line in football.