The first novel to be translated from Uzbek into English, an “Uzbek Game of Thrones” that is banned in the author’s home country and was initially published in Facebook posts, has won the €20,000 (£17,200) EBRD literature prize. Hamid Ismailov’s The Devils’ Dance intertwines the stories of two central Asian writers: the 19th-century Uzbek poet Oyxon, a slave who was forcibly married to three khans, and the author Abdulla Qodiriy, who was writing her story when he was imprisoned by Stalin’s secret police, the NKVD, in 1937. Translated from Uzbek by Donald Rayfield with John Farndon, Ismailov’s novel took the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development-sponsored prize on Thursday. The award, which is split between author and translator, was established in partnership with the British Council and goes to the best work of literary fiction translated into English, and written in the language of one of the 38 countries – from Morocco to Mongolia – where the EBRD works. Ismailov, who fled Uzbekistan in 1992 because of what the authoritarian state described as his “unacceptable democratic tendencies”, initially published it, chapter by chapter, on Facebook. It went viral, and was smuggled into Uzbekistan in printed editions following the death of dictator Islam Karimov in 2016. Chair of the judging panel Rosie Goldsmith said that, “with its spies, police, princes, poets and great plot”, The Devils’ Dance was “an Uzbek Game of Thrones”. “The storytelling style captures perfectly the prose and poetry of central Asia while being incredibly readable in English. A novel within a novel, narrated by a great novelist with an equally great translation,” she added. Ismailov, who has lived in the UK since leaving Uzbekistan, said he was proud to win the award – but also “proud for my literature”. “Lots of silenced writers, and imprisoned writers, have no possibility of being heard even in their own country, let alone the wider world. I hope it’ll open up some doors into central Asian literature, and into Uzbek literature,” he said. Rayfield, emeritus professor of Russian and Georgian at Queen Mary University of London, learnt Uzbek specifically to translate The Devils’ Dance. The book, he said, was extraordinary for many reasons, including: “interweaving two parallel stories so that they end up merging; Hamid’s sheer versatility and richness of language, the use of eccentric Uzbek proverbs, of British documents, of Sufi philosophy and above all integrating major poets such as Uvaysi and Cho‘lpon into the text”. Tilted Axis Press is publishing another of Ismailov’s books, The Language of the Bees: A Tale of Hayy ibn Yakzan, translated by Shelley Fairweather-Vega, later this year. “Central Asia is a cultural and religious melting pot, where oral traditions play a central role, so any novel from the region is going to be very different from the ‘standard’ Anglophone Atlantic novel,” said publisher Deborah Smith. “Hamid’s books aren’t someone writing about central Asia for the benefit of outsiders, but an Uzbek author addressing his audience  – and the translations allow us to eavesdrop.”