The DUP leader, Arlene Foster, has signalled her party is ready to do a deal to end the Brexit impasse, as Conservative Brexiters said they would ask lawyers to examine a new proposal to exit the backstop. Tory Eurosceptics told the Guardian on Thursday that they and the DUP could be persuaded to back Theresa May’s Brexit deal if the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, gave clearer legal advice about how the UK could withdraw from an international treaty. Foster, who is visiting Washington for an event she attended with the Irish prime minister, Leo Varadkar, said her party was back in talks with the government, which needs to prove only that the constitutional integrity of the UK would be preserved. “We are speaking to the government. The government has come to us and the attorney general also,” she told the BBC. “We want a deal, we’ve said we want a deal, and we’re talking to them around that. We hope that can be the case, because nobody wants to leave without a deal. We know that is bad for the whole of the United Kingdom and we want to make sure that we get there.” Foster said it was “not only about the attorney general changing the advice” and that reassurances had to come as a package. “When you come to the end of the negotiation, that’s when you really start to see the whites of people’s eyes and you get down to the point where you can make a deal,” she said. The DUP leader confirmed she had held talks with Varadkar in Washington on Wednesday, and that Brexit had been on the agenda. The majority of MPs from the Tory pro-Brexit European Research Group (ERG) voted against May’s revised deal because Cox advised there was only a “reduced risk” that the UK could be trapped indefinitely in the Northern Ireland backstop and therefore a customs union with the EU. Discussions are now taking place around a point that Jacob Rees-Mogg, the ERG chair, raised in the House of Commons before Tuesday’s vote, relating to article 62 of the Vienna convention. Stephen Barclay, the Brexit secretary, replied that the UK would be able to terminate the withdrawal agreement “if the facts clearly warranted that there had been an unforeseen and fundamental change of circumstances affecting the essential basis of the treaty on which the United Kingdom’s consent had been given”. An ERG source said that had Cox’s final legal advice said as much “it could have changed the vote”. A number of leading lawyers have questioned the plan. The QC Martin Howe, who was the only non-MP to be appointed to the ERG’s “star chamber” of lawyers who looked at Cox’s legal advice ahead of the meaningful vote earlier this week, said the idea was a non-starter. Howe told the Standard that the use of the convention required a “radical change of circumstances” and said that the international court of justice had considered “the fall of the Soviet Union, disappearance of the Warsaw Pact and dissolution of Czechoslovakia, were not sufficient to satisfy this ground”. The ERG is to ask Howe and other lawyers to examine the proposal over the coming days, but their advice will not necessarily be published. One source in the group sounded pessimistic that it could win broad support. “No UK government is ever going to break a treaty anyway,” the source said. The Labour MP Ian Murray, a supporter of the pro-referendum group Best for Britain, said: “Not content with bullying the country toward a disastrous no-deal cliff-edge, the Brexit extremists in the Tory party now want the UK to become an international pariah. “Trying to use obscure articles to worm out of international treaty commitments is a far cry from what was promised by leave campaigners back in 2016. This advice from one of their own should put the debate to bed.”