The previous day’s exertions had rather taken it out of everyone. Having voted to allow itself indicative votes on the next stage of the Brexit process, parliament pretty much awarded itself a day off while Sir Oliver Letwin and a handful of helpers were having an ontological debate on the meaning of meaning as they tried to work out what colour the ballot papers would be and what font should be used. Most MPs were having a quiet lie down, struggling to work out if there was any point to anything any more as the government that couldn’t govern had already indicated it would regard all indicative votes as non-indicative. A theatre of the absurd. But at a thinly attended meeting of the Eurosceptic Bruges Group in Westminster, the standard bearers of the One True Brexit fought on. Here were the true believers. The resistance. The paramilitary wing of the Rotary club, threatening mass civil disobedience if Jacob Rees-Mogg failed to maintain his opposition to Theresa May’s withdrawal agreement. Lawns would not be mown, cars would not be washed and churchwardens would go on strike. Society as we knew it in suburban and rural England would grind to a halt. This was the worst day in the country’s history in the past 200 years, said one man. And that included women getting the vote. The sense of grievance was echoed by the Bruges Group chair, Barry Legg, in his opening remarks. The change of the leaving day from 29 March was a moment of national surrender. Businesses had already had to pulp independence day souvenirs. The waste of mugs, T-shirts and 50p coins was nothing short of a national betrayal. He spat the words out in anger, before turning to kneel and sob gently before a photoshopped portrait of Margaret Thatcher on the screen behind him. The establishment had stitched up the entire country. Parliament and the CBI were to blame. He seemed to forget the TUC was also not in favour of a no-deal Brexit. Still, comfort was on hand in the form of the former junior Brexit minister Suella Braverman, an MP Legg was confident enough to introduce as “one of the brightest stars of the Brexit movement”. It’s a small field. Braverman quickly lived down to expectations by declaring herself to be Brexit’s very own Anders Breivik with a war on the “cultural Marxism” of political correctness. Not a position many people would be willing to adopt, but one that was applauded loudly by this audience. For someone who is apparently well educated, Braverman has always gone to extraordinary lengths to make herself appear extremely dim. A hard-fought campaign at which she genuinely excels. Only the previous day she had insisted the UK could still leave the EU on 29 March even though that was a non-starter under international law. Now she was insistent that 90% of Conservative MPs would vote for no deal if only the Leader in Name Only was brave enough to embrace it. She concluded by affirming she would continue to campaign for Brexit by voting against it. The support act was even more dismal. Something most observers would have reckoned an impossibility. The Tory MP Christopher Chope is best known for blocking attempts to tackle upskirting and female genital mutilation, and only that morning had suggested the best way to reduce knife crime would be for potential victims to get fitter, so they then had the choice of either beating up their assailant or running away. Truly, nothing escapes him. Other than that Lino has always been consistent in her inconsistency. He seemed genuinely bewildered that the prime minister had failed to keep her word on anything. His dullness is his only partially redeeming feature. At least he gives an audience the chance to zone out. Not that the provisionals of the Bruges Group appeared to mind. They were too busy planning insurrection. Their dreams would never die. How could the Conservative party not understand it would remain in power for generations to come if the UK were to leave on World Trade Organization terms, one elderly man in a balaclava inquired. Chope nodded enthusiastically. This was his area of expertise. First we take the Faroes, then we take Fiji. Braverman led the final rousing singsong. We had to leave the EU. Now. Anything else was unthinkable. If we didn’t, the EU would come to rue the day we held European elections and returned 1,000 Nigel Farages to Brussels. She seemed to be a little hazy on the number of MEPs we were actually allocated. Now was the time for loyalty, she insisted. To the ideals of the European Research Group, not to the Conservative party. Rees-Mogg may be a splitter – a Grand Wizard, a Not So True Star – who could be swayed from the path of righteousness, but she would fight on to the very end. Others may weaken, but there was one corner of a British field that would be for ever bonkers.