The Indonesian foreign ministry has summoned the Australian ambassador in Jakarta to express strong condemnation of Australian senator Fraser’s Anning’s controversial response to the Christchurch massacre. In a meeting in the Indonesian capital on Monday, the Indonesian foreign affairs minister, Retno Marsudi, told Australia’s ambassador to Indonesia, Gary Quinlan, that Indonesia strongly denounced the Queensland senator’s comments. Speaking from the world’s largest Muslim-majority nation, foreign ministry spokesman Arrmanatha Nasir said Anning’s statement showed a lack of understanding about Islam and his view of the religion was “very shortsighted”. Acts of terrorism, he said, were not associated with any religion. “The thought conveyed by the Australian senator is inappropriate and does not have a place in the modern world, whether in Australia, Indonesia, or elsewhere,” he said. Hours after a shocking attack on two mosques in the New Zealand city of Christchurch on Friday, which left 50 people dead, Anning issued a statement linking the shootings to immigration. The offensive comments have been widely condemned, including by the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, and by Quinlan. On his official Twitter account, the ambassador posted a series of messages in Indonesian, a translation of Scott Morrison’s words, saying that “Anning’s views had no place in Australia, let alone in the Australian parliament”. Monday’s meeting follows calls from an Indonesian lawmaker, Charles Honoris, to ban Anning from entering Indonesia. “As I condemned the terrorist acts in two mosques in Christchurch, I also strongly condemned the official statement of senator Fraser Anning of Queensland who basically assumed that terrorism against mosques was a price worth paying [by] Muslims and that Islam is an ‘ideology of violence’,” Honoris said. The foreign ministry spokesman said entry permits were granted at the discretion of the government. Anning’s viral comments have been the subject of intense derision from social media users in Indonesia and neighbouring Malaysia, with one meme showing a picture of Anning with a Hilter-esque moustache and a serving of fried rice topped with egg, a local specialty known as nasi goreng, atop his head. Three Indonesians were victims of the brutal attack, with one, 50-year-old Lilik Abdul Hamid, an engineer for Air New Zealand, confirmed dead and two others in hospital. Of three Malaysian victims, two are reportedly in a stable condition while a third underwent an operation today to have bullet fragments removed. Meanwhile Will Connolly or “Egg Boy”, the 17-year-old Australian boy now famous for cracking an egg on top of Anning’s head during a press conference following the attacks, is being hailed as a hero in Indonesia. “Dear egg boy, We thank you greatly for your bravery because you’ve done more than what the Australian government has done about racist senator Anning, bless your soul,” wrote one Twitter user, with the handle Zander Liem, which has since been shared 92,000 times. In Malaysia well-known artist Fahmi Reza offered the internet this tribute, an egg between two fingers with the words: “This eggs beats fascists”. Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day. In New Zealand, the crisis support service Lifeline can be reached on 0800 543 354. In Australia, Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the UK and Irish Republic, contact Samaritans on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.