If there is a racing certainty at the end of Cheltenham week it is that around 9.15 on Saturday night, at a dark and slightly echoey Twickenham, England’s women will be completing one of the most one-sided grand slam triumphs in the 23-year history of the Six Nations. One-horse races are not exactly novel for England. They have won 13 grand slams since 1996 and Saturday’s opponents Scotland are, like their men, used to suffering at Twickenham. Scotland’s 89-0 defeat there in 2001 is their worst and Shade Munro’s team are propping up the Six Nations table again. England are rampant and playing a brand of expansive rugby never seen in the women’s game in Europe. They have scored 198 points in their four games in the Six Nations so far and their 33 tries means they have crossed the opposition line every 10 minutes or so. Italy came to Exeter last weekend as the only other unbeaten side in the competition but their much-improved side were blown away 55-0. Not everyone, though, is enjoying the spectacle and England’s detractors point to the fact the 28 full-time contracts awarded to their leading players at the start of the year makes the playing field less level than it could be. The Rugby Football Union is looking to the 2021 World Cup in New Zealand and has ploughed cash into the 15-a-side women’s game after concentrating on sevens. This decision, allied to the introduction of the Tyrrells club tournament, is helping keep the production line of talent moving. Hannah Botterman, the 19-year-old Saracens prop who gets a chance to start , is just one of a new generation making her mark. “Yes, there is an inevitable consequence in paying the players,” says England’s head coach, Simon Middleton. “We are in a fantastic situation but it comes with a huge amount of accountability. That’s our driving force at the moment and it is a source of pressure. The players may have contracts but these girls have in reality been professionals for three or four years. “From England’s point of view we have a responsibility to grow the game as much as possible. The other teams in the Six Nations are doing their best but I don’t really know how they are being resourced. I agree our dominance is not really good for the Six Nations. It has to be competitive. The other teams are good but they are not competitive in games for long enough. “Our long-term goal is the World Cup. New Zealand and Australia will be dangerous and teams like Canada are making fantastic progress. Clearly the World Cup is our motivation. But there is pressure on us in this tournament. “That’s why last week against Italy was so satisfying. There was a big crowd at Exeter and we wanted to be at our absolute best and entertain them. It was the best we have performed this year. We played well in the first half against France but our goal isn’t to be a 45- to 55-minute team. “What people don’t realise is that we’re still a young squad. We may have 400-odd caps but 250 of them have been shared by four players. The competition for places is so high and by the time the World Cup comes round I would like three or four world-class players in each position.” England are so well stocked in the second row, for example, that Cath O’Donnell, one of their best players this season, has to share a place on the bench with the experienced Marlie Packer, and Vicky Fleetwood returns to take her place in the back row. Abbie Scott, their lock who played with a broken finger against Italy, said: “We’ve played well in parts but as a group we’ve let ourselves down a bit, such as in the second half against France. We’ve left something on the pitch and it has been a little bit frustrating but we are all hungry.” Sarah Hunter, England’s captain who wins her 113th cap this weekend, still has the air of someone who cannot quite believe she is being paid for something she has willingly done for years. “There’s a great atmosphere in the squad but we can’t get complacent and we know there are harder challenges to come,” she said. “When we play New Zealand we may get three chances to score a try and we have to take them.” You suspect that the Red Roses will have more than three chances of crossing the Scottish line on Saturday night. Concerns have been raised about the potentially embarrassing `scenario of England’s women playing a major Test match at a rain-lashed, largely empty Twickenham with few officials from the Rugby Football Union or the Scottish Rugby Union in attendance. Last weekend a record five-figure crowd watched England against Italy in Exeter but the Red Roses’ Six Nations grand slam decider kicks off at 7.30pm, clashing with the men’s formal post-match dinner. “It is one of the issues the game is going to have to wrestle with if it is going to take women’s rugby seriously,” said an RFU source. “In an ideal world we wouldn’t have had a sit-down dinner because we want as many people as possible to watch the women.” Unlike the men’s Six Nations, the women’s tournament does not currently have a title sponsor; only the men’s game, furthermore, will be broadcast to a terrestrial audience on ITV with Sky showing the women’s Test. It also emerged this week the RFU has opted to host a men’s-only HSBC Sevens series event for the next four years rather than introducing a combined men’s and women’s London double-header. Robert Kitson