Donald Tusk has issued a rallying call to the “increasing majority” of British people who want to cancel Brexit and stay in the EU. In a stirring intervention, the European council president has praised those who marched on the streets of London and the millions who are petitioning the government to revoke article 50. Speaking to the European parliament, Tusk reprimanded those who voiced concerns about a potential lengthy extension to article 50 in the event of the Commons rejecting the withdrawal agreement again this week. Tusk said: “Let me make one personal remark to the members of this parliament. Before the European council, I said that we should be open to a long extension if the UK wishes to rethink its Brexit strategy, which would of course mean the UK’s participation in the European parliament elections. And then there were voices saying that this would be harmful or inconvenient to some of you. “Let me be clear: such thinking is unacceptable. You cannot betray the 6 million people who signed the petition to revoke article 50, the 1 million people who marched for a people’s vote, or the increasing majority of people who want to remain in the European Union.” To heckling from Ukip MEPs, Tusk went on: “They may feel that they are not sufficiently represented by the UK parliament, but they must feel that they are represented by you in this chamber. Because they are Europeans.” The former Ukip leader Nigel Farage responded to Tusk by describing him as “deluded” and claiming that a second referendum would deliver a larger majority for leave. Initial suggestions that 1 million people marched last weekend in favour of remaining in the EU have been questioned in recent days. In a pantomime moment, Farage turned to those sat behind him to ask whether they really wanted him to return as an MEP. He ended his speech to the parliament by appealing to the EU’s leaders to “get the British out”. Later in the debate, Tusk hit back, saying: “Mr Farage, you have presented passionate arguments against a second referendum. But the truth is that the second referendum took place in 2016 because the first one took place in 1975. And then a vast majority of the British public decided that the place of the UK was in the European Economic Community. “No, it was you who thought three years ago that it was possible to organise a referendum to invalidate the previous one. Then please be consistent also today.” Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator, also spoke, saying that “no one is trying to steal Brexit from you, no one is trying to undo the vote of the British people”, but that the UK would have to bear the consequences of its decisions. He said the EU’s leaders last week had allowed an extension of article 50 until 12 April to “open the possibility to the UK to shoulder its responsibility – it is now over to this country to shoulder that responsibility”. Tusk’s comments came as the British government emailed the 5.8 million people who have signed a UK parliament petition seeking the revocation of article 50. The email informed signatories that “this government will not revoke article 50”. It went on: “Revoking article 50 would break the promises made by government to the British people, disrespect the clear instruction from a democratic vote, and in turn reduce confidence in our democracy.” MPs are set to take part in indicative votes later on Wednesday after  they voted to seize control of the parliamentary timetable to allow the House of Commons to explore whether there could be support for alternatives to Theresa May’s twice-defeated deal. MPs will be offered a series of options on a paper ballot and be given the opportunity to choose as many as they want to support. Another set of votes is likely to be held next Monday to continue the process of whittling down options, though it is probable May will have another go at winning a majority for her deal in the interim. The European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, speaking after Tusk about Tuesday’s summit where discussions were also held over EU relations with China, told MEPs he awaited the Commons decision with interest. “The debate on China was far less complicated than the debate on the UK and I was saying to some of you that if I was to compare Great Britain to a sphinx, the sphinx would be an open book by comparison,” Juncker said. “Let’s see how that book speaks over the next week or so.” It was noted by several MEPs that there were no Conservative party speakers in the debate. Guy Verhofstadt, the European parliament’s Brexit coordinator, mocked Farage for failing to stay on the Leave Means Leave march he had organised from the north of England to London. “I’m surprised to see you here, Mr Farage,” Verhofstadt said. “I thought you were marching 200 miles in the leave campaign? How many did you do? Two miles? You remind me more and more of Field Marshal Haig in Blackadder, sitting safely in his London office – you in Strasbourg – while your people are walking in the cold and the rain. “But let me recall the words of Sir Winston Churchill … ‘Success is the ability to go from one failure to another with no loss of enthusiasm’. “He could be talking about House of Commons and Prime Minister May today. This afternoon the house will have – if, of course, the Speaker allows – no less than 16 options for a Brexit on the table. So there is certainly no loss of enthusiasm.” Barnier warned the British government that the Irish backstop, under which Northern Ireland would stay in the single market and the customs union, would continue to form the basis of the EU’s policy to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland even in the event of a no-deal Brexit. “In all scenarios, the Good Friday agreement will continue to apply,” he said, describing it as the “line to follow”. “The UK will remain a co-guarantor of that agreement and uphold it in spirit and letter … There will be no hard border. “We have to respect the single market, our single market, and it is out of respect for the British internal market. There will have to be checks somewhere. We must intelligently find a solution that limits the damage caused by this decision and do that as soon as possible.”