DON’T say his name. Don’t share the livestreamed video of the killings, don’t read that rambling adolescent nonsense of a manifesto, don’t fill newspaper front pages with stories about his childhood. Ever since news broke of the terror attack on two Christchurch mosques, there have been calls to deny the suspect attention in favour of focusing on victims and survivors – and now New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has put her moral authority behind them. She will not, she said in parliament, publicly use his name: “He is a terrorist. He is a criminal. He is an extremist. But he will, when I speak, be nameless.” Obviously, there is a limit to what such a decision can realistically achieve. Everything about the manifesto, with its jarring in-jokes and knowing winks to meme culture, suggests that its writer and potential audience couldn’t care less what some liberal woman politician says. An online subculture of angry inadequates flooded the internet with repeated uploads of that gruesome film. At times, a new upload was being posted every second to YouTube, while Facebook took down 1.5m of them in the first day. It is easy to look at those numbers and despair; to feel that mainstream culture is increasingly powerless against, and irrelevant to, the sort of people who would obsessively share a film of fellow humans dying. Yet to strip a man of his identity against his will can be a powerful thing, all the more so given that it’s more usually done to women. The Canadian film about sex trafficking She Has a Name took its title from a grassroots campaign against the dehumanising of victims (the story goes that it originally came from an exchange between a pimp and a customer – when the man asked the name of the girl he was buying, the answer was: “She doesn’t have a name. She is whatever you want her to be.”) We recognise it as grossly belittling, too, when a murder victim is reduced to an afterthought in the coverage of her own death, which is why headlines (and depressingly sometimes whole articles) about the Oscar Pistorius murder trial caused such offence when they failed to name his dead girlfriend, Reeva Steenkamp. The hashtag #SayHerName is used to draw attention to black female victims of police brutality precisely because giving someone a name and a face creates an emotional connection to them. For Ardern to withdraw that privilege from the man about to go on trial in New Zealand may be a symbolic gesture, but it’s not an entirely empty one. It shouldn’t be confused with refusing to examine how the suspect may have been radicalised, what clues there may have been in his past behaviour or what lessons could be learned to prevent future tragedies. That’s serious, painstaking work that will go on regardless of whether two words are uttered in public or not. What Ardern has done differs, too, from Margaret Thatcher’s attempt to deny some republican and loyalist groups the oxygen of publicity by banning the broadcasting of figures associated with them during the Troubles. There is no compulsion here. Ardern didn’t decree that the media must follow her example, although inevitably her decision puts some moral pressure on the New Zealand press in particular. But it should prompt journalists the world over to reflect carefully on how they cover a trial the defendant may hope to turn into a self-aggrandising circus. The principle of open justice means it would be wrong for the alleged perpetrator of a crime not to be named the minute his identity is known. It is the legitimate work of journalists, too, to report on trials without fear of censorship and to investigate the background to a crime. Sometimes terrorists look more powerful hidden behind a balaclava than they might do if you ripped the mask off, exposing the often pathetic reality behind a carefully cultivated myth. It is also our job, however, to tell complex stories in a way that remains faithful to the facts but avoids unnecessarily feeding the propaganda beast. That’s a difficult editorial balancing act but no different from the ethical considerations raised by Islamic State, whose grotesque beheading videos were calculated to expand their sphere of political and emotional influence beyond their limited physical territory. Ardern has chosen her own way of cutting the suspect down to size. Now what about the rest of us? • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist