Liverpool Alisson Looked nervous and uncertain from the start, especially with his kicking. Better with his handling. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold Combined an effective attacking display with key challenges on Lucas and Alli inside his area. 7 Joël Matip Not always tidy but alert to Spurs’ attacking intentions and made several important interceptions. 7 Virgil van Dijk Contained Kane for the most part and steered Sissoko away from Son brilliantly. Dangerous at set pieces. 8 Andy Robertson Another superb assist and dominant display, despite being away with Scotland in the build-up. 8 Georginio Wijnaldum Far from his best in what was a scrappy midfield display. Careless on the ball and second best in the tackle. 5 Jordan Henderson Loose in possession, like his fellow midfielders, although his cross-field ball did lead to the opener. 6 James Milner Switched the play accurately and regularly to disturb Spurs’ shape. Offered more creatively, too. 6 Mohamed Salah An eighth game without a goal and quiet in all honesty but will care not a jot after his vital contribution at the death. 6 Roberto Firmino Dispatched his only chance expertly. His touch and movement kept the Spurs defence on edge. 7 Sadio Mané Less effective than of late. Kept Trippier occupied but no real opportunity to threaten or get behind the Spurs defence. 6 Subs Divock Origi (for Henderson 77) 6, Fabinho (for Milner 77) 6, Dejan Lovren (for Salah 90) 5 Tottenham Hugo Lloris Undercooked clearance for the first goal and weak handling for the second. Cost his team dearly. 4 Toby Alderweireld Spurs’ most solid defender until inadvertently deciding the outcome, although little he could do about that. 7 Davinson Sánchez Strong in the air but Firmino was his man and he lost him when Liverpool struck for their first goal. 6 Jan Vertonghen Could also have done more to prevent the breakthrough. Extremely polished on the ball, however. 7 Kieran Trippier Given a hard time by Mané and Robertson. Not as comfortable at wing-back but did well for equaliser. 6 Christian Eriksen Influence grew as game wore on. Had been a performance of nice rather than telling ideas until Lucas’s goal. 7 Moussa Sissoko Disciplined and intelligent in the holding role yet wasted a glorious chance to turn the game late on. 7 Dele Alli Sacrificed the creative side of his game to sit deeper than usual in central midfield. On the margins. 6 Danny Rose Impressed as a wing-back, unlike Trippier, with his pace and sharp passing causing problems. 8 Harry Kane Showed great awareness and precision with the free-kick that produced the equaliser but was otherwise anonymous. 6 Lucas Moura Neat control and direct running unsettled Liverpool. Hesitant inside the area, however, with the exception of his goal. 7 Subs Son Heung-min (for Sánchez 69) 7, Ben Davies (for Lucas 82) 6, Fernando Llorente (for Eriksen 90) 5