Theresa May was greeted by a smattering of applause as she stood before her Conservative MPs to convince them that “this is the day” to vote for her Brexit deal in the interests of the party and the country. But as she spoke, Eurosceptic MPs were poring over bombshell legal advice from Geoffrey Cox, the attorney general, in growing horror. It showed he had returned from Brussels negotiations unable to say the Irish backstop was temporary – and therefore could bind the UK into a permanent customs union. May, looking weary and suffering a heavy cold, struggled to command the room. A string of supportive MPs left to brief reporters unconvincingly that the tide was turning among Conservative colleagues. “I think she will win tonight,” Amber Rudd, the work and pensions secretary, insisted. Nadhim Zahawi, a Brexit-supporting minister, said “many” MPs had stood up to tell the prime minister they would now support her deal but struggled to name a single one. George Freeman claimed there was a “big migration of wildebeests” towards the deal and a “collective sound of pennies dropping”. However, even those standing up to say their minds were changed were damning in their praise. Mark Pritchard said he had been expecting a “rabbit out of the hat” but it turned out to be a “hamster” – only just enough to persuade him to back the deal. May left the room looking unsure of herself. Asked if she had done enough to bring in the votes, she grimaced, saying: “Sufficient.” Within minutes, it started to become clear that the European Research Group and Democratic Unionist party were turning against the EU concessions held up by May as legally binding, as they were unable to stomach Cox’s unchanged legal advice. Hours earlier, it had looked as if May had got almost enough. But Cox gave an early hint that he would not be pressed into changing his mind under duress from No 10. In response to a suggestion that he would, he simply tweeted: “Bollocks.” Leaving the meeting with May, Mark Francois, a vocal member of the ERG, set the tone as he pronounced he “found the prime minister’s answers wholly unconvincing”. Another firm Eurosceptic, Andrew Bridgen, called the mood among his colleagues uncooperative. “There is a feeling that the prime minister has got a short shelf life and yet is determined to impose a withdrawal agreement so onerous it will trap and restrict whoever is the prime minister who negotiates the next phase,” he said. “The short-term political expediency is to vote it through but in the long term I think it would cause a great deal of pain.” From May’s meeting in Portcullis House, MPs headed for the House of Commons, where Cox was due to set out his view that the deal should be backed despite his legal reservations about the permanent nature of the backstop. Sources close to the DUP began briefing furiously that they were not likely to support the deal. At the same time, the leader of the ERG, Jacob Rees-Mogg, had been skewering the Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay, in a committee hearing: “But the ability to ask is not the same as the ability to leave, is it?” Before long, the ERG’s “star chamber” of lawyers said: “In the light of our own legal analysis and others we do not recommend accepting the government’s motion today.” A trickle of MPs began to declare they had changed their minds on May’s deal with little enthusiasm, simply pointing out that it was better than something worse. Zac Goldsmith said the deal “remained appalling” but he was considering backing it anyway. With the ERG standing firm, anger exploded into the open among some of the deal’s supporters. Charles Walker, a vice-chair of the 1922 Committee of backbenchers, openly called for a general election if the deal were not passed. “She has to get a new mandate for the sake of the country. Needs must when the devil drives. We cannot go on trying to govern like this,” he told the BBC’s World At One. The prime minister herself opened the afternoon’s debate on her Brexit deal at 2pm, watched by her husband, Philip, from the Commons gallery. Several MPs passed her throat sweets as she spoke but the Tory benches were only half full behind her. Never a bunch to resile from drama, the ERG gave the prime minister a chink of light by calling a meeting at 5pm to make their final decision on how to vote. The room off the ancient Westminster Hall was packed with hardline Brexiters including Sir Bill Cash, David Davis, Iain Duncan Smith, Dominic Raab and Baker. Boris Johnson, who led the Vote Leave campaign, was also present after setting the tone of the ERG response by telling the Commons that the deal “sews an apron of fig leaves that does nothing to disguise the embarrassment of the UK”. He added: “This deal has reached the end of the road.” When the meeting broke up after 90 minutes, senior members invited journalists and cameras inside to brief them that the clear majority of the group were planning to sink May’s deal. The Tory MP Chris Green explained the thinking. “Parliament can’t become the executive. We’ve already had a vote and so the law is we leave on the 29th. The question is how we leave on the best possible terms. It’s only a few days away but there is still plenty of time to come up with a significantly better deal. It’s not just about the 17.4 million people but all the people who participated in that democratic process.” It was clear the ERG still believed a no-deal Brexit was a serious option to be pursued; many argued that parliament would not be able to stop it because there was no time for more legislation. With most of the Eurosceptics standing firm, MPs filed into the Commons to make their decision at 7pm – voting on a single motion with no amendments. After the prime minister crashed to a 149-vote defeat, she stood up once again with a faltering voice to throw the ball into parliament’s court. “Does the house wish to revoke article 50? Does it want to hold a second referendum? Or does it want to leave with a deal but not this deal? “These are unenviable choices, but thanks to the decision the house has made this evening they must now be faced.”