With Robert Mueller’s report finally submitted, the US faces fundamental questions. Could the report’s contents change the course of American history? Will we soon see a president’s downfall? Is Robert Mueller relaxing poolside with a cocktail and a cigar? Given the momentousness of the occasion, Twitterwas naturally on hand to make light of the situation. Many explored what the special counsel might do next, ranging from giving his apartment a much-needed cleaning to watching cat videos. God it must feel so good for Mueller to close all those browser tabs. Mueller’s gonna dust the whole apartment and then iron a few things because he’s really been meaning to do that. https://t.co/JiajKE8Kzp #Muellersgonna sit down at his new iMac and suddenly realize that his emails have really been piling up and needs to unsubscribe to Groupon and all of its affiliates- could take days https://t.co/DPp0ZCvHzw Other commentators weighed in on what might be in the report and what it meant for the president. can't wait to finally find out if trump is bad Live footage of Don Jr. right now. pic.twitter.com/Z2Bgwho3GI If you stay after the credits of @UsMovie Nick Fury comes out and holds his phone up to camera and you can read the Mueller Report via Notes App I have read the Mueller report and it turns out in 2016 Lori Loughlin paid $600 on Craigslist for her daughter to be elected president of the United States. FROM: Mueller, RobertTO: Barr, WilliamSUBJECT: Final reportHey - attaching report. Thanks. ----FROM: Mueller, RobertTO: Barr, WilliamSUBJECT: Re: Final report 📎Oops sorry. Actually attaching this time. Lol📄 As long as everyone else is opining on something they haven’t seen: My sources tell me Mueller got to the bottom of who put the bomp in the bomp bah bomp bah bomp. Also, who put the ram in the rama lama ding dong. So Mueller finally said he wanted to tell us something, and he pops open this little box — and it’s a friendship bracelet. He wants to be friends. No hard feelings. He will always love us, in a way. But he wants to be friends. https://t.co/lDhmBBxgBI I wonder if the Mueller report will have anything REALLY explosive in it, like Donald Trump standing in front of reporters and asking Russia to hack Hillary Clinton's emails But ultimately, the filing raises more questions than it answers. So the report has been filed but we won't know what's in it until the attorney general takes a look. You might say it's...em-Barr-goed.