Lewis Hamilton took victory at the Bahrain Grand Prix, his first of the season, but it was a win the British driver largely inherited after a heartbreaking mechanical problem for Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc. The Ferrari driver had a marvellous run under the floodlights of the Sakhir Circuit from pole and looked on course to win until an energy recovery system failure severely curtailed his pace. He finished third. Hamilton’s Mercedes teammate, Valtteri Bottas, was second while Sebastian Vettel could manage only fifth after a spin late in the race. Red Bull’s Max Verstappen was fourth. Leclerc took the extra point for the fastest lap, and Hamilton’s win puts him just one point behind Bottas who leads the world championship. Ferrari looked strong across the meeting and Leclerc had done everything required for the 21-year-old to take his debut win until Ferrari’s power unit proved fallible. Hamilton, up against it all weekend, skilfully ensured he remained in the mix throughout and drove a very strong race, including pressuring Vettel into an error. It had been a tense and at times dramatic encounter and Hamilton expressed his sympathy for Leclerc. “It was extremely unfortunate for Charles,” he said. “We have a lot of work to do.” This is Hamilton’s 74th career victory and the third time he has won the Bahrain Grand Prix, having won for Mercedes in 2014 and 2015.He was disappointed with his second place to Bottas at the opening round in Australia, when he lost the lead to the Finn off the start and then suffered damage to the floor of his car. Mercedes had been outpaced by Ferrari across practice and qualifying, with Hamilton noting his team were lacking straightline speed to the Scuderia in particular. He was pleased to come within three-hundredths of Vettel’s time in qualifying and had been optimistic that he could challenge in race pace, but he and Mercedes know that this was an unlikely win. The opening laps feature some furious vying for position. Vettel made a lightning start to jump Leclerc who was slow off the line into the first corner, and the Monegasque, struggling for grip, also fell to Bottas who had already passed Hamilton and made it to second. The Finn locked up on lap two, however, lost the place to Leclerc and Hamilton promptly came back at his team-mate to retake third. With the front runners settled the Ferraris opened up a two-second gap to Hamilton but Leclerc was in no mood to play second fiddle to Vettel. Having chased the German down, he had found the grip he needed and swept past to retake the lead on lap six. Vettel fought back but Leclerc held his nerve and the place. It was a marvellous display of confidence and commitment from the young driver. Hamilton was able to stay with them, holding his gap to the front to three seconds and closing hard on Vettel. Leclerc and Hamilton pitted on lap 14, with Hamilton opting for the soft rubber and committing to a two-stop, while Leclerc took the medium, retaining the faint possibility of making it a one-stop race. Vettel pitted one lap later for the medium tyre but Hamilton on fresher rubber had made the most of the undercut and when Vettel emerged the British driver had taken second place. The differing strategies left the race intriguingly poised but Hamilton was soon struggling with a lack of grip due to rear tyre wear and was chased down by Vettel who passed him with ease on lap 23. In front Leclerc was in command, stretching his lead to eight seconds by the halfway mark. Ferrari appeared in control. With the decision to take the soft rubber having not paid off Hamilton made his second stop on lap 35 to take the medium tyre. Vettel followed him a lap later and then Leclerc. With the Mercedes working the medium rubber far better, Hamilton went at Vettel round the outside of turn four and Vettel, attempting to defend, lost the rear and spun. It damaged his tyres and front wing which subsequently came off and he was forced to pit, dropping down the field. It appeared to be an unforced error, similar to the ones that were so costly last season. The drama was far from over, however, when Leclerc, with the win seemingly in his hands, lost his turbo energy recovery on lap 46 and was easily caught and passed by Hamilton on lap 48, from where he went on to take the flag under a late safety car. Lando Norris was an excellent sixth for McLaren in front of Kimi Raikkonen’s Alfa Romeo. Pierre Gasly in the Red Bull was in eighth, with Toro Rosso’s Alexander Albon also impressive in ninth. Racing Point’s Sergio Pérez was 10th.