There have been at least 35 suicides of Indigenous people this year – in just 12 weeks – and three were children only 12 years old. Eight have been in the past week, according to the National Indigenous Critical Response Service, a federally funded service that works closely with bereaved families. “This year, almost half of Australia’s child suicides have been of First Nations children,” suicide prevention campaigner Gerry Georgatos told Guardian Australia, “and of child suicides aged 14 years and less, nearly 90% this year have been First Nations children. “It is reprehensible that the nation sits idly by. “It is a heart-breaking tragedy across the continent. “It is an indictment of this nation, moral and political abominations. “Nearly all First Nations suicides are of people living below the poverty line. Above the poverty line there’s few First Nations people taking their lives and, in terms of rates of suicides above the poverty line, First Nations suicide rates are much less than non-Indigenous. The more crushing the poverty for First Nations people the higher the suicide rates.” In response to the WA coroner’s report on youth suicide, the federal government has funded community-driven action plans to prevent suicide across the Kimberley.The trial is running in seven communities, including Kununurra, Balgo, Wyndham, Halls Creek and Broome.Each community receives up to $130,000 to help roll out its action plan which reflects and responds to local issues.Four of the plans are for cultural camps on-country involving high-risk groups.The federal Indigenous health minister, Ken Wyatt, said the Kimberley trial was one of 12 across the nation, with total funding of $48m. On Wednesday, three of the country’s top medical organisations called on the federal government to take urgent action to stop the “unspeakable tragedy” of Indigenous youth suicide, following another four Indigenous people taking their own lives in Queensland last week, and in the wake of a major report into child suicides in Western Australia. The Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP), the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP) and the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (Naccho) want an “immediate investment in Aboriginal-led mental health and wellbeing services needed to stop child deaths”. “We are calling on the prime minister to implement a co-ordinated crisis response to urgently scale up Aboriginal-led mental health services before more young lives are tragically lost,” the joint statement said. RACP spokesman Dr Mick Creati said: “The unspeakable child suicide tragedy that has been unfolding requires a national response and the attention of the prime minister. “Unless we see an urgent boost to investment in Aboriginal-led mental health services, then the deaths will continue.” • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org