Should you still listen to Michael Jackson? In the days following the broadcast of Leaving Neverland, a four-hour documentary uncovering detailed allegations of child sexual abuse against Jackson, the question was posed repeatedly online. For diehard fans, however, it seems the answer is very much yes. Crowds queuing outside London’s Lyric theatre for Thriller Live, the Jackson musical now in its 11th record-breaking year, were upbeat the day after Channel 4 aired the first part of the film by director Dan Reed. Leaving Neverland documents in disturbing detail the stories of James Safechuck and Wade Robson and their relationships with Jackson. “People will receive the documentary based on what they’ve always believed,” said Holly, 54, a black American who called herself “an admirer rather than a fan”. Holly was in town on business and was joined by her husband. They had turned up to the West End on the off-chance that tickets might still be available; the evening’s two-hour-and-45-minute performance eventually sold out. “Some people who think [the accusations] were over-exaggerated or false will continue to believe that,” she said. So what did she believe? “I think he was amazing and a genius, but he had issues. He had a mental illness. It is very difficult to be that famous, that wealthy, that adored, exposed and praised as Michael Jackson was from since he was a tiny child and to be normal,” she said. Then again, she added with a shrug, “he had some weird, quirky, innate desires that he then fulfilled.” Such a view may be profoundly difficult to understand for many who heard the allegations detailed by Safechuck and Robson in Reed’s four-hour opus: accusations that they were groomed by the singer as children, frequently separated from their parents and sexually abused for years. For many, any attitude that shrugs off Jackson’s behaviour as “quirky” is to sweep shocking allegations of child abuse under the carpet. Some may feel uneasy even about appreciating Jackson’s music. But most of those outside the Lyric last week remained determined to enjoy the show. Several groups of German tourists joined the queue. One couple, Karl and Sofie, had arrived from Düsseldorf and were ecstatic. “I am very excited. People are saying bad things about him, but we love the songs,” said Sofie, 20, who had bought the tickets as a birthday gift. Karl, 23, was unfazed by the battle for Jackson’s legacy. “We grew up knowing Michael was the biggest pop star.” Having paid upwards of £35 each, most fans were keen to have a good time. Jolene, studying at Queen Mary University of London, had bought her tickets that day, despite watching the documentary the night before.“I don’t care too much about his personal life or that news,” she said. “I don’t think that influenced his music. My memories around him are good.” The estate of Michael Jackson, which strongly denies the accusations, engaged in a furious PR battle all week, including advertising on London buses with a campaign sloganed: “Facts don’t lie, people do.” Still, Anne Hudson, from London, admitted performing mental gymnastics to separate Jackson’s work from the most damaging allegations levelled against him. “I wouldn’t be surprised if it was true, but [Thriller Live] was made because of his music, not his personal life. This music is part of history now, there will always be artists influenced by him. He made so much of music what it is today.” The Lyric theatre declined to comment on the future of the show, but in a statement on Facebook, Adrian Grant, the creator of Thriller Live, insisted Leaving Neverland was part of a smear campaign. “I have been advised by some not to get involved with this debate,” he wrote. “But I cannot do that. It would be as morally wrong for me to remain silent as it is for the media to convict Michael without a fair trial or evidence.” In the UK charts, Jackson’s Number Ones album climbed 44 places in the past week to reach number 43, while The Essential Michael Jackson sat at number 79. Mother and daughter superfans Sue and Leyla Demirel were dressed in Thriller bomber jackets and dismissed any accusations made against their idol. They had watched the documentary the night before. “I just don’t think Michael was capable of doing something like that,” said Sue. “He was just very childlike and he spent his time playing with children because he was the boy who never grew up, that’s why he was nicknamed Peter Pan.” “Personally, I think that if the accusers’ story was more solid, I’d believe it more, but they keep changing,” said Leyla, who was seeing Thriller Live for the 34th time. Asked where she stood on the #MeToo movement, Leyla was supportive. “I’m 100% pro any form of allegations where people come forward, it’s really important and it’s great that people are speaking up,” she said. Did she not see a contradiction in her support for Jackson?” “If it was genuine, their parents would have said something. The two accusers defended him when he was alive and they are known to have lied in the past,” she said.