It’s a day that should unsettle all dictators and autocrats. “Beware the Ides of March,” said William Shakespeare’s soothsayer. Alas, Julius Caesar did not, and was brutally dispatched on this day 2,063 years ago, perhaps the first dictator in history to be assassinated. For the rest of us however, the Ides of March is a good augury. For when dictatorships give way to democracies, people tend to get healthier. That much was established by a study of 170 countries published this week which found that people living in countries that transitioned to democracy over the past 50 years lived longer and healthier than those in autocracies, were less prone to a range of diseases such as cancer and cirrhosis – and even less likely to die in car crashes. “We estimate that, between 1994 and 2014, the increases in democratic experience resulted in 16m fewer deaths from cardiovascular disease globally,” said the study’s lead researcher Thomas Bollyky. It is a shot in the arm for democracy, which in case you had not noticed is going through a rough patch. Division, disenchantment, skulduggery … rich nations seem to be experiencing a slump in morale the likes of which we have not seen since the 1970s. Perhaps a shorter working week is the answer (even if it was not back then). The Upside has spent some time investigating companies adopting new four-day-week working patterns. Few seem to have a bad word to say about it, as my colleague, the Guardian’s social affairs correspondent Robert Booth, found out. It could be good for businesses, staff, customers, profits, morale, families, health and even the environment. What’s not to like? Otherwise we were intrigued by proposals for progressive reform of income tax in the UK, and we salute Berlin’s plan to offer women cheaper public transport next Monday to draw attention to the gender pay gap. We were also impressed by the people really taking a stand to do something about impending environmental armageddon. (Warning: this piece will make you want to save the planet.) Lots of things this week: the US cities that are having some success in tackling homelessness; the Japanese pensioners who have signed up for a “second life”; and the downbeat Russian video game that sticks you in a dark, quiet, suburban tower block with no obvious plot or mission. But above all, this epic from Fergal Keane on the whisper of hope in Africa that bottom-up youth-driven movements will change the continent’s disastrous “strongman” leadership model. What a refreshing series of positive stories you give to Guardian readers! They counter the exclusivity axiom “if it bleeds, it reads” expressed in North American journalist circles. In the early 1990s I was a Canadian delegate to a development conference in Nairobi. I had brought along copies of Against All Odds, a book of stories on what communities in various African countries have achieved on their own – against great odds. Delegates were disappointed that there were not enough copies for every person; they were excited about these examples of community development which could be modified and applied in other communities. My suggestion is to take the best of the upside stories and publish them in a book. I am sure non-governmental organisations would welcome them and distribute them to others. Volume 2 and 3 might even follow. Upside superfan Richard MacBride, from Ontario, by email We are all part-timers … Participant in Guardian Live event on the 4-day week On the streets of towns and cities in 100 countries, where the next generation sent a very clear message to their elders about climate change. Also in a certain European capital, ranked the best for quality of life for the 10th year in a row. If you have a thought, comment, criticism or suggestion for story ideas or subjects, please email us at theupside@theguardian.com. We generally try to reply to all emails as long as they are concise and interesting.