My father was a railway engineer and got a good job in India, so although I was born in Yorkshire I spent the first eight years of my life out there. But Yorkshire really formed my character. I get straight to the point and say what I feel. I can’t help it, it’s genetic. That’s my excuse anyway. I was sent back home to go to boarding school. I hated it – and that left me feeling disenfranchised most of my life, as if I didn’t belong anywhere. I might as well have said I wanted to go on the game when I told the headmistress I wanted to be an actress. When I joined the RSC I was, literally, a spear-carrier. I had a walk-on part and watched the likes of Dame Edith Evans and Laurence Olivier who were in the company. What a training. When I appeared nude in a play on Broadway in the 70s, a nasty little critic said I was built like a brick mausoleum Becoming a sex symbol overnight [in The Avengers] shocked me. I didn’t know how to handle it and I kept all the unopened fan mail in the boot of my car because I didn’t know how to respond and thought it was rude to throw it away. Then my mother became my secretary and replied to the really inappropriate ones saying: “My daughter’s far too old for you. Go take a cold shower!” Not one woman in the industry supported me when I demanded more money after finding out the cameraman on The Avengers was paid a lot more than me. Neither did Patrick [Macnee, Rigg’s co-star], though I never held it against him, I adored him. But I was painted as this mercenary creature by the press when all I wanted was equality. It’s so depressing that we are still talking about the gender pay gap. Yes I have a dark side, doesn’t everyone? I’ve played a lot of evil, ball-breaking women. And, if you’re honest, you’ll just drag up from the depths all the times you’ve hated or felt passionately about something and play it. I turned 80 last year when I was playing Mrs Higgins in My Fair Lady on Broadway. I gave a huge party and invented my own cocktail called Diana’s Dynamite – Prosecco with Cointreau – which got everyone hammered. When I appeared nude in a play on Broadway in the early 70s, a nasty little critic said I was built like a brick mausoleum with insufficient flying buttresses. He should have seen me after the menopause, there was no shortfall then! It was devastating at the time. It wasn’t my decision to have Lady Olenna killed off in Game of Thrones. I’d love to have stayed on. Thank God I didn’t die on a toilet like Charles Dance’s character. Dame Diana Rigg will receive the Variety Icon Award at Canneseries on 5 April