In the first line of Abdulaziz Bouteflika’s letter to the nation on Monday night, the Algerian president said the country was living through a sensitive stage of its history. On this, at least he and his compatriots are agreed. The 82-year-old politician, who has had a series of strokes that have left him in poor health, has been in power since 1999. The announcement thathe would not be seeking a further five-year term caused widespread celebration. This was the principal demand of the hundreds of thousands – possibly millions – who marched peacefully through cities and towns across Algeria on Friday in protests on a scale not seen for decades. But joy gave way to doubt as the president’s statement was scrutinised more carefully. It might have been full of fine words about the need for reform, a new generation and the voices of women and young people, but did it really guarantee greater freedoms? Or had Bouteflika, a master of political feint, pulled off a deft manoeuvre to allow himself more time to reinforce the repressive, corrupt and opaque system before he finally goes? And though Bouteflika cancelled elections scheduled for 18 April, he gave no indication of whether he would step down when his mandate expires next month. This was described as “the last ruse of Bouteflika” by the influential daily newspaper El Watan. Many analysts have pointed out that Bouteflika does not have a constitutional right to stay on, as he apparently intends to do, past the end of his mandate. Four of Bouteflika’s long-ruling counterparts – in Tunisia, Libya, Yemen and Egypt – were all ousted following the 2011 Arab spring uprisings. Bouteflika, who came to power in the aftermath of Algeria’s 1954-62 independence war against France, has promised “deep reforms”. These will be thrashed out at “an inclusive and independent national conference” to involve “the largest possible and most representative participation of the Algerian society”. The conference will lead to a “transformation of our nation state”, and fix the date of the next polls, the president said. This is all too distant and too vague for many Algerians, especially the young, who are seeking real change to an ossified political system dominated by opaque cliques of officials, businessmen and politicians amid soaring unemployment, widespread corruption and a chronic shortage of accommodation. The departure of the unpopular prime minister, Ahmed Ouyahia, is not likely to satisfy protesters either. His replacement is Noureddine Bedoui, the high-profile 59-year-old interior minister. A “pure technocrat”, Bedoui is one of the few senior officials who use social media, according to Jeune Afrique magazine, and is a friend of Nacer Bouteflika, the president’s brother. If a victory has undoubtedly been won, the crisis is far from over and the threat of real instability remains, commentators say. Abdelaziz Rahabi, a former diplomat and minister, said Bouteflika’s determination to cling to power was pushing Algeria towards the unknown. Several hundred students protested on Tuesday, while many more are likely to take to the streets on Friday. The size of those crowds will be watched closely by observers trying to divine the future of a vast and strategically important African and Mediterranean state. Others are looking to the past, and taking a more sanguine view. Kader Abderrahim, a Paris-based expert on the politics of Algeria and the region, told France Culture radio that if in 1962 Algeria had experienced independence, history would remember that in 2019 the country had found its freedom.