Before I began writing this column, there were several waste ingredients, odds and ends, that I’d have put in the compost bin. But I’ve since discovered that coffee grinds are delicious in brownies, beer dregs create the best batter and that aquafaba arguably makes better mayonnaise than eggs. I always thought that stale crisps were goners, too, but oh how wrong I was: with a little culinary alchemy, even they can be turned into something delectable. Pop them in an oven for five or so minutes at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4/350F/ until their crunch returns, then crush into tiny pieces and use like breadcrumbs – on top of a macaroni cheese, say. Or take a tip from chef Ferran Adrià, godfather of modern fine dining, and use them in a tortilla, cutting the workload in half while producing the most perfect dish. This is a really fun and quick way to make a Spanish tortilla, transforming stale crisps into a delicious lunch or snack. These quantities are to serve one, so multiply by the quantity of crisps available or the portions you’d like to serve. ½ onion, peeled and finely choppedVirgin or light olive oil, for frying1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed60g old crisps3 eggs, beaten Fry the onion in a small frying pan with a dash of oil over a medium heat for 10 minutes, or until caramelised. Add the garlic and fry for another two minutes, then tip into a bowl with the stale crisps and eggs, and mix together. Re-heat the frying pan with a good splash of oil. When it’s hot, pour the mixture into the pan – be careful, because it may spit; as the mixture enters the pan, swivel it from side to side, so the egg doesn’t stick. You should see the egg moving independently from the pan itself. Turn the heat down low, to stop it burning, and cook for four to five minutes. Put your finger in the middle and feel where the egg is cooked – when it is cooked a quarter of the way through, it’s ready to turn. Put a plate on top of the pan then carefully flip over the pan, turning the tortilla on to the plate. Return the pan to the heat. Scrape off any bits that may have stuck and add a little more oil. When hot, slide the tortilla back into the pan raw side down, again shaking the pan from side to side to make sure it doesn’t stick. Turn the heat down low and, using a wooden spoon tuck, the rough edges underneath to make them rounded. Cook for a further three to five minutes, until cooked but still a little soft in the centre, then serve.