New Zealand police have confirmed there have been multiple fatalities and four people are in custody, three men and one woman, after shootings at two mosques in Christchurch on Friday. The country’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said it was “one of New Zealand’s darkest days”. Police have not confirmed how many people were killed in the attack, but confirmed that a number of IEDs or improvised explosive devices were also found attached to cars in the city. “This speaks to the seriousness of what occurred,” said New Zealand’s police commissioner Mike Bush. He confirmed devices had been made safe. The deaths occured at Al Noor mosque on Dean’s Road and the Linwood Masjid on Linwood Avenue, police said. The gunman entered the mosque in central Christchurch and opened fire at 1.40pm local time. In a statement just after 4pm local time, the police said Christchurch was in lockdown and urged people to stay indoors. A Christchurch hospital spokesman said some shooting victims were being treated at the emergency department but he could not provide numbers, because the hospital was in lockdown. The mayor of Christchurch Lianne Dalziel said the city was in shock: “This has come as a bolt from the blue ... It just feels like it’s not what would happen in a place like New Zealand.” Ardern said many of those directly affected by this shooting might be migrants to New Zealand. “They have chosen to make New Zealand their home, and it is their home. They are us,” she told reporters. “The person who has perpetuated this violence against us is not. They have no place in New Zealand.” Members of the Bangladesh cricket team, who were outside the Masjid Al Noor when the shootings occurred, escaped unhurt. The team was due to play the final Test match of their NZ tour in Christchurch on Saturday. The game has now been cancelled. Our heartfelt condolences go out to the families and friends of those affected by the shocking situation in Christchurch. A joint decision between NZC and the @BCBtigers has been made to cancel the Hagley Oval Test. Again both teams and support staff groups are safe. All team members and staff caught up in the incident were able to return safely to their hotel, Bangladesh Cricket confirmed, after taking refuge in the immediate aftermath in the dressing rooms at Hagley Oval. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said he was “horrified” by the reports. “Our thoughts and prayers are with our Kiwi cousins,” he said. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has urged Australians in Christchurch to follow the instructions of local authorities, but has not changed its travel advice from normal safety precautions. An estimated 300 people were inside the mosque for Friday prayers, including members of the touring Bangladesh cricket team, who all escaped unhurt. Witness Len Peneha told Associated Press he saw a man dressed in black enter the Al Noor mosque and then heard dozens of shots, followed by people running away in terror. He said he also saw the gunman flee before emergency services arrived Peneha said he went into the mosque to try to help: “I saw dead people everywhere.” Another man who was at the mosque told TVNZ he had not seen his wife, who was also in the mosque, since the shooting. The man, who was in a wheelchair, pushed himself out to the carpark. “It was very peaceful, calm and quiet, as it is when the sermon starts, you could hear a pin drop. Then suddenly the shooting started,” he said. “I saw about 20 plus people, some were dead, some were screaming. On the left there were 10 plus people, some were dead.” With agencies