David Cameron has robustly defended his decision to call a referendum in 2016 on the UK’s membership of the EU, according to a film-maker producing a documentary about his time in 10 Downing Street. Denys Blakeway, a leading British political film producer, conducted a series of interviews with Cameron for a two-part documentary on his time in power, which will be released at the same time as his memoirs later this month. The former prime minister is defiant about calling the vote on Brexit and insists he did his best for the country, according to the film-maker. Blakeway, once dubbed the “TV confessor of choice” for Britain’s politicians, has previously interviewed Tony Blair, Sir John Major and Lady Thatcher about their times in office. “I don’t get the sense he is deeply wounded in a traumatic way by his political career. He is not a man given to great introspective regret, in my view. He will always maintain that as a politician he was doing what had to be done and was best for the country,” the film-maker told the Radio Times. Cameron’s autobiography, For the Record, will be published on 19 September and is expected to be billed as a frank account of his time in Downing Street. The rights to the memoir were purchased by William Collins, an imprint of HarperCollins, for a reported £800,000 in 2016. The former prime minister had intended to publish the book in 2018 after Brexit, according to reports, so he would not be seen as a “backstreet driver” in Theresa May’s handling of Brexit. Earlier this year, the Daily Mail reported that Cameron had been asked to cut 100,000 words from the manuscript after finishing the draft. For the Record will come out less than two weeks before the Conservative party conference in Manchester amid Britain’s worst political crisis since the second world war. In 2016, when Cameron first signed the book deal, the Old Etonian said: “It was an immense privilege to lead the Conservative party for more than a decade and the country for over six years as prime minister. I am looking forward to having the opportunity to explain the decisions I took and why I took them. I will be frank about what worked and what didn’t.” A £25,000 designer garden shed, complete with a wood-burning stove, a sofa bed and sheep’s wool insulation, was purchased by the former prime minister in 2017 as a quiet place to write his memoirs.