The comments from Allan McRobert about British Airways pilots are simply wrong (Letters, 11 September). All BA pilots are directly employed by BA and are taxed under PAYE just like everybody else. The service-company model that he mentions has never been used by BA pilots. All BA pilots now have a retirement age of 65. Unlike former BOAC staff from the 1970s, no current BA staff have an active final-salary pension scheme. All active BA pensions are now defined-contribution schemes. Senior pilots are well paid, but salary scales for those now joining the company start at just over £26,000. These young men and women will have incurred training debts of £90,000-plus to get their professional qualifications. BA does pay additional sums towards this debt over the first seven years of a pilot’s career, but this does not cover the whole debt. The comments about safety are disappointing from someone who has worked in aviation. Current levels of safety are only achieved through the combined efforts of very talented engineers, the dedication, professionalism and sheer hard work of the pilots, and our teamwork with great cabin crew.Name and address supplied • As a British Airways pilot I take exception to Allan McRobert’s letter. I would dearly love to pay just 20% tax on my income. As it is, as with many professionals at our level under PAYE, we pay over 60% on much of our income. By the time you take into account national insurance payments, 40%-45% income tax, and the loss of one’s tax allowance (at the rate of £1 for every £2 earned above a certain threshold), we quite honestly pay more than our fair share of tax to Her Majesty’s coffers. We do not get guaranteed free first-class travel for ourselves and families, though it would be nice; and we get the same meal allowances as all other crew members – whether they were more generous than for cabin crew in the 1970s I have no idea, but if so they have long since been consigned to the history books. For sure, our cabin crew colleagues play an important safety role onboard, and sometimes I am left in wonder at how they put up with much of what is demanded of them. But to downplay the safety-critical nature of a pilot’s role is mischievous at best. While many aircraft accidents have an element of human failing in them, many more are prevented daily by the intervention of the pilots that so many are quick to criticise. And yet, we generally go about our business quietly, and for the most part, without fuss – just as many other professionals working in safety-critical workplaces. For the most part, we, as a group, have been grateful to the Guardian for presenting some of the most balanced reporting on our dispute. If the comments on our union forum are to be believed, you may even have gained a few new subscribers.Name and address supplied • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition