As you were then, the Urn. After the miracle of Headingley and the miracle of Lord’s, England found their miracle jar empty of all but a few late crumbs at Old Trafford. Instead, on a brisk, grey-green autumn day Australia successfully retained the Ashes by confirming what has been clear ever since the middle of the first Test at Edgbaston. Tim Paine’s tourists are simply a more settled, more potent Test team, to a degree that miraculous individual performances can only disguise for so long. There will now be a temptation to dwell on England failing to regain the Ashes; but in reality this has been an active feat. Australia have retained them, and done so by asserting some obvious strengths. To the credit of England’s batting lineup the final day was much more than the wake most had expected. Indeed it almost became a resurrection as the overs remaining ticked down past 30 with two wickets still to fall, as the air began to thicken and crackle, taking on that strange, animate fifth-day quality. At times the entire kop end of the temporary stand writhed and bounced and waved its arms, taunting the approaching defeat. Jack Leach’s appearance at the departure of Jofra Archer had been greeted like a triumph, a bonus, a masterstroke. Leach did his best. The twiddle, the hop, the neat little crouch. As the balls went by it was almost showy. At the other end Craig Overton seemed to have become something impregnable, 6ft 5in of impassible willow. At which point, enter the cold, hard reality of a disintegrating pitch and a hard ball. Leach got one from Marnus Labuschagne that leapt. Overton was rapped on the pad by Josh Hazlewood. As the review confirmed the match had been won the Aussie huddle began to dance and leap and dissolve into a series of heartfelt embraces. And sporting justice was served here. All credit to the victors. Steve Smith has been busy producing his own summer of historical ascent, his own moon landing, his Woodstock. His performances will be talked about as long as people still care about Test cricket. At Old Trafford Pat Cummins was again a marvel of sustained, high-pace craft, not to mention an Australian cricketer with the easy cinematic charm of a 1950s American matinee idol auditioning for the role of the world’s most handsome astronaut. Paine deserves a separate round of applause: his team has been relentlessly orderly in the field; and almost to a man likable and good-humoured in the face of crowd hostility. Although there is a case to recalibrate just how intimidating the sight of 200 beer-sodden middle-aged men in emu suits really is, and to what degree this actually constitutes a “fortress”. In the end the nation with the best pace attack in the world, the best finger spinner outside India and the double insurance of Him at No 4 has just been too strong for a Test team with one fit bowler in the ICC top 25 (Australia have four). Plus of course there is other mitigation. England’s resources have been geared for the last three years towards white-ball cricket, with scheduling and decision-making at all levels geared towards winning the World Cup. It has been a commercial choice. And you can’t, as England’s cricketing history demonstrates so well, win ’em all. And yet, not so fast. There are still debts to be paid here, wrong turns to be picked over. England have clung on in a series they might have lost by now. But they should still be better than this. Selection has been muddled, and at times wilfully quirky, with too many empty holes and half‑filled roles. Jason Roy, Joe Denly, Jonny Bairstow and Jos Buttler have walked out to bat 32 times and scored three fifties between them. Why have they all played four Tests, the entire active lifespan of this series? The feeling of a lack of direction from the key centre of power, coach plus captain, has been tangible at times. England have picked 25 new players in the last three years. Plenty of good ones – Ben Foakes, Sam Curran, Dawid Malan – have been discarded for reasons that are often unclear. With Joe Root yet to suggest any real vision or authority as a captain this Test team would perhaps benefit from more direction than has been evident under the light-touch style of Trevor Bayliss. A new coach will be hired after the Oval. It might be a good first act in the job to tell Bairstow that if he wants to be a Test player he has to knuckle down to batting in the middle order; and Buttler that if he wants to be in this team it’s going to have to be on merit as a No 7 who keeps wicket. To his credit Root has led in this sense, moving up to No 3 and scrapping away through a rough patch of form. Yet in many ways England’s fate here is a minor issue. The England and Wales Cricket Board will view this series as a triumph in any case. Headingley put Test cricket on the front pages. Old Trafford was sold out on four days and almost full on the fifth. The coffers have rung, the product has been visible, even in defeat to a superior opponent. This feels like the start of a new cycle. The lesson of the secondary, less triumphant half of the summer is that England would do well to take just a little more care of the oldest, most relentlessly gripping form. 1) Lack of preparation Both teams got their preferred prize this summer: England won the World Cup, Australia the Ashes. They have been preparing for this since 2015. They managed their fast bowlers with the Ashes in mind and used a Duke ball in Sheffield Shield cricket. England, for richer or poorer, prioritised the white Kookaburra ball. 2) Missing Jimmy Anderson bowled only four overs at Edgbaston before a calf injury ruled him out of the series. In English conditions, that was actually a calculable loss – his last 100 wickets in home Tests have come at an average of 16. He loves beating Australia, and he might even have dragged Steve Smith’s series average into double figures. 3) Supersub crucial No right-thinking person would argue with the introduction of concussion substitutes but the timing of that law change, the first day of the series, was crucial. The first concussion sub, Marnus Labuschagne, survived 100 balls on the tense final day at Lord’s. Without him, England would probably have won the second Test. 4) No-ball calamity A spinner taking a wicket with a no-ball is usually described as a cardinal sin. When the batsman is Steve Smith, it really is deadly. Smith was on 118 in the fourth Test when Leach had him caught off a no-ball; a wicket then would have left Australia 273 for six. Instead Australia added a further 224 runs to take control of the match. 5) Cummins and goings When Pat Cummins ripped out Rory Burns and Joe Root went in the first over of England’s second innings, it felt like a symbolic statement of Australia’s superiority. Burns and Root batted for more than 50 overs on the third day; had England started the final day with 10 wickets intact, they might well have saved the game.