“With the retirement of Samuel Eto’o, how many players to have featured at France ‘98 remain active?” tweets JBfaeDundee. “Buffon was in the Italy squad, but didn’t actually play.” We had lots of answers to this one, but the most comprehensive came from Pete Tomlin. “I have actually managed to find seven players who were in their country’s squad for the 1998 World Cup and are still (sort of) actively playing,” he tells us. “Firstly, Brazilian defensive midfielder and former captain Emerson (Ferreira da Rosa), who is currently 43 years old, is listed on the playing roster of US side Miami Dade FC. He is also listed as a club executive. Back in 1998, Emerson came on as a substitute in the quarter-final against Denmark and the semi-final against the Netherlands. “Another 43-year-old still playing is Joseph N’Do, an attacking midfielder who started all three group games for Cameroon in 1998. He is now the player/coach for Achill Rovers in Ireland’s Mayo League.” N’Do has spent more than 15 years in Ireland as a player – there’s more on his story here. “Lee Dong-guk, a South Korean striker who came on in their group game against the Netherlands, is still playing in the K-League at 40. He has made 18 appearances for Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors this season, scoring four. Saudi Arabia defender Hussein Abdulghani was included in his country’s 1998 squad, but didn’t play in France. Now 42, he currently plays and captains Al-Ahli in the Saudi Pro League.” Japan made their World Cup debut in 1998, and three members of their squad are yet to hang up their boots. “Forward Masashi Nakayama started all three group games and scored his country’s first ever World Cup goal, against Jamaica,” adds Pete. “He is now listed as a player for Azul Claro Numazu in the J3 League, who also include 1998 non-playing midfielder Teruyoshi Ito in their squad. Ito is now 43, while 39-year-old Shinji Ono, who came on against Jamaica, now plays for FC Ryuku in the J2 League.” Nakayama will be 52 next week, and is the oldest active player by far to have featured at the 1998 World Cup. He also has the distinction of being the only player in Panini’s official sticker album who is yet to retire. Russell Yong also flagged up trivia favourite Kazu Miura, who is also still playing at 52, for J2 League side Yokohama FC. “Miura was key to Japan’s qualification campaign for 1998, scoring 14 goals, but was incredibly and controversially left out by coach Takeshi Okada, who said he couldn’t even envision a role for him as a substitute. Miura was just as vital in qualification for USA ’94 and would almost certainly have been in the squad, but Japan failed to qualify.” “I distinctly remember watching some fitba on the telly in the late-1970s/early-1980s and being highly amused when a long ball was played towards Kenny Dalglish, who inexplicably stood perfectly still and caught the ball with both his hands,” writes Frank Hames. “I recall a cacophony of hooting and jeering from the crowd, bewildered expressions being worn by teammates and opponents alike, Kenny looking comically shamefaced as he received admonishment from the referee, and the commentator having a whale of a time. However, a cursory search of the internet has failed to uncover any mention of this episode. Was this some kind of Spangles-and-Findus-Crispy-Pancakes-induced childhood fever dream?” The answer, Frank, is perhaps. “I remember watching Richard Gough instinctively catch the ball above his head and then look very embarrassed about it, especially after seeing the inevitable red card,” writes Nick Thorp. “But that was in 1992, so perhaps he was inspired by Dalglish!” Gough’s moment of madness came in a World Cup qualifying defeat against Switzerland. His coach, Andy Roxburgh, claimed afterwards that the ball had struck a sprinkler on its way into the centre-back’s arms. “I have a very similar memory, only it wasn’t Kenny Dalglish,” writes Michael Thomas (presumably not that one). “I remember watching an Old Firm match, probably mid-to-late 80s, where Terry Butcher – I think – caught a ball that was flying over his head and out for a throw. He was booked for it as I recall.” We can’t find that specific incident – although Butcher was no stranger to shenanigans in Old Firm games – and are still none the wiser as to whether King Kenny himself ever trapped a long ball with his hands. Think you can help us out? Email us at knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU. Last week we looked at the closest cross-border European ties. But Bas van Eldonk replied: “Why limit this to Europe?” OK Bas, the floor is yours. “According to the RSSSF, Cara Brazzaville played Kinshasa-based AS Vita Club in the second round of the 1974 African Champions Cup (winning 4-3 on aggregate),” he writes. “The distance between Stade Alphonse Massamba-Débat (Brazzaville, former Stade de la Revolution) and Stade Tata Raphaël (Kinshasa, former Stade du 20 Mai, also known from the Rumble in the Jungle) is – via the Kinshasa ferry – just 18km (11 miles).” “I noticed during that the attendance at Elland Road for Leeds v Norwich in the EFL Cup was given as 22,222,” noticed Liam Hughes in 2016. “Has there ever been a higher attendance where all the digits are the same?” Yes, and impressively so. Seb Dunn mailed in to point out Spurs 3-2 Ipswich at White Hart Lane on 30 August 1969, with 33,333, and then also about the 2003 Copa Libertadores, which Gareth Bell-Jones also spotted. “In the last-16, second-leg tie between Corinthians and River Plate at the Morumbi, São Paulo, there was a 66,666 official attendance,” noted Gareth. “River Plate won the leg 2-1 and 4-2 overall.” It’s good but still not quite the largest … “Santos beat Flamengo 3-2 at the Estádio do Morumbi in the 1983 Campeonato with 111,111 spectators allegedly in attendance,” wrote Stuart Sale. “Assuming Santos didn’t fudge the numbers, anticipating this trivia question arising, this surely has to be the record. Highlights of the match are here.” • For more from the font of nerdvana, click this thing here. “In the dying stages of a final or decisive match, the camera often pans to the sideline showing an engraver putting the team name on the trophy,” writes Richard Smith. “Has this ever backfired due to late goals or some other reason?” “Initially coaching the relegated Kingston City, Nick Tolios became the coach of the eventual NPL Victoria champions, Bentleigh Greens, in part of Australia’s overall second tier,” reports Leo Crnogorcevic. “Has a coach ever taken charge of two sides finishing in such diametric positions in a single season? @TheKnowledge_GU Filip Knezevic debuted for Radnicki Nis last night playing in the number 1 shirt, in spite of being a winger not a keeper. What other notable outfield number 1s are there? pic.twitter.com/UaAYyans6y “Alexander Tettey wore the captain’s armband in Norwich’s fantastic victory over Manchester City,” begins Simen Kristiansen. “How many other Norwegians have been captains for their sides in the Premier League?” • Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.