Wales players went hell for leather in training on Wednesday night in a bid to put the investigation into Rob Howley’s suspected breach of betting regulations behind them. Howley’s departure from the Rugby World Cup has rocked the tournament in Japan and left Wales somehow attempting to move on from what has been a monumental distraction. Warren Gatland’s side trained twice on Wednesday – once in the afternoon and again in the evening under floodlights to prepare for Monday’s first game with Georgia – before travelling to Toyota via train. The evening session in Kitakyushu saw Gatland’s men take out some of their frustration ahead of what will be a physical meeting in their World Cup opener. It is understood it was Wales’ best session since arriving in Japan last Wednesday. “We’ve had to get on with it really” said forwards coach Robin McBryde. “Georgia are our opponents, it’s our opening game of the World Cup, and that has taken precedent over anything else. There is a duty we need to fulfil. The preparations have gone well up to date. There was a little bit of a feeling of circling the wagons and not allowing anything to influence the environment. It’s important we start with a bang.” McBryde played with Howley – who is alleged to have breached World Rugby’s regulation six which covers betting and anti-corruption – with Wales. “It’s been tough. We’ve been together for a quite a bit of time. It’s unfortunate he [Howley] has to go through this. He’s been a great servant both as a player and a coach,” McBryde said. “This was our swansong as a coaching group so it’s unfortunate we’ve got to go through this. He’s a good man and a good friend. It’s sad to see someone have to go through it. He was keen to explain the news to the other coaches, rather than us finding out second hand. He did that.” Wales were met in Toyota on Thursday by Stephen Jones who has been flown in to replace Howley as attack coach in emergency fashion. Somehow head coach Gatland must prepare his team for a game and the players are determined to have a backs-to-the-wall approach which may yet prove invaluable. Gatland will name a strong side for Georgia, but rookie flanker Aaron Wainwright is set to start. McBryde believes the Dragons tyro – who is just 21 and only made his Test debut in Argentina in June 2018 – can have a better career than former Wales and British & Irish Lions captain Sam Warburton. Wainwright plays in the back-row like Warburton and Gatland is a big fan. “He’s definitely a player with that growth still there. He’s still learning the game,” McBryde said of Wainwright. “He’s in fantastic condition. He’s put some good weight on and he’s able to maintain that weight with all the running we’ve done. “His skill work is still on the up and it’s the same for his set-piece work as well, but he’s going to be around for a number of years. The potential he has got is to grow. I don’t like to compare people to other players, but he is very reminiscent of a young Sam Warburton with the way he carries the ball. Both in attack and defence, he’s very physical. He enjoys that part of the game. He could even be better than Sam, though.”