‘Being mad and bad,’ Carrie Gracie writes towards the end of Equal, her account of a year-long struggle to get the BBC to pay her the same as her male counterparts, “is exhausting.” Eating chorizo hash in an upscale breakfast spot near Broadcasting House in London, where she’s about to go on shift, Gracie doesn’t look mad, or bad, or even exhausted. Indeed, she’s recently returned from a holiday in Majorca during which she hopped over to Ibiza and was snapped clubbing with her news colleague, Simon McCoy. One might even say she looks pretty perky. She was referring to that moment in a battle when you have to convince your opponent that you are willing to do what it takes to achieve your goal; that you will not blink, or back down, or slink away. And on 4 June 2018, when her grievance appeal was turned down with no further option but litigation, Gracie didn’t blink; she threatened war. When the BBC responded by sending a senior executive to her house to negotiate, she hid the washing up and the dog’s toys, shooed her teenage son upstairs and turned her garden sprinkler on to hide the unmown grass. “Imagine the home of a single parent locked in a long battle with her employer and suffering depression as a result,” she writes. “That’s what my house looked like.” It didn’t matter. The BBC had agreed to pay parity, and to backdate the consequent increase. She had won. Victory, though, is rarely the final moment. Particularly when you have a powerful collective – known as BBC Women – to fight injustice alongside you, and when your objective is not to destroy an organisation, but to make it confront inequality and reform. And particularly when you were shocked to find yourself in a fight at all. “I just thought we’d sort it out,” Gracie tells me of the period in July 2017 when, after the BBC was compelled by Royal Charter to publish details of salaries over £150,000, she discovered that she was being paid substantially less as China editor than the corporation’s US editor, Jon Sopel, or its man in the Middle East, Jeremy Bowen. “We’d have a conversation, we’d sort it out – because I’d asked for equal pay before I went to China, for one thing, and I was just like, ‘Well what on earth’s happened here? This is all a bit weird.’ So in the beginning, I guess I thought it was the anomaly that they kept claiming it was.” The words “oversight” and “anomaly”, she drily notes, are much beloved by those who pay women less than they’re entitled to and then get found out. As it turned out, there seemed to be no intention of “sorting it out”; rather, Gracie embarked on a protracted series of confrontations in which her sense of self-esteem and her faith in professionalism and ethical behaviour were shaken. Throughout, she was sustained by the solidarity of female colleagues, although she remains adamant that this is a universal problem: “Whenever anyone makes it a woman’s issue, it annoys me. It’s a human issue. And do they believe in equality? Do they believe in justice?” Gracie had not been dissatisfied with her annual pay of £134,000; and she is well aware of her own privilege as an Oxford graduate, a longtime journalist and a white, middle-class woman. (Nor was she shy of talking about pay; back in 2009, at the height of the MPs’ expenses scandal, she had responded to a demand from Lord Foulkes, irritated at being questioned by her, to reveal her salary: £92,000, she replied, immediately and unapologetically. In the hoopla after the programme, it was reported that McCoy, her co-host, was earning £190,000, although the BBC denied it.) But now she was angry that the post she had been all but begged by James Harding, then director of news, to take three-and-a-half years earlier was being remunerated at up to half the rate – high salaries were published in bands – than those performing a clearly comparable role. Harding had invoked her experience and expertise – now 57, she had joined the World Service in 1987, covered the death of Deng Xiaoping, the handover of Hong Kong and the Beijing Olympics, and speaks fluent Mandarin – and the urgency of covering China’s rise as a superpower to persuade her; she would not simply be good in the role, she was arguably the only person who could do it to the required standard. Gracie’s hesitation was not due to a lack of interest, but a consideration of the impact of a long-distance, high-profile job on her teenage children, one of whom had endured childhood leukaemia and both of whom had watched their mother survive breast cancer. There were also the challenges of reporting from a heavily censored, one-party state. But when she accepted the role, urged by friends and family, she demanded equal pay, having long suspected that she was paid less than male colleagues. Until July 2017, she believed she had secured it. She is at pains to point out that it wasn’t about the money and, indeed, when she reached a financial settlement with the BBC, she donated the full amount of £361,000 to the Equal Pay Advice Service and the Fawcett Society. “If I’d been more motivated by money than I was by advancing gender equality,” she explains now, “then I might have pursued a different course. But I wasn’t, because I am very deeply – what would be the verb? – immersed in BBC values.” Among those values, one might conclude, are fairness, impartiality and a respect for facts. But Gracie’s attempts to correct the “oversight” suggest otherwise. “I definitely think it’s easy to make the mistake of pointing out a problem and think that by articulating the problem clearly and forcefully you are thereby solving the problem,” she says. “I learned the hard way that that’s not how it works; you know, reasoning with people who are powerful, wealthy, have status, reason with them and you can make the best argument in the world. It can be evidence-based until the cows don’t come home and you’re still not going to win.” One of the reasons is that pay, as well as being an emotive and often obscured part of our lives, is also, as Gracie points out, like the game Jenga – once you start to mess with one brick, the whole edifice starts to wobble. That’s why, she argues, employers in cases like these attempt to “keep it isolated in one woman’s silo and then preferably she will sign some kind of confidentiality clause about it, about the back pay or whatever they’re going to give her to make it right, then often it does stay quiet and it gets resolved”. Less chance of that, of course, when the organisation is a highly scrutinised and publicly funded national institution; one in which the subjects themselves are adept at gathering and disseminating news. At the beginning of 2018, getting nowhere with the BBC, after having taken advice from such BBC luminaries as Clare Balding, Fiona Bruce and Mishal Husain, Gracie threw a gigantic stone into the millpond by using the letters page of the Times to reveal the details of her case; on the front page, the newspaper reported that more than 130 other women working at the BBC had endorsed her case. That same morning, Gracie headed into Broadcasting House to present the Today programme – in one of the situation’s many grim ironies, she had been given some holiday cover in response to widespread complaints that the programme didn’t have enough female presenters. Her co-presenter was John Humphrys who, she writes in Equal, arrived at 4am, told her that her letter was either idiocy or a stroke of genius, and “then did some harrumphing that it would be uncollegiate of me to repeat”. During our conversation, I press her to do precisely that – in particular concerning the far-from-supportive conversation that Humphrys was recorded having with Jon Sopel, both of them presuming themselves to be off air. (It is a matter of continuing amazement that veteran broadcasters seem to have such trouble remembering the cast-iron rule that you are never alone with a microphone.) What did she feel? What did the programme’s editor, Sarah Sands, delayed by travel arrangements that morning, say to her when they finally caught up? She is admirably, if frustratingly, guarded; she replies that she has said everything she wants to say about her colleagues in Equal, and doesn’t want to speak off the cuff. (Even in the book she’s tactful, saying that she felt the pair had let her, the BBC and its audiences down.) Of Sands, she says now: “I mean private conversations are private conversations, so I said what I said. I actually think Sarah just laughed but I can’t remember, to be honest.” Where Gracie is prepared to be forthcoming is on the toll that such a gruelling and prolonged experience takes. She stopped sleeping properly and became depressed; eventually, her doctor signed her off work. “I was mentally unwell,” she says now. “And that’s not uncommon. These fights take a huge amount out of people.” What was her primary sensation? “Helplessness. I don’t like feeling helpless. And when I feel helpless, I feel really helpless, it’s physically, emotionally immobilising. I have to lie down, you know? I don’t know what to do. I don’t know how to operate.” This comes from a woman who has faced more than her fair share of harrowing loss and trauma. Her mother died of ovarian cancer at 42, when Gracie, the second of five children, was 17. It was, she agrees, an existential crisis. “I think my mother had provided my map of the world and without her it was hard to see why to get up in the morning or what you would do if you did get up in the morning. It was hard to have any sense of purpose about life at all.” It also gave her, she thinks, a sense of impatience, a conviction that waiting around for things to happen is a fool’s errand. That profound understanding that life is precarious and unpredictable can only have been reinforced by her daughter Rachel’s diagnosis with leukaemia when she was two years old. Gracie’s marriage, to Chinese musician Cheng Jin, foundered under the strain, and although he has stepped into the breach at various points, Gracie has for long periods been their children’s principal carer. She inherited the BRCA1 gene from her mother, which put her at risk of both breast and ovarian cancer; in her 40s, she had breast cancer twice and went through chemotherapy and mastectomies. Gracie’s mother died, she says, because despite their best efforts, the medical profession had not found a way to cure her; she and her daughter survived because they had. In her battle with her employer, she says she felt they were “finding clever ways to avoid solving the problems… that’s not acceptable to me. Life is short. We’re not going to do this.” Equal comes out at the beginning of this month, just a few months short of half a century after the 1970 Equal Pay Act. Carrie Gracie has returned to the BBC News Channel, where she worked before her appointment as China editor. BBC Women still exists; Gracie describes them as “a large group of people who still believe in the things we believed in two years ago. We still fight a cause.” I ask her what she does when she’s not at work, writing a book and campaigning for equal pay. Uncustomary holidays in the Balearics aside, where’s the froth in her life? She hesitates before offering that she walks her dog and reads. “Yeah,” she says, ruefully. “Exciting life. What do I do? I don’t do anything that’s very frothy at the moment. I actually think my life needs more froth. Everyone needs froth and I think one of the downsides of writing a book about something as big and serious as this is that the froth has been marginalised in my life to an unacceptable degree.” I wonder if I’ve struck a chord, because, a little later, she says: “I might just kind of have more fun. I don’t have any debts to anyone else any more. I have a debt to myself.” Three-and-a-half years earlier James Harding, the then director of news, had begged me to become the BBC’s first China editor, saying we urgently needed to tell the story of a rising superpower and I was the only person who could do the story justice. The BBC had said the role was “on a par with” the other international editors. I’d explicitly made equal pay with my male peers a condition of taking the job. Four years on, my salary was £134,000 but this pay list said the North America editor was earning between £200,000 and £250,000. Equal pay might sound like an unusual deal-breaker, but it made perfect sense to me. Like many women at the BBC, I had long suspected I was earning less than the men I worked alongside. But in an environment where pay was opaque and talking about it taboo, it seemed preferable to talk about the journalism. I’d never asked my peers directly what they were earning and never issued an ultimatum on pay. I liked my male colleagues. It seemed invidious to challenge managers in a way that might impact the pay of people I liked. When I went through treatment for breast cancer, my bosses were kind to me. I reasoned that, in many ways, the BBC was a good employer. In return, I had always tried to be a good employee. Every year I persuaded my ex-husband Jin to come back from Beijing and stand in at home for a few weeks so that I could do one big reporting trip to China, and I never demanded higher pay for all the prep and post-production. The BBC showed me goodwill and I showed it goodwill back. One of my documentary projects followed the transformation of China through the experiences of three families in a village that was being razed to make way for a city. This White Horse Village series won the BBC a Peabody Award and an Emmy. At the moment the Emmy was announced in New York, I was, quite literally, washing up at my kitchen sink. My children, Rachel and Daniel, were 12 and 10 at the time, and as I dried my hands and sat down to help with homework I joked that I was a real-life Cinderella. But not being invited to the ball was a commonplace at the BBC. We had lots of people who did brilliant work for little recognition. In a letter to the director-general, Tony Hall, I wrote that unless I was made equal I would resign: “I am a cancer survivor in my mid-50s who lost my own mother to cancer when I was a teenager and who nursed my own daughter through childhood leukaemia. I did not apply for the China editor post, and was reluctant to take it, precisely because of the strains I knew it would impose on my family and my health. I agreed to do the job because I cared about our coverage of China and because I thought the BBC needed older women journalists to ‘lean in’. I am bitterly disappointed to discover that my contribution as an editor is valued at so much less than my male peers.’ I warned the director-general that unless I was made equal I would resign. I then worked backwards through the past 20 years of my career, asking male peers direct questions about pay. I chose not to tackle this face to face or on the phone, but to put questions in writing instead, as I felt this would allow me to be polite and clear and would allow them time to consider. My email explained that I realised they were under no obligation to disclose their salaries and might prefer not to, but that the recent revelations compelled me to ask in an attempt to make sense of my own pay story. The responses were mixed. Some men, like the Middle East editor Jeremy Bowen and the world affairs editor John Simpson, were generous with information. Others were less so. Asking became easier the more often I did it, and in the end I wished I had started years ago as it came to feel natural and collegiate, just something that all grown-ups should do. I felt grateful to those who shared. Theirs was a real-world demonstration of empathy, one of the simplest but most powerful things a man can do to help a woman achieve equal pay. Equal, by Carrie Gracie, is published by Little, Brown on 5 September (£18.99). Buy it for £16.71 at guardianbookshop.com