As this year’s host of celebrities have suffered through their first outing of ballroom escapades, causing one premature exit due to injury from Made in Chelsea’s Jamie Laing, it is now time for their professional partners and previous stars to showcase their skills (and, presumably, justify their professional titles). Expect to see a political bent to the guest appearances with the glorious return of Ed “Gangnam Style” Balls plus left-footed fan-favourites Ann Widdecombe (who holds the record for the most ones scored) and Jeremy Vine. Ammar Kalia This year’s classical extravaganza comes to an end, opening with a newly commissioned work, Woke, from Daniel Kidane, described as a play on political awareness in our troubled times. Vocalist Laura Mvula also performs her song Sing to the Moon, backed by the BBC Symphony Orchestra. AK On the north coast of Kent, palaeobiologist Tori Herridge discovers a mysterious sandbar nicknamed The Street and a forgotten military base that helped win the first world war in the third series of the archaeology show. But coastal erosion and rising sea levels will soon see these treasures washed away. Ali Catterall The murky Danish thriller continues with Investigator Jan Michelsen trying to piece together the connections between two abductions that happened a decade apart. In this fifth episode of eight, Michelsen finds a key clue: a hidden dress from the first victim. Gloomy and nail-bitingly captivating. AK Wossy returns with a new series of slick chat with big-name guests, and this week he’s got Elizabeth McGovern and Michelle Dockery promoting the Downton Abbey film. National treasures are well represented by Stephen Fry and Craig David, while Charli XCX joins Christine and the Queens to bring the tunes. Hannah Verdier If you think all there is to Canadian singer-songwriter Randy Bachman are the soft-rock epics produced in partnership with Fred Turner then, in the words of his signature song, You Ain’t Seen Nothing Yet. This doc looks back on a sprawling career that began in the 60s with the Guess Who and continues today. Phil Harrison Drag Me to Hell 10.55pm, Film4 Sam Raimi returns to his Evil Dead roots with this splendidly gory tale about a young bank worker (Alison Lohman) cursed by an old Gypsy woman when she refuses a mortgage extension. Pursued frantically by a demon, she has three days before she is dragged to you-know-where. It’s deliriously gruesome fun. Paul Howlett Cycling: Tour of Britain 10.45am, ITV4. The final stage, a route from Altrincham to Manchester. Premier League Football: Liverpool v Newcastle United 12noon, BT Sport 1. Norwich v Manchester City airs at 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Boxing: Tyson Fury v Otto Wallin 2am, BT Sport Box Office. Heavyweight clash from Las Vegas.