A steel company which has admitted health and safety failures over the deaths of two workers who were killed in an explosion at a plant in Cardiff could be fined up to £1.5m. Engineers Peter O’Brien, 51, and Mark Sim, 41, died when a blast ripped through the Celsa Manufacturing plant. Another man was seriously injured in the explosion at the plant, in the Splott area, in November 2015. Celsa Manufacturing UK entered the plea on Wednesday, the day their trial was due to start at Cardiff crown court. Judge Neil Bidder told the court an automatic shut-off failed to activate after hot oil used to lubricate steel rollers surpassed normal temperatures. Workers did not manually shut down the system because an alarm that would have notified them of the danger had also malfunctioned. The judge said: “The oil ignited and reached flash point … it caused a terrible explosion. The company has pleaded guilty to having failed to make suitable risk assessments. Had they made the assessments this accident would not have occurred. “Two men were tragically killed. They went out to work one day and never came back, and another man was very seriously injured.” Addressing the victims’ families, the judge said: “I would like to offer my very sincere condolences to the families of both men, and sympathies to the man who was injured. Nothing I can say will make things better, frankly, but I hope you feel you’ve been kept completely in the loop here.” Judge Bidder said the size of a fine would depend on the category of the offence, but it would be between £130,000 and £1.5m, with a sentencing hearing scheduled for 4 October. Simon Morgan, prosecuting for the Health and Safety Executive, said after accepting the company’s guilty plea, that a second alleged breach of health and safety regulations, relating to the machinery which caused the blast, would lie on file. Celsa UK employs more than 500 people and produces 1.2m tonnes of steel each year from scrap. Its parent company, Celsa Group, is one of the largest steel companies in Europe with bases in Spain, Poland, Norway and France. A statement from O’Brien’s wife, Marie, and their six children, released after their deaths, said: “Dad was a kind, gentle and funny man who loved the simple things in life … He took a major role as a member of the church and local community, through the 27 years of marriage he and Mum have spent time running Christ the King Junior Club, he was involved in rugby coaching at his children’s primary school for many years and loved his role as Confirmation Catechist at Christ the King parish church. “We’ll always remember his huge appetite and insistence on having Classic FM on in the car as well his cheesy jokes and big smile.” Sim’s wife, Samantha, said in her tribute: “Mark was dedicated to his job and would always do it to the best of his ability and was always willing to help others. “He was dedicated to his home life as much as work. He had two families, Celsa and home. “I will cherish time we had together, the laughs and parties, because Mark loved a good party – always the last one to leave. He help coached the local under-14s football team. “Mark will leave a big hole in our hearts and a great void in the lives of his daughter Georgia and son Jackson and to everyone’s lives that he touched.”