Boris Johnson wants war. He knows Britons love war, especially with Europe. He and his allies have turned a technical debate about trade policy into a Battle of Britain. They suggest ludicrously that the national economy faces an existential threat from Europe. They forget that in times of war countries seek to cohere, not descend into partisan strife. A single-issue general election, as Johnson now wants, would be irresponsible. His job as prime minister should be to get a deal on Brexit and not stall one, as he is blatantly doing. The most eerie Commons performance this week was by the minister for no deal, Michael Gove. He was like an air raid warden from Dad’s Army. He had plans for supplies of medicines and food. Trucks were assigned to country lanes. Guards were reinforcing Dover. Two billion pounds will pour into farms, fisheries, manufacturing and hospitals. No expense will be spared, no cost too great, to keep the dastardly foreigner from our shores. MPs purred. They loved it. Last weekend was the 80th anniversary of the start of the second world war, and I counted 20 programmes about Nazis on British television. Johnson, in contrast, comes across as a mad general. In the Commons he was shrieking abuse at Jeremy Corbyn and accusing him of “defeat … shameful surrender … white flag … chlorinated chicken … shit or bust”, and something rude about a girl’s blouse. He says Britain faces vassalage, bondage, humiliation and subservience to the dire European foe. Thanks to Corbyn, his legs had been “cut off at the knees”. With Jacob Rees-Mogg gazing languidly up at him, Johnson hurled his Spitfire about the skies. We need to pinch ourselves to remember that all this noise has nothing to do with whether the UK should leave the EU. Parliament has voted in favour of that, in accordance with the outcome of the 2016 referendum. Objective evidence suggests the best way of honouring the narrowness of that vote is within the context of Margaret Thatcher’s single market, keeping Britain part of Europe’s economic space. Theresa May’s deal was designed at least to leave open that possibility. There was no reason for this to be anything other than a friendly agreement, to minimise the harm Brexit might do to commerce on both sides. The EU has handled deals with Norway, Switzerland, the former Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, and even Britain’s various opt-outs. It was only the witless failure of MPs – including Corbyn’s Labour – to agree May’s deal that gave Johnson his opportunity. He duly won his party’s leadership by declaring that only by cutting all economic and political ties with the rest of Europe could Brexit be achieved. Eventually, only no deal was the answer to a national cataclysm. Any degree of self-harm was a price worth paying. Johnson’s hapless chancellor, Sajid Javid, was left squirming in obfuscation on the BBC yesterday morning, after proposing a spending splurge that would have once made the Labour party blush. This week, finally, a Commons majority has behaved with some sense of public responsibility in bringing temporary order to the no-deal chaos. This has involved offering Johnson what amounts to a compromise. If he really wants Brexit on 31 October, he can have it, and a general election to boot; but he must negotiate a swift Brexit deal in return, or face a delay. This is high-risk. Much will depend on Johnson playing ball. The prime minister has a choice. He can negotiate a reordering of the Irish backstop – which the EU seems ready to consider – and restore May’s withdrawal deal. That will unlock Brexit on 31 October, and an early election. It would be a compromise. But Johnson must see that honouring his October pledge would be hugely popular. The nation would heave a sigh of relief. The question is, can Johnson sustain a postponed gratification? His political imagery, and thus his behaviour, is gripped by the rhetoric of war. The trouble, as students of war know well, is that when the battle lines are thus drawn, neither side is content with less than total triumph. In the last weeks of the Falklands war, moves to reach a deal advantageous to Britain were scuppered by Thatcher’s cabinet, since “so many soldiers have died”. Johnson is so hyped up that he seems almost to yearn for the cost and disruption of no deal. He believes that intransigence holds the key to election victory and that calm Gove can keep the home fires burning. His Brexit has mutated into a Clausewitzian war by other means. Ever since it was first mooted, Brexit extremists have drifted from rejoining the European free trade area, to soft Brexit, to hard Brexit and now to no deal. The wilder the stance, the greater the price of glory. Johnson is a very British populist. I still find it hard to believe he seriously sees former colleagues such as Ken Clarke, Philip Hammond and Nicholas Soames as traitors to the national interest. But he clearly regards the Conservative party, and indeed all of parliament, as an Athenian oligarch saw the Delian League: as owing loyal subservience to his vanity. His model, Alcibiades, would I am sure never have countenanced a Spartan backstop. Expressing Brexit in terms of war – and war extended into domestic politics – does no favours to the current ailments of democracy. Johnson may see his chaotic reign in Hobbesian terms, as nasty and brutish, if not short. But the strength of the Conservative party has been its rooting in Burke, not Hobbes. It is the party of compromise, a coalition of the little platoons. Johnson’s cleansing of dissent strips it of diversity, much as Corbyn would like to do for Labour. The longer term casualty of Brexit may yet be the demise of two-party cohesion in Britain. Parties across the western world have become ever more bruised and ridiculed, as democracies fragment into lobbies and identity groups. Banal though it may seem, traditional parties are crucial to accountable democracy. They are Burke’s platoons writ large, the intermediaries between the atomised voter and an overweening central state. They are the agencies of power from the bottom up. We need them. Rhetorical war may be better than real war. But it is an ever more polarised conflict. No-deal Brexit may deliver Johnson some populist gain, but is not the product of a responsive democracy. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist