Theatre seems one of our crazy nation’s few growth industries, with new spaces opening all the time. The latest arrival is a 200-seat venue that is part of an urban development next to Battersea Power Station. Even if the area has the futuristic feel of Godard’s Alphaville, the theatre is a welcoming space and kicks off with the revised version of a Harvey Fierstein play, originally known as Torch Song Trilogy, that started in an off-off-Broadway theatre in 1978 and went on to introduce gay drama to a wider audience in both New York and London. Although the piece has lost its pioneering edge, it still packs a certain punch. It charts the life of a New York drag-queen, Arnold Beckoff, who in the first and still the best third enjoys an on-off relationship with a bisexual teacher and seeks sex in unlikely places: an encounter with a penetrative stranger in a backroom bar remains the sad-funny highlight. Thereafter, we get echoes of Noël Coward, when Arnold goes to see his now married ex-lover, and of Neil Simon when Arnold, seeking to adopt a 16-year-old boy, is visited by his outraged Jewish mother. Many of the play’s arguments, especially about the normalcy of gay relationships, are now widely accepted and Fierstein bombards us with one-liners such as “a thing of beauty is a joy till sunrise”. But Arnold remains a rich role that Matthew Needham, last seen in Tennessee Williams’s Summer and Smoke, successfully makes his own. He focuses less on Arnold’s drag-queen flamboyance than on his neediness, insecurity and craving for love and respect. Needham, who has the string-bean physique of Anthony Perkins, suggests that Arnold’s sharp tongue conceals a warm and affectionate heart. Choreographer Drew McOnie, making his debut as a play director, excavates the emotion beneath the epigrammatic barrage and there are good performances from Bernice Stegers as Arnold’s intransigent mum and from Dino Fetscher as his dithering lover. The play may have done its work in the world, but it offers a fat star-role that Mr Needham fills with the right tremulous assurance. • At Turbine, London, until 13 October.