The pound fell below $1.20 to its weakest level in three years at one point on Tuesday before recovering losses after Boris Johnson lost a crucial Brexit vote. The currency, which has lost 20% of its value since the UK voted to leave the EU in 2016, dropped to as low as $1.1959 earlier on Tuesday, sliding by about 1% before rallying as the prime minister faced humiliation in the Commons. After the government was defeated by MPs backing a motion to allow a debate on a bill on Wednesday that would prevent a no-deal Brexit, sterling was trading around the same level it began the day, at about $1.2084. Although recovering the losses, the pound had not traded below $1.20 since 1985 – apart from very briefly during the “flash crash” in October 2016, when sterling momentarily plunged to as low as $1.15. Despite City investors betting on the rising chance of Britain either agreeing a Brexit deal or staying in the EU, some City analysts suggest the risk of the UK crashing out remains relatively high. Goldman Sachs has raised its odds of a no-deal Brexit from 20% to 25% and said the odds on Britain staying in the EU had declined. Ranko Berich, the head of market analysis at Monex Europe, predicted the pound would fall below parity with the euro if there was a no-deal Brexit. He said the “fragile support” for the currency created by Johnson’s trips to Paris and Berlin last week had been eradicated by the political drama in Westminster. “No-deal risk remains the be all and end all for sterling. Given that sterling’s fall over the past six months has been driven by an increase in the no-deal risk, from an outside possibility to approximately 50% chance today, we estimate that the pound is likely to weaken by around a further 7% if no deal actually happens – taking [the pound against the dollar] to around $1.12 and [the pound against the euro] to just below parity,” Berich said. On Tuesday, £1 was worth €1.096, meaning €1 was worth 91.2p, close to the 10-year low recorded last month. The Financial Conduct Authority warned that trading currencies using information taken from unpublished polls could breach market abuse rules. The City watchdog was responding to MPs’ concerns that polling firms provided surveys to broadcasters and also sold data privately to hedge funds that could use the information to make trades during the 2016 EU referendum. An imminent election looks increasingly likely, meaning polling firms are poised to spring into action. Official figures published on Tuesday appeared to show sterling’s decline this year had been a boon for foreign investors, who were able to snap up British businesses more cheaply. The value of mergers and acquisitions of UK companies by overseas businesses was £18.4bn in the three months from April to June, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said, more than double the £7.6bn recorded in the first three months of the year. At the same time, UK companies spent £1.5bn buying overseas businesses, compared with £6bn in the first three months of the year. One major acquisition – the £5bn buyout of insurer Jardine Lloyd Thompson by US rival Marsh & McLennan – accounted for much of the jump in foreign purchases. But the trend for foreign companies seeing UK assets as bargains appears likely to continue, with Hong’s Kong’s richest family on course to buy the pub and beer business Greene King for £2.7bn and a US private equity firm making a successful £4bn bid for the defence supplier Cobham. Earlier this month, Hasbro, the US toy company behind My Little Pony and Play-Doh, agreed to buy the owner of Peppa Pig for £3.3bn. Much of the interest in UK assets has come from China, with 15 major acquisitions by Chinese companies valued at a combined £6.75bn completed already this year.