Director Ursula Macfarlane didn’t hesitate when asked to take on the daunting task of documenting the story that led to the launch of the #MeToo movement: “I almost jumped up and down and said: ‘Yes, absolutely.’” The result is a mesmerising feature-length film that, while vacillating unevenly between marvelling at Weinstein’s movie-producing prowess and vilifying his treatment of women, allows his accusers to tell their stories. Mike Bradley After a shaky start, Steven Knight’s piece of Brummagem brilliance has recovered its sparkle. As Tommy, Arthur and Michael head to Westminster, the only fly in the ointment is the hamfisted caricature portrayal of fascist tyro Oswald Mosley (Sam Claflin), the man they’ve come to meet. Otherwise, terrific. MB As well you might expect, the finale to season three is a deftly plotted piece of thriller writing that will have you on the edge of your seat, as June (Elisabeth Moss at her ruthless best) risks everything in an attempt to spirit a group of children out of Gilead. Echoes of the Book of Exodus are everywhere in the best drama of the week. MB Now 90, Japanese contemporary artist Yayoi Kusama has lived a life marred by trauma, war and mental illness. However, her multidisciplinary creations, ranging from surrealism to pop art, continue to inspire – with a second wind thanks to Instagram. This doc charts her life and work. Hannah J Davies In Glasgow, this tasty showcase for new theatre work – where lunch is included in the ticket price – has staged more than 500 plays in 15 years. Six recent productions have been filmed in situ for broadcast, starting with a music-filled tribute to comic Chic Murray, the surreal Scottish patter merchant who died in 1985. Graeme Virtue “Cinemas are a shelter from the storm,” says Belfast-born writer and film-maker Mark Cousins – and for the nervy boy who was four when the Troubles began they were a lifeline. In this beautiful work, he traces the changing face of Northern Ireland and its depiction in film. Ali Catterall Life of Crime 11.20pm, BBC Two Jennifer Aniston draws on the comic timing of all those Friends episodes to lead this fun-filled adaptation of Elmore Leonard’s The Switch. She plays the socialite wife of Frank (Tim Robbins), a slimy crook who has no intention of paying up when she’s held for ransom by bumbling kidnappers (Mos Def and John Hawkes). Paul Howlett Darts: BDO World Trophy 1pm, Eurosport 2. Day three from Blackburn. Coverage of the final airs at 6pm. Motor Racing: Belgian Grand Prix 2.05pm, Sky Sports F1. Round 13 of the Formula 1 season. Premier League Football: Arsenal v Tottenham Hotspur 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A derby between two Champions League chasers. Preceded by Everton v Wolves (2pm).