Sue Perkins is having to confront her failures – and shout about them. Which she is failing at. Perkins is attending a management training course for Japanese salarymen and one of the tasks is to voice your shortcomings. “I AM SUE,” she yells, gamely. “I AM VERY SHY AND I DON’T LIKE SHOUTING. BUT I HAVE COME HERE TO LEARN JAPANESE DISCIPLINE.” “TOO QUIET!” the instructor barks back. The TV presenter is making quite a career from travel programmes – Japan With Sue Perkins (BBC One) is at least her third. Usually I find celebrity travelogues about as interesting as the holiday stories of people I know in real life, which is to say not very. But they show no sign of dying out, so somebody must be watching. I like Perkins, though, and she is an amiable traveller and presenter – there is an openness to her that puts people at ease, and an honesty that makes her intriguing to watch. She arrives in Tokyo and the cliches start. There are neon lights and zebra crossings the length of runways. It feels “so alien, so other, so extraordinarily strange”. There is something about reconciling the “traditional values of old Japan” and its “strange new future”. Perkins checks into a hotel with creepy robot receptionists and is flummoxed by a hi-tech wardrobe. Then it is on to a sumo training session, where the sight of Perkins being trussed with a mawashi – that beige nappy-style jockstrap – made me laugh. “That’s certainly reconnected me with my genitals,” she says. She trains with some female students who hope to become Japan’s first professional female sumo wrestlers, once it is allowed. There are more robots in the home of a Japanese family, who have a mechanical dog to keep their proper dogs company and a cutesy humanoid robot who does the same for their children. Instead of being alarmed, Perkins seems taken with the idea that robots could keep us company when we are lonely and elderly. “Suddenly they don’t feel like the enemy,” she says. Thankfully this programme is elevated beyond foreigners doing funny things by Perkins’ empathy. When she goes to a business school outside the city to learn to be a better manager – it is based on SAS techniques and known as Hell Camp – the absurdity of it is obvious, but she has genuine concern for the men who seem to be struggling. “If they don’t do what they’ve been told and they don’t complete the course, then it’s shameful for them and their jobs could be on the line,” she says, looking tearful. There are men crying from humiliation, confronting their shortcomings as bosses. “It’s really painful to watch,” she says. Perkins has watery eyes again at the photoshoot of the fake wedding of a young woman – minus a partner – who wants to be made up and photographed in a wedding dress for “my family and my Instagram”. It is ridiculous but Perkins finds the humanity – and poignancy – in it. Marriage rates are down, she says, and “young people are more likely to be celibate than ever before”. Exploring the culture of kawaii – cuteness – Perkins visits a district filled with shops selling infantile clothes and accessories for grownups. “The more I walk down [this street] the more I think about Japanese girls and how much pressure must be on them all the time to be sweet and submissive and pink and cute,” she says. “Someone like me, aged nine or 10, would have felt so lost in a culture that prizes that version of the feminine.” You know what she is thinking when she goes to a meet-and-greet held by one of Japan’s many girl bands, above a garage and up a “piss-stained concrete staircase”, and it is full of middle-aged male fans. “This guy’s got your classic gig outfit on – suit, tie, face mask,” she deadpans. But the gig itself, with a load of men cutting loose with glow sticks, is hilarious. “Imagine if you put Taylor Swift in a garage and filled it with estate agents and football hooligans,” is Perkins’ perfect description. It is a “maddening, brilliant” experience – not seedy, as she imagined. She looks as if she might cry again. As a travel buddy, Perkins is great fun. But as a satisfying exploration of the country, the programme lacked depth. Perkins hints at more interesting subjects; she is critical of Japan’s rigidity, particularly gender roles, and I would love to have heard from some expert Japanese voices unpicking the salarymen’s shame, or the impact of kawaii on women. For the last 10 minutes, Perkins heads to the countryside – stunning, beautiful mountains – for a dash around Shintoism and a spot of forest bathing. She is instructed to lie down on some logs and “fully enjoy the sounds of nature”. Then the forest therapist starts playing a flute, and Perkins’ eyes snap open in alarm. A priest at a Shinto festival explains that in a hi-tech world, getting close to nature is a chance to live at a more relaxed pace. It is presented as a profundity, but is hardly a dazzling insight.