Pep Guardiola has said that as Manchester City were unable to buy a centre-back in the summer there appears little chance of adding cover for Aymeric Laporte in the winter window after the Frenchman was ruled out for up to six months. The manager, who had wanted to strengthen in Laporte’s position before the start of the season, described the loss of his defensive linchpin as hard. “It will be long – five or six months, January or February maybe – next year for sure,” he said. “My advice to you is not to write too many names about the winter window, because you are going to make a mistake. I don’t think it’s going to happen. I heard already we are interested in this player or the other player. I would like to say to all the clubs in the world: ‘Don’t be nervous, because we are not interested in any players or central defenders in Europe.’ “We are going to survive with the players we have. Maybe in December we are going to start to think about it – maybe. But we could not invest in this situation in the summer, we cannot do it in winter. That’s why we are going to wait with the players we have, with the two central defenders [John Stones and Nicolás Otamendi], with Fernandinho, with Eric García and Taylor Harwood-Bellis, even some players in different positions we can use there. We’re going to move forward.” Of what City will miss because of Laporte’s absence, Guardiola said: “It is hard, the same as Leroy [Sané, also out until the new year]. We are disappointed for him, for both of them. Leroy is important. Aymeric in that position is important too, for his left foot and his personality. “Unfortunately he is injured. So we’re going to live without him for a long time, and we have enough resources to move forward and see what we can do.” Stones has not always impressed under the manager, yet Guardiola said: “He’s going to play incredible this period, while Laporte is not with us. I don’t have any doubts about his quality. The same case like Nico [Otamendi]. And I’m pretty sure the [same regarding the] young players, from what I know from pre-season with Taylor and especially Eric. I know him a little bit more; he played the Carabao Cup last season. Fernandinho with his quality can play there. “The personality [of Stones] is always there. So there’s a guy who in the first season made some mistakes and always tries again. The only problem is sometimes I decide for Nico and sometimes Vinnie [Kompany, last season]. They have to compete with each other but the quality is there. I know the qualities [of all my players] after three seasons or a little bit more. So I don’t have any doubts – John included.” Guardiola is confident Stones and Otamendi can be a successful partnership. “Before Aymeric came they were a partnership and they played many games,” he said.