Eddie Jones believes Japan’s sweltering conditions will give England the edge over their World Cup rivals as he seeks to take advantage of his inside knowledge of the host nation. England arrived at their pre-tournament base earlier this week in the southern city of Miyazaki – where humidity levels are above 80% – to fine-tune preparations before heading north for their tournament opener against Tonga in Sapporo next Sunday. Jones earmarked Miyazaki as his preferred location, having spent weeks with Japan here before the 2015 World Cup, but rivals Ireland and New Zealand have opted to base themselves in Tokyo prior to beginning their respective campaigns. In addition, Jones twice took his squad to Treviso in an effort to replicate the kind of humid conditions England are currently training in and are likely to encounter once the tournament begins. “We’re looking forward to playing in the humidity,” said Jones, speaking at England’s official arrival press conference. “We’ve prepared for it and it’s obviously a big part of rugby in Japan in September and October. We feel like playing in the humidity will give us an advantage. “The players have adjusted really well. We’re very positive and there’s a good feeling in the camp. Everyone is ready to start work now. We’ve actually had to pull players back because they wanted to work harder. We’ve had a variety of activities on and off the field. The players feel like they’ve adapted to the environment as well as they can and now they’re ready to begin the serious preparation for the World Cup. “The first part of the World Cup is always dependent on your travel. We had a vigorous travel schedule, but we’ve settled in well now and have got used to the conditions. Players have been out and about a bit. We’ve deliberately had quite an easy training week but we’ll increase that starting today.” Jones also believes his star status in Japan, having masterminded their historic win over South Africa four years ago, could give England an advantage. “The Japanese love the All Blacks and that isn’t going to change, but I’m sure we’ll get our fair share of support … the number of English jerseys we’ve seen in Miyazaki, it’s been quite incredible,” he added. “We’ll get some good support and it will make a difference because as you know Japanese rugby crowds can be quite quiet so if we’ve got a number of people supporting us, it could make a difference.”