‘You are an enemy of the people,” a character remarks in Frances Ya-Chu Cowhig’s ambitious new play. The phrase prompts memories of Ibsen and, like her predecessor, the playwright shows an individual battling governmental corruption, in this case in 1990s China. The result is instructive and demanding but the most moving feature of the first night was the appearance at curtain-call of Dr Shuping Wang, on whose experience the play is based, and who has been under pressure from the Chinese authorities to have it withdrawn. She has resisted, and the play exposes a horrifying story. Set in Henan province, it shows how local officials were urged to collect blood plasma in vast quantities for sale to an American pharmaceutical company. Shortcuts were taken to stimulate profits until an infectious disease specialist, here named Yin Yin, discovered that this booming trade was leading to the spread of HIV. That is a bald summary of a complex story and the play’s first half takes time to set up the sometimes confusing background. But the medical detail pays off in the second half, which not only traces the government cover-up but explores the personal sacrifices made by the whistleblower. One of the best scenes shows Yin Yin reluctantly abandoning her family to flee to the US and reveal the scandal to the wider world. Ideally it’s a play for a big space but Michael Boyd’s production and Tom Piper’s design, with its onstage travelators and audience walkways, commendably encompass an epic story and a cast of eight play multiple roles with great skill. Celeste Den shows how Yin Yin’s heroism is a byproduct of her dedication to scientific truth and Millicent Wong captures the seeming guilelessness of a ministerial official who turns into the operation’s mastermind. Christopher Goh as Yin Yin’s agonised husband, Shen, and Kok-Hwa Lie as his unscrupulous brother give equally strong performances. It’s not flawless but the play, which kickstarts a new regime at Hampstead theatre, opens one’s eyes, not just to systemic corruption, but to China’s eager embrace of capitalist values.• At Hampstead theatre, London, until 12 October.