With the first part of this intricately researched documentary following the immediate run up to the Brexit referendum and Cameron’s resignation, the concluding episode traces his career back to vying for leadership of the Conservative party. With access to key figures such as George Osborne and the man himself, it is a cautionary tale of how ambition easily overtook Cameron’s supposed liberalism, sowing the seeds of division within the party. Cameron is characteristically robotic but the archive footage paints a stark picture. Ammar Kalia With Britain recently losing its measles-free status, and anti-vaccination populist campaigns on the rise across the globe, this incisive documentary delves into the history of the movement and how its shonky science has become legitimised on social media and helped by its lack of scrutiny. AK Boasting all-areas access to prisons across Britain, at times there are too many stories jostling for attention in this new documentary series. But there is still plenty of bleak insight, including a religious conversion and a new officer on one of his first shifts witnessing a case of serious self-harm. Phil Harrison The first series of this medical drama ended on a cliffhanger, when the ambulance transporting the reforming doctor Max (Ryan Eggold), his wife and newborn baby to hospital collided with a stolen vehicle. Who survived? Who was injured? And who is that dead body under the sheet? Now is our chance to find out. Ellen E Jones After so much toxic machismo, we have earned this cathartic payoff at the end of the biography of the Fox News boss Roger Ailes. While Russell Crowe does a good sclerotic meltdown as Ailes, the show takes time to give his female victims their moment. And when it does, it is a proud and bitter vindication. Jack Seale Fourteen banks are robbed every day in the US and this new series takes us through the stories of the culprits, from their often desperate motivations to the methodology and aftermath. In tonight’s episode, bank manager Louis Early Jr reunites with his long-lost father to run a series of daring heists. A gripping watch. AK The Killing of a Sacred Deer, 9pm, Film4As you might expect from the director of The Lobster, Yorgos Lanthimos’s horror-thriller is absurdist, to hugely entertaining and disquieting effect. Heart surgeon Colin Farrell and his wife Nicole Kidman seem to be a successful couple but his friendship with teenager Martin casts a deeply threatening shadow. Paul Howlett Rugby World Cup: Italy v Canada, 8am, ITV4Canada crashed out at the first stage four years ago; will they be more successful this time? Rugby World Cup: England v US, 11am, ITVThe sides’ first clash since 2007. Women’s Champions League Football: Glasgow City v Chertanovo, 7.30pm, BBC AlbaSecond leg from Petershill Park.