Building a music system can be a bewildering process. Formats (digital, analogue), types of connectivity (wired, wireless), concerns about obsolescence and issues with making all your bits, new and old, work together: it all needs consideration. Here, we show you how to build a capable sound system and update your listening experience for the 21st century. As TVs have got slimmer, and the space for built-in speakers has become smaller, so the need for a bit of help in the sound department has become necessary. Even the most expensive televisions benefit from the addition of a soundbar, to ensure the audio performance is as cinematic as the picture. The good news is that a decent soundbar can double as a pretty impressive sound system. Most of them will incorporate Bluetooth playback, so you can stream directly from a tablet or smartphone, but an increasing number of people are using their TV as the source, thanks to apps such as YouTube and Spotify, which are available via smart TV systems. Yamaha make some of the best soundbars. The MusicCast BAR 400 (£449, pictured above) is a 2.1 channel system with an included wireless subwoofer that’s great for movies, but it also includes plenty of features aimed specifically at music playback. The MusicCast label means it is compatible with Yamaha’s growing multi-room setup, while AirPlay 2, Spotify Connect and direct access to streaming services Deezer, Tidal and Qobuz via the remote app give you many different ways to play your tunes. There’s also support for hi-res 24-bit/192kHz playback, meaning audiophile-grade music collections will feel at home here too. Total: £449 While dedicated portable audio players have their place for those who want the very best sound on the go, all but the most discerning of audiophiles will be using the powerful device that already sits in their pockets – their smartphone. But what lets down a smartphone from a sound perspective compared with a dedicated device is usually its circuitry, specifically its DAC – or digital-to-analogue – converter. This is something you will find in any digital device that deals with sound. Ultimately, it changes a digital signal that can’t be heard into an analogue soundwave that can. The better the DAC, the better quality the sound. That’s why it is often a good idea to bypass the DAC in your device and use a standalone one instead. The pocket-size Audiolab M-DAC Nano (£149) is a superb entry-level option and adds extra convenience by being wireless. This means you plug your headphones directly into its 3.5mm jack but connect to your device via high-quality Bluetooth. Team it with a pair of wired headphones such as the excellent Sennheiser Momentum 2 (£99, pictured above) and you’ll hear your music instantly clearer, cleaner and more expressive, with more punch and power than you’d get from your device directly. Perfect for helping you switch off from your commute. Total: £248 If you’re attached to an older hi-fi system, there is no need to bin it just so you can introduce more modern functionality to your setup. The Bluesound Node 2i (£499, pictured above) can do all that for you in a single box and is hands down the most talented streamer you’ll find for under £500. Just connect it to your existing stereo receiver using a pair of phono cables and it will instantly breathe new life into an older system with a plethora of new playback options. Alongside a digital input, a USB port and an excellent headphone stage for private listening, there is also built-in aptX HD Bluetooth, AirPlay 2 and of course wifi, which will give your legacy kit access to internet radio stations, streaming services and any music that’s stored on your home network. It also makes it instantly compatible with the Bluesound high-resolution, multi-room system, plus there’s an Alexa facility for introducing voice commands. In addition to allowing you to stream music through your cherished old hi-fi, the Node has a DAC that may well outperform the one in your CD player, meaning your old discs will sound better than they did before. Total: £499 Laptops are popular music sources for both home and office setups, whether for playing back music that has been ripped from CDs or downloaded from iTunes or is being streamed from Spotify. Built-in laptop speakers aren’t cut out to deliver any of the detail or nuance, so supplanting them with a decent pair of active speakers is a quick and easy way of improving your desktop setup. Active speakers have built-in amplification, so don’t require a separate stereo receiver to power them, as you would have in a traditional hi-fi setup. They usually plug into the source using a 3.5mm input but some, such as the Ruark MR1 Mk2 (£330, pictured above), offer an optical input for 24-bit/192kHz support too. Whichever way you connect them, they sound fantastic. This is hi-fi grade audio from a category that, only a few years ago, wouldn’t have come close. If all you do to your desktop setup is buy a pair of Ruarks, your music will sound instantly better. However, team them with the Audioquest DragonFly Red (£169) USB DAC and you’ll add a further layer of sophistication, subtlety and solidity to your music – plus you can also use it to enhance your headphone experience. Total: £499 Music streaming services have made owning music surplus to requirement for many people. Making one monthly payment for unlimited access to a whole world of music makes a lot of financial sense for people who have eclectic tastes, not to mention limited space for storing the physical alternative. Plus, it’s great for music discovery. This kind of music ownership lends itself to an audio setup such as that offered by streaming pioneer Sonos, which allows you to tap into all of your services in one place and play them back reliably and in good quality, all around the home. While you don’t have to buy more than one speaker, the fun really starts when you do. The control app is easy to use and helps you get a multi-room system up and running in a matter of minutes. You can keep adding to it as your budget allows, with a whole family of speakers and soundbars to suit every room of the house. The Sonos One is a fantastic little speaker to get you started (£398 for a two-room bundle, pictured above), offering rich, spacious sound for a small speaker. It also offers voice control with both Alexa and Google Assistant support built in. Total: £398 With interest in vinyl well and truly revived, buying a system to play it on has undergone a renaissance. The popular briefcase-style record players might look the part, but with poor quality built-in speakers and none of the adjustment options that will protect your vinyl from damage, you won’t be doing your record collection any favours. For a setup that will do the analogue sound justice, you’ll want to build a system of traditional hi-fi separates. The Pro-Ject Primary E (£145, pictured above) is a fantastic entry-level deck from a respected turntable manufacturer and although its design is pretty plain, its sound is anything but. Team it with the Onkyo A-9010 stereo amplifier (£199) and the Mission LX-2 bookshelf speakers (£149) and you’ll have a system that’s not short of energy or clarity. The LX-2s are a couple of years old now, but there are few budget speakers that can match them for refinement and musicality, offering punch and unshakable poise in equal measure. The A-9010 will bring the best out of a budget setup like this, but is equally at home with pricier kit too, should you look to upgrade at any stage. Total: £493 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.