Preston moved up to third place and closed the gap on Leeds and Swansea (both drew) to just a point after a 1-0 away victory at Birmingham. The visitors grabbed the winner in the 23rd-minute when Sean Maguire converted from close range after Paul Gallagher’s free-kick had cannoned off the inside of the post. Queens Park Rangers are alongside Preston on 16 points after climbing up to fourth from seventh with a 2-1 win at Millwall. Nahki Wells made it four goals in two games with a second-half brace, his 72nd-minute winner coming after a bad mistake from home goalkeeper Bartosz Bialkowski. Shaun Hutchinson had levelled for the home side just a minute earlier after a goalmouth scramble. Nottingham Forest continued their good run of form by scoring a second straight 1-0 victory, this one over Barnsley, to move up to fifth. On a day when the home supporters celebrated the life of legendary manager Brian Clough, who passed away 15 years ago, not-so-young man Ben Watson sealed the victory with his first goal in a red shirt, the veteran netting 11 minutes into the second 45. Charlton slipped to seventh after Cheyenne Dunkley netted either side of the break to give Wigan a 2-0 win at the DW Stadium. Dunkley opened to the scoring in the 22nd minute and added another 20 minutes from time. It represented a second successive reverse for Charlton, who were unbeaten prior to losing 1-0 at home to Birmingham last week. Sheffield Wednesday pinched a point at home to Fulham after 77th-minute substitute Atdhe Nuhiu netted two minutes into added time with a diving header to bag a barely-deserved 1-1 draw. Fulham were the better side and had taken the lead in the 42nd minute through Tom Cairney. Blackburn joined Wednesday on 13 points – four off the pace – after a 2-1 success at Reading. Rovers made it two straight three-point hauls with goals from Adam Armstrong (8) and Bradley Dack (48). Reading cut the visitors’ lead in half with a 57th-minute response from John Swift but that was all they could muster, the Royals ending the day in 20th. Leeds 1-1 Derby, Birmingham 0-1 Preston, Brentford 0-0 Stoke, Bristol City 0-0 Swansea, Cardiff 1-0 Middlesbrough, Luton 0-3 Hull, Millwall 1-2 QPR, Nottingham Forest 1-0 Barnsley, Reading 1-2 Blackburn, Sheffield Wednesday 1-1 Fulham Accrington 1-1 Blackpool, Bolton 1-1 Sunderland, Doncaster 2-0 Peterborough, Fleetwood 2-1 Rochdale, Gillingham 0-1 Ipswich, Lincoln 0-6 Oxford, MK Dons 0-1 Southend, Rotherham 0-0 Shrewsbury, Tranmere 2-1 Burton, Wimbledon 1-3 Bristol Rovers Bradford 3-1 Carlisle, Cambridge 0-1 Swindon, Colchester 2-1 Leyton Orient, Crewe 4-1 Salford, Forest Green 0-0 Stevenage, Grimsby 1-0 Macclesfield, Newport 1-1 Exeter, Northampton 2-2 Crawley, Oldham 3-1 Morecambe, Plymouth 0-2 Cheltenham, Port Vale 2-2 Mansfield, Walsall 1-0 Scunthorpe Cardiff remain in the bottom half of the table (13th) but extended their unbeaten run in the Championship to five games with a scrappy 1-0 victory over Middlesbrough. The Bluebirds’ winner came after just two minutes when winger Josh Murphy swung in a corner which Ashley Fletcher inadvertently headed past his own goalkeeper Darren Randolph. Hull, who started the day in 20th, scored the biggest win of the day in the Championship thanks to a 3-0 victory at Luton. Former Liverpool midfielder Kevin Stewart broke the deadlock in the 63rd minute before the Tigers sealed it via Kamil Grosicki (87) and a Dan Potts own goal (90). Hull had won just one of their previous 13 away games. Stoke doubled their points tally for the season – from one to two – with a low-key 0-0 draw at Brentford. Nathan Jones’ side had lost three out of three on the road in the Championship but held on for a point. For now it takes them off the bottom, leaving Huddersfield to prop up the table. The Terriers travel to West Brom on Sunday. Ipswich returned to the top of the shop – and maintained their unbeaten record – with a narrow 1-0 win at Gillingham. Kane Vincent-Young fired the visitors in front and the Ipswich defence, which has conceded just four goals in their opening nine games, did the rest. Ailing Bolton looked on the verge of their first win of the campaign at home to Sunderland before the Black Cats snatched a draw with a last-gap penalty from Aiden McGeady. Oxford produced the performance of the day in the third tier with a 6-0 hammering of Lincoln, Tarique Fosu-Henry helping himself to a hat-trick. Wycombe are third after a 1-0 home triumph over Portsmouth while Fleetwood moved up to fourth after Ched Evans’ late winner in a 2-1 success over Rochdale. Exeter remain the division’s only unbeaten side although their lead at the top was reduced to a single point after a 1-1 draw away to Newport. The top four are now separated by just two points. Crewe thumped Salford 4-1 to stay second, Cheltenham remained in third with a 2-0 victory at Plymouth while fourth-placed Swindon narrowed the gap on Exeter with a 1-0 success at Cambridge. Bradford moved into the top six with a 3-1 victory over Carlisle, both sides being reduced to 10 men, while Stevenage remain the only League Two side without a win although they nudged their tally on to four points with a creditable 0-0 draw at fifth-placed Forest Green Rovers.