Telling the stories of others is a weighty responsibility. The Jumper Factory, created with prisoners at HMP Wandsworth as part of the Young Vic’s Taking Part programme, is sensitive to this. It opens with a warning: “We are not us,” say the cast, acknowledging that these are not their stories to own. There are two layers to this project, which began with performances in prison and was remounted by a company of young men with little prior acting experience. They might not be telling their own stories, but the performers themselves have all had contact with the criminal justice system, some narrowly escaping the experiences of the inmates they represent. In this version of the show, there’s the impression of two communities overlapping: the prisoners (whose recorded voices we occasionally hear) and the actors, warmly and collaboratively sharing their experiences. From these collective voices emerges a single story – “a story that is true without actually being true” – about an unnamed inmate acclimatising to life inside. The jumper factory of the title is a fiction, a cover story made up by the protagonist because he can’t face the shame of telling his mum where he really is. Slowly serving his time, he misses his family, he gets in and out of trouble, and he studies in hope of a better life on the outside. It’s a slight narrative, but writer Luke Barnes handles it with care. The narration, shared between the cast of six, flips between first and second person; the play’s central character becomes a sort of every-inmate, standing in for shared hopes, dreams and frustrations. Josh Parr’s production is simple, creating the world of the play with just a row of chairs and Jess Glaisher’s evocative lighting. It reflects both the plain surroundings of its original performances and the bare expanse of time behind bars. Though it feels laboured at times, the insistence that these stories belong to the inmates also serves another purpose. Stories can bridge gaps, connecting us to experiences far removed from our own. In the words of the play, its absent speakers are people, not just crimes. At Home, Manchester, until 14 September.