Low tide on the Passage du Gois reveals a scene that has barely changed in centuries. As the sea retreats, people armed with rakes and shovels set out across the sand flats either side of the cobbled causeway connecting Noirmoutier island with the mainland. Hunched over the rippled sand, they fill baskets and buckets with cockles and clams. Others use penknives to prise oysters off the rocks and pop them straight into their children’s mouths. One family offered our eight-year-old son an oyster, which he golloped down, declaring it delicious. For a moment we felt a little bit French. Until 1971, this causeway was the only link between the island and the mainland; now a bridge offers a safer, quicker crossing, but of course it’s not as much fun. Nine wooden towers along the 2½-mile length of the causeway provide views – and refuge from the rising sea if you mistime your visit. To avoid getting stranded, we walked back on to the island as the tide turned and sat on a rocky slope watching the sand flats and road disappear under the water and wondering when the owners of a car parked on the causeway were going to return. As the sea started lapping around the tyres, they finally ran back and drove off in the nick of time, to cheers from us onlookers. It was a moment of drama on an island where very little happens. Noirmoutier is a flat, 16-mile-long island off the coast of the Vendée. While Île de Ré, about 80 miles further south, has long been a place of second homes for Parisians and, increasingly, British holidaymakers, Noirmoutier has been mostly overlooked by Brits. Both islands are known for their seafood (particularly oysters) and cycling; both have sandy beaches and pretty villages. But where Île de Ré has boutique hotels, chic shopping and high-end restaurants, Noirmoutier offers a lower-key experience. We stayed in a cabin at Domaine Le Midi, a campsite amid dunes by a long Atlantic-facing beach. It wasn’t beach weather, so we hired bikes and set off to explore. The Vendée has the largest network of cycle tracks in France and these extend to the island. We rode across the salt marshes where salt is still harvested in the traditional way and piled on the banks in little white mounds. Between the salt marshes and oyster farms was Chez P’tit Louis, a seafood shack where we devoured two dozen oysters (€16) between us. Salt farming declined at the end of the 20th century but now a new generation of artisan producers are using traditional methods to harvest the “white gold”. On our way back we stopped off at one of many wooden huts advertising salt and stocked up on little linen bags of fleur de sel, the delicate flakes that form on the surface of seawater. The village of L’Épine has a water park (Océanile) and there’s a small aquarium (Sealand) at Noirmoutier-en-l’Île, and that’s about it for attractions. Other than cycling, most activities revolve around the sea. The east coast is scalloped with sheltered beaches offering surfing, kayaking, sand yachting and sailing. We stuck to the simpler pleasures of sandcastle building by rows of smart white beach huts on Plage des Dames and peering into fishermen’s buckets on the wooden pier. As well as shellfish and salt, the island’s other foodie claim to fame is the world’s most expensive potato, the salty bonnotte. We saw them roasted whole in giant pans at the market in the village of Barbâtre. Local produce is also highlighted on the menu of La Marine, a two-Michelin-star harbourside restaurant in L’Herbaudière, on the far western tip. Here, chef Alexandre Couillon turns whatever the boats bring in – sole, seabass, red mullet, lobster, spider crab – into beautiful dishes (four courses from €88). But Couillon and his wife also run a more affordable restaurant right next door. La Table d’Élise shares a kitchen with La Marine but offers a three-course menu for €33. We ate in its pretty garden one night and were treated to chargrilled octopus, shellfish ravioli and red tuna with tapenade. Heading back to the mainland, we took in the craft village of Sallertaine on the way to eco-campsite Domaine de l’Oiselière, arriving just as a local seller of biodynamic wines was setting up a stall offering tastings and platters of cheese and cured meats. The campsite, near the small town of Chauché, is run by a brother-and-sister team who gave up jobs in aeronautics and hospitality respectively to set up an environment-friendly business in the area where they grew up. The site has EU Ecolabel certification for its commitment to recycling, green products and low energy and water consumption. Big enough for spacious pitches but small enough for kids to run around freely, with a pool, free bike hire, organic grocery and restaurant, it’s a pretty near perfect family campsite. And that’s before you factor in its proximity to France’s second most popular theme park. I had heard about Puy du Fou but nothing prepared me for its scale and ambition. It was worth going for the bird show alone. Le Bal des Oiseaux Fantômes (dance of the ghost birds) is an over-the-top half-hour of live storytelling involving a few actors and more than 300 birds of prey, released from various corners of an outdoor auditorium, often swooping just inches above the audience’s heads. It’s hard to put a finger on the most surprising bit of the show – the flock of vultures in among the falcons, eagles and owls, or perhaps the snake eagle dancing around a rubber snake. Probably my biggest “what the heck?!” moment came when more birds were released from a balloon tethered above us. By the end of the show the sky was filled with hundreds of birds, in what would be an ornithophobe’s idea of hell, but is a highlight for the thousands who see the show every day. The bird show is just one of six major daytime shows (there are also two evening ones). The spectacles can be five years in the making, sets can take a year to construct, and casts run into hundreds – human, mammal and avian. One of the most gobsmacking and, for some, uncomfortable sights is the opening parade in the 7,000-seater “Roman arena” (wild animals are allowed in French shows). First came 100 geese, led in formation around the arena. Two oxen followed, then 12 ostriches, their heads peeking out of a pen, a caged leopard and a trio of camels. Later a tiger stalked the edge of the arena and a white lion leapt on to a platform. Other wow moments included a flaming Viking ship and the knights of the round table rising from a lake. But even all this pales in comparison with the evening extravaganza, La Cinéscénie, which features nearly 2,500 actors and is the world’s biggest nighttime show. Between the theatrics there are landscaped gardens and themed villages to explore, with more costumed actors busy bashing metal or sculpting wood. The closest we have to it in the UK is Kynren, the live action show produced by the team behind Puy du Fou every summer at Bishop Auckland, County Durham. On 30 August, Puy du Fou España opened in Toledo, central Spain, with an evening show. A grand park is slated to open there in 2021 and four more parks across Europe are set to open by 2030. After Puy du Fou, the Vendée’s other attractions could seem a little underwhelming, but several castles tell their own grisly stories through reenactments. We spent a couple of afternoons at Château de Tiffauges and Château Saint-Mesmin, practising jousting and crossbow skills at the former and learning about medieval life at the latter. In the idyllic town of Clisson on the River Sèvre, medieval France meets renaissance Italy. Its castle and 15th-century market hall are surrounded by terracotta roofs reminiscent of Tuscany, a legacy of early 19th-century sculptor François-Frédéric Lemot, who had studied in Rome and designed the neo-classical mansion Domaine de la Garenne Lemot, now a museum and sculpture garden. We only had a couple of hours in Clisson but it’s a lovely spot. It’s the last place on Earth you’d expect to come across a gathering of heavy metal fans, but visit in late June and you’ll spot posses of leather-clad rockers descending on a site just outside the town for Hellfest, a three-day hard rock extravaganza. Local winemakers take the chance to set up stalls and sell gallons of wine to 50,000 thirsty metalheads. It’s such a fixture that there’s a statue of Lemmy from Motörhead on a roundabout next to the site. Among the winegrowers who profit from Hellfest are the Paquereau family of Domaine de l’Épinay, who, unusually for the area, also produce red, rosé and sparkling wines as well as muscadet, the predominant grape of the Nantes area. We stopped for a tasting and to raise a glass to a region perfect for stepping back in time, whether it’s on a small, sleepy island that’s changed little in generations, or at a vast show with state-of-the art special effects. • The trip was arranged with help from Vendée Tourism. Ferry travel was provided by Brittany Ferries, which sails from Portsmouth to St Malo from £377 return for a car and four people, including a cabin on one sailing. Domaine le Midi has tent pitches from €17 and cottages from €56 (two-night minimum). Domaine de L’Oiselière has pitches from €22 a night and cottages from €77 a night. Puy du Fou entry: adult €36, child €26 Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.