As David Cameron’s autobiography is finally released after days of extracts and interviews, there are still significant details of his account that had not come to light. In 2013, Cameron wanted to do more to back the Syrian rebels’ fight against Bashar al-Assad. But he faced opposition in his cabinet and among senior officials and military and security services, who were “a huge source of frustration”, he wrote. “‘Maybe it’s just a wicked problem that can’t be solved’ was the gist.” He felt he was getting better information from “odd members of the Syrian diaspora I’d meet than I did from our diplomats”. Whitehall officials refused to write down ideas for action, for fear of the legal consequences, part of the fallout from the Iraq war. “I understood their nervousness but … it was misguided,” Cameron writes. His biggest frustration, however was Barack Obama’s White House, where “indecisiveness reigned supreme over American policy”. At the time, he recorded his thoughts that “the Americans have not done enough, quickly enough, to back the right people in Syria, and I think Obama has rather missed the boat. It’s a slow moving tragedy.” Cameron said he had received several handwritten “detailed and thorough” letters from the heir to the throne and acted on some of those relating to the environment, wildlife and planning. He had “no sympathy with those who complain” about Charles’s interventions. Referring to the Guardian’s investigation into the prince’s attempts to influence ministers, Cameron wrote: “Why shouldn’t the heir to the throne write to ministers with suggestions, questions, ideas? And why should those letters be made public?” He said ministers could reject the entreaties, which anyway were often “expert”, and the habit made it no harder for Charles to retain the monarch’s constitutional independence when king. He highlighted his decision to seek cross-party support to ensure no more of Charles’s letters would be released. As early as January 2012, Cameron said he thought a referendum would be a good idea because the EU bloc was becoming “multi-speed” as a result of the single currency. He said he had held this view before the rise of the Ukip threat or increases in immigration – and that it was not driven by the need to protect the Conservative party from Ukip’s advances. He wrote that during the referendum campaign Lord Rothermere, the owner of the staunchly pro-Brexit Daily Mail, told him over tea in Downing Street that leaving the EU would be “a disaster”. Cameron replied: “Why on earth have you got someone editing the Daily Mail who is determined to drive us out?” This was reported as Cameron urging Rothermere to sack Paul Dacre, but Cameron says this was not the case, although he added: “I wish I had.” Rothermere replaced Dacre two years after the Brexit vote. When Jeremy Corbyn became Labour leader, “he kept asking if he could do things like PMQs differently. ‘Do I have to do it all myself? Can I share it out?’ he said.” Cameron said Corbyn “seemed completely incapable of thinking on his feet”. The opposition leader’s early tactic of reading out questions from the public enabled Cameron to explain policy. “Any attempt to shout me down could be quelled by explaining that Mavis from Motherwell had asked a question and deserved an answer.” Ed Miliband was “annoyingly good” at landing class-themed blows, Gordon Brown was “tough but you could get around him”, and Tony Blair was “superb” and “played the chamber like a music hall star”. Cameron admitted that he was “far too slow to act” when the Guardian revealed that an offshore investment trust set up by his late father used the services of Panama law firm Mossack Fonseca, which had helped many with tax avoidance. He described the leak as “a landmark moment in the fight against corruption”, but added that his fury at any allegations over his father’s integrity had blinded him to the need to answer publicly. He described how it took his brother, Alexander Cameron, a leading QC, to come to Downing Street to persuade him that every accusation needed to be rebutted.