It is difficult to say Simon Harmer enjoyed the perfect day out as he inspired Essex to their maiden T20 Blast title because there could be one which tops it later this week. But it certainly wasn’t bad for the South African off-spinner who starred with ball and then bat across the two games. In wins over Derbyshire in the semi-final, a routine victory, and then defending champions Worcestershire in a thrilling final, Harmer returned combined figures of seven for 35 on an Edgbaston turner before hitting the winning runs off the last ball against the Rapids. He claimed man-of-the-match awards in both games with figures of four for 19 and then three for 16. He also added an unbeaten 18 off seven balls in the final. Harmer, in his first campaign as T20 leader having taken over from Ryan ten Doeschate, had previously taken only 10 wickets in the 2019 Blast. “I don’t think you could have scripted it better,” he said having recorded the best combined figures by any bowler at Finals Day since the competition’s inception in 2003. “To come here, with the wicket turning like that, I couldn’t have asked for a better day personally and for the group of guys down in the changing rooms.” Essex were not far off down and out late on in the group stages of the competition. They had won only two of their first 10 games before winning three of their last four to finish fourth in the South Group. They then beat Lancashire in the quarter-finals at Durham, successfully defended a total of 161 to overcome Derbyshire and squeaked home against Worcester as they chased 146, needing 12 off the last over and two off the last ball bowled by Harmer’s compatriot Wayne Parnell. When he came to the crease Essex were 129 for six, needing 17 off eight balls, and he struck 18 not out off seven, including cutting the last ball for four. After celebrations die down attention will turn to becoming the first club to secure the County Championship and T20 Blast double. Essex are 12 points clear going into a blockbuster final-round clash with second-placed Somerset at Taunton starting on Monday. Success would mean a second Championship title in three years, with Harmer, who has taken 78 Championship wickets in 2019, saying: “We’re always told we’re a small club but we have the chance to win the double and I think we’ve shown we’re a force to be reckoned with.” Ravi Bopara’s contribution against Worcestershire should not be underestimated. Essex were 107 for five after 15 overs in pursuit of 146 but he smashed a superb 36 not out off 22, leaving a magnanimous Moeen Ali to say: “I thought they deserved to win. At one point, I thought we were winning the game but the way Ravi played was fantastic and basically won the game. As long as he was in, I always thought they were going to win.” On Friday, Moeen lost out on the red ball part of his England central contract and revealed he planned to take a break from the longer format. He is due to go on holiday almost immediately, but he did confirm his availability for England’s five-match November T20 series in New Zealand. The day had started with an incredible game between Worcestershire and 2017 champions Nottinghamshire. Chasing 147, Notts needed only 11 runs off the last two overs with eight wickets in hand and lost. Parnell, as in the final, was left defending two off the last ball against Ben Duckett and sealed a memorable heist. The Notts coach, Peter Moores, said: “It’s as gutting a loss as I can remember.”