Britain has taken a step closer to suffering its first recession since the financial crisis, according to a closely watched survey that showed the private sector failed to grow in August. IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply said the UK economy was on track to contract by 0.1% in the three months to September, as the growing likelihood of a no-deal Brexit serves as a handbrake on growth and damages business confidence across the country. The warning comes after the economy shrank in the three months to June, marking the first quarterly decline since 2012. Economists view two consecutive quarters of falling output as a technical recession. According to the survey, which is monitored by the government and the Bank of England for early warning signs from the economy, meagre growth in the service sector failed to offset sharp declines in manufacturing output and construction activity last month. Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: “The lack of any meaningful growth in the service sector raises the likelihood that the UK economy is slipping into recession.” Growth in Britain’s dominant services sector, which accounts for about 80% of the economy, dropped close to stalling point in August amid the mounting risks to the economy from a disruptive no-deal Brexit. Confidence among companies in the sector that includes hotels, restaurants and financial services dropped to the lowest level since July 2016, reflecting concerns about the impact of domestic political uncertainty. The reading on the IHS Markit/Cips services purchasing managers index sank to 50.6 in August, from 51.4 a month earlier – below the forecasts of City economists polled by Reuters. Anything above 50.0 separates economic growth from contraction. Taken together with sharp declines in construction work and factory output falling the most in seven years last month, the all sector output index dropped from 50.3 in July to 49.7 in August. James Smith, an economist at the City bank ING, said: “A lot will hinge on the events on Wednesday in Westminster but the bottom line is that risk of a no-deal Brexit on 31 October is unlikely to fade completely after this week. This will continue to keep the pressure on underlying growth.”