Is there really such a thing as a football bogey team? Opponents whom fans of a particular club dread to see their team face because they seem inexplicably incapable of registering a win? Although it may be some time before the next Tyne-Wear derby, Newcastle supporters could be forgiven for being baffled by their side’s curious recent inability to beat Sunderland, their bitter rivals in the north-east. Newcastle are on a run of nine games without victory against a team that generally didn’t take much beating even before their ignominious slide into League One. Between April 2013 and October 2015, Sunderland beat Newcastle six times in as many games. Meanwhile in East Anglia, Norwich City and Ipswich Town have played each other 148 times dating back to 1902. Ipswich have won 60 matches to Norwich’s 58 but have failed to prevail in any of the past 12 Old Farm derbies, losing seven and drawing five. On Merseyside, Everton fans won’t need reminding that they haven’t won against Liverpool in any of the past 19 meetings. Further south, Tottenham Hotspur finally ended a weird hoodoo against Chelsea in April 2018. A 2-1 win ended a run of 32 meetings without a Spurs victory at Stamford Bridge dating back 28 years. For more than half a century in international football, Germany considered Italy to be their particular angstgegner, due in no small part to an apparently inexplicable inability to beat them at major championships. At the 1962 World Cup finals, the two nations played out a scoreless draw in front of 65,440 fans at the Estadio Nacional in Santiago, beginning a series of eight games between the sides at summer finals in which West Germany/Germany failed to register a win. Described as “the Italian trauma”, this malaise was finally cured in Bordeaux at the 2016 European Championship, when Germany prevailed in a quarter-final penalty shootout. Somewhat remarkably, Mesut Özil’s opener in the 65th minute marked the first time in 845 minutes of tournament play between the two sides that Germany had even taken the lead. Writing in the Guardian more than a decade ago, the Racing Post football betting guru Kevin Pullein, a man whose currency is cold stats rather than sentiment or superstition, debunked the notion of bogey teams, stating that they are “as much a figment of our imagination as the bogey man”. He made the point that “past results in a fixture have no influence over future happenings”, pointing out that teams “who seem to have some sort of spell over their opponents have simply been lucky most of the time”. His words will come as music to the ears of Watford fans travelling to the Etihad Stadium to face Manchester City on Saturday. Bottom of the table and still smarting from that FA Cup final humiliation last May, most of them would probably settle for a reasonably narrow defeat before escaping with their dignity intact. The more optimistic among Hornets fans, however, may view the game as an opportunity for some sort of payback, considering their team’s stirring second-half comeback against Arsenal one day after Pep Guardiola’s side had showed obvious signs of fallibility while losing at Norwich. Injuries to key personnel mean Manchester City look so vulnerable they could finish as low as second come season’s end. For optimistic, read delusional. While there is no shame in losing to Manchester City, getting beaten by them 11 times in a row is a state of affairs that is, at the very least, mildly embarrassing and suggests there may well be some sort of supernatural force at work. In the past 16 meetings between the two sides, Watford have managed two draws, both masterminded by the now England Under-21 manager Aidy Boothroyd well over a decade ago. Watford have lost the other 14 matches by an incredible aggregate score of 46-8. When the sides line up at the Etihad shortly before 3pm, it will be 11,158 days since Watford last beat Manchester City. To put this in some sort of context, Margaret Thatcher was still prime minister of the UK, the Scottish rockers Simple Minds were No 1 in the UK charts with Belfast Child, and eight of the Watford starting XI that lined up against Arsenal last weekend had not been born. As well as Boothroyd, the managers Colin Lee, Steve Perryman, Glenn Roeder, Graham Taylor (twice), Kenny Jackett, Gianluca Vialli, Ray Lewington, Malky Mackay (twice), Brendan Rodgers, Sean Dyche, Gianfranco Zola, Giuseppe Sannino, Óscar García, Billy McKinlay, Slavisa Jokanovic, Walter Mazzarri, Marco Silva, Javi Gracia and Quique Sánchez Flores (twice) have been appointed at Vicarage Road since Watford last beat Manchester City. With all that in mind and the visitors to the Etihad available to back at odds of 30-1 to buck this trend, a bet on Watford might be best left alone.