Dane Haylett-Petty Israel Fo-Who? It has taken him quite a while, via his youth in Biarritz, but now surely a fixture in Australia’s back three. Unruffable and skilful with a dash of pace. 8 Adam Ashley-Cooper Took his try well, stepping past the over-committed cover with relative ease, but quiet otherwise and replaced early in the second half. Missed Adams early on. 5 James O’Connor Some real flashes of class, even if the direction of traffic was against him for much of it. Tidied up a lot of horrible ball too. 6 Samu Kerevi Ferocious with ball in hand. Wales struggled to put him down all evening. Made nearly 100m, none of them easy. Nearly got in trouble for a high forearm. Thankfully, ref was sensible. 7 Marika Koroibete Another Fijian to cause merry hell among the Welsh defence. Never seemed far away from any Aussie breakout and made a few himself. Outjumped for Wales’s first try. 7 Bernard Foley Lovely cross-kick for Ashley-Cooper try, but looked a little off it otherwise. The gamble of playing him with such little game time not obviously successfully. 5 Will Genia Mixed bag. Passing very loose at times – unless you were Gareth Davies, in which case it was perfect. But at other times he was as sharp and composed as ever, which is very. 6 Scott Sio A couple of rumbles but the quietest member of the Aussie front row in the loose. Penalised at the first scrum, otherwise solid at the set piece. 6 Tolu Latu Australia’s lineout was largely smooth, the scrum dominant. So a good match from Latu, all the more so given the problems he caused in the loose, which were considerable. 7 Allan Alaalatoa Was a constant barrelling, battering presence in the loose, which is some achievement as he was much the same in the tight. The Aussie scrum long gone as a weakness. 7 Izack Rodda A real threat on the Welsh lineout, pilfering almost as many balls as he took. One of Australia’s leading tacklers in first half. 6 Rory Arnold Big point of reference throughout. Hardest working forward in defence in first half, then leading lineout target in second, as Australia set to work on an unlikely deficit. 8 David Pocock Just makes so few mistakes, then pops up with a big play when most needed. At the heart of all three tries. But not as dominant as four years ago. 7 Michael Hooper (capt) On balance in credit, particularly as Australia started to chase the lead down. But did not enjoy first half, penalised twice, and in the current climate lucky not to have been worse so. 6 Isi Naisarani Another who grew into the game. The number of Pacific Islanders coming at Wales from every angle was bewildering. He as much as any other. Looser in the first half. 7 Replacements Matt Toomua for Foley, 45; Kurtley Beale for Ashley-Cooper, 48; Nic White for Genia, 55; James Slipper for Sio, 63; Sekope Kepu for Alaalatoa, 63; Jordan Ulese for Latu, 66; Adam Coleman for Arnold, 66; Lukhan Salakaia-Loto for Naisarani, 68. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales  Liam Williams No chance to dazzle as he can, but he is never less than classy. Stepped up with some important interventions to keep the Aussie tide at bay. 7 George North Moments when it looked as if he might cut loose. Couple of rumbles in first half and a nice run and offload in second. Not enough in between. Penalised twice. 6 Jonathan Davies You know he is playing a big part out there with his experience and leadership, but in terms of noticeable interventions this was not his greatest match. 5 Hadleigh Parkes Leading tackler among the Welsh backs, but missed a lot as well, as Australia chased the game. Rose sweetly to score the try that set Wales in motion. 6 Josh Adams Dangerous down the left, getting the better of Ashley-Cooper, and causing all kinds of problems with chips in behind. Another let off on the high-tackle lottery (thankfully). 6 Dan Biggar Pretty stellar first half-hour. Pretty stellar first half-minute, setting Wales on their way with a drop goal. Cross-kick for try. Heroic tackle on Serevi, but poor technique and off. 8 Gareth Davies What a game! His ability to anticipate an experienced half‑back pair did much to win Walesthe match. One of the deadliest 9s, now also with a kicking game. 9 Wyn Jones Bit of action with ball in hand and a decent shift in defence. No doubt, though, the Australia scrum held the edge more or less throughout. 5 Ken Owens Had a couple of his lineouts nicked, which would have irked, and not comfortable at the scrum. But never far behind his captain on the barricades. 6 Tomas Francis Really does haul himself round the place in defence. Well into double figures on the tackle count. Wales’s second half built on such unfussy displays. 6 Jake Ball Another tight forward into double figures on the tackle count. This was a day of head-down graft for Wales’s pack. They defended Australia’s maul credibly. 6 Alun Wyn Jones (capt) More than 20 tackles, more than 34 years of age and soon to have more than 130 caps. He is this Wales team, if any one man can be. 8 Aaron Wainwright Fabulous first half. Shame he was subbed so early in second. On both sides of the ball he looked a rare mix of class and hardness. Great future. 7 Justin Tipuric Does not exactly put the fear of god into hardened Test forwards, but kills them quietly anyway. Wales’s lineout king and second only to his captain on the tackle count. 8 Josh Navidi Another valiant Welsh forward, manning the defences till the very end, but also the busiest with ball in hand. Caught by the ref a couple of times. 7 Replacements Rhys Patchell for Biggar, 28 (7); Nicky Smith for Wyn Jones, 49; Ross Moriarty for Wainwright, 49; Dillon Lewis for Francis, 63; Aaron Shingler for Ball, 63; Elliot Dee for Owens, 66; Tomos Williams for G Davies, 71; Owen Watkin for Parkes, 71.