As a comedian, one of the first jokes I make when I pick up the mic is about my sexuality. Coming out on stage is easy – it helps introduce me to the audience and cement their preconceived ideas about my haircut. Coming out as working class has been more problematic. I grew up in Liverpool in the aftermath of the Toxteth riots. My dad worked away on ships, my mum was a dinner lady. I was loved and looked after, fed and clothed, but there was no money for extras. I still live in the city and the latest dose of austerity has decimated many of our communities. There are people in my family who are on benefits, people on my street who use food banks. I work part-time while trying to carve out a career in comedy. I am still very much working-class, which is a real barrier in the comedy industry, where the privately educated continue to dominate the top tier. When anyone starts performing comedy, they begin at open mic nights, then progress to unpaid short spots at comedy nights or local clubs. During that time comedians are learning their craft, writing and editing their material, plus working on their delivery and stage presence. It is a necessary but costly apprenticeship. After a few years some comedians begin to earn money from their craft. This will be on a freelance basis and they will have to create and maintain relationships with a huge variety of promoters, bookers and clubs. Many working-class comedians make a living on the circuit in this way, but unless they branch out into tours or festivals they risk being pigeonholed as a “club comic”. If you come from a wealthy background, taking a few years to pursue a dream while not earning much money might be a possible option. For a working-class person it is a luxury. Juggling a low-paid day job while trying to kickstart a comedy career without any extra support can be exhausting. These jobs are unlikely to offer sabbaticals, unpaid leave, flexitime or work from home options. This means working-class acts will often miss out on gigs, or be too exhausted to give the best of themselves on stage. For many comedians, the leap of faith into standup would not have happened without the benefit of a trust fund or the bank of mum and dad – and there is more chance you will have something to fall back on if things don’t go to plan. The scrabble for jobs at the lower end of the market means the risk of leaving work to pursue comedy could lead to irreversible financial insecurity. Networking skills are crucial within the comedy industry and something else that many working-class people struggle with. In school we were taught to know our place – not the art of the elevator pitch. It is unlikely that we will start out with any contacts within the industry, such as family friends or old school pals. Neither can we afford the often eye-watering cost of taking a show to the Edinburgh fringe, which is the world’s biggest arts festival and also a trade fair and industry showcase where deals are done, tours are booked, contracts are signed and sitcoms are commissioned. For the last two years I have run crowdfunding campaigns to cover the fees of performing at the free fringe in Edinburgh. I select eight working-class comedians each year to perform in a showcase called Best in Class and they all get a share of any money we make. Each comedian does a week of shows and pays for their own travel and accommodation. It is not the same as being able to take their own show, but does offer an opportunity to perform at the fringe without the financial risk. In 2018, our first year, we received plenty of media attention and had several reviews. In 2019, with a fresh cohort of acts, we filled our room daily but the media stayed away. Either they considered Best in Class last year’s news, or they naively believed that one showcase had fixed the problem. As the industry currently stands, we are in danger of losing working-class voices from comedy. While there is still a long way to go, the industry has schemes in place for diversity and equality when it comes to gender, disability, race and sexuality. But there is nothing when it comes to class. Several working-class comedians have, of course, broken through. Darren Harriott and Lauren Pattison were both nominated for best newcomer at the 2017 Edinburgh Fringe and Harriott was nominated for best comedy show this year. Tez Ilyas made a point of showcasing other working-class comedians by featuring Adam Rowe and Sophie Willan on The Tez O’Clock Show. TV is just one part of the comedy industry but it is its public face, through which most people engage with the art form. Widening opportunities and opening doors for working-class comedians is a vital step to remedy the current homogeneity of panel shows and sitcoms. Working-class comics have varied and diverse experiences that need to be heard. We need an industry that is accessible and willing to listen. Sian Davies is a finalist in the Funny Women awards at the Bloomsbury theatre, London, on 19 September.