Matthew Kapowitz is a Canadian teenager under house arrest for raping three girls. A storm of camera flashes are seen outside his home as a voracious media pack begins constructing its story of a middle-class family with a child-monster in its midst. We do not glimpse the world beyond his front door. Evan Placey’s potent play is about the seismic fractures such a crime creates inside the family home, although the power of the media to demonise the child criminal’s family is a major theme. This is contentious and courageous subject matter for the stage and Placey’s script addresses it unflinchingly. As in Bruce Norris’s Downstate, Placey does not set out to explain or humanise Matthew. He dramatises the dynamic between the supposed monster and those closest to him. Almost all of the characters are caught between guilt, bewilderment, culpability and anger at Matthew’s crime, and none more so than Brenda, his mother. Matthew (Scott Folan) remains a wan, inscrutable figure who does not account for his actions. This is the story of motherhood at its most tormented. Brenda is a single mother of two boys and a high-powered career woman. Tracy Ann Oberman’s steely eyed performance as Brenda shows her still to be desperate to “fix things”. She is caught between the rock and hard place of seeing Matthew’s actions as those of a rapist and those of a child – her child. Placey’s rich and multilayered script takes us into tough and rarely visited territory to ask difficult questions: to what degree is the mother of a child-rapist answerable for his actions? Where should Brenda’s allegiances lie? She questions her love for Matthew and speaks of hate. Other hard-edged sentiments are bravely spoken aloud; when she sees the rape victims for the first time she admits: “I resented them.” Her attempts to get answers out of Matthew are met with blankness and while his emotional repression reflects the inability to articulate reason or regret, it is frustrating on a dramatic level. The closest he gets to an explanation is a single, unfinished sentence to Brenda: “You know I never meant …” There is an occasional sense of emotional distance between actors in the toughest scenes, too, though there are moving moments between Brenda and her youngest son, Jason (Hari Aggarwal) to whom she can still show tenderness without feeling compromised. Matthew’s fate is cleverly foregrounded in the visual symbolism of Lee Newby’s monochrome grey set, which has a Lego-like quality, quickly rearranged from a bedroom to a kitchen to Matthew’s bedroom. It looks like a home while recalling the grey concrete of a prison. Based on a real event and first staged almost a decade ago, Mother of Him is as relevant as ever in its exploration of motherhood and troubled, problematic, porn-fed young masculinity. • At Park theatre, London, until 26 October.