With 80,000 tickets sold – a record for a women’s golf event in Britain – and from evidence of an acclaimed Ryder Cup held at the same course in the not so recent past, the 16th staging of the Solheim Cup will play out minus waves of negativity. Gleneagles, with its rolling Perthshire hills, is about as photogenic a venue as golf can provide. Still, this competition between Europe and the United States requires appropriate context amid evolution – and revolution – in women’s golf. Perhaps it is harsh to criticise giddy advertising claims but it is tricky not to take exception to one on the Solheim Cup website. This, we are told, is “the pinnacle of women’s golf”. Some bare statistics undermine the point. Eight of the world’s top 10 will not feature in this Solheim Cup. Neither will 14 of the top 20, 22 of the top 30, 27 of the top 40 or 32 of the top 50. The average world ranking of the US team, odds-on to win the biennial competition for what would be a third time in succession, is 27. Suzann Pettersen’s position at 635 – the Norwegian has barely played for two years after taking a break to start a family – skews the European equivalent but a figure of 105 still paints a picture of implied standards. South Korea dominate the summit of women’s golf, with notable mentions due to Thailand, China and Japan. Excitement at this year’s Women’s British Open at Woburn as Charley Hull headed home and Georgia Hall launched a title defence was undone as Hinako Shibuno, who had not played outside Japan before, triumphed. Perhaps sport does not need best versus best to be engaging. Match play tends to be gripping no matter the level. Maybe time-honoured needle between Europe and the US – see Annika Sörenstam’s chip ordered by the Americans to be re-taken in 2000 or the almighty rumpus involving Pettersen four years ago – means this competition will always be perfectly valid. It would surely benefit from a home success this time; the Solheim Cup had a credibility issue when landing at Killeen Castle in 2011 after the US had won three times on the bounce. Crucially Europe stopped the rot. Karen Stupples, once a Solheim Cup participant and a former major champion, will take on an analyst role for Golf Channel this week. The Englishwoman played down any notion this joust should be reconfigured. “In my mind it comes down to the roots of this tournament and the roots of the Ryder Cup,” she said. “At the very beginning of both it was very much a classic David and Goliath and it was that battle of a smaller European Tour versus the giant of the LPGA or the PGA Tour. I think that people warmed to that kind of fight and that battle. “ It’s not something you would see if you had a giant of Korean golf playing against a giant of American golf. You wouldn’t have that same kind of feel to it.” We will not know if it is not tried, however. The Ryder Cup’s continual, extraordinary success is intrinsically linked to the level of players within. Koreans and their fellow Asians do have a chance to shine collectively both at the Olympic Games and the International Crown, with the latter due to be held in England next year. Yet while the former is restricted – golf cannot command much attention against track and field – the latter, featuring eight countries, is complicated. With a batch of non-American or European players on the rise, men’s golf introduced the Presidents Cup in the early 1990s. This largely failed: the tournament is ridiculously one-sided while grasping for wider relevance. Yet the women’s game is different. The collective excellence of Koreans in particular will not abate any time soon. If anything, matching them up with Americans would result in embarrassment for the nation which provides such a lucrative living to golfers from the Far East – a bad look, possibly. The phoney war is already under way. Debate as to whether the bookies have it all wrong before a Gleneagles ball is struck involves captains and team members. Watching on from afar are the best female golfers in the world. This feels a strange, unsatisfactory business.