The Israeli prime minister flew into London on Thursday to urge Britain to end talks with Iran over the nuclear deal. Benjamin Netanyahu met the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, for hastily arranged talks on Thursday in which he was expected to call on Britain to spurn a French plan to offer a $15bn (£12bn) credit lifeline to help Iran sell oil. The Israeli prime minister was in Downing Street with a preoccupied Johnson for a total of 29 minutes but speaking ahead of the substantive discussions Netanyahu said he wished to discuss Iran and Johnson voiced his support for a two-state solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict. Johnson will also meet the US vice-president, Mike Pence, while Netanyahu will hold talks in London later in the day with the US defence secretary, Mark Esper. That Johnson has cleared his diary in the middle of domestic political chaos is a tribute to Netanyahu’s influence in Downing Street. Iran and three European countries – Britain, France and Germany – have been engaged in talks to save the landmark 2015 nuclear accord, which has been unravelling since Donald Trump withdrew from it in May last year. On his way to London the Israeli leader cited an Iranian plan to restart research on building advanced nuclear centrifuges in a further breach of the accord. The centrifuge plan, Tehran’s third step away from the deal, was announced by the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, on Wednesday. “Today we were told about another violation carried out by Iran, this time in relation to nuclear proliferation,” Netanyahu said. “This joins Iran’s aggressive acts against international shipping and against countries in the region, as well as its efforts to carry out murderous attacks against the state of Israel, efforts that have not ceased. “This is not the time to hold talks with Iran; this is the time to increase the pressure on Iran ... These are important matters for the state of Israel at all times, but especially now.” In July 2015, Iran and a six-nation negotiating group reached a landmark agreement known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that ended a 12-year deadlock over Tehran’s nuclear programme. The deal, struck in Vienna after nearly two years of intensive talks, limited the Iranian programme, to reassure the rest of the world that it cannot develop nuclear weapons, in return for sanctions relief. At its core, the JCPOA is a straightforward bargain: Iran’s acceptance of strict limits on its nuclear programme in return for an escape from the sanctions that grew up around its economy over a decade prior to the accord. Under the deal, Iran unplugged two-thirds of its centrifuges, shipped out 98% of its enriched uranium and filled its plutonium production reactor with concrete. Tehran also accepted extensive monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which has verified 10 times since the agreement, and as recently as February, that Tehran has complied with its terms. In return, all nuclear-related sanctions were lifted in January 2016, reconnecting Iran to global markets. The six major powers involved in the nuclear talks with Iran were in a group known as the P5+1: the UN security council’s five permanent members – China, France, Russia, the UK and the US – and Germany. The nuclear deal is also enshrined in a UN security council resolution that incorporated it into international law. The 15 members of the council at the time unanimously endorsed the agreement. On 8 May 2018, US president Donald Trump pulled his country out of the deal. Iran announced its partial withdrawal from the nuclear deal a year later. Saeed Kamali Dehghan, Iran correspondent There is suspicion, nevertheless, that Netanyahu’s lightning visit to London is in part designed to bolster his international standing, and play the security card ahead of highly charged elections in a fortnight. But the timing gives the Israeli prime minister a platform to pour cold water on Emmanuel Macron’s Iran proposal – a plan that has already been greeted with deep scepticism by the US special representative on Iran, Brian Hook, as he announced fresh plans on Wednesday to sanction Iranian efforts to export oil. Trump for his part has reiterated his willingness to meet Rouhani, but said there would be no easing of US sanctions. “That’s not happening,” he said. “That won’t be happening.” It would be a diplomatic coup for Israel and the US if they could lever Britain away from the Macron plan, and, even more, away from the nuclear deal. In the face of year-long pressure from the White House, the UK has continued to ally with France and Germany, the two original signatories to the 2015 deal, insisting Iran was not in breach of a deal that remained the best way to prevent nuclear proliferation in the region. Many European diplomats claim even now that the narrowing door to diplomacy remains open because Iran has announced it will take its next step on centrifuges only if, in two month’s time, no progress on selling oil has been made. Iran also did not announce any steps to increase its level of uranium enrichment. The French plan, largely leaked by Iran, proposes a $15bn credit line as a prepayment for the purchase of Iranian oil. The plan requires a US willingness to reinstate sanctions waivers on countries that purchase Iranian oil. The credit line would be the first step in a phased programme to address wider concerns with Iran, including its ballistic missiles, regional behaviour and the renewal of the nuclear deal. Britain has not yet said anything publicly in support of the plan, but has emphasised that it has been led by the French. But given the US and Israeli approach, Macron’s chances of success seem to be receding. Rouhani has also refused to countenance a meeting with Trump, possibly at the UN general assembly in New York, and the Iranian decision on centrifuges has disappointed the French. Under the accord, Iran was allowed to keep restricted quantities of first-generation centrifuges, IR-1s, at two nuclear plants. The successful development of more advanced centrifuges, IR-4s, IR-6s and IR-8s, would enable it to produce limited amounts of material for a potential nuclear bomb at a faster speed. “From Friday, we will witness research and development on different kinds of centrifuges and new centrifuges and also whatever is needed for enriching uranium in an accelerated way,” Rouhani said. “All limitations on our research and development will be lifted on Friday.” In a step away from confrontation, the owner of the captured British-flagged ship Stena Impero has confirmed that seven crew members have been released by Iranian authorities.