Such was the air of spontaneity about Nicholas Hytner’s original National Theatre production of One Man, Two Guvnors that a reader gave the Guardian a breathless description of the performance they had seen. Amazingly, when James Corden’s Francis Henshall said how hungry he was, someone in the audience proffered a sandwich. Not only that, it was hummus, the perfect comedy filling. Corden kept his composure long enough to make a quip about Guardian readers and everyone fell about. It seemed too good to be true. Spoiler alert: it was too good to be true. None of it was improvised. The remarkable quality of Hytner’s production was its illusion of being made up on the fly. I watched one performance with surtitles and saw line-by-line that it left nothing to chance. To create this sense of chaos took brilliant, meticulous work and, although this revival by Sarah Brigham hoodwinks the audience into its theatrical games (they laugh a lot), it lacks the original’s taste for danger. That’s reflected in her “if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” staging, which follows the NT production to the letter. Brigham sticks to the 1963 setting, the checked jodhpurs of David O’Reilly’s Henshall and the skiffle band ushering us in. Neil Irish’s set has the same weekly-rep staginess, and the routines still recall the heyday of British variety. Richard Bean’s reworking of Carlo Goldoni’s The Servant of Two Masters is breezily performed by the 19-strong cast, but the show is wearing borrowed clothes. It would be overstating the case to say Hytner’s original had a sense of purpose – the show only ever aspired to be escapist fun – but there was method in its madness. Without that anarchic sensibility, the play comes across as a good deal more ordinary: less a knowing nod at the seaside-postcard values of early-60s British pop culture than an unmediated reproduction of the real thing. As a jolly romp, it gives the audience a good time, but it lacks the animating spark to make it truly delirious. At Derby theatre until 28 September. Then at Queen’s Theatre, Hornchurch, 2–19 October.