Dear me. As we entered the short-lived parliamentary phase of the Johnson era, the first appearance, as far as I can see, of “Johnson” in a puzzle is a reference not to the prime minister … 6d Defeat Johnson? Why? They say he’s a party pooper (7) [ wordplay: synonym for ‘defeat’ + first name of ‘Johnson’ + what ‘why’ sounds like (‘they say’) ][ KILL + JO + Y ][ definition: he’s a party pooper ] … but to his brother JO. The setter Dalibor doesn’t appear often and the rest of the puzzle is recommended. If you’re not already keeping up with Chris Lancaster in the Telegraph, he has revealed the hidden messages used by Elgar (known locally as Enigmatist) in Telegraph Toughie puzzles, concluding: If you’d like to try Nina-spotting for yourself, then today’s Toughie (Toughie 2294) is Elgar’s 135th. Be warned, however; the puzzle is tough, and the Nina even tougher to spot. Well, of course. The puzzle is here. Meanwhile, if my hunch is correct, and the proportion of maths lovers to bookworms is greater among crossword solvers than is generally assumed, some of you might enjoy Maria Hagsten Michelsen and Ole Bjørn Michelsen’s Regex Crossword series. If you don’t already use regular expressions, getting your head around the few codes may save you hours at your laptop in the future. Meanwhile, a thought experiment from Vlad … 18ac Female lead at last – a new Bond producer’s change for the better? (11)[ wordplay: type of female, with first letter moved to end (‘lead at last’) + A (‘a’) + abbrev. for ‘new’ + something that creates adhesion (‘Bond producer’) ][ HEN, with first letter moved to end + A + N + CEMENT ][ definition: change for the better ] … in a clue for ENHANCEMENT from a prize puzzle for which the annotated solution is now available. Perhaps Vlad’s suggestion will turn the head of Barbara Broccoli, the executive producer of the franchise, who insists that 007, unlike the Doctor, is inherently a chap. The surname is, of course, familiar: Barbara’s father Cubby did a similar job with earlier Bonds, as one of the few producers whose surnames are noticed by audiences. “Broccoli” has meant “little shoots” in Italian for centuries (the film-making Broccolis like to claim that they imported the vegetable to America) and the calabrese variety is, of course, named for Calabria, where it was developed. “Broccolini”, a hybrid with Chinese cabbage, is one of those words I was sadly surprised to discover is a trademark, at least in the US. And then there’s the broccoli that isn’t broccoli at all: named for the little shoots on the top of a turnip, “broccoli raab” is an anglicisation of “broccoli di rapa”. There we have it. Raab is a turnip. And reader, how would you clue RAAB? Thanks for your clues for OLIVIA. I enjoyed all the references to soon-Dame Olivia Colman, especially (I presume) Croquem’s “An Oscar at 51 by way of Shakespearean countess?” Zedible gets the audacity award for “She sounds even more like Popeye’s girlfriend!”, run a close second by Ousgg’s “Girl heard to claim residence in Australia” and Shenguin’s “I live here, cries Brummie girl.” The runners-up are both Shakespearean: Jamesfarrier’s “Belle for Sebastian?” and Encota’s “She loves Viola in disguise when seen around Illyria initially”; the winner is Patjberry47’s smart “Discovered country girl”. Kludos to Patjberry; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. As is often the case here, the words in the wordplay are doing different jobs to those you initially expect in Chifonie’s clue … 13ac Come to understand rage’s inconsequential (3,3,5)[ wordplay: synonyms for ‘rage’ (as a verb) and ‘inconsequential’ ][ definition: come to understand ] … which all makes sense when you finally SEE THE LIGHT. Eureka.