Seven years before his suicide, Tony Hancock tried to become a movie star. The Rebel (1961) is a comedy about a clerk who quits his job and moves to Paris to become an artist, despite his total lack of talent. Scripted by Half Hour creators Ray Galton and Alan Simpson, it was a deluxe bespoke vehicle, designed to take Hancock across the Atlantic and turn him into the new Peter Sellers. Brits flocked. Homegrown critics raved. And Hollywood absolutely hated it. (“Stumbling … presumptuous … depressing … low,” reckoned the New York Times, comparing him unfavourably to Norman Wisdom.) It was the start of the end. The following year, after a final series of Hancock’s Half Hour minus Sid James – let go lest Hancock be defined only as part of a double act – Hancock fired Galton and Simpson, too. They then made Steptoe and Son (average audience: 28 million); Hancock made a second bid for international film stardom with a self-scripted feature about a Punch and Judy show in Bognor Regis. “It’s not a comedy,” grimaces Paul Merton. “Don’t expect any laughs. It’s very bitter.” Merton was six when he went to see it with his mother, who began flinching in the first scene, when Hancock swears at the Lord Mayor. By the time he had “taken an ornamental pig and shoved a bunch of flowers up its arse, really quite violently”, her fandom was substantially shaken. Now, those two films that kiboshed Hancock’s big-screen dreams – one wonderful, one sort of awful – have been restored and rereleased with the heave-ho of Merton, a longtime keeper of the Hancock flame. The Rebel, at least, is a revelation: snappy, surreal, full of satirical horsepower and starring a baby-faced, blue-eyed bon vivant. For those of us familiar only with the black-and-white grump, the effervescence is amazing. Tell Merton this, and delight knocks a decade off him. “Ray and Alan always said Hancock seemed to have been born at 40, but in The Rebel he does have the bloom of youth in those cheeks. I think it’s the smooth skin.” Nice clear eyes, too. “Yes, wonderful!” he beams. Yet he is still a far cry from 35-year-old leading men today, few of whom have white tufts and dialogue describing themselves as “stout”. “Well, yes,” says Merton. “But since the early days he was called “Tubs” and there was lots of talk about his terrible feet. Comics then were meant to look a bit funny.” Still, when he remade half a dozen Half Hours in 1996 (big ratings, iffy reviews), he says you would never have guessed he and Hancock were the same age at the time of shooting: “It was to do with the war and with nutrition.” Plus, this was the era of Sgt Pepper, when 64 was repellently elderly. “Now, it’s not considered anything! It’s the new 12!” At 62, Merton looks like a merry, greying, hippie-era John Lennon. He is having cappuccinos in a deserted Bloomsbury hotel, hair straggly, round specs thick and glinting. He wears a charcoal suit and enormously floral shirt presumably bought for TV. In fact, he could have strolled straight off it. Merton surpasses even your most hopeful expectations: funny, friendly, generous, easy. Yet, like his hero, there is a residual sense he is a bit dour and depressive, stemming perhaps from an inpatient episode at Maudsley psychiatric hospital around the time he broke through on Whose Line Is It Anyway?. Actually, he says, that was down to some dodgy malaria tablets – his stay extended because staff didn’t believe he actually was on telly every Friday. The smog that surrounds Hancock is harder to shift. “It’s an impossible story to ignore,” says Merton. “The clown with the tear in his eye; the comedian who makes everybody else laugh but cannot find satisfaction himself.” An easy cliche is media catnip. Merton “loathed” Stan & Ollie, last year’s Laurel and Hardy biopic, because “it tried to create drama where there was no real friction. If I’d seen it in a cinema, I’d have been asked to leave. Every 15 minutes, I was like: ‘Oh, for fuck’s sake!’” Galton and Simpson were, he reports, “just astonished” by the 1991 Hancock film starring Alfred Molina, which shows them smirking “like the Kray twins” in the back row at his ill-fated 1966 stage comeback. Years later, Galton met the writer at a party and punched him to the floor. “Good on him!” grins Merton. “The sheer anger! How dare you do that! Ray and Alan were always grateful and affectionate towards Tony. He’d split his fee with them 50/50. He introduced them to France and wine. When they knew him there was little hint of what was to come. He was a bit of a worrier. But then a lot of comedians can be worriers, particularly if you’re not writing your own material.” Hancock’s legacy, he thinks, has suffered under a spotlight fixed on his grubbier troubles – and some unhelpful visuals. “That famous shot of him wearing the big coat and looking miserable over a cup of tea. That was from a programme called The Cold. He’s meant to be ill. Not to look desperately suicidal.” Yet even Merton can’t help having false hindsight. “There’s that line in The Rebel,” he says with a shiver. “‘You’ll be sorry when I’m dead.’ It does rather leap out at you.” Quite why the film was such a disaster across the pond is still a puzzle. After all, Ealing succeeded, despite – or perhaps because of – its amplified Englishness. Even the Carry Ons had cut through. But something about the bluster and camp indignation of Hancock’s delivery seems to have mistranslated. And there is something peculiarly parochial about the narrative of a frustrated fantasist crashing out of the rat race. There are echoes of Billy Liar in the office scenes; groundwork for Reggie Perrin in the train commute, in which Hancock’s voiceover speculates about his fellow passengers (few Americans travel to work in the same way). When Merton first saw The Rebel in the late 70s, it was during his three-year stint at Tooting Bec employment office in south London. The sequence on the 8:32 to Waterloo struck a special chord. “Hancock goes: ‘Oh, there’s young Reginald. If this train’s still running in 1980, he’ll be on it.’” Merton shudders. “When I started at 19, they told me about the pension scheme. Going to the same place every day, doing the same job, filled me with horror.” This is another reason The Rebel might not have hit home in the land of the American dream. Even back in 1961, the notion of ditching a mundane job to try to make it big wasn’t so wild. It might also be what limits its contemporary appreciation, when it is taken as read you should seek artistic fulfilment (and jobs for life are the real pipe-dream). In the film, George Sanders’ art dealer is unsparing about Hancock’s lack of talent; today, such harsh criticism is a no-no. Whether or not someone actually has any gifts “doesn’t seem to be important any more,” says Merton. There are too many channels and “not that much talent to go around to fill all this space”. He was watching something the other day, he says, that recapped the career highlights of a social media star, “which mostly seemed to be combing his hair. I mean, it’s a long way from Sammy Davis Jr! I know we all want to leave our mark, but now there’s millions of them, I’m not sure it’s any better than it used to be in terms of standing out from the crowd.” The Rebel is especially sharp on the fallacy of individualism. An existentialists’ party sees them bemoaning the hegemony of office life, while dressed in matching black outfits with identical goatees. Plus ça change, laughs Merton. “I’m by no means an expert on women’s hair, but I have noticed in the last three or four months this fashion, which I think is great, for pink hair and yellow hair. Everyone’s individual in their own way of doing it, but they’re all doing it.” Merton’s granny-ish lack of savvy is knowingly naive – and real. He delights in a luddite world (no mobile phone, no email, no idea what Instagram is) not so distant from that inhabited by his hero. Despite his day job, he says he doesn’t follow the news or care for politics. “Give me a story about a parrot that’s learned how to drive and I’m in seventh heaven.” Nor does he watch modern comedy (his most recent reference is The Royle Family), mostly because he’s got an “incredibly good memory for jokes” and worries about accidental plagiarism. When he does catch a bit, he’s rarely impressed. “Comedy has coarsened. It’s weak. It’s lazy. I don’t want to sound prudish, and some bodily function jokes can be good. But it’s a shame that if you say ‘fuck’ in front of an audience, they’ll probably laugh. It’s a shock thing. Any weak punchline can be bolstered by sticking that word in there.” Not that we should rose-tint comedy’s golden age. The Blood Donor contains uncomfortable lines about Hancock’s “undiluted British” blood and how it ought not to be mixed. The Two Ronnies had “quite a bit of blackface and antisemitism. Stuff which you’d have gone ‘Ooooh’ at even in 1977.” But Merton doesn’t really want to give anyone a kicking. Comedy is an underrated skill, he says, more so now than ever. It is overlooked for Oscars “because comedy undermines the pomposity of calling yourself something like The Academy of Motion Pictures and Science”. Yet it is harder than drama, because if that audience seems spellbound “they might just be thinking about tomorrow’s shopping. While with comedy, they’re either laughing or they’re not. You know exactly how it’s going.” He sighs. “In the 1920s, Chaplin was compared to Michelangelo and Leonardo Da Vinci, Beethoven and Shakespeare. He was considered a giant of his art.” Hancock’s aspirations were understandable. And in filming The Rebel – about a man desperate for artistic acclaim – he was making his own stab at what he saw as the ultimate immortality. It’s not so unusual, it turns out. As we’re packing up, I ask Merton if he ever fancied getting into film. “Yes, but the film didn’t want me getting into it.” He laughs. “But that was always my real big top ambition.” I hadn’t realised. Oh yes, he says. A couple of years ago, he wrote a script with his wife, Suki Webster. “We couldn’t even get meetings. Channel 4 never even replied.” I’m amazed. Why? He frets it might have felt like a vanity project; that he should have got a director onboard first. “But I’ve got no reputation in that world. No credit, no credibility. Still, I think we were rather bemused by the complete lack of interest.” Merton smiles sadly. And, for a second, Hancock is back in the room. The Rebel and The Punch and Judy Man are on Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video from 30 September.