Tim Paine will become the first Australian captain to fly back from England with the Ashes since Steve Waugh in 2001. Speaking after the win in Manchester, he offered a heavy nod towards “the best player we’ve seen” for making it possible. Paine replaced Steve Smith in the wake of last year’s ball-tampering scandal and has looked to restore the tainted public image of the Baggy Green. But the question of how the side’s premier batsman would fare on his return from an enforced 12-month spell out of international cricket remained outstanding. The results from this modern great are unequivocal. Smith’s first three Tests back have witnessed three centuries from five innings at an average of 134. Even the concussion that forced him to sit out England’s remarkable win at Headingley could not affect his thirst for runs, returning scores of 211 and 82 at Old Trafford. Paine said: “I didn’t think it would be this emotional. The amount of work that’s tried to go on in to retain the Ashes has been enormous. I’m really proud of this group. “I don’t know what to say [about Smith]. He is clearly the best player we’ve seen, there’s no doubt about that. His ability to go anywhere in the world and score runs against all types of attacks is just phenomenal. “Anyone who’s watched him bat know the talent, hunger and skill that he has got. People don’t see how driven he is and how he trains, eats and sleeps batting. “He is just a genius and I never had any doubt he would come back and be the player he was. The scary thing is he’s getting better. I don’t know where it is going to stop but we are enjoying being on the ride that is for sure.” Paine claimed his side “put their egos to one side” in conquering English conditions - Pat Cummins and Josh Hazlewood in particular - and fancied the 18-month rebuild played a part in helping the players bounce back from the galling nature of the Ben Stokes-inflicted defeat in Leeds a fortnight ago. “The group has clearly been through a bit of adversity – some more than others,” Paine said. “But the guys sat in that change room have been through what happened at Cape Town and at times like that you find out what sort of people you have got. “You find people who can give up or keep fighting and I think we have got guys who have come back and kept fighting. The Headingley loss makes this all the more sweeter after a lot of people wrote us off.” On his own role as captain, achieving something that eluded predecessors such as Michael Clarke and Ricky Ponting by retaining the Ashes on English soil, Paine added: “My dream was to come here and win an Ashes [as a player]. But I certainly didn’t want to be the captain winning the Ashes. “It doesn’t mean any more or any less to me. I have said a lot of times, my part in this team is just one job. I get credit, I suppose, but it is something we share around us between the players and staff. I am just happy to be a part of it.”