What were you hoping for?Someone who would make me laugh, and free wine. First impressions?Warm, friendly, great outfit. What did you talk about?Background, university, best London nights out, Fleabag, coming out, books, Glastonbury, Love Island. Any awkward moments?A couple of scuffles with lairy men, sadly. Good table manners?Some of the best I’ve seen. Best thing about Georgia?I really like how chilled she is. Also excellent that she was up for cocktails afterwards, despite having a dissertation to write. Would you introduce her to your friends?For sure: they would probably prefer her. Describe Georgia in three words?Outgoing, friendly, relaxed. What do you think she made of you?I honestly have no idea. We swapped numbers, so hopefully something good. Did you go on somewhere?Round the corner to get drunk on martinis. And... did you kiss?Hmm. Maybe. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That I would not have worn all black like a goth on a hot summer evening. Marks out of 10?A solid 8. Would you meet again?I imagine so, as friends. What were you hoping for?Someone to move to a small cottage in the countryside and keep chickens with. First impressions?Not my usual type, but super pretty and really friendly. What did you talk about?Accidental bike thievery, lesbian parenting, meeting people “organically”, Berlin, getting off social media, the wild west that is the London rental market. Any awkward moments?When she said she was hoping for someone “not too Guardian” and didn’t want to be set up with someone “sandal-wearing”. I was glad I hadn’t worn my Birkenstocks. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Rachel?She nearly got into a fight defending my seat from a drunk guy who chucked my bag on the floor in order to sit down. Would you introduce her to your friends?I can see her getting along great with my pals. Describe Rachel in three words?Beautiful, honest, clever. What do you think she made of you?She maybe thought I was a bit weird. Did you go on somewhere?Yes, to a cocktail bar round the corner. And... did you kiss?A little bit. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d prefer not to have been homophobically harassed by a group of drunk men while I was walking her to the station. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?We’ll see. • Georgia and Rachel ate at Hoi Polloi, London E1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com