As advertisements for the heterosexual ideal of romantic love go, you have to admit Don’t Tell the Bride (Sun, 9pm, E4) is arguably the worst ever: a straight couple, almost always 24 years of age and living together in a new-build, mug at the camera on a greying rock-strewn beach, telling us the story about how their paths first crossed, hours before he starts planning to absolutely ruin their wedding, every single moment of it. “When I first met him, I hated him,” the bride will say. “When I first saw her, I thought she was fit,” the groom will reply. This is it. This is as good as it gets. They literally always have a two-year-old together, as sure as clouds and rain. In the DTTB sub-universe, the gender roles we have all spent years railing against never really moved on: the grooms, universally, are useless thick-headed morons who can’t make toast without a speakerphone call to their mum about it; the brides, young women with their eyebrows drawn like they did it with a prison crayon during an earthquake, stomp into beige rooms to pick Xbox controllers up off the floor and seethingly repeat how much they want to feel “like a princess” on their big day. Any creative decision beyond “church wedding, white cake, ornate lace wedding dress” is treated with more contempt than war criminals get in court. Bridesmaids, meanwhile, are ferally infuriated at the groom from the second the three-week wedding-planning period starts – they will always call him in puce-faced tears from the hen do to say what a bad time they are having, baffled by the sheer idea of buying their own drinks there (how do you think hen dos work? Do you think they are covered by a government stipend?) – while every best man is just a lad in a hoodie with neck hair who is silently drinking a warm can of lager and doesn’t know how much anything in the world costs. And these two factions – a man with £14,000 and decisions to make supported by bored idiots, and a bride pre-emptively sobbing in a dress shop surrounded by an iron curtain of bonebreaking bridesmaids – are fundamentally, permanently opposed. No marriage on this show has a single chance at success. I would pay the wedding fee for one entire episode just to know the divorce rate this show inspired. Not the point though, is it? Because Don’t Tell the Bride – previously with its uni boyfriend BBC Three, then a year-long fling with Sky, and now settled in a cul-de-sac with E4 – has evolved from an insightful glimpse into the sheer toil wedding planning has on the human mind, cut with footage of mums sobbing tearlessly in a car, into an elaborate party-planning show, and I cannot decide whether it has lost a little of its charm along the way. Essentially: to get on an episode, now, the groom clearly has to pitch the worst possible idea for a wedding – Game of Thrones-themed? An adrenalin experience for the bride? Jacuzzi wedding? – and make it happen. So you’re basically watching a man who can’t plan a cup of tea somehow throw a lavish party to the exacting standards of the woman he alleges to love but who, almost always, very visibly hates him. Actually: that sounds amazing. It’s still amazing.