A young academy player at a top European club who needs to shift some excess weight snaps a picture of his dinner and sends it to his fitness coach at the club. Back comes the reply: “Good work but take some of the potatoes off and add some more broccoli. You’re smashing it. Have a great evening.” At another top club there is an academy player who doesn’t think the meals at the club provide the right nutrition (he is right). He gets up early to make his own lunch, packs it up and takes it to training. The coaches routinely mock him, calling him the “fucking packed lunch boy”, and they encourage his fellow players to hide or take his lunchbox. He tops all of the club’s fitness tests. The first player is now fully contracted and a standout performer, while the second had to battle against negative cultures right at the start of his career when he should have been in an environment that would inspire him. He has now left the game. Those two stories and many similar ones were at the forefront of my mind as I read Robert Kitson’s brilliant interview with Kearnan Myall. These cases might sound unconnected to Rob’s piece but they serve as an example of just how vital it is to provide an environment that gets the best out of those within it. Do that and the results will come as a ripple effect. Still, so many clubs in all sports don’t get that right. They try but they get it only partially correct. Metres run, tackles made, kilograms squatted, calories consumed, hydration levels met, hours of opposition analysis logged. They will get every ounce of energy from a player to maximise those returns but what about their psychological safety? Not a sense of false safety, that your door is always open as head coach but if I don’t like what I’m hearing then there will be another door leading you to your exit. Not a coach high-fiving you down the corridor and sending you late-night messages telling you how much they value you after you put in a man‑of‑the‑match performance, then later that month ignoring you as you walk down that same corridor, because you missed a tackle in the last game. And not a coach who calls one of the management at 11pm and tells you to have a presentation prepared for a 7am meeting. You do it but not to the level the head coach wants, and he stops you after a few seconds, berates you and cancels the meeting. These are not made-up stories, just the thin end of the wedge and they are just the printable ones to give you a flavour. But valuing the psychological safety of a team or how happy they are isn’t sufficiently prioritised and certainly is not measured, so in many cases it simply is not managed. I have talked about this with some head coaches and I can see in some of their eyes they think it’s all a pile of shit. “Happy clappy” I think one director of rugby called it once. They totally miss the point, just as they will ultimately miss their team goals and in the future, I hope, miss their jobs as they are flushed out of the system. They confuse framework with processes. Creating clear boundaries in behaviour isn’t suddenly redundant if you want to listen to a player or give them more autonomy. Being on time, being off your phone at team meals, cleaning the changing room, helping the kit man – all of these things are part of a team’s clear behaviours that form your guardrails for culture. But within those guardrails, it is vital to treat people well, consistently. Listen to understand, not to answer. Unfortunately there is a tendency in professional sport for those at the top to feel they must behave in a certain way, so others clearly see they are in charge. The professional game has never been harder. On the field we all know the physical commitment it now requires. Away from the echoes of the stadium on match day is a daily struggle for many. You grow up dreaming of being a professional. You often sacrifice your education and future financial wellbeing to make the grade. Then you get there and it’s nothing like you thought. You fall in line because speaking up will make it worse. Your love of the game decreases. Your mental wellbeing nosedives. You look for other escapes. You look to self-sabotage and give yourself and others an excuse to be deselected. This used to be a rarity and, in the amateur game, you had other distractions and the head coach had lower pressures. Your bills were paid via other avenues. You looked forward to playing at weekends with your mates in a sport you loved. The finances may have changed but that feeling still exists at some of the best sports clubs in the world. I’m lucky enough to see it in the consultancy work I do now. At the best places they embrace the individual and put their happiness first. Perhaps the rest need to pack up their lunch and go on that journey, too.