For close to two decades, BBC Parliament has quietly chuntered away in the background, mainly appealing to a core of committed wonks. Its start was inauspicious to say the least: existing first as an audio-only channel and then, due to bandwidth restrictions, with images that took up only a quarter of the screen. As recently as last year, the channel was being threatened with funding cuts. But look where we are now. On Tuesday, BBC Parliament recorded its biggest single-day audience, with 1.5 million people tuning in. And this was no one-off event either. During one week in January, the channel briefly attracted more viewers than MTV, and in July it was announced that BBC Parliament was the only channel in the entire corporation to see an increase in its viewing figures. True, there’s more than a whiff of disaster capitalism about BBC Parliament’s success – you can bet your bottom dollar that the figures would be much lower if the country hadn’t become a perpetual bin fire – but that isn’t to say that it isn’t extraordinarily entertaining. In fact, BBC Parliament is becoming increasingly similar to reality TV. Specifically, it’s the Big Brother livestream. Viewers of a certain age will remember the lazy background thrill of watching Bubble nap in a chair for hours at a time, all in the hope that proceedings would explode into an orgy of drunken violence without warning. That’s exactly what BBC Parliament is: long stretches of not very much, punctuated with moments of extraordinarily high drama. Admittedly, in a visual sense, the sight of a middle-aged man walking over to a different bench than usual – as the MP Phillip Lee did this week – doesn’t amount to much. But if you were a regular viewer invested in the drama, it was easily the equivalent of Kinga’s close encounter with a wine bottle. And, really, what is Newsnight these days if not BBC Parliament’s version of Big Brother’s Little Brother? But BBC Parliament is so much more than that. At moments such as this, it observes all the basic tropes of dramatic television. The characters are larger-than-life caricatures, many of them taking the form of sneering pantomime villains. The stakes are just about as high as they could possibly be. There’s even a ticking clock to ramp up the tension. It’s basically 24, albeit a version of 24 where Jack Bauer is legitimately incompetent and ends up accidentally blowing up an entire country in the final episode with his stupid dumb ham hands. BBC Parliament is a real-life House of Cards that’s easier to watch because Kevin Spacey isn’t in it. It’s a warped version of EastEnders where all the characters somehow managed to go to the same school. And since we’re actively encouraged to pick sides throughout the whole thing, it’s also the WWE. One of our elected representatives is Stone Cold Steve Austin. God knows who. John Bercow, probably. Now that a host of Conservative MPs have had the whip removed, it’s not impossible to imagine that they will hit the Love Island circuit; appearing on Coach Trip and Celebrity MasterChef and doing cash-in-hand public appearances in dingy provincial nightclubs. Maybe some of them will even manufacture a phoney relationship to keep the paparazzi interested. I’m not saying it will definitely happen, but I urge a note of caution if any time soon we see pictures of Sir Nicholas Soames getting off with Antoinette Sandbach outside a Nando’s. Obviously, it would be better if everything was fine and it was business as usual and BBC Parliament continued to burble away unwatched. But at least we can console ourselves that it has managed to capture the mood of a nation. And better yet, we’re just days away from the season finale of all of democracy as we know it. Let’s hope they have got something spectacular planned to mark it.