Toronto is booming – pulsing with energy, from its homegrown art scene and its diverse culinary offerings to its status as one of North America’s style capitals. Rivalling New York City and LA, Toronto’s become a new premier destination for millennials curious to discover its thriving arts, culture, fashion and dining scenes. After taking in some of the top-tier downtown attractions, such as the CN Tower, head over to nearby Kensington Market. Spanning only a few blocks, the streets lined with outdoor fruit markets, musicians and local craft boutiques are emblematic of Toronto’s diverse spirit. Kensington Market; Seven Lives From Mexican to Japanese food, the market is a culinary beast. It’s home to Toronto’s best-rated taco shop, Seven Lives, where you can snatch a spot in line and grab a combo of three fish, octopus or shrimp tacos for less than £10. Wash it down at El Rey, a mezcal bar with an Americana western vibe, where a shot and brew go for less than £8. Finally, for a spot of fine dining, look no further than acclaimed chef Jen Agg’s Grey Gardens, where you can enjoy wine and oysters in an exquisite French-bistro setting. El Rey; Grey Gardens, Ronnie’s local. Kensington Market is also a treasure trove of vintage finds. So whether you’re looking for a bossy fur coat or a 90s Nike tracksuit, get thrifting! Mixed into the vintage crawl are local designer clothing and jewellery stores that offer a personalised touch at a reasonable price. One of these most notable mainstays is Sole Survivor – an all-female shoe and leather repairs shop, owned by Lorena Agolli. The caring neighbourhood spirit of the city comes alive in the shop, with the craft perfected in patience and care. ‘I would say to come and visit with an open mind and to avoid just visiting the standard tourist attractions. Instead, try and get lost in the more diverse and culturally immersive areas in the city, like Kensington Market.’ Lorena Agolli, Sole Survivor owner More or less everyone in Toronto can agree that Riverdale and the adjacent neighbourhood of Leslieville are having a moment. While most of this guide features hotspots in the west end, the sweeping views of the skyline and flourishing culinary scene puts this east end spot on the map. Toronto’s appetite for brunch is huge – and its menus reflect the city’s status as one of the most diverse in the world, fusing cultures, ingredients and techniques from across the globe. Leslieville knows its way around a brunch better than pretty much anywhere else in Toronto. Lady Marmalade, a long-time local gem for all-day breakfast, has featured in the top 10 eggs benedict in the city since it opened in 2005. Mixing traditional and Mexican-inspired dishes, the bright, airy space combines local hospitality with a touch of elegance. Leslieville; The Real Jerk (top); Lady Marmalade For lunch, the Real Jerk, which was the filming location for Drake and Rihanna’s music video for Work, is a family-run, unassuming spot for some of the city’s best West Indian cuisine. Finally, Ascari Enoteca, named after 1950s Italian racing legend Alberto Ascari, is a Leslieville favourite. Serving up plates of handmade pasta paired with perfect wine matches, it’s known as the date-night spot by neighbourhood denizens. If you’re heading back to the area for some fun after dark, the hottest spot at the moment is the Rooftop Bar at the Broadview Hotel. Housed in a historic building dating back to 1891, this newly renovated space, featuring industrial chic decorative touches, offers unmatched views of the city skyline. Another hotspot is the Vatican Gift Shop, where patrons step through a secret door, in what from the outside appears to be an unassuming storefront, into a neon-lit basement speakeasy to enjoy live music and a cocktail (or two). The Broadview Hotel Get artsy on Queen Street West. From its independent galleries and hip bars to high-end boutiques, this street, which stretches from Roncesvalles to central Toronto, is an urban trekker’s dream. Get those cameras out – you won’t want to miss a photo-op next to the many murals that span Queen Street West. Don’t be surprised if you wander into one of the many galleries and get handed a complementary glass of wine at an exhibition opening if you’re around in the early evening. Queen Street West; Terroni Local creatives flock to Queen Street West to share their crafts – so store-hopping is a must. Find your new favourite vintage rock T-shirt from F as in Frank. Or what about bespoke lipstick, fused together right before your eyes at Bite Beauty Lab? If simplicity with a conscience is your thing, check out KOTN, a homegrown clothing label committed to quality essentials, ethically made, and honestly priced. Owner Ben Sehl’s store, bordering popular Trinity Bellwoods Park, is a reflection of the city’s bubbling creativity. ‘The balance makes Toronto such a great city, and the diversity keeps it interesting – there’s always something new to discover.’ Ben Sehl, owner of KOTN Need to fuel up from all that wandering? A quick grab-and-go prosciutto sandwich from Forno Cultura is a great option for those on the run. Or take a break at Terroni, a hometown casual eatery with simple and delicious Italian fare, paired with an exclusive list of wines from Italy. For a snack, feed your pastry and caffeine cravings at award-winning Sam James Coffee Bar across from Trinity Bellwoods Park. For an exquisite, once-in-a-lifetime experience, Alo, which has topped Canada’s 100 best restaurants list three years in a row, combines French cuisine with local seasonal ingredients for an eye-opening culinary experience. The bar at Apartment 200 Finally, when dusk falls, romantic cocktail bars and hideaways come to life on Queen West. For the crowd, head to the Drake Hotel, where parties are held across three levels (basement to rooftop bar) each weekend. For something less flashy, a 10-minute walk north to Dundas Street West brings you to Cocktail Bar, where delicious cocktails meet refined snacks. Finally, bring your A-game to Apartment 200 — perhaps the city’s trendiest bar, where Toronto’s top DJs go for a spin. Toronto has one of the world’s biggest Chinatowns, so it’s no surprise that it’s a fixture of the city. Chinatown is a fine option for planning a day excursion filled with activities. Start off with selfies at the Art Gallery of Ontario, especially with the world-acclaimed Yayoi Kusama Infinity Mirrors installation. Then, prepare yourself for a food adventure. For an authentic dim sum experience, order your har gow and siu mai off the menu at Rol San Restaurant. Need a quick fix? Swatow offers cheap and plentiful food – order the signature wonton noodle soup or Yeung Chow fried rice (note: These portions are huge.) For a snack, Juicy Dumpling is the easy option – where six soup dumplings start at less than £1. Toronto’s Chinatown is a fine option for a day out In recent times, the area has also become a hub for street style with world-class stores sprawled along Spadina Avenue. Check out Nomad Toronto, carrying everything from Issey Miyake and Comme des Garcons to the self-styled “internet street apparel” available at local hang Creeps, which is run by an all-female cast. Around the corner is Better Gift Shop. Owned by Avi Gold, who has collaborated with big-time retailers such as Dover Street Market, it offers a collection of unique international brands and local wears, catering for all your unique souvenir needs. ‘An impressively wide range of diversity in cuisine and quality at a fair price defines Toronto’s food scene. There are many high-end, world-class establishments, as well as accessible spots that a visitor could enjoy and find affordable.’ Sam James, owner of Sam James Coffee Bar Despite being known as a foodie’s paradise, Chinatown is the ultimate spontaneous night out. Enjoy a lychee cocktail underneath the glowing lanterns at Big Trouble in Little China, named after the 1986 fantasy martial arts film. Then, if you’re gutsy enough, head to B Boss KTV to belt it all out. Whether it’s Ed Sheeran, Spice Girls, or Mariah Carey, the private karaoke has a great collection of songs and fun disco lighting. Ready to explore Toronto? Start planning your visit with Canadian Affair today