Jonny Bairstow has been challenged to fight his way back into England’s Test side as a specialist batsman after he was dropped for the upcoming series in New Zealand and saw his wicketkeeping gloves handed to Jos Buttler. In response to the summer’s 2-2 Ashes draw with Australia, Ed Smith, England’s national selector, has plumped for a reboot when Joe Root’s Test team play a two-match series in late November (one that follows five Twenty20 internationals and sits outside of the World Test Championship points system). The uncapped Dominic Sibley and Zak Crawley will challenge Rory Burns and Joe Denly for spots in the top three, while Lancashire bowlers Matt Parkinson and Saqib Mahood also earn maiden call-ups to both squads. Surrey’s precociously talented Ollie Pope gets a fresh Test chance after two fleeting appearances against India in 2018. But it is the decision to stand down the Bairstow, just three days after renewing his Test central contract, that jumped off the page on Monday when Smith once again proved himself to be a selector unafraid of shuffling the pack. The Yorkshireman boasts 69 caps but has made just one half century from 13 innings since regaining the gloves in February following a brief hiatus. Those returns sit in contrast with - but are possibly not unconnected to - his thundering performances from opener in England’s World Cup-winning team. And such is the sensitivity of the call and the cricketer concerned that Smith and fellow selector, James Taylor, will now meet with Bairstow in Leeds tomorrow, hoping they can convince a player who was previously so determined to keep wicket that he can instead convert himself into the batsman England would prefer. Smith said: “I’m using my words carefully. Jonny hasn’t been rested. That would be a cop out. However I do see Jonny as being a top batsman, so I would say it’s an opportunity to reset and come back. “If I had to give a prediction, it would be that he comes back stronger and has a very good Test career. He has a non-Test match first-class average of 50, which puts him alongside Joe Root. Only Ollie Pope [57] is above those two. I think there’s a real opportunity to reset, work on a few things and focus on how he can become that top Test match player. “For whatever reason, whether it’s white ball cricket, a busy schedule, keeping, I don’t have an answer. But I do have an aspiration and that’s that Jonny becomes a top batsman. I wouldn’t want to narrow his options but I want an open conversation with him. The primary issue is getting the most out of him as a batsman.” I’m using my words carefully. Jonny hasn’t been rested. That would be a cop out. However I do see him as a top batsman. As well as diminishing returns and a growing propensity for being clean bowled, Bairstow’s demotion is linked with Root’s desire to return to No4 come the first Test in Mount Maunganui on 21 November. Trevor Bayliss, the now departed head coach, felt No3 was the right-hander’s best spot but with a replacement yet to be sourced, the captain’s personal vision has held sway. It is why England have opted for both Sibley, the Warwickshire opener with 10 first-class hundreds in the last two years and a hunger to bat long, and Crawley, the Kent right-hander picked more on style and potential, rather than choose between them. England also want Pope, notionally the reserve wicketkeeper for the second half of the tour with Ben Foakes placed on standby, to have an extended run at No6 below Ben Stokes and above Buttler. The latter was first pick as selector last year, and a player now felt to be in need of a defined role beyond simply a lower-middle order wildcard. On Pope, who battled back from shoulder surgery this summer, Smith said: “His numbers are outstanding but also his character - the way he came back in better shape is typical of him. We are excited about his future as we look to identify players with the DNA of a Test player.” With Jimmy Anderson now eyeing a return for South Africa in December – he and the similarly injured Mark Wood will attend a fast bowling camp there at the start of the month – his county team-mate Mahmood comes in to offer pace and skills with the older ball. Parkinson, another rising star from Lancashire, will support to Jack Leach. The leg-spinner’s big chance results from Moeen Ali’s desire to take a break from Test contention, one that has surprisingly earned the all-rounder an extended breather; Smith cited the all-rounder as one of six players rested from the Twenty20 squad along with Jason Roy, who has lost his Test spot, Jofra Archer, Buttler, Root and Stokes. The World Twenty20 in Australia next October is a fresh priority for the white-ball side – Eoin Morgan will again captain after recommitting to the role – and England are keen to widen their pool of players in international cricket, allowing the more established players to further their experience in next year’s Indian Premier League. Somerset’s Tom Banton gets his first call-up as a result, following a blistering campaign in the T20 Blast, while fellow batsmen Sam Billings, James Vince and Dawid Malan all return. Pat Brown, the 21-year-old Worcestershire seamer with a deceptive knuckle ball, is another to benefit here. Bairstow was also included but Smith said the decision on whether he or Billings keeps wicket will be made by Morgan and whoever is head coach. Chris Silverwood and Graham Thorpe, both in contention for the vacancy, sat in on selection. Joe Root (Yorkshire) captain, Jofra Archer (Sussex), Stuart Broad (Nottinghamshire), Rory Burns (Surrey), Jos Buttler (Lancashire), Zak Crawley (Kent), Sam Curran (Surrey), Joe Denly (Kent), Jack Leach (Somerset), Saqib Mahmood (Lancashire), Matthew Parkinson (Lancashire), Ollie Pope (Surrey), Dominic Sibley (Warwickshire), Ben Stokes (Durham), Chris Woakes (Warwickshire).