There have been some wonderful stories in the first week of the World Cup and some fantastic rugby played but it is unfortunate that the leading topic is the high tackle and refereeing controversies that are dominating the agenda in Japan. World Rugby is not solely to blame, even if I disagree entirely with the decision to go public with a statement slamming the referees. The more I think about it the less I can see why that statement was released. I do not understand what the intention was, other than perhaps to appease the public. The team of officials was selected by World Rugby so I don’t see why the governing body has not backed its team. If it needs to, do the autopsy after the tournament but do everything you can to alleviate the stress on them at this stage. To dig deeper into the debate however, we need to look at various stakeholders: World Rugby, the referees, the players, the broadcasters and the media and supporters. Looking at World Rugby first, there is a huge disparity between what it has said in public and how matches are being refereed. I was in favour of World Rugby coming out with its clampdown on high tackles before the start of the tournament. The World Cup has been taken to Japan, there are more eyes on the game than ever before so it was an important statement to make. But it only works if those goals are aligned in practice with how the referees operate and it is clear that has not been the case in the opening matches. So where does the responsibility lie? Some of the referees have just missed things. It happens, that’s human error. There has never been a harder time to be a referee and we can’t expect them to get every single decision right but they are under so much scrutiny. So many supporters have an in-depth knowledge of the laws nowadays. They can find clips of incidents, post them on social media and it is almost as if the citing takes place on Twitter first. I look to what Steve Hansen said before the New Zealand v South Africa game. He criticised Rassie Erasmus for trying to get into the ear of the referee and urged him to lay off because they have a hard enough job as it is. If Hansen is saying that even before the storm was whipped up, why on earth is World Rugby cranking up the pressure? After most rugby matches, the top international coaches will put their hands up and say that they themselves didn’t quite get it right if their team underperforms. It’s very rare that a coach will come out and say that the players just didn’t perform. They may say it behind closed doors but not usually in public and that’s what I felt World Rugby did. With regards to the players, it is of course really tough for them, the game is speeding up, the ball is in play a little longer, players are getting tired and having to adapt techniques that have been drummed into them. That isn’t an excuse, it is just the reality. The margin for error is incredibly small. Look at the Reece Hodge and Rey Lee-Lo incidents – chalk and cheese but the same outcome. I feel sorry for Hodge. It’s a stone cold red card but he is chasing across, Peceli Yato is stepping really late and Hodge is having to adjust at the last second. Is there sympathy for Lee-Lo almost taking someone’s head off? Or for John Quill on Owen Farrell? No. That was thuggish. We have to set a strong example that those techniques are no longer acceptable. Piers Francis has now been cited; it wasn’t malicious – the adrenaline was pumping, he wanted to set his stall out. We’re talking inches. If he hits him on the chest it’s a yellow card but he struck him on the chin and he could well be going home. I’ve never known a sport to be on such a knife edge. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales So what are the solutions? With rugby we really led the way with TMOs. We’ve seen things such as Hawk-Eye and Snickometer follow. A fluid game was made even better and sharper. You could hear the TMOs in commentary, you had the introduction of ref links but I feel like now it has gone back in time. We’re not talking about the technology, we’re talking about the referee’s ability and I’m not quite sure there is another sport where the referees are scrutinised as much. We have the technology but I’m not sure it’s used as well as it could be. It’s so important that there is a consistency between what is being said, what is being refereed and on top of that how pundits and broadcasters are dealing with it too. We ask referees and TMOs to do their jobs and it’s really important that we do our jobs as well. This is my first World Cup as a commentator. If I was working back home I would have a direct line to the TV director where I can call for replays, have a look at things and the TMO can hear our commentary. This World Cup is very different and that is unfortunately out of our control. It’s not only referees and their assistants missing things, but TMOs as well. Directors need to be better at finding angles and replays for everyone to be able to help guide that decision-making process. Ultimately, I believe that referees need as much help as possible. They are not robots and we should fully accept that they will not get everything right all the time. All we should be expecting is that they get the big decisions right and if there’s a way to assist referees to make those decisions better and sharper we should look at every option available.