Perhaps the greatest weakness of the Rugby World Cup is its predictability. Look at the way the pools are filled and from a distance it is possible to see who will be clambering out in first and second place. Of course, upsets happen from time to time, though very few shocks to the system. So while it was painful four years ago for England still to be treading water while Wales and Australia towelled off and headed to the quarter-finals, it was not seismic. Wales finishing third to Fiji in 2003 would have been a bigger deal. Ireland like to play their part in the predictability game. Almost always they are locked on to get out of the pool and, in the same vein, are packing their bags for home a week later. Irish attempts at getting to the last four of this competition have grown more feverish over the years. Aside from Italy they are the only tier-one nation not to have placed a flag on that hill. It is an issue. So how will it look if the team currently ranked top in the world cannot make it to the last four in Japan? For Joe Schmidt, a man with bruises on his back from all the hearty slaps he has taken in guiding Ireland to No 1, it would be not so much a send-off as an exit under cover of darkness. Given his stellar record, between Leinster and Ireland, that would be a chapter on its own in the story of sport as a cruel mistress. He looked happy enough as the team flew out from Dublin on Wednesday. The mood-changer came in the space of eight days between Cardiff and Dublin, where his side had rehabilitated themselves, having looked punch‑drunk against England. At Twickenham Schmidt was ashen faced. The former Ireland coach Eddie O’Sullivan would be able to identify with that feeling. It was in the preamble to France for the 2007 World Cup that he realised his side were dangerously undercooked. So for Schmidt to see his team beating up Wales for most of the second half last weekend was a massive relief. The interesting bit was the postscript. Warren Gatland spends a lot of time throwing curve balls. He loves to shine a light on Ireland’s policy of collision-first rugby, because his team usually struggle to cope with it. But just because he has an agenda it does not mean his point is not valid. It is inescapable that Ireland’s attack relies in large part on working extraordinarily hard to gain ground and score points. Attrition, in other words. To view Ireland’s gameplan against Scotland in Yokohama on 22 September, check out their second-half approach last weekend. There was a lot of one-out rugby, a lot of Welsh shirts being ground down. Never mind the aesthetic, the question is whether or not this is sustainable through a World Cup which Ireland hope will extend to at least six games. If you feel that should read seven then remember the history, not the current ranking, which inevitably is skewed by the time of year. Four years ago Ireland were plugging holes by the time they ran into Argentina in the quarter-finals. That prompted a concerted drive to deepen the squad – which Schmidt has done well – but it does not diminish the target: get to a semi‑final. Nail that down and it will mean clearing the pool hurdle and then coping with either New Zealand or South Africa in the quarters. Beating both of these opponents in the last two years helps. As does winning a series in Australia. So Ireland have long since stopped writing off contests against the southern hemisphere’s big three. Even if it is hard to see Ireland not qualifying from the pool, the progress from that point will depend on two things: the fitness of core players and the state of their game. For the former the continuing injury concerns round Joey Carbery, who flew out on Wednesday confident he would soon be fit but unable to prove it, puts even more emphasis on keeping Johnny Sexton in one piece. Conor Murray is coming off the back of a poor season but nobody wants him out of the team. And the captain, Rory Best, brings more in experience than he does in anything else. His role in what has been a stuttering Irish lineout clearly is significant. For Schmidt’s possession game to work, Ireland need to launch it off a powerful set piece. The coach’s powerplays have been key in putting opponents on the back foot, and hard work keeps them there until they crack. If that set piece wobbles then all bets are off.