It has not often paid to bet against a team coached by Warren Gatland. Wales start their final campaign under him against Georgia on Monday after a turbulent buildup. The head coach has built his reputation through turning chaos into focus, steady as he goes, but even he was rocked last week. The decision of the Welsh Rugby Union to send home Rob Howley, Gatland’s attack coach and right-hand man, while it launched an investigation after being contacted by the integrity department of a gambling company, will test the strength of what he has spent the last 12 years building, having inherited the flimsiest of properties. A feature of the last eight years under Gatland has been an almost total lack of incidents off the field involving his squad. It took him four years to impose order: the 2011 World Cup was a watershed and after it, he started to ease out players whose fondness for socialising, even in the confines of the team hotel on tour, held the risk of an unwanted headline. Until this World Cup, the greatest threat to the harmony developed by Gatland was the game in Wales where political battles are fought with relish. The latest erupted during this year’s Six Nations campaign but it proved briefly diverting rather than truly distracting, reflective of how the mentality of Wales’s players has changed under the New Zealander: no longer predisposed to find someone or something to blame. Gatland’s final Six Nations in charge produced a grand slam, the third since he took over when the three previous ones had been spread over 32 years, but the prize he craves is the World Cup and nothing he will have seen on the opening weekend will shake his belief that his Wales side have what it takes to become only the second European team to win the tournament. Wales have neither the strongest squad on paper nor the depth of some of their rivals. What they possess is a clear understanding of where and what they are and a consequent ruthlessness and sacrifice. It is here where the loss of Howley is as yet an unknown factor: the bond between Gatland and his management team has been umbilical. They have been with him throughout, and while Stephen Jones, who has replaced Howley, was a player under the regime until 2012, he is having to feel his way in. It should make no difference against Georgia. There was a time in World Cups when Wales struggled to put away limited opponents, but the real tests will be in the next two rounds, against Australia and Fiji, teams who will pose more of a defensive threat. Howley never enjoyed public popularity in Wales, seen as a Thomas Cromwell figure exercising undue influence behind the scenes, but he was as much a part of the team’s radical transformation as any of the coaches. As a young scrum-half, Howley made a habit of scoring tries from long distance, constantly on the lookout for opportunity. The game was amateur then and defence coaches were yet to be imported from rugby league. After 1995, he increasingly had to rein himself in and when Graham Henry became Wales’s head coach three years later, Howley bridled at the more prescriptive nature of the gameplan. He adapted, recognising that there were fewer moments to seize, and that was what he brought to coaching. Rugby was the art of the possible and at a time of wall-to-wall analysis and defensive systems that are allied with supreme conditioning (unless you are French), space could no longer be readily engineered with a sidestep or scissors movement. Attacking strategy is elaborate. It is the forwards, rather than the backs, who will be tested by Georgia, one of the few sides who still worship at the scrum altar. With the outcome of the match unlikely to be in doubt, Gatland has not taken much of a gamble by dropping Ross Moriarty to the bench and starting Josh Navidi at No 8. With Taulupe Faletau injured, Moriarty’s importance has grown but Gatland detected during the warm-up matches and training that something was missing and dropped the forward, expecting a reaction before Australia on Sunday. It is one of the reasons he has been successful: his readiness to call out anyone, regardless of their experience or rank. No one can rest easy and they have become hard to beat.