Tobias Jones was born in Somerset and educated at Oxford University. He worked for the London Review of Books and the Independent on Sunday before moving to Italy in 1999. He published The Dark Heart of Italy in 2003 and has written three detective novels set in Italy. He returned to Somerset for 14 years to co-found Windsor Hill Wood offering sanctuary to people in crisis (the subject of his 2015 book A Place of Refuge). In 2017 Jones moved back to Parma, where he lives with his wife Francesca and three children. His latest book is Ultra: The Underworld of Italian Football. What got you interested in the ultras?I’ve always been fascinated by subcultures and I’ve always been a football nut. And I suppose the main themes of my professional career have been crime and community, both of which the ultras seemed to encapsulate. You spent a lot of time with the hardcore supporters of Cosenza, a relatively obscure team from the south. Was it hard to gain their trust?I was concerned it would be, but I found them surprisingly welcoming and open – and actually exit has almost been harder than access. Critical distance is difficult when you’ve been hanging out with people for two or three years, going to their houses and meeting their families. Did you feel any trepidation about entering these groups?I remember going to one of the ultra dens of a very big club, to write a story [for the Guardian], and the Italian journalist I was talking to advised me very strongly not to go, and phoned me every half hour to check I was OK. Those kind of things make you nervous. But I quickly worked out how to do it: present yourself as a writer rather than going in the side door without telling anyone. If they say yes, then happy days. You approach a particularly intimidating senior figure and ask if his ultras haven’t become too arrogant. That struck me as a bit touch and go.Yeah. A lot of them have a short fuse, and they openly talk about their own violent nature. But they are also very intelligent, canny operators, and they’re not going to beat up an English writer unless he does something really, really stupid. Actually I did get a kicking once, but I didn’t put it in because I didn’t want the book to be about me and my psychology. What happened?I was walking by myself with a Cosenza scarf on, thinking I’d hook up with the Cosenza fans on the way to the stadium. Then I was surrounded by seven people with different coloured scarves and they told me to take mine off. I refused and that’s when it kicked off. But it’s absurd: why would I, a boy from Somerset, refuse to take off a scarf of a Calabrian team that I’d only discovered a couple of years before? You mostly use “we” rather than “I” when writing about your exploits with the Cosenza ultras. Were you trying to efface yourself from the story or is it also a sign that you were getting caught up in the action?It’s interesting: about a year ago a friend sent me a YouTube video of me singing [for Cosenza] with the veins popping in the neck and I thought, blimey, is this too immersive? But [using “we”] is partly me trying to convey a sense of the absolute safety and exuberance and ecstasy that you feel when you’re in a massive crowd singing a song after a couple of beers. The book also shows what a grim, exhausting existence it can be for many ultras. Can you understand why people dedicate their lives to these movements?Yeah I can, and I think belonging is at the centre of it. It’s a truism, but in an age of alienation and loneliness, people are so desperate for any kind of belonging, even if it comes with some dark or scary aspects. In the book, I was really trying to show that a lot of these lads – they’re mostly lads – were fatherless or without family or vulnerable in some way, and this was the only tribe they had. I’m fortunate to come from a settled family, but I can still find [ultra life] incredibly beguiling. Violence is a central part of what they are, and they’re very honest about that Ultras are widely derided as “animals”, but the book challenges that narrative. Tell me about some of the more positive things you witnessed.A lot of charitable work goes on. They’ve all got causes – maybe one of their daughters has cancer and they fund her medical bills. I’m well aware of the criticism here: the mafia gives money to hospitals; fascist parties give out food parcels to the destitute. It’s not unproblematic. But they always complain that journalists never write about this side of things. They are also eloquent critics of modern football and what it has become. The money in the football industry is so immense and even journalists are often uncritical, because the football circus pays the bills. Whereas the ultras point out what’s wrong about football. Everything they stand for, modern football is the opposite. They stand for rootedness and football is completely rootless. They’re loyal and football is disloyal. The fascism, the far-right extremism, all of that exists and it’s repugnant. But there are many terraces that claim to be inclusive. They would argue that they are places of tolerance where anyone can go. What connections exist between ultras and the far right in Italy, and how important is the ultra movement to far-right politicians?For a very long time, through the 70s, 80s and 90s, hardcore ultra groups gave visibility to certain symbols and gestures associated with fascism, in a time when you would never see a Roman salute or a swastika. When a lot of middle-aged, far-left ultras left the scene, there was a vacuum into which the neofascist parties, most of all Forza Nuova, sent their troops. Now you can see an overlap of personalities between certain terrace leaders and leading figures in the far right. If your group has a membership in the thousands, that’s a big electorate that needs to be wooed. Some of the rhetoric the ultras were using in the 80s and 90s, Matteo Salvini is now tweeting almost identical phrases. Did your basic understanding of ultras evolve while researching this book?Behind the news stories and the ferocious, snarling facades, it’s amazing how many of them are retired accountants, lawyers or university professors, as far removed from thuggery and the far right as you can imagine. You quote one ultra saying that football without violence is like cooking without salt. Does that apply, even with the retired accountants?I think so. I’ve yet to meet an ultra who doesn’t say that [violence] is a central part of this way of life, that’s just what it is. They’re very honest about that.