 There were echoes in Sapporo of England’s opener four years ago against Fiji. Back then the bonus-point try did not come until the 80th minute, here with three and a half to go, but it may not have arrived at all save for a moment of individual brilliance from Jonathan Joseph. Just as when beginning their campaign against Pacific Islanders in 2015, England were scrappy. There were 14 handling errors and four early penalties against, including one for obstruction with Maro Itoje and Billy Vunipola not on the same page. When it was given Eddie Jones appeared on the big screen, furiously banging his desk. Ultimately it is a case of job done, the kick-chase functioned well, there are no injury concerns and Tonga never looked like scoring a try. You could hardly blame the waves of neutral supporters who streamed through the exits well before full-time though. Given the added scrutiny on referees in the opening few days it was inevitable to see Paul Williams take his time over major decisions. He and the TMO Ben Skeen communicated well whenever Williams needed assistance and Williams made the correct decision when opting against reaching for his cards after Sione Kalamafoni’s tackle on Anthony Watson. The trouble is, the first half was nearly an hour long because Williams needed Skeen’s help on four occasions in the opening 40 minutes. Early matches four years ago were plagued by endless TMO reviews which, you sense, has played at least some part in referees preferring to try and let things flow in Japan. It is not easy but the key is striking the right balance. Williams erred on the side of caution given the heat coming World Rugby’s way and he was among the best performers on the pitch. In the first half Billy Vunipola set off on one of his many runs – in total he made 12 – but was walloped backwards by Tonga’s openside flanker Zane Kapeli. It was notable because it was celebrated like a match-winning try by the Tonga bench given the player’s rich links to the country. The head coach, Toutai Kefu, had warned that Vunipola would be targeted – and the England No 8 said he was expecting as much in the buildup – and met the tackle with a wry smile. Vunipola did not have the kind of impact he would have wanted but he was well shackled by Tonga, who often doubled or tripled up on him. All in all Vunipola made 37 metres which does not sound a lot but they are hard yards and that is the role he performs in this side. The problem was more that England were too sluggish to capitalise for large parts against Tonga. It was no surprise to see Henry Slade come off the bench for almost half an hour given his last match was at the start of June but to see him lining up at full-back was not necessarily expected. It is nonetheless an insight into what Eddie Jones wants from his No 15 given he could have feasibly moved Anthony Watson there had he wished. Slade does not have the pace of Elliot Daly nor Watson but he does like to join the line as the former does. He has a sharp rugby brain and a fine array of passing, giving England three playmaking options with George Ford and Owen Farrell on the pitch. It works because of the variety Manu Tuilagi brings and the havoc he can cause in the No 13 jersey, as shown with his two tries. Slade it must be said was notably rusty but it would not be a shock to see him line up in the No 15 jersey against the USA on Thursday. There was no better sight on Sunday than seeing Nasi Manu coming off the bench for Tonga after 58 minutes. It was Manu’s first international match since defeating testicular cancer, having been ruled out of 2018 in its entirety and undergoing months of chemotherapy. “I had tears just then,” said Manu after Tonga’s welcome ceremony last week. “I don’t think anybody knows just how much I have been through to get here.” Understandably, Manu was exhausted after the match, no doubt emotionally just as much as physically. “It was an emotional week for him,” said Kefu. “He said he needed more game time. He wants to give 100%, we’ll just keep drip-feeding him game time because he’s a bloody good player for us, on and off the field.”