Matthew Wade enjoys a chat. As talk-show formats go this one probably wouldn’t make it past the proposal stage, even in the city of Partridge, Granada TV and feisty men of all ages with a liking for the sound of their own badinage. Not that this is likely to discourage Wade, who on the fourth day of this fourth Ashes Test helped dish up the most abrasive moment to date of a series that has up to now been peppy without slipping over the line into boorishness. It was probably coming. There has been something in the air at Old Trafford. Tours tend to drag on. Players get tired or grow irritated by the friction, the feeling of being assailed on all sides. Every day of this Test match a small crowd has gathered at the back of the pavilion to barrack Australia’s players as they come down the steps at the start of a session. Most simply walk past stony-faced. David Warner has taken to cheering back at the boos, both arms raised. Peter Siddle could be seen on Saturday waving and smiling happily at one extended heckle. Nathan Lyon, short of his best humour all Test, kept his response last night to one decisive expletive. Something was always likely to give. It was always likely to be something involving Wade, a gnarled, travelled, well-seasoned 5ft 7in pocket tug-ship Australian cricketer, and a foghorn in any team; the kind of sportsman who feels it is a part of his value to bark and carp and uphold general standards of on-field yap. A few years back, Wade caused a stir by turning on Ravindra Jadeja, informing him he was “useless” during a series where Jadeja became the world’s No 1 ranked bowler. He was described as “embarrassing” by Kepler Wessels after his relentless drone during the 2016 series in South Africa, and became a kind of in-house fire-starter when he got a game in that abrasive, gritty Australia vintage of Lehmann-Smith-Warner. Here Wade’s moment arrived with England on 248 for seven in the morning session and Jofra Archer at the wicket in place of Ben Stokes. Josh Hazlewood was bowling. Archer had barely faced a ball. Wade was at short leg. “Hit him on the helmet!” came the cry, which is, to be fair, some tactically sound advice. There was more of the same; followed, a little oddly, by some gabble about how Jofra might want to change Big Bash teams and leave Hobart, where Archer and Wade are teammates as it happens. Analysing a short leg’s stump-mic waffle is among life’s more futile occupations. Nobody but Wade can say what, if anything, he meant by that. Perhaps it is a bit oversensitive to assume this was a “loyalty” sledge, a reference to the fact Archer has chosen to play for England rather than the West Indies. But it is to be hoped not. A pair of Australians have already been ejected from Old Trafford for shouting at Archer about passports. This is not really a laughing matter, or indeed a suitable topic in this country for sport-bantz. On Saturday Archer spoke in an interview in The Times about a passer-by in a supermarket ranting at him about immigrants and thieves. These are complex and sensitive issues. Stick to hit him on the grille, Wadey. Archer was dismissed limply a few balls later. However, he was energised when Australia batted, and when Wade appeared at the wicket in the middle of a sustained high-grade spell from England’s new-ball bowlers. Archer had just taken out Travis Head’s leg stump with a 91mph nip-backer. As Wade marched out he dried his hands in the dust. Wade flexed and bent and sprang up, all gladiatorial intent. Archer’s first ball was blocked. The second one was a throat tickler that sent Wade somersaulting out of its path. And, for the next 10 minutes, it was teeth and toes, as Lockie Ferguson calls it: Archer aiming for both ends of the Wade physique, offering a word here and there, and cranking his speeds up to 94mph at times. To his credit, Wade never took a backward step. Although there was one very funny moment as he turned to take a second run, having brushed past the bowler on the first, only to find Archer standing square in his path glowering down. Wade made the required calculations, turned on his heel and scurried back. What to make of all this? Nobody was harmed in the creation of this on-field banter. Wade might want to watch the loyalty stuff, if indeed that’s what it was, when he’s talking to a mixed-heritage black Briton. Archer, for his part, has annoyed the Australians with his own loose chat between games. But it did get him going. Perhaps it helped Archer to forget himself a little, to get lost in the contest. Lest we forget, this is a cricketer who has played 30 first-class games, who is learning about every part of these contests of fine margins. He did get Wade in the end, drawing an edge to the keeper and running past with nothing more than a look as Wade marched off. By that stage Steve Smith had spun his strange, luminous brilliance around Old Trafford long enough to push the game, and most likely the series, beyond England’s reach. With any luck, Archer v Wade will fade into the background, an oddity in the middle of a largely good-natured contest. However, it was at best an encouraging riposte from a cricketer whose career is likely to revolve around managing his own tension, raising his levels at the right moment, blocking out the background hum; and in giving the right answer in his own way, as he did here on a day of rising drama all round.