Jonathan Lennie Life can be chaotic – between work, family and social commitments many of us have difficulty switching off. And the thought of spending quality time on yourself is often forgotten. This is what mindfulness seeks to address. Non-judgmental moment-to-moment awareness is a form of meditation in which we engage with our thoughts and the world around us in the present moment. And being a spiritual art form of fixed duration, classical music is an ideal medium with which to practise it. Here are seven pieces of classical music that can transport us into a world of relaxation and wellbeing. Edward Elgar – Variations on an Original Theme, Op 36 (Enigma): 9 NimrodNimrod is one of a suite of short pieces from Edward Elgar’s Enigma Variations. In popular culture it has become a British anthem, though it was actually a cryptic tribute to his friend Augustus Jaeger. The enigmatic element of the work is useful in mindful listening, in that the overarching musical theme is intended as a mystery that need not be solved – like the mystery of life, to be dipped into as it occurs. Concentrate on what is actually happening in the music as you breathe along with the work’s gentle pulse, rather than zoning out as you anticipate the orchestral climax. The conception of the work is an instance of mindfulness itself. The composer was noodling at the piano when his wife pointed out that he had written a marvellous melody. He had allowed it to emerge, he later said, “from nothing”. You can listen to this piece live at the BBC Concert Orchestra’s Orchestra Unwrapped concert on 26 September. Pauline Oliveros – Deep Listening“Walk so silently that the bottoms of your feet become ears,” said American experimental composer Pauline Oliveros. She became obsessed with mindfulness through “deep listening”, a term she coined in 1988 after descending four metres into a disused water tank to make a recording of the same name. The underground room had an acoustic resonance lasting 45 seconds, allowing the musicians to create a smooth overlapping texture by listening carefully to each other. The album Deep Listening presents four pieces conceived as an aid to mindful focus. Choose one of them, concentrate on the constant drone of the didgeridoo, then become aware of the slowly evolving sounds of accordion and voice as they expand and contract around it. Purge your mind of clutter as you focus on this swirling soundscape, allowing the melodic trombone line to order your thinking. Gustav Mahler – Symphony No 2 (Resurrection), UrlichtGustav Mahler declared that: “A symphony must be like the world. It must contain everything.” To experience his immense symphonies is, therefore, to musically engage with the vastness of the human experience, and his second is a case in point. It starts with a funeral march and questions the randomness of life, before concluding that it is wondrous and meaningful. This positivity begins in the fourth movement, Urlicht (Primal Light), a slow, simple song arranged for solo singer and sparse orchestra. When the choir, with full orchestra, enters for the final Resurrection movement and sings: “Die shall I in order to live; rise again, yes rise again”, feel the energy flow through your body, swelling and expansive like the music. Johannes Ockeghem – Alma Redemptoris MaterIf ever there was a form of music designed for mindful reflection, it is Renaissance polyphony, which shows the beauty and complexity that can be achieved by voices alone. Alma Redemptoris Mater by Johannes Ockeghem is such an example. Written during the 15th century, this sacred motet is presented by just four voices. Close your eyes, breathe and follow the individual vocal lines as they flow together and apart, weaving a rich harmonic tapestry of sound. Focus on the beauty of the words: “Loving mother of the redeemer, who opens the gate to heaven, and star of the sea … You who gave birth, in the wonderment of nature, to your own creator ...” After its five minutes duration, you should feel both calm and focused. You can listen to this piece performed live by the BBC Singers on 7 December. Ralph Vaughan Williams – The Lark AscendingThis exquisite musical depiction of a singing lark taking to the air has been described by British violinist Tasmin Little as “floating above a cushion of sound”. Its composer, Ralph Vaughan Williams was inspired by George Meredith’s poem The Lark Ascending. Read the poem, then listen to the music, focusing on the violin depicting the bird as “He rises and begins to round”. Observe the lark’s efforts to take flight: “As up he wings the spiral stair”, swooping as it trills “A song of light”. Follow its ascent, until at last the full orchestra glides with the creature, saluting its “Serenity in ravishment”. Finally, become the lark, letting your spirit fly free – and, in your mind’s eye, look down upon the rural landscape rolling beneath you. You can listen to this piece live at the BBC Symphony Orchestra concert on 1 November. Olivier Messiaen – Quartet for the End of TimeFrench composer Olivier Messiaen’s Quartet for the End of Time is an exceptional example of mindfulness. Incarcerated in a freezing prisoner of war camp, he created a piece about the end of time itself, when all earthly concerns will be swept away as foretold in the Revelation of St John. This extraordinary piece was premiered at the camp on old battered instruments in January 1941. By writing for the only instruments available (violin, cello, clarinet and piano), Messiaen was adapting to the moment, yet was focused on eternity. The mindful theme is also present in the musical structure itself, which is based on an unravelling mathematical sequence that, if played out, would be infinite. John Cage – 4’33’’Mindfulness is about time, specifically now. Consequently, the ultimate work of mindfulness might be John Cage’s 4’33’’. More of an experimental concept than piece of music, Cage’s 4 minutes and 33 seconds of silence presents a set time framework in which a pianist (or any solo/group of musicians) sits at the piano and turns the pages of the empty score in silence. Meanwhile, the audience is invited to listen to the ambient sounds in the auditorium – breathing, air conditioning, the rumble of cars outside ... essentially, listening to the world around them as a unique aural event and appreciating its variety, rather than ignoring it as irrelevant noise. Of course, you don’t have to attend a concert to experience this – just set your timer, close your eyes and listen. Choose your own mindful listening from the BBC’s upcoming series of classical concerts from the BBC Symphony Orchestra, BBC Concert Orchestra and BBC Singers