Crispin Odey, the hedge fund manager who is a leading backer of a no-deal Brexit and Boris Johnson, has dismissed claims his support is motivated by an opportunity to make millions from short-selling UK companies and the pound as “absolute rubbish”. Odey said he was optimistic about the prospects for the UK after Brexit, denied influencing strategy at No 10 and said his fund had an overall “neutral” position on UK stocks. The founder of Odey Asset Management said he had spoken to Boris Johnson only once since the latter became Conservative leader, “two days after, to say congratulations”. He added: “I am an observer. When it comes to his strategy, I am not involved.” Over the weekend, Philip Hammond questioned the political connections of some hedge fund managers backing a no-deal Brexit, and the former permanent secretary to the Treasury Nick Macpherson argued the former chancellor was right to do so. Labour has been granted an urgent question in the House of Commons on the issue. Responding to the criticisms on Monday, Odey said: “It’s absolute rubbish. It really is. Politics doesn’t drive markets. Markets are very bad at observing political events because they are not monetary. “We are trading currencies all the time, long and short. Sterling is weak because we have a big current account deficit and an annual budget deficit of 2.5% of GNP [gross national product]. And we have all this noise about whether we are coming out on 31 October and who governs the country – Boris or parliament.” Odey donated £10,000 to Johnson’s Conservative leadership campaign and has given almost £900,000 to pro-Brexit campaigns in the past. The wealth of Odey and his wife, Nichola Pease, has been put at £775m by the Sunday Times rich list. Odey said he supported holding a general election, arguing “the problem is that this parliament was never set up to deal with Brexit”. A fresh election, he said, might result in a parliament that was “more closely aligned to opinion in the country, so not 80:20 but 50:50. It is not good for the country that we live on a knife edge every single day and everyone wants to postpone.” Odey said the UK portion of his portfolio was weighted 50.58% towards long positions, meaning profits would be generated by an increase in the value of those shares or other assets, and contained 49.42% short positions, where price falls would be profitable. But he emphasised the short positions were sometimes proxies for other bets. A short on a UK-listed gold miner, for example, can be regarded as a short position on the price of gold. “Most people’s view of the UK is that ‘it’s not going to get any better’. My view is that, if we get out, we will have all this invigoration of things we have got to do, including reforming the constitution. There are parts to the constitution that need reform, including the upper house, which is far too large,” he said. “The idea that Boris is a tyrant doesn’t make sense, if you look at the experience of his time as mayor of London. He is an enterprise man.” Asked why Hammond and Macpherson might question his motives, Odey responded: “It’s the deep state. They are feeling, for the first time, a little bit frustrated.” He backed a no-deal Brexit, he said, because alternative methods of leaving the EU would lumber the UK with the equivalent of unattractive “non-voting shares”.