My finely tuned West Midlands ears pricked up this week at word of the California actress Beanie Feldstein working in a shop in Wolverhampton in order to learn the Black Country dialect. It was research for her role in the film adaptation of Caitlin Moran’s How to Build a Girl. While I simply can’t believe there is no British actor suitable for the role of Caitlin Moran, it’s great that Feldstein is a) making the effort to do the thing properly and b) going to get the difference between the Black Country and Birmingham accents, which is not really understood anywhere more than 30 miles from, say, Cradley Heath. I’m delighted we are going to hear words such as “bostin’” on the big screen (if it doesn’t appear in the film of Moran’s book, I’ll be livid, as I expect Moran would be). Bostin means great, derived, I have always assumed, from bursting, as in something so great it’s bursting out of itself. The associated noun is “boster”, as in “what a boster that goal was!” Many moons ago, I taught English to Spanish kids in Rickmansworth, of all places. I well remember them shooting down a water slide yelling “What a boster!” at me. Confusingly, “bost” is also how you say bust or broken. When I was at university in London, a friend of mine, a Black Country blues singer and harmonica player called Big Jim Merris, came visiting. There was an old jukebox in the union bar, which an extravagantly posh boy called Max was struggling with. Jim said to him: “Oh you won’t get no joy out of that mate; it’s bost.” Max edged away from us, possibly a little frightened. But the key thing about Black Country speak, or spake as they say round here, isn’t the accent, or even the words; it’s the syntax. For example, “How are you?” is expressed as “How am you?” and “You are great” is “You am great”, which in turn is conflated to “You’m great” which has ended up as “Yam great”. This is why Brummies call Black Country folk yam-yams. As a friend of mine at West Brom pointed out once, Toys R Us in Oldbury really should have been called Toys Am We. Oh yes, as well as “are” becoming “am”, “aren’t” is “ay”. Hence something like: “Me? From Birmingham? Yam joking, ay ya?” Furthermore, instead of saying “she is”, for some reason we say “her is”, hence something like: “Her’s a boster, her is.” When I say “we”, by the way, I don’t really mean me. Although when I first came to work at the BBC I am sure they thought they had a bit of proper Black Country rough. But the truth is I would be regarded as rather posh in these parts, being raised in Hagley, which is where Brummies and Black Country folk came to live when they did well for themselves. To be honest, as a kid I wasn’t really fully across the proper lingo. In a school football match I was somewhat aghast when a lad I was marking from the (to us) scary Grange school in Stourbridge inquired: “Am yow in the district league? We am.” Best not upset him, I thought. Anyway, I salute Moran and Feldstein for putting we (yes “we” not “us”) on the map. We am most grateful. In fact, I have to say wim delighted; they am a right pair of bosters, an no mistake. • Adrian Chiles is a writer, broadcaster and Guardian columnist