Last week, climate strikers young and old came out in force calling upon the government to act with greater urgency in tackling the global climate emergency. Their demands should be emboldened by the stark findings of the special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate, released on Wednesday by the International Panel on Climate Change. The report highlights the intimate connection between our climate, our oceans and our very existence. It presents irrefutable scientific evidence that our warming climate is placing marine and frozen areas of our planet in grave danger, with some changes happening at a much larger scale and faster rate than previously predicted. Urgent action is needed if we are to keep our planet – and our oceans – safe and habitable. This requires more ambitious targets to reduce carbon emissions and shift our energy system away from polluting fossil fuels towards 100% renewable energy. Change is also needed in international cooperation around how our oceans are protected. It is hoped that early next year, UN member states will agree a strong global ocean treaty that could pave the way for the creation of marine sanctuaries, placing at least 30% of oceans off limits to human activities such as commercial fishing and oil and gas exploration. This is a crucial step towards building the resilience of marine ecosystems and securing a sustainable future for those whose livelihoods depend on our oceans. The government has been a vocal champion for ocean conservation. Now is the time for Britain to turn political will into decisive action and lead the way on forging a global ocean treaty. The prime minister’s direct involvement could make the difference between a watered-down agreement or a robust one. Gillian Anderson, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, Joanna Lumley, Sindhu Vee, Ranulph Fiennes, Stephen Fry, Professor Callum Roberts University of York, Professor Alex Rogers University of Oxford, Dr Diva Amon Natural History Museum • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition