Sajid Javid said on Wednesday that the government could afford to “turn the page on austerity” as he set out Whitehall spending priorities. Publishing departmental budgets for next year, the chancellor claimed that a rise in spending of 4.1% over this year and next would “bring about a decade of renewal”. Critics warned that his claims were overblown and that nine years of spending cuts would continue to take their toll. Here we assess Javid’s claim that a line is being drawn under austerity. Day-to-day spending on public services will grow by about £13.8bn between 2019−20 and 2020−21. This is above the more circumspect spending plans set out by his predecessor, Philip Hammond, in March. Most of the increase – about £11.7bn – will take effect in the next financial year. Javid rightly said the increase represented the largest increase in at least 15 years and was a turning point after years of spending cuts. He also topped up next year’s capital spending by £1.7bn. The annual public spending deficit – the difference between government income and expenditure – reached almost 10% in the wake of the financial crisis. Most of the traditional sources of advice – the International Monetary Fund, the OECD, the governor of the Bank of England and the Institute for Fiscal Studies thinktank – said government spending cuts were needed to balance the books. Under George Osborne, the Treasury forced through measures from 2010 that reduced local authority spending by about 60% and imposed 40% cuts on many government departments. Public investment spending also came to a virtual standstill, bringing to an end 15 years of improvements to hospital and school buildings. Only three budgets were saved from Osborne’s knife: schools, the NHS, and international aid. Osborne’s plan, which included tax cuts for companies, was supposed to spur growth and reduce the government deficit – the gap between income and expenditure – to zero by 2015. Cuts to the schools budget were introduced two years ago, leading to widespread staff lay-offs and rising deficits, especially in secondary schools. Once inflation is taken into account, the Resolution Foundation thinktank calculates that day-to-day departmental spending fell by £32bn between 2010-11 and 2017-18, from £334bn to £302bn. This is a 10% fall. If Britain’s rise in population is taken into account – to show the effect of diminished government funds being spread across more people – day-to-day departmental spending fell by 15% between 2009-10 and 2017-18, from £5,340 per person in 2009-10 to £4,560. Figures released last year by the House of Commons Library revealed that £37bn was on course to be sliced off the welfare budget by 2021, a 25% reduction in real terms since 2010. The financial crisis hurt British businesses and the financial sector. While the government used about £100bn of taxpayer funds to bail out banks (much of which has subsequently been recouped), the dramatic cuts in public spending meant ministers had reduced means to support households – the bedrock of spending in the economy – and the wider business community. At the time, Labour proposed maintaining public investment, arguing that with borrowing rates at historic lows in the post-crash period, there was an opportunity to improve the UK’s infrastructure on the cheap. With a Conservative-led government unprepared to step in, businesses remained nervous about the future and private investment failed to take off. Employment jumped to a record high, but without an increase in public or private investment, productivity stagnated and wages rose more slowly than inflation, leaving household incomes depressed. The IFS said Javid’s spending plans were enough to reverse about two-thirds of the real-terms cuts to average day-to-day spending on public services since 2010. However, this achievement is even less significant when Britain’s rising population is taken into account. On a per-capita basis, only one-third of the cuts are reversed. The average rise of 4.1% across Whitehall also masks substantial variation within the total. “If we exclude health, the additional spending will only be enough to reverse around a quarter of the cuts since 2010 (or around 15% of the per capita cuts to non-health areas),” the IFS said. If Boris Johnson wins the looming general election, the autumn budget is likely to feature the £20bn of tax cuts that he has championed. These are commitments that are likely to limit the scope for further increases in departmental or welfare spending. According to the Resolution Foundation, departments such as work and pensions will have suffered cuts of 69% compared with 2010 figures, even if the 2020-21 increases are taken into account. On the same calculations, the justice department has suffered a cut of 31% and local government 77%. Reversing these cuts will take more than Javid was prepared to offer in his spending review. Avoiding a no-deal Brexit is another way to limit the damage to the economy and government tax receipts. However, Javid said he would review the government’s fiscal rules, which bind the Treasury’s ability to lift austerity because they curb spending. Under these guidelines, borrowing must not exceed 2% of GDP and public debt must keep falling as a percentage of GDP. If they are scrapped, greater progress can be made on rowing back austerity.