Attica Locke was born in Houston, Texas, in 1974, now lives in Los Angeles and is the author of five novels including Bluebird, Bluebird, a thriller that won both the Edgar and the Anthony award in 2018. Her new novel, Heaven, My Home, is the sequel to Bluebird, Bluebird and part of her Highway 59 series exploring race, power and freedom and featuring the black Texas ranger Darren Mathews; in the new novel, he is searching for missing nine-year-old Levi, who comes from a family of white supremacists. Locke is also a screenwriter and producer, including for Empire, When They See Us and Little Fires Everywhere. What inspired you to write about a Texas ranger?I’d been working in television and got to know how much fun it could be hanging out with a character over a series. I came up with this idea that it would be a Texas ranger. I like underdogs and outsiders and I found a way he could be both and that is his fundamental contradiction: Darren is an authoritarian figure, but at the same time he’s conflicted about it. When I ended Bluebird, Bluebird on a cliffhanger, I knew I had to come back and finish the story. The novel explores anxieties ahead of Trump’s inauguration...When I look back I will say they are a Trump-era series. I wrote Bluebird, Bluebird before Trump was elected – white-supremacist thought was present during his campaign, but I didn’t believe he’d ever be elected. I made the decision to set Heaven, My Home right before Trump was inaugurated as so many people felt anxiety in that window between election and inauguration. This book is more personal; I was wrestling with the concept of forgiveness. There was this incident at my daughter’s school: a white kid called a black kid the N-word and I was shocked and filled with rage. My daughter had a willingness to forgive him. She’s 12 now. I looked at the mother of the black child and started weeping and saw the child who said that word and I felt sick inside; that’s where the character of Levi came from, trying to work out why I couldn’t forgive a child. I’m working from my own pain. And did your feelings about forgiveness change?No. I still sit at a crossroads not knowing how I feel. Do black people always have to be the ones doing the forgiving? Do we go on being the bigger person into perpetuity, or is there a limit to forgiveness? As a child I did a lot of looking out the window at creeks and people boiling peanuts from their pick-up trucks You movingly explore the theme of home...The title Heaven, My Home is from a blues song. A lot of black roots music can never quite pen a permanent location for home, and I think that speaks to the black American experience: when they came here not having a home that was theirs – they could be moved anywhere. For me, that music has served a real purpose. When I’ve had struggles in my life where I felt racial pain, I play blues songs. Where do you feel at home?I live in LA now, but Texas is my home in a way that will never be displaced in my heart and soul. It’s the lens through which I see the world. I don’t mean its current state or politics. I mean I come from rural, agrarian people. There’s a fortitude I draw on when I struggle: a practicality of life that comes from my Texas upbringing, particularly my agrarian upbringing. Texas is very deeply my home. A lot of your family come from towns along Highway 59. How did that spark your imagination?As a child we were always driving up and down 59 to see relatives. I didn’t have an iPod or iPad back in the day, so I did a lot of looking out the window at creeks and pine trees and people selling fresh fruit and boiling peanuts out of their pick-up trucks. These are some of my earliest childhood memories. That’s where the impulse to write about that came from. What appeals to you about crime fiction?The thing that fascinates me about crime fiction is that it gets to the heart of human nature in a visceral way. I’m fascinated by what makes people behave the way they behave. What kind of reader were you as a child?Sporadic. I wasn’t one of these kids who always had a book with them like I do now: I take a book everywhere, including the grocery store. I loved To Kill a Mockingbird. What books are on your bedside table?I’m reading Fleishman Is in Trouble [by Taffy Brodesser-Akner]. I love it a lot. What current writers do you admire?So many. Megan Abbott. Kate Atkinson – Life After Life is my favourite. Laura Lippman. Jesmyn Ward and Tayari Jones. Did you always want to be a writer?I wrote as a child and adolescent. Then I fell in love with movies and for a long time wanted to be a movie director. I moved to LA, but it all fell apart, and one day I said I don’t want to do it any more, so I decided to write a book. Having given myself the gift of time, I found my voice. What books have influenced your writing?Jane Smiley’s 13 Ways of Looking at the Novel was super-helpful to me when I wrote my first book. The book is a hybrid memoir and love letter to the novel. Its gift to me was expressing what was possible and deconstructing a lot of myth around writing. There’s a quote in it which I’ll paraphrase: “The only way you can fail at a first draft is not to finish it.” As a new writer I needed to hear that. • Heaven, My Home by Attica Locke is published by Serpent’s Tail (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99