In 2007, in the middle of the re-formed Stooges’ chaotic Glastonbury performance, Iggy Pop suddenly struck up with an a cappella rendition of 1965 movie theme The Shadow of Your Smile. This clearly wasn’t something the audience were expecting: No Fun, yes; I Wanna Be Your Dog, of course; an easy listening ballad made famous by Johnny Mathis and subsequently covered by Engelbert Humperdinck, not so much. But it wasn’t an isolated incident: throughout the Stooges’ career, Pop showed a propensity for launching into The Shadow of Your Smile at unlikely moments. He sang it in 1972, for CBS Records boss Clive Davis, in the hope of convincing him to sign the Stooges at a point in their career when the band had been written off as a joke: a move that paid off. Later that year, he sang it during the Stooges’ mythic performance at London’s Scala cinema, to an audience who were largely bemused or horrified by what was happening on stage. There are muddy bootleg recordings of him singing it at whatever godforsaken venues the Stooges were reduced to playing in 1974, during the original band’s harrowing terminal phase. Pop, it seems, has always been keen to demonstrate that, amid the chaos and bloodshed and visceral rock’n’roll on which his reputation is based, he’s a man of many, perhaps improbable, parts. This is worth remembering when trying to make sense of his recent solo releases. The Stooges’ re-formation – and their failure to translate the force of their live shows into a potent studio album – seemed to have largely rid him of the desire to make loud, aggressive rock music. Supposedly his last album, 2016’s Post Pop Depression instead looked to the arty angularity of his 70s Bowie collaborations for inspiration. Elsewhere, the Pop of The Shadow of Your Smile has been very much in evidence: 2009’s Préliminaires saw him crooning Autumn Leaves and flirting with trad jazz; 2012’s Après featured the mind-blowing sound of Pop essaying the Beatles’ Michelle. But perhaps not even that could prepare you for Free, on which Pop collaborates with jazz trumpeter Leron Thomas and shoegaze-inspired guitarist Noveller, recites poetry – by Lou Reed and Dylan Thomas – over new-agey piano and ambient synth textures and occasionally sounds less like one of rock history’s greatest frontmen than a special guest, a man with a cameo role on his own album. His contribution to the title track consists of him saying “I wanna be free”, twice. The nearest comparison from his back catalogue might be the spoken-word-heavy Avenue B, unveiled to minimal sales and critical raspberries 20 years ago. But even the ardent Pop-timist who’s sat through that might find that certain moments on Free cause them to hit the panic button, not least when Pop augments his The Shadow of Your Smile baritone with a pub-singer vibrato so pronounced and arch that, at one point during Page, it causes him to stretch the word “all” out over nine syllables. There are undoubtedly moments where the collaboration sparks. Love’s Missing is taut, gripping and not unlike the Pixies, had the Pixies opted to expand their lineup with a jazz trumpeter. Sonali, by contrast, sounds like something from the early 80s: wafty electronics, ringing guitar harmonics, surprisingly rapid-fire drumming. It’s a curious place for Iggy Pop to fetch up, but, as we’ve already established, a certain expectation-confounding streak has always been in evidence. Sonali also features the sound of Pop audibly struggling to fit the lyrics to the music. In fact, lyrics are a bit of a problem throughout. Pop has been keen to point out that Thomas and Noveller wrote the album, and it’s tempting to say you can see why. There’s clearly nothing wrong with Dylan Thomas’s Do Not Go Gentle Into That Good Night or indeed Lou Reed’s We Are the People, which hails from 1970, but sounds like an excoriation of Trump’s America. Occasionally, however, Pop seems to have accepted the challenge to sing something even more embarrassing than the lyrics of DD’s, the re-formed Stooges’ 2013 paean to large breasts. On Dirty Sanchez, someone has had the brainwave of using breasts and penises as a metaphor for the inequities of capitalism: “Just because I like big tits doesn’t mean I like big dicks, rich man make it stop – we don’t all want the cock”. It all ends after barely 30 minutes with The Dawn: more dramatic ambient tones, more spoken word, this time delivered in a menacing growl. “To lay down is to just give up,” Pop says, which perhaps offers some explanation for the preceding half-hour of poetry, weird vocal experiments, excruciating lyrics and occasional flashes of inspiration. Around the time of Post Pop Depression, he started talking of retiring: the ensuing documentary, American Valhalla, didn’t shy away from showing the physical toll being Iggy Pop on stage takes on a septuagenarian. Like adding vocals to Underworld’s music on last year’s EP Teatime Dub Encounters, Free offers him a way to continue, to demonstrate that he’s still a man of many, perhaps improbable, parts without unduly exerting himself. You can’t really blame him, although you do wish he’d exerted himself a little when it came to quality control: it’s an experiment that only fitfully works, that makes you eager for his next album largely because this really doesn’t feel like the right way for Iggy Pop to bow out. Jay Som: CrownHazy but expansive alt-rock from Los Angeles one-woman band Melina Mae Duterte, perfectly timed for the end of summer.