No driver enters motor racing unaware of the very real risks involved. This weekend at Spa they were given a brutal reminder of what will always be a possibility when climbing behind the wheel. The death of Anthoine Hubert during an F2 race on Saturday served tragic notice that, for every effort to improve safety, drivers are still always putting their lives in jeopardy. But they know this and accept that risk will never be legislated out of racing. Hubert was killed in a horrific, high-speed accident exiting the Eau Rouge corner. Only 22 years old, the much-liked Frenchman from Lyon went off the track at around 150mph, took a major impact into the barriers and then another when he was hit by the car of Juan Manuel Correa, who could do nothing to avoid it. Hubert was taken to the medical centre but died shortly afterwards. Correa has had leg and spinal surgery and remains in intensive care. The motor racing community expressed shock and sadness. There was grief then and an outpouring of sympathy for Hubert’s family. Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc, who went on to win the Belgian Grand Prix and was a friend of Hubert whom he first raced when he was seven, hugged the Frenchman’s mother when they met on Sunday morning – a natural, emotive and human reaction as both of them struggled with the loss. Yet Leclerc had no doubts he would climb into his car shortly afterwards and race through the corner at which his friend was killed. “It was definitely the first situation like that where we lose someone on track that you need to race the day after,” he said. “It’s obviously quite challenging to then close the visor and go through this exact same corner at the same speed you do the day before, but that’s what you need to do in the end.” His views were echoed by the world champion, Lewis Hamilton, who also noted that he believed the risks drivers take were not fully understood. “All these drivers put their life on the line when they hit the track,” he said. “People need to appreciate that in a serious way because it is not appreciated enough.” Safety in F1 has improved so drastically since Ayrton Senna and Roland Ratzenberger were killed at Imola in 1994 that the danger seemed to have dissipated. Drivers climbing practically unhurt from major incidents has become almost commonplace. The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, agreed with Hamilton. “We were fortunate for many years to not have had these kinds of accidents and have maybe forgotten how dangerous the sport is,” he said. “I think this is what Lewis wanted to express. I can totally relate to it. If you drive towards Eau Rouge at 260-270kph, which looks like a 90-degree corner and you take it flat, it’s beyond understanding that these guys do what they do. And it can end fatally like it did on Saturday.” In 2015 Jules Bianchi, Leclerc’s godfather, was the first driver to die as a result of injuries sustained at an F1 race since Senna. But across the spectrum the fatalities have never gone away. Among many others, in recent years Dan Wheldon was killed in Indy car in 2011, Allan Simonsen at Le Mans in 2013 and Justin Wilson also in Indycar in 2015. The peril then has always remained and in certain situations, as may transpire to be the case at Spa, the forces involved are simply too terrible to survive. Sir Jackie Stewart, a driver who saw so many of his friends die and has campaigned tirelessly for safety, was forthright in expressing the blunt reality. “Safety is constantly looked at but the accident that occurred was a huge, high-speed accident,” he told BBC Radio 5 Live. “When a thing like that takes place sometimes there is nothing to protect you because an impact at 140 or 180 mph, there is very little you can do about that, it is an aircraft accident at that speed.” On Sunday the F1 race director, Michael Masi, said a comprehensive investigation into the incident at Spa was already under way and would include the FIA and the Belgian authorities. “The FIA with our technical department, our safety department, and all of the various departments in the FIA commenced an investigation immediately,” he said. “The FIA, together with the RACB [Royal Automobile Club of Belgium], will work together with the authorities, and we will go from there.” Masi rightly added there was no timescale on the inquiry and that it would take as long as was required to reach the correct conclusions. There may be findings that contribute further to making the sport safer but, for all that Hubert’s death was a tragic loss, those findings will not guarantee it never happens again. Motor sport will never be completely safe, as the drivers are more than aware, but perhaps now there will be some greater appreciation of the risks they are taking week-in, week-out.