Dear Leo, As your brother, I was hugely proud and impressed when you entered parliament in 2017. In other circumstances, your recent promotion to assistant whip would be something that I would celebrate. But in the current situation, as your government tries to drive through a ruinous Brexit, I cannot. And now that this government is also seeking to destroy the very principle of democracy by suspending parliament, my despair at your involvement has only increased. You and I are on opposite sides of the Brexit debate, but I had hoped that we would at least be united on the basic requirements for representative democracy. I have been lobbying you over the last two years in the hope that you would maintain a sensible position on Brexit and other political matters. Now that Johnson is hurling us towards no deal, can you really still support him? We have both gained from private education. There is a grim irony in you going on to threaten the life chances of others You will of course not have forgotten that you were born in Glasgow, and may be dimly aware that we are descended from a long line of shipyard workers on the Clyde. What you may not know is that our great-grandfather, Robert McK Docherty, was not only a plate riveter but also a committed communist who was very active in the Red Clydeside period of the 1920s and 30s. He was so committed that he was, for a time, planning to move the entire family to the Soviet Union. It is almost amusing that the great-grandson of a communist riveter from the Clydeside shipyards can, as you have done, serve as an officer in the Scots Guards and be elected as a member of parliament for a safe Conservative seat. It suggests a high degree of social mobility. However it would be much less of a positive story if you go on to use your position to end opportunities for others and damage the lives of generations to come. Brexit will be such a blight on the country that the social mobility from which you have benefited will be battered. You and I have both gained from the significant social advantage (for that, sadly, is what it remains) of being, at least in part, privately educated. You will recall however that our private education was paid for largely by the state in the form of the assisted places scheme. There is therefore something of a grim irony – possibly even hypocrisy – in you going on to threaten the life chances of others through support for a government that is actively pursuing a policy of economic ruin and a regressive attack on democracy. I used to joke that your degree in Swahili and Hindi made you “perfectly qualified to be an army officer – in the 1840s”. As you now serve in a government with alarmingly backward intentions, that no longer seems quite so funny. I must therefore beg you, as your brother, to resign your post in the whips’ office and speak out in defence of democracy. How important is your own job when something as priceless as parliamentary democracy is under threat? I was once proud and impressed as you entered parliament – that was just two years ago. Now I am simply appalled that this government, of which you are sadly a part, has become the principal threat to the lives and liberties of the people. Please do the decent thing, and resign. Many thanks, yours aye, Paddy • Paddy Docherty is a historian of empire and anticolonial resistance • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.