I ricocheted across Britain from the fishing working class of Aberdeen where I was born. Up and down the country we went, taking in mining villages in Northumbria, Canterbury, North Lanarkshire and finally Norfolk, by the time I was 15. My childhood involved more than nine primary schools (I eventually lost count), five secondary schools and more council houses, B&Bs and private slum flats than anyone’s should. The woman I am is the sum of all the challenges, kindnesses and observed tenacity from those less written-about streets, as much as it is the product of my adventures in an adulthood spent nomadically in Hanoi, Buenos Aires, Berlin and Budapest. But Great Yarmouth is the town that made me and broke me in equal measure. The name will conjure up the smell of hot, sugared doughnuts, the adrenalin fizz of cascading 2ps in neon-lit arcades If you live in the south, you may have visited it in your childhood. The name will conjure up the smell of hot, sugared doughnuts, sea salt-scratchy hair, the adrenalin fizz of cascading 2p coins in neon-lit arcades, the swoop of the rickety rollercoaster at the pleasure beach. Maybe in later years, but not recently, you’ll have gone to a hen or stag do there, drinking your way through £2 doubles and syrupy shots until you stagger back to a garishly decorated B&B with a thin, lumpy duvet. It’s unlikely you will have seen it in the winter, though, when the town empties and slows and the party stops. When those who’ve had seasonal work go to the jobcentre beside Tesco and the town takes on a morning-after feeling of hangover and regret, but keeps on drinking anyhow. We moved there from Coatbridge, a small, post-industrial town in North Lanarkshire, in 1995, at the tail end of one of the last good summer seasons Great Yarmouth would have. Then the seafront swarmed with tourists squeezing whatever enjoyment they could from their long weekends. The Sea Life centre’s sound system and cuddly toy-grabber machines’ droning of “Oh, my darling Clementine” joining in a symphony with commercial pop – Boom, Boom, Boom by The Outhere Brothers and Shy Guy by Diana King were the tunes of that summer. The three of us – Mum, me, my little sister – moved into two tiny adjoining rooms in a B&B called Seashells or Sea Breeze or similar, a street away from the beach. I was 14, and newly relieved of my virginity by a sweet Catholic boy in Scotland. I was only just starting to understand what power and burden female sexuality would bestow, along with the severe limitation of being born not just poor but also a woman. In Great Yarmouth I got my first job for £1.50 an hour, serving up kiddies’ meals in a greasy spoon. I managed to keep it a few weeks beyond the season’s end because the 50-year-old, pony-tailed owner liked to see me bend over to fetch the bread rolls. But that job gave me my first understanding of the clout of earning your own money. The freedom from the constant, grinding counting of every penny. In my school, a little out of town and deemed marginally better than the local high school, I learned the harshness of group mentality and the danger of being different, but I also had a teacher who gave me Sylvia Plath and JD Salinger, who cared enough to find books that inspired us and to create an environment in which we might learn. The “kiss me quick” sexual permissiveness that seemed, thanks to my hormone-drenched teens, to pervade the atmosphere also allowed me to understand my sexuality, my queerness, without too much slut-shaming. And though I also experienced the darker side of that permissive culture – I was raped and sexually assaulted twice in my late teens – I remain grateful to have come of age in a place where sex was mostly seen as a pleasure, as something everyone did whenever they felt like it, with whomever they felt like doing it with. There were gay bars, too, where, at 16, with bright blue nails and glitter on my face, I was welcomed warmly by older gay men who celebrated my newfound curiosity in a way I doubt I would have experienced in a bigger city. It’s perhaps no surprise that Great Yarmouth and its heady excesses would come to shape me, would sink into my marrow so deep that I would continually revisit the town in all three of my books. When I returned to Great Yarmouth last year, to write Lowborn, I was frustrated to discover that 71.5% of voters had voted for Brexit, and to see a newly minted Ukip office in an otherwise economically ravaged town centre. But I hold on to my memories of a place that did have the potential to be progressive, and full of life and laughter despite hardship. Full of people taking every drop of joy that might be offered to them, no matter how meagre. And that lesson was a gift I would retain for my entire life. • Kerry Hudson is the author of Lowborn