She was in the early stages of a relationship with a man who pretended to be a police officer. He was gradually more controlling and, at one point, he became jealous of photos on her phone. “He punched me in the back of the head, then he raped me… The second time he attacked me he had a huge kitchen knife.” Rebecca – not her real name – eventually reported her attacker to the police. It turned out that he was a prisoner released on licence, with a history of violence against women. He was initially charged with three counts of rape, as well as assault by beating and false imprisonment. But Rebecca was later informed that the Crown Prosecution Service was dropping charges, because if a jury saw the amicable WhatsApp messages between Rebecca and her attacker – the messages Rebecca says she sent to her abuser to placate him in order to try to stay alive – they would not convict. Rebecca is not the only rape survivor to have been denied the chance of justice in recent years. Annie Tisshaw says she was raped in her flat by a man she had been on a few dates with. She reported it to the police and was told it was a “positive” case by the CPS, but a year later was informed it was dropping the case due to “inconsistencies” that included text messages she sent before the rape and the fact she did not look “particularly scared or nervous” in CCTV images from earlier that night. Figures out last week suggest that there will be many other women with stories like Rebecca’s and Annie’s. Despite a 9% increase in the number of rapes reported to the police in the last year, there has been a significant fall in the number of cases being taken to trial by the CPS. The number of rape charges fell by 38% in a year, the number of rape prosecutions by 33%, and the number of convictions by 27%. It is the second year running that the number of rape charges has fallen dramatically. These striking figures suggest that there has been a damaging change in approach to prosecuting rape at the CPS, despite the strenuous denials of its director of public prosecutions, Max Hill. He has blamed falling prosecution and conviction rates on the police, pointing to fewer referrals of rape cases to the CPS and the increasing volume of digital evidence police and prosecutors need to work through as a result of the proliferation of smartphones and other devices. But Hill’s explanation does not add up. While it is undoubtedly the case that police capacity is suffering as a result of spending cuts – police numbers have fallen by 20,000 since 2010 – CPS decisions to prosecute rape cases have declined almost twice as fast as police referrals to the CPS. Moreover, the police take advice from prosecutors about what to refer to the CPS, so it is entirely possible that the CPS itself might be influencing police referral rates. There have been important indications of a shift in approach at the CPS. From 2009 onwards, the CPS promoted a “merits-based” approach to prosecuting rape: rather than looking solely at the likelihood of securing a conviction from a jury, prosecutors were told to take decisions based on the merits of the evidence in the case. This was intended to avoid situations where the CPS decide not to proceed despite there being strong objective evidence because they fear that the pervasive myths and stereotypes about rape mean that a jury would nevertheless fail to convict. However, last year the Guardian reported that staff at the CPS were concerned about a move away from this approach. In 2017, senior CPS staff held a series of unpublicised “roadshows” with prosecutors across the country, in which they said the CPS “should be winning more trials than we are losing” and urged prosecutors to take a proportion of “weak cases out of the system” in order to improve conviction rates. While the CPS has denied this signalled a change in approach, it did not challenge this account of what its senior staff said. Together with the dramatic decline in the rape prosecution rate, this suggests that since 2017 the CPS has raised the bar for prosecuting rape cases in order to push up conviction rates. But given high levels of societal prejudice about rape – “she sleeps around so she deserves it”; “she’s consented to sex with him before, so that’s not rape”; “if she gets blind drunk, what does she expect to happen?” – which are fuelled by media narratives that wildly exaggerate the extent of false rape allegations, this is nothing less than the CPS pandering to rape myths to make it look like its performance is improving. It means complex cases, such as those that involve women with mental health issues or who know their attacker well, are less likely to go to court. It is a symbol of how far we have to go as a society in recognising and addressing the extent of violence perpetrated by men against women. In a week in which it was revealed that the number of domestic violence killings had hit a five-year high, the domestic violence bill was delayed again, as a result of the prorogation of parliament, and Geoffrey Boycott was given a knighthood despite a conviction for the violent assault of his female partner. Today, a woman reporting a rape has just a 3% chance of seeing her alleged rapist convicted. Campaigners are right to argue that rape is effectively becoming decriminalised. Unless the CPS is held accountable for its failings, growing numbers of rapists who should be behind bars will continue to be free to reoffend with impunity.