Rhys Patchell will feature in a Wales team showing 15 changes for Saturday’s final World Cup preparation game against Ireland. The Scarlets fly-half endured an injury-hit campaign last season and has not made a Test start since June last year. Warren Gatland has named a powerful team for Dublin, with the head coach changing it entirely from the side beaten 22-17 by Ireland last weekend. It includes the captain, Alun Wyn Jones, the wing George North, the centre Jonathan Davies and the openside flanker Justin Tipuric. There are also opportunities for the scrum-half Tomos Williams, the prop Wyn Jones and the hooker Elliot Dee. Patchell suffered concussion issues and a hamstring injury last season, which stalled his international hopes. But he delivered an impressive try-scoring display off the bench last Saturday, and it helped him edge out Jarrod Evans for a place in Gatland’s 31-man World Cup squad. Wales complete their warmup schedule at the Aviva Stadium, before an opening World Cup match against Georgia in Toyota City, Japan on 23 September. L Halfpenny (Scarlets); G North (Ospreys), J Davies (Scarlets), H Parkes (Scarlets), J Adams (Cardiff Blues); R Patchell (Scarlets), T Williams (Cardiff Blues); W Jones (Scarlets), E Dee (Dragons), T Francis (Exeter), J Ball (Scarlets), A W Jones (Ospreys, capt), A Wainwright (Dragons), J Tipuric (Ospreys), R Moriarty (Dragons). Replacements K Owens (Scarlets), N Smith (Ospreys), D Lewis (Cardiff Blues), A Beard (Ospreys), J Navidi (Cardiff Blues), G Davies (Scarlets), D Biggar (Northampton), L Williams (Saracens). Gatland said: “This is our final preparation match, so it is important we get enough rugby into us and get rugby-ready ahead of our RWC opener against Georgia, which is just over two weeks away. “It is important we hit the ground running in Japan and we give the players enough time on the field. Saturday is the first time these players would have taken to the field as members of the RWC squad. “It has been a big week, and it is a big opportunity for players to put their hand up and secure spots for the starting XV in Japan.”