Leading medical researchers have warned that their efforts to find new cancer treatments are likely to suffer major setbacks if the UK leaves the EU without a deal. In particular they fear that researchers based in the UK would face legal restrictions on working with other EU member states on clinical trials carried out across several countries. “This could be prohibitively costly to deal with and could mean UK-based organisations will be less likely to lead multinational trials, undermining the UK’s position as a global clinical research leader,” said Emma Greenwood, director of policy for Cancer Research UK. “It would be a considerable burden.” Newly established co-operative trials with other EU medical researchers have recently been raising hopes that advances can be made in treating relatively rare cancers. An example is provided by the paediatric hepatic international tumour trial (Phitt), which is seeking to test new techniques to treat children with rare liver cancers, and is part of a larger collaborative international project called the children’s liver tumour European research network (Chiltern). The €7.9m funding for these projects was supplied through the EU’s Horizon 2020 science funding programme. The leader of Phitt, Professor Keith Wheatley, of Birmingham University’s Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, said there were around 30 new cases of childhood liver cancer diagnosed in Britain every year. The disease’s relative rarity was welcome in one sense, he added. However, he also pointed out that the scarcity of cases poses problems for scientists seeking better ways to treat the condition. “If children are to have a chance of survival from early liver cancer, they often require intense bouts of chemo- otherapy,” he said. “But we do not know exactly how much chemotherapy – which can have very toxic side-effects – to give them. The trouble is that finding the answer is difficult because we have so few patients on whom to test out different regimes.” However, scientists recently set up international studies with hospitals in other European countries as part of the Phitt project. This will provide more patients, so scientists can set up trials involving hundreds of individuals and try out different chemotherapy regimes. It is hoped that Phitt will produce results within five years, leading to major improvements in treating childhood liver cancer. But the prospect of studies of this kind being set up to improve treatments for other cancers has been put in jeopardy by the threat of a no-deal Brexit. EU science funding would be likely to dry up for British scientists, and while the UK government has promised to make up the loss, medical researchers would still find themselves unable to collaborate so easily with European colleagues on projects such as Phitt and Chiltern. This point was supported by Greenwood, who said Cancer Research UK feared the potential impact of a no-deal Brexit on cancer patients could be considerable. “It is going to become harder and harder to keep studies going and, even worse, to set up new studies to look at cancers that have not been tackled yet.” In addition to the problems that will afflict UK collaboration with Europe-wide cancer treatment trials, there is also likely to be serious disruption to deliveries of the tens of millions of items of medicine imported from the EU every month because of problems with setting up new border and import checks. Drugs for those needing routine hospital care would then be given priority, leaving medicines for relatively small-scale cancer trials at risk of being held up or blocked. Greenwood acknowledged that civil servants and National Health England had been working hard to try to offset the problems facing doctors and medical researchers, in particular in ensuring critically important medical supplies would be avail- able after Brexit. “However, we remain extremely concerned that something could go wrong,” she added. Scientists have also voiced concerns that the free flow of researchers needed to maintain first-class projects would also be threatened by a no-deal Brexit, despite government pledges to try to ease restrictions that are likely to be imposed.