One of many great things about the 2,000 Guineas is that it identifies the most classy young milers so we can have fun following them through the summer, right? But not this year! Neither Magna Grecia nor King Of Change, who finished first and second in the Newmarket Classic, have been seen since May. Now, 137 days after the Guineas, King Of Change will return to the track at Sandown this afternoon and we’ll get some idea as to whether his effort at 66-1 last time was a fluke or not. But the mystery of Magna Grecia remains unsolved, as Aidan O’Brien’s colt has not run since he was a disappointing fifth in the Irish Guineas on 25 May. It was soon reported that he had pulled a hamstring in that race but it wasn’t supposed to be the end of his year, or, let’s hope, his career. “It’s just taking its time,” the trainer said in June. “It can be slow sometimes. It either responds very quickly or it takes its time, these hamstrings.” In July, it was reported that he was back in training with the Juddmonte International as his “first option” and the Irish Champion Stakes as a backup option. Both of those races have, of course, whistled past us. More recently, O’Brien has mentioned returning to a mile for the QEII at Ascot on Champions Day if the colt wasn’t ready in time for the Irish Champion. If you expect Magna Grecia to make a triumphant return on 19 October, those generous bookies will let you have 14-1. It reminds me a bit of Gleneagles, who was on fire at the start of 2015, won both the Guineas and the St James’s Palace Stakes, but then went missing and was a ground-related withdrawal at York in August and Leopardstown in September before flopping in the QEII and at the Breeders’ Cup. Magna Grecia has already secured his place at stud, of course, and we all understand that O’Brien has a responsibility to the owners not to run him in circumstances where he can only dent his reputation. But the QEII has an open look, especially if O’Brien finds a different target for Circus Maximus. Let’s hope it’s not over yet for the first Classic winner of the season. There remains the suspicion that Magna Grecia and King Of Change were assisted by the way the Guineas panned out, either by racing on a fast strip of ground up the near rail or by tracking the strong pace set by Shine So Bright. Skardu, the Guineas third, has done little for the form, finishing fourth in all three runs since. So I’m inclined to oppose King Of Change as he steps down in class for the Listed race at Sandown, for all the encouraging noises supplied by Richard Hannon. “He had a hard race in the Guineas, so we gave him a nice break,” the trainer says in the Racing Post. “He looks a million dollars.” But the betting market prefers Turgenev (3.25) and that looks right to me. You might remember him shooting three lengths clear of 27 rivals at Royal Ascot when Frankie Dettori was trying to go through the card and possibly got a bit too trigger happy. He folded up in the final furlong that day but cheekpieces helped him go close in the Celebration Mile (Skardu a length behind) under Rab Havlin last time. Dettori returns to the saddle and, with the ground still quick, this looks a good opportunity for the Italian to atone for going too soon in June. They’re available at 7-4. Gosden and Dettori could be in for a good day, as Byzantine Empire (2.20) appeals at 9-4 in an earlier novice race. By Golden Horn, he’s a half-brother to a Gosden-trained Chesham winner and should come on a lot for his debut second, when he blew the start. I’d rather have him than the current favourite, Heaven Forfend, who hasn’t been seen since running sixth in this year’s Chesham. Later, I like the look of a William Jarvis handicap debutant in Lady Bowthorpe (4.00). She’s nicely bred and might be able to do a lot better than when making all in her Lingfield novice last time. This step up to a mile ought to help. She’s 5-1. Pick of the card at Yarmouth might be the 7-2 shot Khuzaam (3.45), carrying the second Hamdan colours. Montatham, carrying the first colours, comes from the William Haggas yard that has gone a bit quiet lately. Yarmouth 1.40 Restless Rose 2.10 Maqtal 2.45 Fanny Logan 3.15 Holmeswood 3.45 Khuzaam 4.20 Pinnata 4.50 Golden Force Sandown 1.50 Gnaad 2.20 Byzantine Empire 2.55 Palace Pier 3.25 Turgenev (nb) 4.00 Lady Bowthorpe 4.35 Just The Man 5.05 Colony Queen 5.35 Petite Malle (nap) Beverley 2.00 Calippo 2.30 Freyja 3.05 Flylikeaneagle 3.35 Arctic Ocean 4.10 Magical Journey 4.40 Tan 5.10 Dependable 5.40 Grey Berry Kelso 3.40 Newtown Boy 4.15 Glorious Lady 4.45 Ballycrystal Court 5.15 Canford Thompson 5.45 Tidal Watch 6.15 One Night In Milan 6.45 Elle Est Grande