Over the years, Adult Swim has carved out a niche as a place of angry anarchy. It’s a place where a sitcom’s opening credits will stretch and warp until it becomes an orgy of murder. Where James Van Der Beek will be taunted by a nightmarish doppelgänger. Where puppets slice other puppets up for ham. But it’s also the home of Joe Pera Talks With You (now streaming on All4), which is the precise opposite of all that. Joe Pera Talks With You is quiet and still. It’s a hushed little tone poem about small-town America. It never loses sight of its own sincerity. It’s still odd, because it’s an Adult Swim show, but it’s about as good natured as anything you will ever watch. It’s terrific. Pera – a 30-year-old comedian with the voice and mannerisms of someone three times his age – plays a fictional version of himself; a middle-school choir teacher living on Michigan’s Upper Peninsula. A single man who lives alone, he finds enormous pleasure in tiny things: iron, sheet music, the sound of liquid being poured from a large container into a smaller container. He’s well liked by his local community, but he doesn’t quite fit in. As such, he’s found comfort in his own routines. He reads the announcements at church. He goes on an annual drive each autumn. He collects minerals. Another show would have painted Pera as a figure of fun, using his quirks as a weapon against him, but Joe Pera Talks With You has too much heart for that. The show is always on his side. When teenagers place a For Sale sign outside his home, and it looks for a moment like he’ll honour the wishes of the strangers who make him an offer, you go through all the dips and turns of his dilemma with him. When he marvels at a spinning dessert display, seduced by the sweet delights but knowing that as an adult he has to make healthy choices – it’s like you’re seeing it for the first time. Each episode of Joe Pera Talks With You is 10 minutes long, which is just enough. We’re introduced into his world, and we watch him impart some folky, home-spun wisdom on a certain topic, then we leave him as we found him. There’s only a veneer of an emotional arc – a lightly-drawn relationship with a colleague starts to burble up in later episodes – but even that feels unnecessary. Joe Pera as a character is an island, and the fun of watching it is feeling his own worldview slowly align to yours. He’s a soft and soothing presence, a little like Bob Ross, and the series can often veer into something approaching ASMR in its meditative delivery. My favourite episode of the nine currently available is Joe Pera Reads You the Church Announcements, in which Pera hears Baba O’Riley by The Who and is suddenly awakened – in a charmingly small way – to the transformational power of music. At first he widens his eyes and bobs his head. Then he telephones all the local radio stations to request it. Two days later he’s a sleepless convert. It’s hard to say why, but the sight of this is actively moving. This could be thanks to Ryan Dann’s exquisite soundscapes, which are sad and spare and only surge up in times of true emotion, like when Pera bids farewell to a pumpkin by watching it tumble off a waterfall. Or it could be down to the performances, none of which betray the slightest hint of mockery. Whatever the reason, this is an absolutely gorgeous show, so quietly heartrending that it’ll take your breath away. The nights are drawing in. There’s a chill in the air. You deserve this show.