Stephen Jones should have been on the school run when Wales set out for their opening World Cup match against Georgia in Toyota on Monday but, having been hastily summoned to stand in as attack coach, found himself the one giving the lessons. If Wales’s four first-half tries from set pieces were a legacy of Jones’s predecessor Rob Howley, who had been sent home the previous week as the Welsh Rugby Union launched an investigation after an approach from the integrity department of a gambling company, Jones aims to make his mark in the coming weeks, starting with Sunday’s key group match against Australia in Tokyo. “It has been a manic week,” Jones said after being presented to the media on Tuesday for the first time since his appointment. “I would be on the school run now if I were not here and I have had a wonderful welcome from the management and the boys. I have worked with a number of them before and the senior players were excellent, taking the helm and leading. “There are a number of good things in the library already. Warren [Gatland, the head coach] has been excellent and said I can evolve things slowly but I am conscious there is going to be limited grass time. I am just fortunate that there is so much in place already.” Jones was due to succeed Howley after the World Cup, part of a new management team under Wayne Pivac, who will take over from Gatland. “When I got the call to come here, it was an instant decision,” said Jones, who won 104 caps and played in the 2011 World Cup under Gatland. “I am not bringing with me any plans for next year. What is hugely beneficial for me is that I have been in this environment and learned so much. It makes the transition a lot easier.” Wales suffered a jolt before the match against Australia, a side that have defeated them in five of the last seven World Cups since going down in the 1987 third-place play-off, when the second-row Cory Hill was ruled out of the tournament with a leg injury. Bradley Davies will join the squad this week. “It is unfortunate for Cory but Bradley has appeared in two World Cups and will bring that experience into the squad. Hadleigh Parkes and Ken Owens suffered knocks against Georgia but I expect them to take a full part in our next training day. “It was an excellent start against Georgia but we have some things to improve on. That’s the exciting part ahead of what will be a massive sporting occasion on Sunday, one that as players and coaches you just love. Wales were successful against Australia last time out (in November), but they have a number of talented players. I look at it from our perspective and we have some wonderful players in terms of skill-sets, athletic ability and work-rate off the ball.” While Wales’s attacking strategy confounded a Georgian team that had prepared for a set-piece battle, Australia will take rather more breaking down. Wales have scored three tries against them in the last four matches between the sides, drawing a blank in the 2015 World Cup despite having a two-man advantage at one point in the second half. “You need balance in your game,” said Jones. “It is about recognising how the opposition set themselves up and being smart. You have the ability in attack to shape the opposition’s defence and, when you get into the right areas, you need to be potent and take your chances. “If a team goes front-loaded against you and the space is behind, you have to take it. It is about managing a game, and your team’s energy, as best you can and knowing when to put the ball through the hands. The way we moved it against Georgia, together with the lines of running, was good but we have things to work on.” Jones said he had not spoken to Howley since arriving in Japan. “I have not had the chance to catch up with him but it is clear there is a wonderful foundation in place.”