On Monday, she secured a mantelpiece full of Emmys; on Tuesday, Phoebe Waller-Bridge got a brand new TV deal. The Fleabag creator will create and produce TV content exclusively for Amazon Prime Video, after signing a deal with Amazon Studios. The streaming service already screens Fleabag in more than 200 countries and territories including the US. “I’m insanely excited to be continuing my relationship with Amazon. Working with the team on Fleabag was the creative partnership dreams are made of. It really feels like home. I can’t wait to get going,” Waller-Bridge said as the announcement was made on Tuesday. While she emphasised the creative benefits, the news echoed growing warnings from senior UK television industry figures that homegrown British on-screen talent is increasingly being bought up by international rivals which “increasingly want to decide what we read, watch and listen to”. Alex Mahon, the chief executive of Channel 4, told the Royal Television Society conference on Thursday there was a “growing concentration of power in the hands just a few tech behemoths”. She added that such firms were motivated by their own commercial interests, which might lead them to promote their own content first, “whether it’s Amazon boosting its own products on marketplace, Google prioritising its own podcasts or Netflix serving us its own productions”. That was followed by a warning from the former BBC director general, Mark Thompson, who will say the UK is facing “a total loss of culture sovereignty”. Thompson will tell an audience at the Steve Hewlett memorial lecture in London on Tuesday night: “No one wants to see the UK turn into a cultural ‘Airstrip One’, but it’s a clear and present danger. With newspapers struggling and broadcasters outgunned, I fear only effective and salient government media policy stands between Britain and a total loss of cultural sovereignty.” Fleabag and those associated with it won six awards at the Emmys, including honours for writing, directing and acting, as well as casting and editing. The programme was also named the overall outstanding comedy series. The programme features Waller-Bridge as a young woman living in London who provides the audience with outrageous and intimate details of her life. It premiered in 2016 to critical acclaim, but was initially overlooked at the Emmys, not scoring a single nomination. Waller-Bridge has also received acclaim as the writer and showrunner of the first season of the BBC America television series Killing Eve, starring Jodie Comer, who won an Emmy this week, and Sandra Oh.