The chapter on the Celts in the history of the World Cup is one of the shortest. Wales have made two semi-finals, double the number of Scotland who have managed it once more than Ireland. Between them, they have failed to make the knockout stage six times but this time they are all daring to dream. When Ireland defeated New Zealand last November, they were seen as Europe’s main threat in the World Cup. Four months later, after a lacklustre Six Nations campaign, their record of never having got beyond the quarter-final stage in the tournament was frequently cited as expectations dipped. Now they sit top of the world rankings after back-to-back victories over Wales. When Warren Gatland’s side secured the grand slam by convincingly beating Ireland in Cardiff in March, it was they who were seen as genuine World Cup contenders, a team that appreciated its limitations and played to its strengths while, unlike in 2015, having tactical alternatives. Six months later, as they headed to Japan after losing three of their four warm-ups despite briefly reaching world No 1 themselves, odds on them taking the title lengthened. Indeed, the ebb and flow of the last 18 months means picking a winner involves hitting a moving target with New Zealand losing their place at the top of the world rankings, South Africa reclaiming their heritage under Rassie Erasmus and France, who had become serial under-performers on the Test stage, getting serious again. It was only last year, after victory over the All Blacks, that Ireland had beaten all their Tier 1 rivals in an 18-month period. Wales went into their warm-ups on a record 14-match winning run and while they could do with a sprinkling of stardust, what will drive them is Gatland in his final hurrah. The draw favours them, with England, France or Argentina potential opponents if Wales make the quarter-finals. Gatland has the ability to milk his players of everything. Under him they are bloody-minded in a competition, obdurate and hard to beat. If someone knocks out New Zealand, who knows? Scotland, meanwhile, may have found a cure for their travel sickness, the draw at Twickenham in March followed by a comprehensive victory in Tbilisi, even if in between they had not found the evening in Nice nice. They are being bracketed not with the teams given a chance of winning the World Cup, merely capable of beating anyone on their day, the one-off shock rather than sustained success. Yet the longer the match between Ireland and Wales went on last Saturday, the greater the prospects for Gregor Townsend’s team looked. Ireland won, more decisively than the 19-10 scoreline suggested, by going back to what they were comfortable with, keeping the game tight, playing around the fringes or using Bundee Aki to make a dent in midfield. They were, for them, indulgent before the interval when the more open nature of the game suited Wales, who used their line-speed to keep Ireland behind the gainline and induce mistakes. Ireland meet Scotland on the opening weekend in Yokohama, the venue for the final. If they play throughout as they did in the second half against Wales, they will likely throttle their opponents, but the conditions will be very different to Dublin when summer was gasping its last breath. The weather, unless a typhoon is lurking, will be hot and sticky. The pitch will be fast; no one will be able to hide in the long grass. Which should suit Scotland. Ireland like to dictate through territory and possession, playing at their own pace and Wales use defence as a means of attack, fit, organised and patient. While their inability to interrupt Ireland’s advance would have frustrated Gatland, as he pointed out afterwards his players were thinking about boarding the flight for Tokyo four days later. Scotland are different. Their strength lies in the way they react, highly effective in transition. Finn Russell and Stuart Hogg are master improvisers, supplied by a marauding, scavenging back row. The way they came back from 14-3 down to defeat France at Murrayfield last month summed them up. They contested the breakdown, forced turnovers and took France on out wide. The conditions in Japan should suit their style, although a question will be whether they are fit enough to sustain it. A cynic could look at the fixtures for Pool A and conclude there is an expectation that Ireland will win it, leaving the hosts and the Scots grappling for the other quarter-final slot. The final day of the group stage is 13 October. Three of the four matches are likely to be of little consequence. The other, in Yokohama, sees Japan take on Scotland. Winner takes all? The commercial arm of the tournament organisers would be delighted, but it assumes Scotland will have lost to Ireland. In a year when form is transient and the expected is not always delivered, that may be a stretch, a thistle among the cherry blossom.