The cabinet manual’s rule that the Queen “should not be drawn into party politics” has been broken by Boris Johnson. It was his decision, as prime minister, to advise the monarch to issue an order in council to prorogue parliament for five weeks. That order was declared “unlawful, void and of no effect” by all 11 justices of the highest court in the land in the most significant constitutional judgment in modern times. The government’s decision to disregard convention was taken to evade scrutiny by MPs at a moment of constitutional and political crisis. The Commons will now reconvene. A prime minister found to have acted unlawfully in this manner should not stay in office. A prime minister with honour would tender their resignation. But Mr Johnson has no honour and no shame. The precedent such an act of defiance sets ought to be unthinkable. The sooner that Britain is rid of him the better. In office Mr Johnson has exposed voters to a level of mendacity, opportunism and belligerence that the country has rarely encountered in an occupant of Downing Street. With no legal training, the prime minister peremptorily dismissed the court for having had the temerity to upbraid him. Despite the ruling having nothing to do with Brexit, Mr Johnson blamed the decision, ridiculously, on remainers. Lady Hale, president of the supreme court, posited the court’s argument upon the foundational principle of a constitutional monarchy, first articulated in 1611 by the jurist Sir Edward Coke, that government “hath no prerogative but that which the law of the land allows”. This was treated with contempt by Mr Johnson, much as Sir Edward was dealt with by James I – he considered this troublesome lawyer’s attempts to restrict the personal use of royal prerogative power as treason. It is barely credible that politicians of a governing party in the 21st century could think it is constitutionally right and proper to suspend parliament in the manner of a Stuart king because MPs are frustrating a political misadventure. Prorogation in the hands of the Brexiters is a constitutional outrage first cooked up by the cartoonish leader of the Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg in January this year. Brexit is becoming a religion in the Tory party, the fundatmental tenet of which is that no deal will do no harm, so no safety net is required. For its adherents, the prize of remaking Britain in a reactionary mould was worth dispensing with legislative scrutiny altogether. It is in many ways desirable for a state of tension to exist between judges and the executive. If there is a state of perfect harmony between them, then citizens ought to worry. But Brexiters chafe against the subordination to the law of the open-ended discretionary power vested in the executive. The supreme court’s decision is the culmination of a long and socially useful process of judicial review. Prerogative powers are much diminished by Tuesday’s judgment. But they still exist, including the power to make treaties, which will become a hot-button issue if Mr Johnson attempts to sign a post-Brexit trade pact with Donald Trump. Prerogative powers ought eventually to come under parliament’s supervision. The Tory party has been captured by extremists determined to chase a hard Brexit at the expense of long-held principles. Ministers toy with underhand political devices such as recommending the Queen does not enact legislation, or questioning why ministers need to abide by the law. The Tories’ baleful mutation has seen them become law-breakers not law-makers. Dominic Raab, Geoffrey Cox and Mr Rees-Mogg have committed grave acts of constitutional recklessness. Mr Johnson has no majority in parliament. He has lost control of the Commons, is unable to command its confidence and is forced to accept laws drafted by his opponents. He would like the opposition to hand back the initative by bringing a vote of confidence so he can decide the date of the election. They ought to resist the temptation. If the factions opposed to no deal cannot agree, Mr Johnson will win an election and Britain will lose. But if they needed an excuse to set aside their differences to work together to save the country from a no-deal disaster, the judges have just given them one. They should take it.