In the bare ruined choirs of the prorogued parliament, one small event carried on unhindered. The scrutinising committees are banned, the prime minister shut parliament to avoid interrogation by the mighty Commons liaison committee as he hid from PMQs. But this one small elegiac meeting went ahead: Lord Giles Radice launching his little red book, A Love Affair With Europe. There they were, older noble lords of passionate pro-European persuasion assembling to mourn the passing of a long-held dream. For 50 years Radice was one of those who toiled unceasingly for the UK to join, and to love, the Europe of peace and prosperity – a beacon of democracy. Every prime minister was bullied by the newspapers into anti-European fist-shaking His own journey starts in 1955 at the age of 18, between school and national service, cycling from Rotterdam to Rome, staying in youth hostels, meeting other young Europeans of the left to talk earnestly through the night of a continent united, forever at peace. There follows a pithy short chronicle of missed opportunities, clinging to empire, failing to see the future, until Harolds Macmillan and Wilson tried. They were blocked by Charles de Gaulle – rightly, as it turned out, suspecting we would never be true Europeans, forever tied to the US, or yearning for our old dominions. Finally Edward Heath landed us there: he of the never-again generation who fought in the war, spoke French, German and other European languages, and knew European politicians as friends, especially among a band of social democrats. But this group never brought the country with them – their enthusiasm was never passed on and was no match for the infections of the anti-European virus. How was it done, that 1975 result of 67% to 33% in favour of staying in the EC? As in its fateful 2016 reprise, almost all heavyweight figures in all parties, business voices, writers and thinkers backed belonging in Europe. Those now searching for reasons why that same heavyweight backing failed this time often blame exactly that establishment phenomenon: an angry electorate opted for the outsiders, the insurgents, rebelling against know-it-all authorities. But whose rebellion was it really and led by whom? Radice reminds us of the vital salient fact too often ignored, or dismissed, because it’s so blindingly obvious as to be banal. In 1975 only one newspaper – just one – advocated voting against the simple question “Do you think the United Kingdom should stay in the European community?” It was the Morning Star. All the others, yes, the Mail, the Telegraph, the Sun, the Times – every single other one – advocated staying. What a contrast with the 2016 referendum, when the majority of UK papers was controlled by a handful of virulently Europhobic offshore press barons, who strongly influence the broadcasters’ agendas. For 40 years the poison dripped from their pens in the wake of Rupert Murdoch’s arrival, when Margaret Thatcher broke our ownership laws to allow him to take over nearly 40% of all British press. The Eurocrats became the foreign enemy, with every British negotiator setting off as to war with Brussels. Never underestimate that colossal cultural influence, even if deeper sociological reasons for the leave vote are more interesting. Every prime minister was bullied by newspapers into anti-European fist-shaking. EU elections came and went ignored by the parties. None dared sing the EU’s praises, not even Tony Blair – and now he does when it’s far, far too late. Radice’s little tome is full of mea culpas for his generation of Europeans. They never won the argument: Eurobarometer, the European commission’s long-running poll of public opinion, he notes, for most of the years of UK membership found only a minority ever said that Europe was “a good thing” – the lowest in the EU. They failed, he suggests, because from the start they were never honest about the exchange of some sovereignty necessary for membership of the club. Don’t treat voters as idiots, he warns – though that’s exactly what leave campaigners do shamelessly. The real failure was of political leadership, forever running scared of Murdoch and the rest, never daring to stand up to these papers to make their case. Look at today’s Daily Mail, attacking the three Scottish judges who ruled prorogation unlawful personally for bias – enemies of the people once again. The foundations of democracy judder when populists defy the law and its arbiters, Hungarian-style. Operation Yellowhammer, with its official list of no-deal risks, doesn’t feature until page 10 of the Mail. Who rules the country when the mainlines of its communications are controlled by extreme and malevolent owners, whose determination to take the UK out of Europe has become a demonstration of their power for its own sake? The ache of loss all through Radice’s book is matched by a hardheaded appraisal of the failure of his breed of pro-Europeans to reach the people – but he ends with a conviction that the next generation will seek to rejoin. It must be so because we are inextricably tied to Europe. If he’s right about this indelible connection, the Yellowhammer warning is only a glimpse of immediate inconveniences: it doesn’t begin to spell out the long downward drag on the country’s fortunes. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist