Clare Barron is drinking coffee in a Brooklyn restaurant she hasn’t visited since she broke up with a boyfriend over at the window table. “We were sitting right there for, like, four hours,” she says, waving a hand toward the offending table. “It was a nightmare.” But sweet dreams have never really been her thing. Turning back to me, the 33-year-old playwright shares this advice for anyone interested in writing about girls and women: “Make it soulful. And big. Take it seriously. Don’t make it cute.” In plays such as Dance Nation, You Got Older, I’ll Never Love Again and Dirty Crusty, which is about to get its world premiere in Britain, Barron shows what it is like to live in an ungovernable (usually female) body with ungovernable (usually female) emotions. Beauty and cruelty collide, as do desire and pain. Wearing a vintage dress, her hair pulled back into a frisking ponytail, Barron is small, slender and doe-eyed. Which some might call cute. Her looks invite condescension, such as, for example that time at an awards ceremony when a critic initially mistook her for an actor and then asked her if she had written her nominated play all by herself. She has also wondered if some of her early success is down to this certain camera-readiness. Dance Nation won a Relentless award in 2015 and is currently a Pulitzer prize finalist. There have been TV development deals, too. (She arrived for pitch meetings waifish after being ill “wearing really slutty clothes, kind of on purpose, almost to troll the whole thing”.) “Sometimes it holds you back,” she says, “and other times the very thing that is being fetishised or commodified is getting you an opportunity. And then it becomes scary to age. Like, do I only have a career because I was a young female writer and that was hip? Or do people actually take my work seriously?” The work tells women’s stories, Barron says, because she is a woman. And it concentrates on bodies and on sex because she grew up in a conservative Christian community in Washington state and has tasked herself with undoing the shame she learned there. “Our bodies are wild and our sexuality is wild,” she says. “And it’s weird that we don’t talk more openly about it.” Barron does – speaking blithely about blowjobs and dating apps geared toward kink. The emotions in her work are wild, too. “I recently got diagnosed as bipolar,” she says. “So part of me is, like, maybe I just have outsized emotions and that’s why I’m interested in this.” She is taking medication, which she thinks is affecting her memory. “It’s not as good as it used to be,” she says. “And I’m like, ‘Is this worth it?’” Dirty Crusty is about a directionless young woman with an eccentric approach to personal hygiene Bodies and emotions smash together in Dirty Crusty, an early play. She wrote it quickly, seven years ago, for Youngblood, a prestigious early-career writers group in Manhattan. She and her boyfriend had started seeing other people (“So I was having all this crazy sex with older men”) and two close friends had died suddenly. The play became a channel for desire and grief. She also thought she might play the lead role, Jeanine. A directionless young woman with an eccentric approach to personal hygiene, Jeanine falls into relationships with Victor, a mask-maker, and Synda, a former ballerina. Dreamlike and hyperreal, Dirty Crusty, like all Barron’s plays, is written with a kind of radical intimacy and explores the limits of what a body can want and take and do. Here’s one line: “Now that I’ve remembered my body, I’m afraid to be alone with it.” The 26-year-old body that wrote Dirty Crusty doesn’t feel like Barron’s own any more and revisiting it, she says, is “deeply weird”. Still, she doesn’t want to revise it. “I want to respect that 26-year-old person. I don’t want to get in there and try to update it to my current self.” That self, by the way, is “extremely single” and had a crazy summer of dating four or five people at the same time. “There’s so much carnage in dating,” she says, philosophically. Barron doesn’t know how a London audience will respond to the play, but she doesn’t like to prescribe a certain response. “I get annoyed with plays where they’re trying to get me to feel something,” she says. “My favourite theatre experience is an experience where some people are laughing – and some are crying.” Dirty Crusty is at the Yard theatre, London, 24 October-30 November.