Ireland will travel to Japan on Wednesday as the leaders of the world rankings after coming from behind to defeat Wales with a typically efficient second-half performance. They look the most likely of the Celtic challengers, but a match played four days before the teams leave for Japan threw up injury concerns for both. Wales started with Rhys Patchell at fly-half. The 26-year-old was chosen in the World Cup squad after a knee injury ruled out Gareth Anscombe, but Wales may have to call on a third. Patchell lasted 23 minutes before suffering a head injury tackling the back-rower CJ Stander in the buildup to the game’s first try. Patchell did not return after his assessment and having suffered two concussions last season, with a total of three in 12 months, he faces a long period out of the game. The head injury return to play protocol stipulates that in cases of multiple concussions, a player has to be guided by an independent concussion expert who determines when he will play again. The Ireland wing Keith Earls, who was making his first appearance in the warmups, suffered a leg injury while the prop Cian Healy did not return to the field for the second period after having a head injury assessment. Patchell was replaced by Dan Biggar who quickly had the chance to give Wales the lead when he intercepted a Johnny Sexton pass on halfway and headed for the Ireland line. He took a diagonal approach to head off the cover that was sweeping across but at the point when he was ready to reach out and ground the ball, Robbie Henshaw hauled him down and Rob Kearney got underneath the outside-half to prevent him from touching down. The referee Mathieu Raynal was going to involve the television match official when Biggar told him not to bother. Ireland were at that stage 7-3 ahead through Kearney’s try following their first move of menace. After Bundee Aki had pierced the midfield, James Ryan won a lineout and the timing of Sexton’s pass gave Kearney the room to step out of Jonathan Davies’s tackle. Leigh Halfpenny had earlier missed a penalty for Wales but was on target after 25 minutes after he had been taken out in the air by Jordan Larmour. Wales applied the early pressure, looking to bypass Ireland’s narrow defence, but were regularly turned over with the home side securing possession through mauls. A reason Jean Kleyn was preferred to Devin Toner in Ireland’s World Cup squad was has ability in the loose, but Ireland again struggled in the lineout, losing two early throws. They were unable to sustain attacks and Wales went into the interval ahead when Hadleigh Parkes scored from a scrum. Ireland went back to basics in the second period and wore down their opponents. Tadhg Furlong scored their second try after Rory Best opted for a scrum rather than a certain three points and Ryan supplied the third which was awarded on review after he had held off challenges by Aaron Wainwright and Josh Adams. Best, who was making his final appearance here, was given a standing ovation he was replaced after 52 minutes. It was a day when Ireland, who start their Japan campaign against Scotland in two weeks, put last month’s collapse at Twickenham behind them. The former Australia hooker Jeremy Paul reckons they will win the World Cup and, for the first time this year, they showed why. Wales did not manufacture a move of note after the interval. A team that attacks through its defence was worn down, conceding penalties as the pressure intensified. Adam Beard was sent to the sin-bin three minutes from the end for his team’s persistent infringing and six months after defeating Ireland to secure the grand slam, they have more questions than their opponents.