It was predicted to be the death knell for the traditional British boozer and likely to lead to a slump in business and permanent closures. But 12 years since the introduction of the smoking ban in England, a pub guide has credited the initiative with transforming pubs and forcing them to become cleaner, brighter places with better food and with greater appeal to women and families. The 37th edition of the Good Pub Guide, published on Thursday, features more than 5,000 pubs on the basis of visitors’ recommendations, backed up by editor visits and inspections. In addition to official reviews, there are online listings for another 40,000 pubs across the UK. UK pubs are still closing at a rate of 14 a week, but the 2020 guide says the 2007 ban – which initially caused howls of public protest, “with licensees fearing a damaging drop in business as smokers deserted their local boozers” – has been transformational. “Those bars full of fug and male chat quickly became a thing of the past,” the guide notes. “Pubs adapted by installing smokers’ shelters and outdoor heaters, and licensees soon realised that by making their pubs smoke-free, they turned into cleaner, brighter places, and opened up a massive new customer base: women and families with young children who headed to pubs for a meal and even an overnight stay.” The editor, Fiona Stapley, said: “It is clear that this national institution has transformed itself from the 1970s, when pubs were smoky and grimy, the domain of beer-swilling men and only serving scampi and chips (if you were lucky), to the modern-day environment that is family and female friendly, serving excellent wines, craft gins and truly delicious home-cooked food.” Stapley singled out the Cottage of Content in Carey, Herefordshire, as a pub which before the smoking ban had offered average food and no bedrooms, with children admitted at the landlord’s discretion. But since the ban and under the landlord, John Clift, the beamed cottage now gives families and children a warm welcome. The food is cooked by Clift and overnighters can enjoy quiet bedrooms and first-class breakfasts. Crowned gin pub of the year for the second year running is the Cholmondeley Arms in Cheshire – nicknamed the Chum – which boasts a collection of 400-plus gins. The guide’s annual survey of drinks prices also reveals the average price of a pint of beer in Britain is £3.79, up 10p from last year. There is a £1.11-a-pint difference between the cheapest area – Shropshire at £3.46 – and the most expensive, London at an eye-watering £4.57. 