It was Philistine’s puzzle that made the news, but we mustn’t overlook other remarks from Guardian setters, such as Arachne’s clue … 17ac Briefly anointed barbarous Boris Johnson? (7)[ wordplay: anagram (“barbarous”) of ANOINTED without final letter (“briefly”) ][ anagram of ANOINTE ][ definition: what Boris Johnson is an example of (hence the question mark) ] … for ETONIAN and Picaroon’s clue … 9ac Leading Brexiteer Boris ending, unfortunately, ruling people (9,6)[ surname of leading Brexiteer + anagram (“unfortunately”) of BORISENDING ][ GOVE + anagram of BORISENDING ][ definition: ruling people ] … for GOVERNING BODIES in a prize puzzle for which the annotated solution is now available. And if you come to the crossword page in a poignant effort to escape all that, there’s still a topical ring to this Times clue … 8d Oval game unfortunately is last of the series (5)[ wordplay: letter with oval shame + anagram (“unfortunately”) of GAME ][ O + anagram of GAME ][ definition: last of the series ] … for OMEGA. But if you prefer a puzzle of pure abstraction, you might enjoy What3Clues, to which Peter Moore Fuller of this parish contributes. Here’s an explanation and an example: #what3clues 1Set by @mister_norm 1. Bug cult member (6)2. Weird second chances (4)3. Server helpdesk in conflict with last of the clueless oldies (8)Final clue:Heading back in disarray (10)Good luck! Answers on Mon. Hints on request.#cryptic #puzzle #what3words A Telegraph setter who I take to be Jeremy Mutch has a surface reading – which, in an ideal world, would be cartoonish and fanciful rather than purely descriptive – in a clue … 13ac Fish eat mostly plastics at first, and rubbish (10)[ definition: type of fish + synonym for “eat” without final letter (“mostly”) + initial letter of PLASTICS (“at first”) ][ COD + SWALLOW without final letter + P ][ definition: rubbish ] … for CODSWALLOP. Perhaps you remember the appeal made by the BBC and the Oxford English Dictionary in 2005: then, the earliest use of “codswallop” on the OED’s books was from a 1963 edition of the Radio Times, and they hoped viewers might be able to provide something older. It seemed possible that there might be a much earlier use of the word, as one theory for its origin involves a 19th-century maker of fizzy drinks named Hiram Codd. Since “wallop” is a term for beer, the idea is that “Codd’s wallop” is, to a lover of beer, about the worst drink you can imagine and then the term found its more general sense. Apart from its being a bit too cute, the main problem with the theory is … well, that the OED couldn’t find it in print before 1963, three-quarters of a century after the death of Mr Codd. But then, a breakthrough! A viewer got in touch with an earlier use. Sid James, to be precise, to Tony Hancock: Tony. I was not. Sidney. Don’t give me that old codswallop. You were counting your money. So, 1959. So much, again, for “Codd’s wallop”. But I have exciting news, if you’re a word fan, which you are. I have submitted to the dictionary this, from, it seems, 1951: Commenting on the competition results the Architectural Design said ‘If you believe that the Christian Church has no function in our society then a cathedral is a building without a function; this is fair enough, but in that case you are acting irresponsibly if you try to design one’, which is a load of old codswallop. If you can find an earlier one, please trump me. And here’s a reminder that the scheme ended with the announcement: “Some Wordhunt mysteries remain unsolved”: Can you prove you bonked before 1975? Did you play on a bouncy castle before 1986? Did you sport a mullet hairstyle before 1994 – and why was it named after a fish? There was also a plea for any evidence to back up or deny that another word – the subject of our next change – is a nautical acronym. The matter appears unresolved; reader, how would you clue POSH? Thanks for your clues for RAAB. Tomrollock gets the ingenuity award for the definition in “Abracadabra: Abba’s SOS” and Alberyalbery made a shameless bid for the audacity award with “Swedish politician?”, pipped by Shenguin’s “Breexiiteeeer”. What’s the opposite of audacity? Something like Dunnart’s splendid “Green politician”. Of those referring to Rab Butler, my favourites were JollySwagman’s “Butler entertains a secretary” and Chameleonxwords’s “A boring Tory”. The runners-up are Catarella’s “One possibly making a brave go of it with Gove?” and PeterMooreFuller’s “Secretary with black belt in karate unable to capture hearts”; the winner is DeetotheGee’s deft “Milne and Corbyn’s centre ground politician”. Kludos to Dee; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. A clue which, we hope, will soon be out of date, from Eccles … 18d Sharapova claims a let initially, but several shots could have prevented it (7)[ wordplay: first name of Sharapova, containing (“claims”) A (“a”) & first letter of (“initially”) LET ][ MARIA containing A & L ][ definition: several shots could have prevented it ] … for MALARIA.