Like all Britons, without exception, I am incapable of looking at Mark Francois and not thinking about Dorian Gray. Attic picture jokes will of course be returned to sender, unopened. What I am thinking of, when I behold the Conservative MP for Rayleigh and Wickford, is a line Lord Henry breathes admiringly at Dorian: “You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found.” And so with Francois, the undisputed breakout star of Britain’s Brexit shitshow. No public figure better crystallises this most edifying of ages, and the terrifying implication of that is the mood music to all our lives. However, there are signs that Francois is becoming bigger than even the Brexit format. This week, a picture emerged of him dressed up as a police officer in a stab vest, apparently going from pub to pub with an Essex police patrol team. According to Francois: “Lots of MPs regularly do this with their local forces, as part of their job. For the avoidance of doubt, no alcohol was consumed.” I think you get a glimpse of the versatility of the man there – comic and otherwise. And we will come to my inevitable plea to telly bosses shortly. Before we do, though, it is literally incredible to think that three and a half years ago, no British adult, including his close relatives, had heard of Francois. Where were we before this pocket battleship was transmitted into our homes thrice-daily by the Brexit industrial complex? Wherever it was, it wasn’t a very happy place. But one of the many Brexit dividends is the opportunity the interminable business has afforded politicians. Namely, the opportunity to be on television for many more hours a week than even someone likable and highly competent and with a daily telly show, such as Holly Willoughby. The effect has been striking. Once they reach their 20s and have graduated from their second rehab facility, former Disney child stars will often give interviews in which they lament “growing up on camera”. For British politicians, the past three years have been the opposite. We have been able to watch them infantilise on camera. People who, three years ago, might have made some tenuously coherent point about tariffs or regulatory barriers will now just bellow stuff about the war or chicken. Bellower-in-chief is Francois, who is as at home ripping up a letter from a German CEO as he is reminding us that, ultimately, this all comes down to his daddy’s war. Francois has exploded into the public consciousness like someone who this week announced Britain “would explode” if we don’t leave the EU on 31 October. I don’t know what channel controllers are telling their commissioning editors, but I very much hope they are just using a Rod Steiger line from the 1994 Sylvester Stallone/Sharon Stone classic The Specialist: “You go out, and you find this explosives expert.” That Francois would be an I’m a Celebrity booking for the ages goes without saying. Failing that, he is surely nearing the stage where a bespoke format is justified. For instance: Mark Francois: Lawman Inspired by the new pictures of Francois in the stab vest, this would be based on the US TV series Steven Seagal: Lawman, which followed the Hard to Kill legend in his other guise as a reserve deputy sheriff in Louisiana, and later Arizona. So almost exactly this, but with Francois, and in Rayleigh and Wickford. Admittedly, the natural landscape in Rayleigh town centre is marginally less compelling than the Arizona borderlands, but otherwise there is a significant level of Seagal energy to Francois. On the most basic level, both are perhaps Earth’s last two non-ironists. Mark Francois: History Man A veteran of messy conflicts from ’Nam to his own stag weekend, Francois is quite simply history’s everyman hero. Furthermore, he is qualified, having an MA in war studies from King’s College London – an achievement that certainly flatters the establishment. After all, here is a man who reacted to a letter to the Times from the German Airbus CEO by announcing: “My father, Reginald Francis, was a D-day veteran. He never submitted to bullying by any German. Neither will his son.” The characterisation of Rommel’s Atlantic Wall defences as “German bullying” is precisely the fresh take telly history presenting needs, and a 12-parter on populism through the ages should be commissioned without delay. Mark Francois: Man’s Man The longer and more deeply I have examined British politics over the past three years, the more convinced I am that essentially it has been operating on the dynamics of a stag weekend gone awry. Coming from a lady, I hope that means a lot. At the same time, I have no idea whether there is or isn’t a crisis in masculinity – and with a mere eleventy thousand podcasts dedicated to addressing this question, no prospect of finding out. No prospect, that is, without Francois taking on this vital debate in a landmark TV series – either wearing his borrowed police stab vest, or a borrowed army uniform from the cold war, or a borrowed hardhat and hi-vis jacket, or any other costume he chooses. Those are just for starters. Admittedly, this column has a huge, huge track record for coming up with enticing TV pitches that somehow don’t get made – I still think my lady detective series Hopkins & Mensch might have been something truly special – but the above are offered on the basis that we regroup, we reimagine, and we keep trying. A star has been born: it is up to the medium to rise to his challenges. Look away now if you find tales of fashion week suffering disturbing, as the Canadian supermodel Winnie Harlow sweeps on to Instagram with what she denies is a “woah is me take” [sic]. “I haven’t slept in four days,” this began, beside a picture of her and a friend spread out over three economy-class plane seats, “and my flight got cancelled.” Fortunately, Harlow and her “team” were found another flight – “but we had to give up our business-class seats in order to land for a huge shoot at 6am.” Oh my God – go on. “I realise this may not seem like a big deal to some,” hazarded Harlow, “but when a plane is your bedroom and a flight the only time to get sleep during a hectic fashion month, it’s tiresome.” From thence, Harlow turned to the cosmic question of how something like this could have happened: “God works in mysterious ways, and everything happens for a reason.” But does it? How can a benevolent deity permit the suffering of supermodels in economy? There is nothing I can find about it in the entire works of Gottfried Leibniz. Alas, it is fair to say the scathing reaction to this post was not the theodicy debate Harlow might have hoped for. But instead of opting for a period of silence, she took the view that a period of revisionism would be more welcome. “If I can post pictures in business class and be proud,” this next post reasoned, not entirely reasonably, “I can also take pictures in coach and be proud. Proud that making it to work is more important to me than how I got there. That is the message.” Was it? Well, it certainly is now. And let that be an end to it. #maxweber #marcjacobs #augustineofhippo #proud #woahthere