A Guardian editorial online last Sunday was prompted by the imminent appearance of the memoir of a former UK prime minister, David Cameron. Its overarching assertion was that privileged people do not govern the UK well. Its theme was that because Cameron came from a privileged background, he lacked empathy for the people who suffered as a result of policies he pursued when in office between May 2010 and July 2016. A theme like that could generate strong views pro and con; many editorials do. It could involve a harsh character analysis; public figures must expect that. The way the editorial initially elaborated its theme was woefully misjudged. “I am personally completely devastated that it was ever published in any form in the Guardian, and that we caused distress to so many people,” the editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, told me in one of our exchanges about what had happened. Katharine Viner, the Guardian's editor-in-chief, replied personally to the more than 40 readers who protested Asserting that Cameron had suffered only “privileged pain”, the editorial discounted, through an obtuse calculus of class and politics, the suffering that Cameron would have felt over the death of his severely disabled son, Ivan, aged six, in 2009. This was made worse by a headline about “the boy in the bubble”, a reference to Cameron’s cushioned existence but also an allusion to the isolation sometimes necessary to the wellbeing of seriously ill children. Subjectively experienced, suffering is not relative. This fact ought to have been enough to prevent the notion encapsulated in the words “privileged pain” from underpinning a critique of Cameron as PM, enough to deter such a critique from becoming an editorial, and enough to stop such an editorial from being published. That it was not enough, at any of those points, has been the cause of troubled reflection. At least three people besides its author saw the editorial before it went online at 6.24pm London time. An editor’s initial attempt to revise it at 7.17pm was inadequate, retaining some of the most egregious features, including the observation that Cameron might have understood the damage done by his policies “had he been trying to get the system to look after a dying parent rather than a dying child”. A third version, at 8.37pm, followed involvement by more senior editors. Viner personally approved it and its footnote apologising for falling “far short of our standards”. (The first two versions were stopped from appearing in the printed paper.) It can only ever be a feeling, not amenable to proof or measurement, but this past week in the office I sensed a kind of vicariously shared shame. Unsigned and badged with the masthead, as is usual for editorials in most papers, the piece had appeared to be the considered view of the institution. That magnified the damage compared with the harm that might result from a serious misjudgment by, say, a bylined columnist or a cartoonist. Viner’s private apology to David and Samantha Cameron was accepted. Viner replied personally to the more than 40 readers who protested, writing in part: “I was appalled by the article, which in no way reflects the views of the Guardian … I hope that over time we can restore your faith in the Guardian, and win back your trust. I am sorry we let you down.” Viner tells me she is “examining all aspects of this episode to ensure it never happens again”. When she decides on the preventive steps she will take, I plan to return to this matter. Several readers wrote movingly of their own experiences with disabled children. Accepting Viner’s apology, a parent wrote: “I felt compelled to write as it was the first time that I’ve felt let down and cheated by the Guardian. The pain of having a disabled child is very hard to deal with at first, so David’s obvious pain is very pertinent to me. I guarantee that David would give up all fame, success, privilege and perhaps even his life in exchange for his son to have been born healthy. Some things transcend politics.”