Andy Farrell has declared Rob Kearney and Keith Earls available for Ireland’s World Cup opener against Scotland on Sunday. Assistant coach Farrell said full-back Kearney and centre Earls “ran well” in Wednesday’s session after struggling with calf and thigh issues, respectively. “We’re pleased with how things have gone today,” said Farrell. “Rob and Keith Earls ran well and trained well. There’s a few protocols that they need to go through, so that’s what we need to adhere to with the medical staff. But they are very happy. They are available, so we’ve obviously another session to go on Friday. It’s Wednesday. The game’s on Sunday, so we’re building nicely.” Leinster centre Robbie Henshaw will definitely miss Sunday’s Pool A match due to his hamstring issue, but Ireland still hope he will be fit for the game against hosts Japan on 28 September. Farrell confirmed that Joey Carbery is fully fit, with the fly-half likely to take a seat on the bench against the Scots. “Joey’s been training well since Monday, so we’re in a good spot,” said Farrell. “Robbie won’t make this weekend, they are very happy with his progress but he will sit out this weekend and hopefully he will be available for next week. His progress has been great.” Ireland’s clash with Scotland could well determine the entire outcome of Pool A, with the winners hoping they can push on and top the round-robin standings. Former dual code international Farrell admitted Ireland have trained with added “bite” this week, as they sharpen up for their biggest match in some time. “If you take for example this week, which is the week that matters, there’s certainly a feel that’s brewing of major importance to the squad,” said Farrell. “The intensity, the bite that’s in training is very significant, and there’s a completely different feel. So I suppose that’s a culmination of what’s happened over the last couple of months.” For Scotland, Stuart Hogg has already suffered a case of mistaken identity in Japan, but he has no trouble recognising the threat facing his side on Sunday. The Exeter full-back is among the biggest names in Gregor Townsend’s squad yet he has found himself in former skipper Greig Laidlaw’s shade since touching down. The scrum-half has emerged as an unlikely poster boy for the Scots, with his teammates left in stitches last week when hundreds of youngsters – as well as dozens of camera crews – flocked to catch a glimpse of the unassuming Borderer during an open training session during their training camp in Nagasaki. Their interest stems back to his role as captain when the Dark Blues faced this year’s hosts in their opening game of the 2015 tournament. But Hogg’s reputation as one of the game’s most thrilling attackers has apparently failed to stick in the minds of the Japanese public after he was first confused by a fan with stand-off Finn Russell – then more alarmingly with prop WP Nel. Hogg – who will earn his 70th cap if he features against Joe Schmidt’s men in Yokohama this weekend – explained: “Mr Greig is a hero wherever he goes. It’s been great to see. There has been a lot of support for Greig and for the Scotland team in general. We’ve had some fun with him. Anytime we’re walking through shopping malls we shout ‘Mr Greig’ when he walks in front. Everyone then turns around and mobs him. It’s been good fun. “Although there have been a couple of things I have been disappointed with. I was standing in the hotel the other night and someone approached me with a poster to sign. Just as I took the pen he asked me if I was Finn Russell. I thought that would be the end of it and said: ‘No, I’m not Mr Russell.’ The guy looked at his sheet again and WP Nel came next. I think it must have been the haircut.”