Do not go gentle into that good night. John Bercow may have announced he will be standing down as Speaker at the close of proceedings in the House of Commons on 31 October, but there was never any chance he would take Dylan Thomas’s poem as anything other than a direct instruction. In his remaining time in office, he is hell-bent on taking no prisoners and in the sixth annual Bingham lecture, delivered to an audience of lawyers, Bercow put the government on notice. For someone who has so often been on the right side of the angels in allowing parliament to hold the executive account and in championing the rights of women and race equality, the Speaker can be a hard man to love. Not just because of the allegations of abuse and loss of temper towards his staff, but also because of his total self-regard. No one could possibly think more of Bercow than Bercow. He is a man who looks in a mirror and falls in love at first sight. Like most narcissists, Bercow is totally unable to judge the mood of a room. He can’t conceive of the possibility that his theatrical and repetitive delivery might benefit from being cut short. If he feels something is worth saying, then it’s worth saying at least three or four times. It can make any extended exposure to him extremely debilitating and when he opened by apologising for being late because he had trouble with the taxi, many were already privately wishing he might have been detained indefinitely. Bercow then got to the matter in hand. Him. Ten years ago, parliament had been as good as dead on its feet. The government of the day held total sway and MPs had been reduced to mere lobby fodder, incapable of original thought or action. But then a new Speaker had been elected – he was far too modest to say just who that remarkable man might have been – who completely changed the character of the Commons. Zombie MPs had been given back their lives. He had healed the sick and the lame and encouraged new backbenchers to find their voice. Urgent questions in which ministers were held to account for scandals and crises were brought back into fashion. As were emergency debates allowing the Commons to seize control of the order paper. Again, it would have been beneath him to observe that he had single-handedly saved the country from a no-deal Brexit by allowing such a debate only a week previously, but since so many people in the audience were clamouring for him to do so it would be wrong for him to deny them the pleasure. Having spent the best part of 20 minutes explaining how he had saved parliament from itself, Bercow moved on to what had been billed as the main subject of his lecture. Brexit. Here he made it plain he wasn’t going to sit back and let the government do what it liked. He believed in an interventionist god. And he was it. There were only three possible outcomes. Parliament could agree a deal. It could vote to overturn the bill preventing a no deal. Or the government could ask for an extension. “That’s an end to it,” he declared. “Period. End of subject.” Except it wasn’t, because it never is with Bercow. There is no void that cannot be improved by him saying more. It was unthinkable that a government could even have thought of lying to the Queen, let alone imply that it would not abide by the rule of law. He would not allow it. HE WOULD NOT ALLOW IT. War had implicitly been declared on Boris Johnson. Even for lawyers who are not averse to a bit of Rumpole hammery in their summing up speeches, this was all getting a bit much. They had got the point long ago and agreed with it. But Bercow was in a world of his own. On and on he went, becoming ever more lachrymose in his nobility. Elsewhere there wasn’t a wet eye in the house.