Joe Root: 325 runs, average 33; three wickets, average 41A shadow of the bustling batsman and dressing room joker of not so long ago. No century in the series and not much fun either. He won’t ever say that he’s had enough of cricket, but it sure looks like that now – and who can blame him? His captaincy attracted a lot of criticism, but when you have only one batsman average more than 40, you’re going to spend a lot of time playing catch-up. Never a good look for a skipper. He out-reviewed his opposite number comfortably and bowled well in the rush for the line at The Oval – it’s amazing what a release of pressure does. Grade: C Rory Burns: 390 runs, average 39Burns started with a century that deserved more than to be somewhat forgotten amid a Steven Smith-dominated defeat, but he was sorted out by the short ball subsequently. Having worked on his game, that flaw is still there but much diminished – so he’s a quick learner. His acrobatic catching in the cordon is a bonus – he might be better employed at first slip. He’s probably a couple of centuries off being penned in as next captain, a particularly seductive proposition as he’s a red-ball specialist. Grade: B Jason Roy: 110 runs, average 14He was removed from the firing line when his “stand still and slash at it” technique, which works in white-ball cricket, was horribly exposed in Test matches. Grade: E Joe Denly: 312 runs, average 31The James Vince question persists: do the lovely cover drives outweigh the windy wafts? He benefited from the unfounded assertion that “there’s nobody pushing for a place”, but looks more like a sixth bowler option on the subcontinent who can score a fifty or two than a regular Test opener. He deserves his chance to prove me wrong. Grade: B- Ben Stokes: 441 runs, average 55; eight wickets, average 45That it is not “Stokes’s Ashes” is hardly his fault, his epic innings to win the Headingley Test one for the ages. Now a batsman who bowls, he is following the path trodden by Jacques Kallis – a top-order bat who can break partnerships or capitalise further if it’s his day. Like some of his teammates, he looked exhausted by the demands of a summer that cannot – and should not – be repeated. Grade: A Jonny Bairstow: 214 runs, average 24; 20 catches, two stumpingsHe regressed to some of his technical problems of the past, hands pushing hard at the ball, the gate an inviting target for a bowler prepared to home in on the stumps. A run of low scores improved (if that’s the word) to a run of starts that he failed to convert. Given that he’s not the best keeper in the country – and maybe not the best in the team – that’s a disappointing return. England’s policy of playing two keepers looks like it might have run its course. Grade: C Jos Buttler: 247 runs, average 25No batsman is deliberately given the role of batting with the tail, but that was Buttler’s lot for much of the series and it undoubtedly impacted on his numbers. Like Roy, his one-day virtue is something of a five-day vice, the firm base and arms-free approach inevitably making him vulnerable to the moving ball, as even straight ones are not lined up properly. He’ll almost certainly retain his spot, but he has to start scoring centuries soon if he is to warrant a top-six slot. Grade: B- Moeen Ali: four runs, average two; three wickets, average 57 A feast-or-famine player who was definitely in famine mode before he was hooked after the Edgbaston defeat. He is too gifted to be written off, but how patient selectors can be with a bowler who gives away so many boundaries and a batsman who so often rolls the dice remains to be seen. Grade: E Chris Woakes: 120 runs, average 20; 10 wickets, average 33 A strangely anonymous series for the English-conditions specialist whose bit-part status was as much the result of Joe Root’s reluctance to bowl him as it was of his own inability to take wickets in bursts. Perhaps it’s perception as much as anything, the captain’s new all-action man toy, with its 90mph arrows, looking a lot shinier than his old reliable, slightly vanilla, ex-favourite. Grade: C+ Sam Curran: 32 runs, average 16; three wickets, average 23 He added variety and no little skill with his left-arm bustlers ducking in and holding their line out. Promoted to No7, he batted like a No9, his skittishness unworthy of a man who has enough ability to make 50s on a regular basis. Like so many in this England squad, his role is not clearly defined – which can’t be fair to a 21-year-old. Grade: B- Craig Overton: 26 runs, average 13; two wickets, average 54 Overton batted with great heart, but looked rather pedestrian in a series dominated by speedsters and seamers. He might need a similar number of injuries to pacers to get another gig in Test cricket – but, with the schedules as they are, expect to see him trundling in again some time soon. Grade: C- Jofra Archer: 48 runs, average seven; 22 wickets, average 20 An effortless fast bowler and an effortless star player; we really do believe the hype. Archer wasn’t at full tilt all the time but, when he was, he could knock over anyone, metaphorically and literally. Like another Yorkshire Ashes captain with a Sussex quick (Ray Illingworth and John Snow) Joe Root knew how valuable Archer’s pace was and went to the well a little too often. A superstar is born – however you look at it. Grade: A Jack Leach: 54 runs, average 14; 12 wickets, average 26 Decent bowler, competent late-order batsman, handy fielder – a perfect example of how analysis can rather miss the story. Leach was the sung as much as unsung hero of Headingley, with his 1* an essential component of an extraordinary win. He’s much more than a turn though, his ability to hold an end in the first innings while attacking in the second is far easier to say than to deliver. He showed plenty of courage – moral and physical. Grade: B Stuart Broad: 61 runs, average 12; 23 wickets, average 27 Broad lost his old mucker almost before the series started, but shouldered the responsibility of leading the attack with real gusto, charging in for spell after spell, many of them excellent, few (if any) poor. At 33, he got through more overs than anyone except Pat Cummins and Nathan Lyon – and almost all were at full gas. He had David Warner on toast, but his seam movement troubled all the Aussie bats (yes, even “him”). Grade: A- James AndersonInjured. Tim Paine: 180 runs, average 20; 20 catchesPaine didn’t bat particularly well, didn’t keep particularly well and reviewed particularly badly, but he got his team off the floor between Headingley and Old Trafford to become the first Australian captain to take the Ashes home since Stephen Waugh in 2001. So who’s laughing now? How long Australia can afford to trade off his lack of output for his leadership remains to be seen, but fixing something that isn’t broken – or, rather, is not broken enough – is seldom a smart move. Grade: C David Warner: 95 runs, average 10And speaking of things that are partly broken… Broad had Warner in his pocket all series long, the pugnacious left-hander mesmerised into chasing the ball that angled in from round the wicket and seamed away – Flintoff to Gilchrist style. After a year out of Test cricket, he seems to have lost the location of his off stump and needs to find it pretty quickly if the likes of Matt Renshaw and Joe Burns are not to take his spot. Grade: D- Cameron Bancroft: 44 runs, average 11Bancroft faced plenty of deliveries but seemed to look less and less “in” as they ticked by. He was pulled and replaced by a man who looked no more in than he did – but spent fewer deliveries doing so. Grade: D Marcus Harris: 58 runs, average 10That man was Harris, who came with a growing reputation but looked somewhat lost against the Duke ball in English conditions. None of the pitches were particularly capricious, but all of the English grounds require an opener to play for his off stump, leaving plenty and driving few – at least for an hour or so. Grade: D- Usman Khawaja: 122 runs, average 21Three scratchy Test matches and he was dropped despite the credit built up over 44 Tests and the fact that it wasn’t exactly Stuart Law waiting in the wings. You can’t help thinking that was a little premature and that a little more belief from the selectors might have engendered more belief in the man himself. Grade: C- Marnus Labuschagne: 353 runs, average 50; one wicket, average 56 A concussion substitute after Smith had fallen, stricken, at Lord’s, he immediately looked like a man in form and scoring runs – which is what he was, having plundered plenty for Glamorgan in Division Two of the County Championship. His technique is reassuringly orthodox, punching and driving, cutting and pulling and never getting out of shape trying to hit the ball too hard. A top score of 80 suggests he needs to work on converting good scores into those that shape matches. Grade: B+ Steven Smith: 774 runs, average 111I made up my mind a couple of years ago as to where Steve Smith stands in cricket history and he’s only improved since then. No batsman in history can ever have gotten off strike with a nudge into the leg side quite as often as Smith does. And surely none has handled the expectations attendant on a comeback with such insouciant brilliance. Archer’s adrenaline-charged helmet-rattling spell at Lord’s aside, Smith seemed to be playing against history as much as the opposition, but none of those 774 runs were cheap and, without them, even this hotchpotch of an England side would have won the series. Grade: A+ Matthew Wade: 333 runs, average 37Some might say I’m being churlish but both of his centuries, though plenty busy and aggressive, were made in second innings when the shape of the match had been (largely) determined. He batted like the wicketkeeper he once was and was just about as mouthy, which might not be a good idea when Archer is bowling as it merely advances his speedometer. Grade: B Travis Head: 191 runs, average 27Head lost his place to Mitchell Marsh at The Oval when Paine fancied the idea of a little more bowling in a back-to-back Test. He started with a solid Test at Edgbaston, but fell away and the change was an obvious one to make. He can come back a better player in 2023. Grade: C- Mitchell Marsh: 41 runs, average 21; seven wickets, average 12 Marsh always seems to have to prove himself whenever he dons the Baggy Green and he did that this time round with as fine a spell of swing bowling as we saw in the series. He didn’t quite nail his batting, which is the more obvious route into the XI, but he looks a fine addition to the squad of pacers. Grade: B+ Patrick Cummins: 71 runs, average 10; 29 wickets, average 20 Cummins would have been a worthy player of the series had Steven Smith not been on another plane altogether. A captain’s dream, he charged in day after day, the hostility never dialled back as much as a single notch. World No1, he justified that ranking with some jaffas that might even have got Steven Smith out, but it was his stamina that stood out, working hard for every wicket and getting his just deserts across all five Tests. Grade: A James Pattinson: 69 runs, average 23; five wickets, average 33 Quick and reliable, it was a surprise to see him turn out just twice in the series, particularly in the light of his extensive experience in England and his near all-rounder level batting. That said, a captain might wonder what he offers that differs from Cummins (quicker) and Hazlewood (who moves it more). It was good to see an old pro back in the saddle after so many injuries. Grade: B- Peter Siddle: 72 runs, average 24; seven wickets, average 42Was it really him? Given a holding brief, he nevertheless went at three an over, but made a critical contribution in the tone-setting first Test, getting Australia out of the depths of 122-8 to 210-9 in the company of, well, you know who. Siddle had found a way to make a difference. Grade: C Nathan Lyon: 79 runs, average 20; 20 wickets, average 33A great start looked like it would set up another fine series for the man they call The Goat, but he was strangely anonymous, his rhythm slightly off key, his output below his standards. He’ll point to 20 wickets as a decent return, but this was not the metronome England had feared. Grade: B Josh Hazlewood: Nine at n/a; 20 wickets, average 22Hazlewood sat out the first Test but bowled beautifully from then on, rather like an old-fashioned English seamer, but 5mph quicker and from a five inches higher release point. He moved the Duke ball no matter its age and had the splice-slamming heavy ball to keep the batsmen honest. He doesn’t have the snarl of a Cummins or the regular 90mph thunderbolts of Starc, but he causes the best batsmen problems whether they’re on two or 102. Grade: A- Mitchell Starc: 57 at n/a; four wickets, average 32There’s no better indicator of the strength of the Australian pace phalanx than the fact that he played just one Test in which he went for a few, knocked over a few in a sensational spell and biffed a few off tiring bowlers. He may have fallen out of favour with his own selectors, but I’m pretty sure other countries’ would bite his hand off. Grade: B • This article appeared first on The 99.94 Cricket Blog• Follow Gary Naylor on Twitter