‘A British type of western’: MotoringJournoWhat started as a low-key gangster story has effectively created a sort-of British type of western, influenced fashion, introduced a world beyond the usual round of London-based cliches to the rest of the TV-viewing planet, and has sprawling inter-character dynamics every bit as engrossing as any US crime drama. Not to mention the fact that it’s been an extremely successful export. ‘The greatest cultural artefact humanity has ever produced’: Stephen, 63, Ipswich Combining the best of Deadwood, Black Mirror and Star Trek, Firefly, as well as being the greatest TV show of any era, may claim to be the greatest cultural artefact humanity has ever produced. Joss Whedon never wrote better, its stars never appeared in anything better, there never was anything better. Cowboys in space – how could anyone resist? ‘This show was so good’: AllergicToTrollsI can remember critics singing the usual praises of this being “the best TV show ever” for a few years? Remember the hype around The Final Five? Everybody seemed to be on tenterhooks to find out who the disguised Cylons were. This show was so good. ‘Rarely a dull moment’: sparky36I’d like to have seen the Spanish language La Casa de Papel (Money Heist) in the list. The series is a tense, intricately plotted drama that combines police procedural, melodrama and heist movie with rarely a dull moment in any episode without ever outfoxing its own logic. Its strength rests entirely in the attention the showrunner has given to establishing meaningful relationships between the criminals and the audience – for me, the charismatic Berlin steals the show with his sophisticated malevolence. The first two series are its likely high watermark, and it would be entirely deserving of a wider viewership in the English speaking world. ‘Made a tough old broad like me cry’: grumpyoldgirl Even if only for Sean Bean’s spine-tinglingly superb acting, Broken was a brilliant serial. Each character was clearly defined and deeply human. It was impossible not to sympathise with the dilemmas of the working-class characters, and it made even a tough old broad like me cry, and the ending was deeply moving. This should have featured in this list, right at the top. ‘Lots of gutwrenching moments’: MomentaryClarityIt started out looking as if it was a slight twist on The Equalizer but it quickly became apparent it was much, much more, exploring issues of free will, morality, ethics in politics, intelligence services and technology, political expediency, possible consequences of strong general AI etc. Brilliant performances from a very strong cast with lots of gutwrenching moments. ‘It started it all’: tenientesnafuThough short-lived, it started it all. Rome defined all the hallmarks of a good contemporary TV show: high value production, elaborate settings, excellent cast, good story, top-notch writing and cinematography. It also created kind of a ‘default cast’ for high-quality TV shows: superb actors that are recognisable but never hijack their roles. ‘It made me laugh very loudly’: FlightGuileAndPies It’s probably very unfashionable to say that Phoenix Nights is one of my favourite programmes of the last 20 years, but it made me laugh very loudly and was very gentle and loving and warm. Some of the humour was a bit unreconstructed, but it was a reflection on real working-class attitudes and life, albeit “dafted up”. ‘Really impressive TV-budget animation’: VariousThingsSeriously. Yeah it’s, you know, for kids, but it stands up to anything on the list. It does so many things superbly well, such as: consistent, believable fantasy world-building with great attention to detail; sympathetic villains with extremely effective long-term redemption arcs; moments of really impressive TV-budget animation; and great voice acting, from both the adults (Mako!) and the child actors. Also it has Toph Beifong, the best character in anything ever. ‘Very funny but fearless’: Johnnybi Last Week Tonight with John Oliver really should go on any best 100 series – very funny but fearless and very informative, often about subjects that aren’t normally covered in depth by serious television news, such as one fascinating piece on how US immigration works in practice. It’s astonishing how much they cram into half an hour. ‘Beautifully shot and superb performances’: RadioPartizanA brilliantly realised drama combining taut investigative thriller, edge-of-the-seat tension, desperate heroism and a powerful denunciation of a secretive, authoritarian society. All the more effective because of its commitment to the real-life events and its understated approach. Beautifully shot and superb performances too. Should be in anybody’s top 10. ‘A gentle and warming exploration of mortality’: Gary Bowden, 55, Newcastle upon TyneA programme about fishing in some beautiful river locations across the UK, but really about the longstanding friendship of two ageing comedians who have had major life-saving surgery. A gentle and heartwarming exploration of mortality, friendship, empathy and humanity with added laughs, tears and Bob Mortimer’s “heart healthy” cookery.