Almost 21,000 people rushed out to buy a copy of David Cameron’s memoir in its first week on sale, placing it second on the latest book charts to Margaret Atwood’s The Testaments and, historically, behind Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair for the title of fastest-selling political memoir by a former prime minister. Published on last Tuesday, For the Record had sold 20,792 copies by Saturday, according to figures just released by official book sales monitor Nielsen BookScan. When Blair’s A Journey was published in 2010 – amid cancellation of launch events over protests from anti-war campaigners – it sold 92,060 copies in its first four days on sale. At the time, this made it the fastest-selling autobiography since Nielsen began to track book sales in 1998. Cameron’s sales make For the Record the bestselling non-fiction hardback of the week, and the second bestselling book overall, behind Atwood’s much-anticipated follow-up to The Handmaid’s Tale, which sold 103,177 copies in hardback in its first five days. Blair has sold almost 350,000 copies of his autobiography to date, but lost the title of fastest-selling memoir in 2013 when Manchester United football manager Alex Ferguson’s memoirs shifted 115,000 in the first week. In comparison, John Major sold just 5,415 copies of his memoir in its first week, but went on to top 200,000 in total. Edward Heath’s The Course of My Life, published in 1998, has yet to top 20,000 copies, while Gordon Brown’s My Life, Our Times has sold 27,846 altogether. All pale in comparison to Margaret Thatcher, whose memoir The Downing Street Years is believed to have shifted 120,000 copies in a week (an estimated figure as it was published before Nielsen’s records began). It has sold more than 500,000 copies since. Cameron’s publisher Harper Collins said it was “delighted” by the figures and that the memoir’s audiobook had been its biggest ever in the first week of release. Richard Humphreys, nonfiction buyer for Waterstones, said all signed copies of the memoir had sold out: “We are very pleased with how well the book has done … prime ministerial memoirs are always keenly awaited and despite the controversy of his exit from Downing Street and the subsequent political tumult, this has been a widely sought after book in our shops.” Cameron’s 700-page book, dealing with the former prime minister’s decision to call a referendum on British membership of the European Union in 2016, was described as a truthful account by Jonathan Freedland in the Guardian. But Freedland found that the “litany of confessed errors gradually loses its charm”, and “at a certain point, the reader stops feeling sympathy for the author and concludes that he was just serially and unforgivably wrong. For the Record is meant to be the case for the defence. In fact, Cameron has written his own indictment.” In the Telegraph, Allison Pearson found similarly, calling it “an exhaustive (and exhausting) case for the Defence”, in which “the author is like a driver who, in a moment of madness, caused an almighty pile-up and tries to convince a jury to go easy on him, offering plentiful evidence of previous good conduct.” Writing in the Standard, editor George Osborne, who was Cameron’s chancellor, found it to be “one of the very best” political memoirs, although he admitted he was not neutral because Cameron is his friend. “His book has been so hard for him to write. It’s been a kind of purgatory for him, motivated by a sense of duty that prime ministers should explain why they did what they did, for the record. It’s why it is so good,” wrote Osborne.