Sixty-nine historic English towns and cities will benefit from a £95m regeneration fund, the government has announced. The funding is intended to “breathe new life” into struggling high streets across the country bytransforming abandoned buildings into shops, houses and community centres. Towns and cities entered bids after the scheme was announced in May, with the Midlands winning the largest share of £21.1m. The government’s future high street fund is providing £52m, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) £40m and the National Lottery Heritage Fund £3m. The announcement comes after it was revealed this week that 16 stores had shut down every day in the first half of 2019, a retail crisis fuelled by an increasing shift to online shopping that has already cost tens of thousands of jobs. Last year the then chancellor, Philip Hammond, announced a £675m fund intend to halting high street decline that has left one in 10 shops in UK town centres lying empty. The Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) has since promised an additional £325m to bring the size of the fund to £1bn. The government said funding would attract commercial investment and support wider regeneration in the 69 successful areas. “Our nation’s heritage is one of our great calling cards to the world, attracting millions of visitors to beautiful historic buildings that sit at the heart of our communities,” said the culture secretary, Nicky Morgan. The shadow culture secretary, Tom Watson, was critical of the announcement, saying that the fund “pales in comparison” to the £1bn “cultural capital fund” that Labour has committed to. By region, the funding breaks down as follows: London and the south-east: £14.3m South-west: £13.7m Midlands: £21.1m North-east and Yorkshire: £17.2m North-west: £18.7m The winning towns are: Barnsley; Hexham; Huddersfield; Hull; Leeds; Middlesbrough; North Shields; Northallerton; Scarborough CA; Castle Ward; Selby town centre; Skipton; Sowerby Bridge and Wakefield Bacup, Rossendale; Barrow in Furness; Blackpool; Burnley; Chester; Fleetwood; Kirkham; Lancaster; Maryport, Cumbria; Ormskirk; Prescot; Stalybridge; Tyldesley, Greater Manchester and Wigan town centre Brierley Hill; Buxton; Coventry; Grantham; Hinckley; Kettering town centre; Leicester; Leominster; Lincoln; Newark-on-Trent Town Centre; Oswestry; Stoke on Trent and Wednesbury town centre Bedford; Dunstable; Great Yarmouth; King’s Lynn; Lowestoft; North Walsham and Swaffham Chard; Cullompton; Gloucester; Keynsham; Midsomer Norton; Plymouth; Poole; Redruth; Tewkesbury and Weston-Super-Mare. Chatham Intra; Croydon; Gosport; Harlesden; Hastings; Newport; Ramsgate; Reading; Ryde; Tottenham; Tower Hamlets and Woolwich.