Spain began life without Luis Enrique by clinging on for a tense 2-1 victory over Romania to maintain their perfect record in Euro 2020 qualifying. Sergio Ramos’s penalty and a goal from Paco Alcácer put the three-times European champions on course for a comfortable success in their first match since Robert Moreno permanently replaced Enrique as manager. But they were forced to survive an anxious finish in Bucharest after the substitute Florin Andone halved the deficit with an hour played and the defender Diego Llorente was dismissed 11 minutes from time. Spain were indebted to Kepa Arrizabalaga after he pulled off two superb late stops to help move his side on to 15 points from five games at the top of Group F. Sweden stay second after Alexander Isak’s first-half double and further goals before the break from Victor Lindelöf and Robin Quaison secured them a 4-0 win in the Faroe Islands. Norway claimed a 2-0 win against Malta at the Ullevaal Stadium thanks to Sander Berge’s header and a Joshua King penalty. Italy maintained their 100% record to stay top of Group J but had to come back from a goal down before winning 3-1 away against 10-man Armenia. Alexander Karapetyan gave Armenia a surprise early lead but was sent off on the stroke of half-time for his second booking after Andrea Belotti had equalised with the first of his two goals. Lorenzo Pellegrini headed Italy in front with 13 minutes remaining and Belotti made sure of a fifth-straight win three minutes later. Finland stay second in the group, three points behind Italy, thanks to the Norwich striker Teemu Pukki’s penalty early in the second half in a tight 1-0 home victory over Greece. Bosnia and Herzegovina sealed their second win in Group J, beating Liechtenstein 5-0 at home, with four of their goals coming in the last 10 minutes. Amer Gojak gave the hosts an early lead and after Haris Duljevic struck their second in the 80th minute, Edin Dzeko and Edin Visca both scored before Gojak added his second at the end. Michael O’Neill praised Northern Ireland’s youngsters after an experimental side emerged with a 1-0 friendly win over Luxembourg. An own goal from Kevin Malget handed the Irish victory at Windsor Park before their Euro 2020 qualifier against Germany on Monday. “It was a very worthwhile exercise,” O’Neill said. “It was a challenging three days in terms of preparation because we wanted to put as strong a team on the pitch as possible but obviously we had more than one eye on the game on Monday. It was good to get young boys on the pitch and I was pleased with a lot of performances.”