I am alarmed by the suggestion that the UK would drop out of the system that allows asylum-seeking children to reunite with family members in the UK in the event of a no-deal Brexit (Refugee children ‘at risk’ from no deal, 2 September). While the impact this would have on unaccompanied children is particularly distressing, it would also affect many other refugees including husbands and wives, brothers and sisters. Over 1,000 people were reunited with family members in this country through the Dublin system last year. It is vital that the government sets up contingency measures so that families do not risk being stranded in separate countries after 31 October. If this route will no longer be open, it’s more urgent than ever that ministers make our domestic family reunion rules fairer. Allowing refugees to reunite with their loved ones provides a lifeline from dangerous and degrading conditions, and makes it easier for refugees to integrate and lead dignified lives again. Danny Sriskandarajah Chief executive, Oxfam GB • The plight of children separated from their parents is one of the many terrible aspects of the migration policy crisis and the Dublin regulation is one effective way of dealing with this problem. In recent months at Arhag, a BAME housing association in London working with migrants and refugees, we have dealt with four such cases helping to reunite children with parents in the UK. Few would oppose schemes that bring torn-apart families back together . The consequence of ending the route provided by the Dublin system will mean more perilous crossings and more tragedies for families who are trying to be reunited. We and our partners at The People’s Place join the UNHCR in urging the government to keep the arrangements in place.Qadeer Kiani Chair, Arhag Housing Association Fizza Qureshi Co-CEO, Migrants Rights’ Network • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition