Hulk might be strong, but he works best as part of team, says Hollywood star Mark Ruffalo, who probably knows a little bit more about the Marvel superhero than the prime minister. The actor, who has portrayed the anger management-averse green giant for the last 12 years, spoke out after Boris Johnson compared himself to the Hulk in escaping membership of the European Union: “Hulk always escaped, no matter how tightly bound in he seemed to be – and that is the case for this country. We will come out on 31 October and we will get it done,” Johnson told the Mail on Sunday. But Ruffalo tweeted in response that “the Hulk works best when he is in unison with a team”, and that his rage is counter-balanced by the “science and reason” of his alter-ego, the mild-mannered Dr Bruce Banner. Boris Johnson forgets that the Hulk only fights for the good of the whole. Mad and strong can also be dense and destructive. The Hulk works best when he is in unison with a team, and is a disaster when he is alone. Plus...he’s always got Dr. Banner with science and reason. pic.twitter.com/jN8BDzgpWl In his interview Johnson stressed his willingness to defy the Commons vote for a delay in the event of negotiations with the EU breaking down, saying: “The madder Hulk gets, the stronger Hulk gets.” His comments drew widespread derision online while Ruffalo’s post prompted an outpouring of colourful memes, with Marvel-themed satire ranging from subversive takes on well-known Avengers quotes and scenes to concern for Johnson’s collection of hand-made model buses, to comparisons with the time he knocked over a 10-year-old while playing rugby in Japan. "what were you NOT meant to do?""SMASH CONSTITUTION""and what did you do""SMASHED CONSTITUTION" pic.twitter.com/kdK0CZ72lV Don’t hold much hope out for Johnson’s model bus collection pic.twitter.com/LEd3ov7wYo HULK SMAAAASHHH !!!!!! pic.twitter.com/td4qBpSMLP Good work pic.twitter.com/CTJ6lOfQb1 Former Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell commented that “if Ruffalo was a town, Johnson just got run out of it”, while Labour MP for Birmingham Yardley Jess Phillips said: “This is the kind of thing my kids would say aside from they would never make such glaring errors about The Hulk, I’ve raised them properly.” Others appeared to look more fondly on the PM’s choice of description, making their own foray into cinematic metaphor. Brexit secretary Steve Barclay told Sky’s Sophy Ridge earlier on Sunday: “The Hulk was a winner and was extremely popular. I’d rather be backing a character and a leader who is The Hulk than one who is on the ‘Chicken Run’, as Jeremy Corbyn is.”