Jamie Joseph has doubled down on Japan’s claims that Ireland scrummage illegally. The Japan head Joseph backed up prop Yusuke Kizu’s accusation that Ireland prop Cian Healy “steps out” and scrummages in at an illegal angle. Ireland head coach Joe Schmidt insisted his side have one of the least penalised scrums in the Test arena in offering a frustrated response to Kizu on Thursday, insisting Healy scrummages square. But after Japan had named their team – confirming squad captain Michael Leitch’s demotion to the bench – Joseph refused to back away from Kizu’s comments about Ireland’s scrum. “I think first thing, Kizu is a young man, probably his first media experience, so that would be the first thing around Kizu-san,” said Joseph. “We’re coming up against a very strong scrum. Yes, at times they are illegal, but at all times they are a very strong scrum. We know that’s a difficult part of the game, but we’ve really improved our scrum and lineout recently. And it’s an area we’ve been focusing on all week.” Hosts Japan saw off Russia 30-10 to kick-start the first World Cup in Asia, with the players admitting they had been overawed by the scale of the occasion in Tokyo. Now the Brave Blossoms will host Ireland in Shizuoka and Joseph admitted Japan will need “the game of their lives” to beat Ireland. Pieter Labuschagne will captain Japan from the off, with Joseph backing Leitch to have a big impact off the bench. “What I believe around the game, in terms of our bench, we’ve got to have an impact. If we’re going to be in a position to win the match, it’s going to come down to the last five or 10 minutes,” said Joseph. “And we’ll need clear leadership. Michael has had an injury all year, he’s only played four or five games, and he’s a very key player. We have in-form players playing really well and experienced players coming on. So as a coach I get to have both things. “Lappies doesn’t speak Japanese, he speaks English, but so does the referee. His leadership is natural, his work around the game is outstanding. I’ve been impressed with him as a leader in the last two years at the Sunwolves and he is respected by the players, which is key.” In Pool C, meanwhile, Argentina have dropped the experienced pair of fly-half Nicolas Sanchez and hooker Agustin Creevy for the match aginst Tonga at the Hanazono Rugby Stadium on Saturday. They are two of four changes made by the head coach, Mario Ledesma, from the side defeated by France in their opener, with loose-forward Javier Ortega Desio also among the replacements, and wing Ramiro Moyano out of the match-day 23 altogether. They have been replaced in the starting XV by Julian Montoya at hooker, No 8 Tomas Lezana, fly-half Ben Urdapilleta and wing Santiago Carreras. For Urdapilleta, it is a first Argentina start since 2013 following his return to the squad this year. In Pool B a new-look South Africa plan to adjust their strategy to a high-tempo, running game for the match against minnow neighbours Namibia at the City of Toyota Stadium on Saturday. The Springboks have made 13 changes to their starting side for the encounter, which includes moving mobile hooker Schalk Brits to the back of the scrum in a loose trio that also includes Sevens veteran Kwagga Smith and Francois Louw. That, along with the half-back pairing of fly-half Elton Jantjies and scrum-half Herschel Jantjies, suggests the Boks are going to look to keep the ball in hand. Namibias coach Phil Davies has made 10 changes to the Namibian starting lineup from the defeat by Italy. Against South Africa key wing Lesley Klim plays after recovering from a calf problem.