Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?, as we all know Juvenal wrote. But now we need the Latin not just for who watches the watchmen but who watches the watchers watching the watchmen watching the watchmen and who checks everybody’s records haven’t been seamlessly replaced thereafter? Perhaps it’s the one good use for our current prime minister. I struggle to think of another. In the meantime, our arts must translate the problems of our world and its growing fakery. And so to The Capture, BBC One’s new thriller built around all manner of deceit, delusion and general jiggery-pokery from ancient to very, very modern. We begin with a court of appeal being watching headcam footage from Afghanistan that shows soldier Shaun Emery (an excellent Callum Turner, grounding the whole thing) shooting a Taliban prisoner without provocation or warning. But DOES it? But DID he? Is war hell? In a neat foreshadowing of the pivotal plot point to come and warning that nothing for the next hour should be considered to be what it seems, a video-engineering expert turns the evidence on its head and Emery walks free. But not, it turns out, for long. Meanwhile, along strand B, DI Rachel Carey (Holliday Grainger, an actor who tends to sacrifice the ends of words to the maintenance of her pout, which is distracting) has recently moved from Met’s glamorous, all-the-resources-you-can-eat SO15 Counter Terrorism Supercool Command to the gritty, all-the-scraps-you-can-glean-from-better-equipped-departments murder realness division. She has a lot to deal with, even if you don’t count investigating the death of a local teenager, killed in front of his little brother who has decided that discretion is the better part of staying alive and is refusing to contribute anything by way of witness statement. She has to contend with the resentment of her immediate boss, who hates fast-tracked high-flyers such as Casey, as well as fulfil her own need to get a good solve under her belt before she can go back and start heading up her own operations at SO15, while also negotiating her declining affair with her married SO15 commander. But they breed ’em tough at the Scotland Yard Cleverclogs Academy and so she is unfazed by the additional requirement to dive headlong into a new assault case that quickly turns into a possible kidnapping. To wit: Shaun Emery and his post-release shenanigans. During the celebrations with family and supporters at the local pub, Shaun realises that his newfound freedom includes the freedom to ask out his posh lady barrister Hannah Roberts (Laura Haddock, who looks almost exactly like Holliday Grainger, but whether the viewerly confusion this engenders is a deliberate effort by casting to mess a little further with our heads, or simply a function of my advancing years, I am loth to decide). So he catches up to her in his car and does so. They kiss and she merrily skips off towards the arriving bus, promising to call him tomorrow. The young woman monitoring the CCTV camera that is trained on the bus stop smiles at love’s young dream. Then she stops, leans closer and we watch her expression becoming horrified as she reaches for the phone to call in an assault in progress. The question of what she has seen is the carrot that dangles before us, pulling us through the rest of an hour that without it would threaten to be very lacklustre indeed. The revelation, when it comes, does poor Shaun’s head in, as well it might, and he is carried off kicking and screaming back to the cells from which he had so recently emerged, there better to ponder the ultimate futility of existence, particularly when you seem to have existed for a few crucial minutes in an entirely different reality from the one you thought you knew. I’m trying to avoid spoilers, you see. BUT. It is clear, once we see the footage, that Shaun is caught up in something much bigger than we suspected. His barrister’s status as an up-and-coming human rights lawyer and public face of several controversial cases takes on new importance and the audacity of the swindle – IF SWINDLE IT BE – suggests that the next five weeks will take us on an increasingly hallucinatory-feeling but frighteningly realistic (or possibly a realistic-seeming load of hallucinatory bobbins) deep dive into the world of the intelligence services and their increasingly elastic powers. Until then, my friends, remember: we live on shifting sands and pinning down the truth is like trying to nail jelly to the wall with a tapioca hammer.