George Monbiot (Rewilding will make Britain a rainforest nation again, Journal, 25 September) makes a timely call to reforest large areas of Britain. However, he is rather dismissive of tree-planting schemes which, based on our experience in Devon, do not have to be as he describes. Instead he wants to allow natural regeneration. Leaving aside the fact that it is slower than planting trees (and for the climate’s sake we need some speed here), there are also problems with promoting regeneration. As shown by the excellent work of Jed Kaplan and others, deforestation in northern Europe, including Britain, started as long as 3,000 years ago. By the time of the Norman Conquest, different areas of southern Britain had between 0% and 40% of the original cover. Many of the deforested areas in Britain today are not under agriculture or grazing, nor kept bare for shooting. Undoubtedly woodland or forest would be the climax vegetation in these areas, but they are still not wooded. One of the main reasons is wild grazing animals that are part of the current ecosystem. If we really want to reforest by “natural” means then we will need to deal with this in some way.John BryantTopsham, Devon • I share George Monbiot’s misgivings about tree-planting and plastic, but I wish he would treat the 200 generations of humans who have left evidence of their life and work in our uplands with some respect. They mostly had a gentle and symbiotic relationship with nature, being part of it themselves. Their tangible relics are our cultural heritage, of equal importance to us as sentient thinking beings as the so-called natural heritage. Burning and grazing are essential to keep such heritage visible and accessible for the inspiration of present and future generations. Julian Glover’s Landscapes Review is remarkable for its almost total lack of discussion about cultural heritage. Until this is given equal weight with “natural capital”, serious errors will continue to be made regarding management of national parks and other uplands.Tom GreevesChairman, The Dartmoor Society, 1998-2019 • While in general I have a lot of admiration for George Monbiot, and his recommendations regarding regeneration of native woodland and rewilding, I do not think people, especially young people, should be discouraged from planting trees. I belong to the Woodland Trust, which both encourages new tree-planting, and helps preserve old and threatened woods and forests throughout Britain. I have taken part in several such activities, and have never helped plant trees in straight rows. While plastic tree guards are used, they protects the young trees from predatory rabbits and deer, and are removed when the trees are big enough to withstand such attacks. These mass tree-planting events encourage children (and adults) to get out into their threatened countryside, and relevant areas near towns, and to take action to help mitigate against climate change. The trees that they and we plant now will be mature when the rest of us oldies are dead. I don’t want my grandchildren to look back and say “they knew what to do but they didn’t do it”. Join the Woodland Trust’s Big Climate Fightback on 30 November and plant some trees for the future of the planet.Rose HarvieDumbarton, West Dunbartonshire • George Monbiot shouldn’t scoff at individuals’ “tokenistic” efforts to reduce their carbon footprint. Without them we would all still be walking around clutching plastic carrier bags and single-use drinks bottles. I can only imagine the opprobrium that would be heaped upon us by him then.Julia DraperBath • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition