How do you catch the ear of one of today’s leading composers? With your exquisite vibrato? With a three-octave range? In Nora Fischer’s case, you scream. The soprano comes to the Proms on Sunday for the UK premiere of the Dutch composer Louis Andriessen’s The Only One, a song cycle he wrote especially for her. “We met when I had a tiny role in his 2016 opera Theatre of the World,” she tells me. “I had a very high note marked to be sung ‘screaming’. I thought “oooh that’s fun. I’ll scream it.” And so at the first rehearsal I did. This was at the Dutch National Opera – very posh and formal and everyone was like, ‘Woah, what’s going on? You don’t do that in the opera house!’ But Andriessen loved it.” The composer, whose 80th birthday is celebrated at this year’s Proms, told the young singer he was going to write her a piece. “I thought, well that’s a very nice compliment but that will never happen,” she says, “and then suddenly here we are! He said: ‘I want everything you can do to be in it!’” I like singers who dare to be very raw, like Björk or Thom Yorke, who are not afraid to sound rough and even ugly. “Everything you can do” casts a wide net for this versatile and genre-hopping singer. Now 32, the Dutch/Hungarian Fischer spent her teenage years a member of the prestigious Netherlands Youth Choir, and then moved to study singing at Amsterdam Conservatoire. A career as Susannas, Adinas and Rodelindas seemed assured. But things didn’t work out. “Classical singing is very beautiful but very specific. I meanwhile was developing an interest in all the other things my voice could do – I felt that I had such a rich instrument and I was only being taught to sing with 15% of it,” she says. “I was listening to a lot of other styles of music, and what I enjoyed most was the singers who dared to be very raw, like Björk or Thom Yorke, incredible musicians and singers who are not afraid – if the emotion asks them to – to sound really rough and even ugly.” Chafing at the conservatoire’s restrictions, she wanted to explore more creative approaches to performing classical music. It’s our way or the highway, said the school, so they parted company. Mind you, non-conformity is in her DNA. Her father is iconoclastic conductor Iván Fischer. “He is also someone who doesn’t listen to the way it ‘should’ be. That’s the whole reason he started his [Budapest Festival] orchestra,” says Fischer. But with no courses specialising in new music and no obvious path to follow, Fischer was demoralised until she came across the vocal course run by Cathrine Sadolin, a specialist in how the voice works across a huge range of different styles, and how to use it healthily, whether you’re belting out rock anthems or Bulgarian folk harmonies. She spent six months at Sadolin’s institute in Copenhagen. “It was so inspiring. It completely opened me up. The voice is such a rich instrument as long as you know what you are doing. The participants came from different backgrounds – folk, musical theatre, pop – I was the only classical singer,” she says. “There was no sense of any one genre being better than any other, no one who was higher quality.” What did her father make of this all? She laughs. “He was definitely worried at first. He kept asking me: ‘Are you working on your technique?’ I think he thought I was going down the drain! But then, when things picked up and I started to have work he began to trust that I knew what I was doing – even if he didn’t!.” Today, she is involved with a wide variety of projects that span centuries and genres, but are united by her delivery – direct and unmannered, the same pure clarity and intimacy whether she’s singing Bartók, Purcell or Morris Kliphuis, whose provocative 2017 song cycle The Secret Diary of Nora Plain has her yelping, wailing and whispering. Hush, released last year on Deutsche Grammophon, eloquently illustrates her innovative approach. Baroque ballads and arias, stripped of vibrato and ornamentation, and accompanied by an electric guitar, gain an immediacy and playfulness that makes them feel closer to pop and jazz. “I’m not saying we should listen to early music only in that way, I’m just saying, look, there’s many ways of approaching this music, no one better or worse, there’s just many options from which people can pick their favourites and get little glimpses of other ways of opening your mind, of looking at music.” Opening her mind is not a phrase idly used. Meditation is part of Fischer’s daily life and central to her wellbeing. The day we meet she’s just back from a two-week silent retreat. “I wouldn’t say I’m a Buddhist, but it’s a Buddhist philosophy – learning to let go, to enjoy the present and not attach to things … it’s about understanding the way your mind works and the way we keep grasping things. It’s not easy, but you realise how much we usually are not where we actually are because we are always thinking about other things, what’s next.” I’m just saying, look, there’s many ways of approaching this music, no one better or worse The mindfulness has hugely affected her career, she says. “I started noticing how I’d get a booking for somewhere I’d always dreamed of, and I’d be so happy, but then by the time I was on stage there performing I couldn’t enjoy it because I’d be thinking of the next thing. It never ends. Now, it’s such a relief to just be able enjoy the present but also not attach to things.” Sunday’s Prom will be her first visit either as a performer or audience member. “I know! I’m sorry!,” she jokes. “I have no idea what’s going to happen, but everyone says it’s so much fun.” And after the Proms? “I don’t have any future plans – I dropped all that!” But she does admit to a few – touring a new Osvaldo Golijov piece with Yo Yo Ma’s Silkroad ensemble, and in February, a semi-staging of Weil’s Seven Deadly Sins with Simon McBurney in Los Angeles. “We’ve had our few first sessions already in London this summer. He is IN-CRED-IBLE.” She doesn’t need to worry about her future when extraordinary collaborators such as Andriessen and McBurney are seeking her out, drawn, surely, to her charisma and versatility. “I try not to make any distinction [between any of the music I do] and just try to do it, however ‘complex’ it might be, in an accessible way. I think people often underestimate their audiences. I prefer to overestimate them! If you speak – literally and figuratively – to them then they can take so much more than you would think they can.” • Nora Fischer is the soloist in the UK premiere of Louis Andriessen’s The Only One at the BBC Proms, Royal Albert Hall, London, 8 September