Nestled in among a maze of new-build houses in Maidstone, Kent, sits a very different kind of supermarket. “I would say it’s like being in Tesco if they were running a club night,” the store manager tells me as we walk up and down its aisles, every product – from the pick’n’mix to the tinned foods – bathed in a headache-inducing glow of pink, blue and yellow lighting. Despite the presence of tills, a self-service checkout, a security guard, fully stocked shelves and branded bags for life, this isn’t a real supermarket at all, but the set for the return of classic 1990s gameshow Supermarket Sweep. And the store manager – a lanky, sweet-smelling configuration of teeth and bronzer – is none other than reality TV star-turned-ubiquitous presenter Rylan Clark-Neal. For most people, the original Supermarket Sweep – which involved six contestants, typically named Karen, Lynne, Val or Neil, answering questions about supermarket-adjacent things before going “wild in the aisles” while dressed in bright sweaters – will for ever be associated with two things: sofa-bound school sick-days, and being overseen by the late Dale Winton (pictured, right), whose tradition of fake tan and effortless camp Clark-Neal continues. “This is his show and it will always be his show,” he says, “but if I can fill even an inch of his shoes then I’ll be very happy. When people watch, they’ll feel Dale’s still a part of it because of the terminology we’re using. A contestant said ‘£50 Dale’ the other day,” – hopefully while struggling to peel the sticker off an inflatable jukebox to reveal a cash bonus – “which was the biggest compliment of my career.” Despite the show migrating from that original afternoon slot on ITV – where it aired between 1993 and 2001, and then again for six months in 2007 – to the evening lineup on ITV2, Clark-Neal is adamant the show’s slightly naff charm remains. “Everything’s shit [in the world] at the minute, let’s be honest,” he smiles. “I just think we all need a bit of fun in our lives. It’s a show that anyone can take part in, you don’t have to be fit with a beautiful six-pack, you haven’t got to be incredibly intelligent. It’s not a life-changing show,” he adds, its basic premise – low stakes and transformation of the mundane – slotting alongside other gameshows such as ITV’s arcade game writ large, Tipping Point. As we continue to wander around the set, however, I can’t help but notice that the new contestants are all surprisingly young, and that actually there’s at least two potential six-packs. Are you sure this isn’t some sort of cool rebrand? “Watch the original show back and [the contestants] were all pretty much in their 20s; they just dressed older,” Clark-Neal laughs. “It was actually a young show, but everybody looked like Deirdre Barlow.” Back then, of course, people didn’t have the option of doing their big shop online, I say. Isn’t this a bit dated now? “Yeah, but I didn’t want the show to be people sat on their computers doing an online order,” he says, not unfairly (although one new round is based on Click & Collect). It has moved with the times in terms of sustainability, however, with some of the food items and sanitary products being given to local charities and food banks. “It’s fantastic that we can have fun but at the same time we’re doing a bit of good,” he says, as we approach his presenters’ podium. Could he ever see the supermarket becoming a relic, a casualty of the steady decline of the high street? “Oh never! Absolutely not, don’t be stupid.” Suddenly, like a full-beam LED being switched on, I’m confronted by Rylan: The Presenter, all teeth and Essex charm. It turns out I’m about to run the Super Sweep, the final round of the show that involves finding and answering three clues hidden in the supermarket. For the actual contestants the prize is £3,000, but I’ve been promised “something absolutely iconic” if I’m successful. As I sprint into the Home & Living aisle to find a pillow, then the Household aisle for a jar of coffee, and finally careen towards the frozen section for a bag of Yorkshire puddings, everything becomes a heady blur of nostalgia, high camp and latent competitiveness. Then there, under bags of frozen batter mounds, is my prize: a pink Supermarket Sweep sweater so glorious I almost cry. Catching my breath, I ask Rylan what he thinks makes a show as ridiculous as this work? “We all want to go wild in the aisles,” he smiles, “but if we did it in real life we’d be arrested. It’s an escape.” Supermarket Sweep starts 9 September, ITV2