You never really know someone, of course, until you’re informed of their death caused by a pill-fuelled bout of auto-erotic asphyxiation with petrol in their bloodstream and a gadget in every orifice. Wealthily-married lady who lunches Simone (Sarah Kendall, the award-winning comedian who also wrote the show) learns this the hard way, when she is called to the hospital to identify her husband’s body. “We’d have called you sooner,” says the doctor (Rufus Jones with his patented air of agony as a man caught in a dire situation not of his own making). “But we couldn’t get the phone out.” The action, by the way, is set in 1988, which makes both insertion and extraction of a mobile even more of a feat than it would be today. Respect all round. So begins Frayed, the new six-part series produced by Sharon Horgan’s company Merman for Sky 1. It’s billed as a comedy but for the opening episode – at least after Jones’ and then Robert Webb’s shining turn as the lawyer who informs Simone that her husband died insolvent – the gags thin out. This leaves a drama leavened by the blackly humorous moments that arise as the fan of life continues to spray what’s recently hit it all over you. Her husband’s lies cause Simone’s own to be brought into the light. All the trappings of her gilded life in London – from yachts to mansion – are sold from under her. The children are withdrawn from private school and she must return with them to her mother and her childhood home in Australia. Which turns out not to be the spiral-staircased pile on a large farm she had claimed, nor in Sydney, but a deeply ordinary suburban home in depressed Newcastle, a three-hour drive away. Nor did her father die in a plane crash; he wandered into the ocean drunk and drowned. And she has a brother, Jim, whom she’s never mentioned. And her real name is Samantha. Apart from that and her resentful, recovering-alcoholic mother, everything is – as they were fond of saying in Home and Away at the time – bonzer. Kendall has deliberately created the antithesis of the world of Summer Bay that was the crucible in which my generation’s image of Australia was immutably formed. Her beachside stretch of New South Wales is full of unemployment, overdosing heroin addicts and homeless men crapping on beaches when you attempt a moonlit stroll. “The toilets are filthy,” one explains. The poor Antipodeans had to manage without the magic of Thatcherism transforming all, you see, dear children. The Fletchers – along with everyone on Ramsay Street, who in our minds lived next door to Summer Bay because we had no internet to educate us – sold us a pup. Simone – now Sammy – lucks out and after an abortive attempt to become a consultant radiologist (“I thought it was someone who consults radiologists”) gets a job with an old schoolmate who is now the local MP Chris George (George Houvardas). He has a sports car with a carphone (“If you ever want to call anyone … don’t. It’s really expensive”) and big, possibly not wholly legal, plans for the town. He also re-introduces her to the former “coolest boy in school” who was – we are given to understand – the Scott to her Charlene, the king-sized prawn to her barbie, the bushfire to her storyline finale and is now the football coach at the local school her children are about to join. Sparks look set to fly, but the first episode was unquestionably a slow burner. Sammy herself is as yet an uncharismatic central figure, and the liveliest characters so far have hardly even amounted to cameo performances. Diane Morgan as George’s Mancunian expat receptionist is underused and underwritten, but it is hard to believe she would have taken the part if that remains true. But there’s certainly enough to bring you back for more to see how Sammy’s new life takes shape. Jim (played with rough verve by Home and Away alumnus Ben Mingay) is a turn, and the immediate and flourishing return to sibling bickering (“Muuuuum!”) when Sammy comes back – the 20 years since they last met vanishing in an instant – is a joy, and the undercurrents of unresolved rage and shame between mother and daughter tug at the attention. Not quite bonzer then, but no dag either.