What were you hoping for?To meet a guy who didn’t take himself too seriously. First impressions?I wasn’t expecting him to be so good-looking. He tried to stand up to greet me but had his leg in a cast. What did you talk about?He was full of random facts: apparently each Wetherspoon has its own carpet, which is designed by the same person. Every day is a school day, he said, tapping his nose. Any awkward moments?My friend messaged me, asking me to send her a voice note from the toilet to debrief the date, and he saw it pop up on my phone. Good table manners?He said he’d save me a bite of pudding, but polished the whole thing off. Best thing about Greg?His laugh was the loudest I’ve heard. Would you introduce him to your friends?100%. They’d love him on a dancefloor. Describe Greg in three wordsNutty, bubbly, warm. What do you think he made of you?I feel that we gelled quite well – we spent a lot of time laughing. Did you go on somewhere?We walked/hobbled to a pub down the road. And... did you kiss?No, we were on the tube and it was really busy. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d want to go on for a dance somewhere. Marks out of 10?8.5. Would you meet again?Maybe. What were you hoping for?To meet someone funny, cute and intelligent – combined with an evening devoid of embarrassment and/or awkward silences. First impressions?Far less nervous than I was. Tall, pretty and instantly engaging. What did you talk about?My recently snapped achilles tendon, family, travelling, career aspirations, Helena’s love of horticulture, my complete lack of creative flair, and how to utilise certain office paraphernalia to avoid engaging with colleagues when hungover. Any awkward moments?None, although I did accidentally touch her knee a few times as I was gesticulating (that sounds dodgy). Good table manners?Very good. Best thing about Helena?Her infectious personality. Would you introduce her to your friends?Sure, I think they would all like her. Describe Helena in three wordsFunny, chatty, interesting. What do you think she made of you?She laughed a lot and seemed quite impressed with my love of cooking – so hopefully she thought well of me. Did you go on somewhere?We went to a pub and had a couple of pints. And... did you kiss?We did not. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Nothing, we got on fantastically and the food was incredible. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?As friends. I didn’t feel any romance, unfortunately. • Helena and Greg ate at Cafe Murano, London WC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com