In 1990 “Champion” was a word most commonly deployed by teenagers – either to describe a garment worn when Chipie and Chevignon were in the wash, or when referencing the suede aficionado’s alternative to Fila. But for those less elegant, “champion” also described a person who “surpassed all rivals in a sporting contest or other competition” – and at Sheffield’s Crucible Theatre on 29 April, such someone was Stephen Hendry. In the entire history of sport, no individual has satisfied that definition with such emphatic dispassion and disconcerting monomania. Hendry wasn’t the best long potter around, or the best safety player; he wasn’t the best striker of a ball either, nor was he the most creative around the table. But he was absolutely the best at being the best, revolutionising the sport with his relentlessly attacking break-building – a tactic that worked only because of his absolute imperviousness to pressure. Hendry was 21 when he won that first world championship – still the youngest ever to do it – and, though he missed out the following year, was rarely troubled in winning the five after that. He took a gloriously miserable joy in dispensing merciless thrashings, his disgust for his elders utterly affirming; like all the best sportsmen, he was implacably dedicated to the sacred art of making the other bloke look a fool. Such obsession meant he was finished as a force at 27, his youthful ire expiring as he totally lost the run of himself and began fraternising with his opponents instead of grinding them to granules. But for as long as he was him, there was only him. Australians are culpable for numerous linguistic crimes – “rack off”, “dunny”, “Steve Smith” and such – but deserve everlasting credit for popularising the notion that a champion is not just a person who wins things, but a person who makes them worthwhile. Sometimes will, skill and character are enough. Graduating from Cambridge with a first in mathematics, Rosi Sexton had no need to pursue a career in mixed martial arts – let alone in 2000, when it was barely deemed a sport for men, never mind women. Except Sexton had every need to pursue a career in mixed martial arts because she could do no other, her obsession with perfection demanding she seek the most exacting challenge imaginable. Over the next 14 years she accumulated an MSc, a PhD and a 13-5 record, pushing beyond the limits of her athletic gifts to become the first British woman to appear in the UFC. A pioneer and an inspiration, Sexton glorified a game as cerebral as it is physical, proving that professional combat and amateur thuggishness are not linked. As it happens, she once held Cage Warriors’ 132lb belt, but her champion status exists independently of that fact. Enjoying your team getting battered is a unique pleasure of cricket, West Indies’ winter doing of England – in the truest Caribbean tradition – a spectacular recent example. Through the 70s and 80s West Indies were not just the greatest cricket team ever but the greatest team ever and perhaps the greatest anything ever, so the subsequent decline of things at the cloaca of capitalism, nepotism and arseholism, represents significant sporting tragedy. But since 2015 the team has had a captain who bats well, bowls fast and leads brilliantly, Holder’s relaxed toughness and buccaneering spirit reflecting a man ensconced in his own skin to an enthralling degree. Meanwhile, in public and behind the scenes, he champions the rights of his players – of all players – to be paid properly and for money in the game to be distributed more equitably, as part of championing Test cricket, as part of championing cricket, as part of championing West Indies, back to the islands and back to the world. The Merriam Webster dictionary says a champion is “one who shows marked superiority”, and that is Holder to a tee: he is better than your average. The Joy of Six once enjoyed the ludicrous pleasure of making a film about darts, part of which involved the best part of 17 days spent hanging about the world darts championships. One quiet afternoon in the the press room, Adrian Lewis and Mardle performed a bout of #bantz, the two-time champion lauding the zero-times champion as an “eight-times competitor”. Yet Mardle is a champion nonetheless, because no one rhapsodises and evangelises “the greatest sport in the world” with such gusto; in that regard, he is not just a champion but the champion. Sharing analysis and expertise without compromising his sense of wonder, his commentary reminds us that occupants of the oche are ordinary people performing extraordinary feats under unfathomable stress, and our duty as human beings is to appreciate them. If you have children or plan to have children, teach them this: find yourself someone who loves you as much as Wayne Mardle loves darts. Obviously nothing is more important than sport, but sometimes sport has bestowed upon it personalities – such as Serena Williams – who transcend it to accomplish other, slightly less important stuff, like changing the world for the better. Whether in her open, honest accounts of motherhood, her refusal to do what she’s told, or her love of who she is, what she does, and how she represents, Williams is unapologetically herself. She ain’t sorry. The problem being that her right to these inalienable things had to be earned by her being a 23-time grand slam singles champion, which is to say that doing whatever you want and being whoever you are should not be a revolutionary act. But such is tennis and such is the world, both of which are different places thanks to the unprecedented genius and transformative fibre of the champion’s champion. For those of a certain age who did, shall we say, spend their post-school hours making dinner taste better and their parents more palatable, mere mention of the word “champion” necessarily evokes the great Harvey Freeman. In his time on Countdown he set records for points in a match and points in an octochamp run, eight being the maximum number of consecutive games any player is allowed to win. Then, after that, he returned to win his series, and when invited back for the periodic champion of champions contest won that too, breaking the points record for a grand final and becoming the first player to win a grand slam: essentially, every match he could possibly have played. In 1996, the show invited its immortals to a competition that would crown the greatest of them all, and Freeman won every round by way of crucial conundrum, unscrambling a 10-letter word faster than his opponent to win 10 points, with the gap between them smaller than that. He then won the final as well, making him the show’s all-time supreme champion of champions and absolute pnolanier.