A former BBC employee has received an out-of-court settlement of more than £130,000 after she accused the broadcaster of failing to meet its obligations over equal pay. Caroline Barlow, who worked at the corporation for more than six years, filed an employment tribunal claim after finding that 15 men in equivalent roles in her division were paid more than her. As well as her allegations over equal pay, she accused the BBC of constructive dismissal, harassment and discrimination. In the claim, seen by the Guardian, the former head of product in the corporation’s design and engineering division claimed the BBC was such a discriminatory, hostile workplace environment that her position had become untenable, leaving her little choice but to resign. The BBC denied Barlow’s allegations, but in May it agreed to an out-of-court settlement on condition that Barlow formally withdrew her claim. Her settlement included a “termination fee” as compensation for her loss of employment. In its response to Barlow’s allegations, the broadcaster admitted she had been paid less than 15 male heads of product in her department. The BBC said the discrepancy was because Barlow had not engaged in work of equal value to the male comparators, citing “non-gender” reasons for the differences in pay. A BBC spokesperson said: “We don’t believe it is appropriate at this stage to comment on what is an individual matter that was resolved some time ago.” Barlow, who was not barred from discussing her situation by the terms of the agreement, said she had been unfairly treated. “Inequality at the BBC is a choice,” she told the Guardian. “The BBC destroyed my career, my confidence, my mental wellbeing, and nothing will ever make up for that. So they can give as much money as they like, but it will never bring that back.” The disclosure of the settlement comes at a time when the BBC is facing severe scrutiny over its handling of gender pay issues. The corporation is under investigation by the Equality and Human Rights Commission over historical claims of unequal pay. Last October, a committee of MPs found the BBC was in denial over the issue, and demanded an end to a culture of “invidious, opaque decision-making” on pay. Barlow, who joined the BBC in 2012, said she had first come to believe she was being underpaid when the corporation published its career path framework data in 2017. In the same year, the BBC found male staff earned an average of 9.3% more than women. Until then, she said, she had believed that the broadcaster would act in good faith. “I think at that point I was still very much believing that they were trying to solve this problem,” she said. “But goodwill starts to go quite quickly when you see nothing’s happening.” She embarked on the BBC’s informal pay inquiry process, which differs from a formal grievance in that it does not allow input from the person, or for a grievance meeting to take place. In the process, she received a 25% salary increase. However, with little explanation or transparency over the decision, Barlow suspected she was still being underpaid. She then raised a formal pay grievance and used data protection laws to force the release of her pay review. Barlow found she was paid at least £9,000 a year less than her male peers, and in her claim stated she believed she was underpaid by up to £69,000 a year in comparison to some of her peers, who were nominally in the same pay bracket. The BBC has yet to provide Barlow with a breakdown of her peers’ pay, despite her requests. Barlow told the Guardian she believed there was a disconnect between what the BBC was publicly saying about its commitment to equal pay and its approach behind the scenes. “The BBC refusing to explain my pay, whilst publicly claiming a transparent process was in operation, was infuriating,” Barlow said. “I was sidelined, undermined, and retaliated against. The BBC has spent an enormous amount of time and public money to try and justify why I was considered less value than all of my male peers.” In February, Barlow resigned from the BBC citing constructive dismissal. She said the broadcaster had left her feeling “disempowered and discredited”. While there has been much public focus on the pay of the BBC’s on-air, high-profile female presenters, such as the former China editor Carrie Gracie, staff behind the scenes have also come forward. By the end of February 2018 more than 1,000 behind-the-scenes staff had registered pay complaints. Lawrence Davies, a discrimination lawyer for Equal Justice, who represented Barlow, said that while the BBC was addressing concerns over equality publicly, he had seen little or no progress since he wrote the report on sexism and ageism at the BBC with Selina Scott a decade ago. “Individually it may seem like a few thousand pounds when looking at snapshot, but collectively the debt owed to women continues to grow every year. Women are being forced to leave their jobs after complaining about equal pay, due to retaliation, and prohibitive legal costs.” He added: “If the civil offence of failing to pay equal pay were ever criminalised it would easily be the largest and most successful theft in our history.” Barlow said the BBC was full of intelligent, dedicated staff but that in some areas an “old boys’ club” wielded excessive power. “The frustration is immense, because I see a lot of people who work very hard, and they’re just treated badly, or driven into the ground,” she said. “And so it doesn’t matter how many brilliant women you bring in, if this is what happens to them when they get there.”