My aunt Irène Poznanski, who has died aged 101, led a remarkable life – as a nurse working in the UK during and after the second world war, on migrant ships from Europe to the Americas and Australasia and at the eye clinic she founded in Senegal – after fleeing from the Nazis in 1939. Irène was born during the latter stages of the first world war, in Breslau (now Wrocław), Poland. Her father, Otto Poznanski, was a judge who had served in the war and been wounded on the Russian front. He died when she was six. During Irène’s childhood the family moved to Nicolai, then to Oppeln (now Opole) in Silesia, and finally to Berlin. There, Irène, her older brother, Konrad, and younger brother, Reinhart, completed their schooling. Irène attended a Catholic school, which shielded her somewhat from the rise of nazism. The ascent of Hitler made it clear that the family, which was of Jewish extraction, should seek its future abroad. In 1937 Irène had spent the summer with a family in Oxford on an exchange scheme. Fortunately, two years later, this family was able to find her a job as a housemaid and she travelled to the UK, spending her 21st birthday on a ship crossing the North Sea, and was joined by Reinhart soon after. Konrad settled in Italy. Their mother, Kaethe (nee Langer), did not escape the Holocaust. After working in domestic service for several years, Irène trained as a nurse in Luton and Dunstable, in Bedfordshire, and continued in nursing roles in Luton and London before becoming an industrial nurse in a coal-mining area of south Wales. From 1951 to 1953 she worked as a nurse on migrant ships from Europe to the US and Canada, Brazil, Australia and New Zealand. She was able to visit Konrad, whom she had not seen for 16 years. In 1955 she moved to Senegal, setting up an eye clinic, which she ran for the next 18 years, and through which she helped thousands of people. Her work there was recognised when she was appointed MBE in 1973. She loved her time in Africa and developed many close friendships, and was tempted to retire there. However, she decided to settle in Paris, where she trained social workers to go to developing countries, and then latterly worked for the charity ACAT (Action by Christians Against Torture), not retiring fully until her early 80s. Irène then enjoyed a long and happy retirement in Chaville, near Paris, surrounded by friends and many artworks from her years in Senegal, and with regular visits by family from Italy, Britain and New Zealand. She is survived by eight nephews and nieces.