William Hill has announced the departure of its chief executive Philip Bowcock, who has been replaced by the company’s chief digital officer, Ulrik Bengtsson. Bengtsson, who will take over on 30 September, joined William Hill in April 2018 and previously ran Betsson, a Swedish online gaming company. Bowcock will remain at the group until the end of the year to help with the transition. The UK betting company said the change formed part of its “strategy of becoming a digitally led and internationally diverse gambling company”. William Hill’s high street business took a deeper hit than rivals from curbs on fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs), which cost it nearly £1bn. Fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) are gaming machines found usually in bookmakers’ shops. They allow gamblers to play a variety of games, including roulette, bingo and simulated horse and greyhound racing. The machines promise the potential of large wins of up to £500. In the past, gamblers were able to bet up to £100 on games, but in April 2019 the UK government introduced a reduction in the maximum stake to £2 following a long-running campaign highlighting fears over the huge losses racked up by users. High street bookmakers have said they will have to close many stores due to loss of revenues. It slumped to a loss of £64m in the first half of the year and profits at the online division, which makes up nearly half of revenues, also fell. Like other betting companies, the firm has pushed aggressively into the US, where the supreme court reversed a decades-old ban on sports betting last year. Bowcock joined William Hill as CFO in November 2015 and became interim chief executive in July 2016 and then CEO in March 2017. The bookmaker said it would release full details of his payoff in due course. He received a total package of just over £1m last year. Bengtsson will receive an annual salary of £600,000, the same as his predecessor, along with benefits, an annual bonus and long-term share bonuses. He will get a pension allowance of 5% of salary, reduced from Bowcock’s 20% pension allowance. Roger Devlin, the chairman, said: “Having overseen the group’s digital operations for 18 months, [Bengtsson] knows the business well and is ideally suited to lead our next phase of growth. Ulrik has deep understanding in digital and has the international and sector experience we need to deliver on our strategy. His appointment will provide continuity, stability and operational digital leadership as we deliver on the strategy we have set.”