When Duncan Taylor takes the field against Ireland in Yokohama on Sunday, he will complete a circle. It was on Scotland’s tour to Japan three years ago that he sustained the first of a number of injuries that forced him to miss 29 of his country’s next 31 Tests and tap into the reserves of strength he did not know he had. He tore a hamstring during the first Test in Aichi and then needed two operations to fix an ankle problem and was then ruled out by concussion. Last season had barely started for Taylor when he ruptured knee ligaments. It looked as if a second World Cup would pass him by, not that the thought occurred to the Saracens centre. “I was determined to put myself back in the shop window and that meant working and working in rehab,” says Taylor, who made his comeback for Scotland in their first warm-up against France and played the whole of their final one against Georgia. “The hard graft in the gym and in the treatment room has paid off and that makes this tournament pretty special to me.” Scotland are content to be the underdogs against the No 1 side in the world, quietly confident that they can disrupt the orchestrated manoeuvres of Ireland through aggressive defence. There will be a pinch of Saracens about them with Taylor joined in the three-quarter line by his club colleague, Sean Maitland, who was part of the side that throttled Leinster in May’s Champions Cup final. Maitland, who has roomed with Taylor since Scotland went into camp in the summer, said they would be drawing on their club influence. “It could help give us an edge when the going gets tough. Everyone at Saracens rallied behind Duncan during his injury troubles. It has been a tough few years for him and no one would have given him a chance of making the World Cup after he smashed every ligament in his knee a year ago. “He got through it and to be starting a match in the World Cup is incredible. He is looking fit and we all know what he can do. I’m just stoked to be sharing the field with him and fair play to him after all that he has been through.” The lure of playing in the World Cup was Taylor’s inspiration after missing out in 2015 because of a shoulder injury. “I never feared the worst,” he says. “The positive feedback I had from the physios at Sarries and Scotland meant I never allowed dark thoughts to enter my head. Everyone was sure I would be able to get back to my best. “It was mentally challenging but it has given me resilience. Being surrounded by so many amazing people has helped and I am confident that if more injuries come along in my career, I am in a good place to deal with them.” Taylor, like the rest of his teammates, will need to be at his best if Scotland are to put themselves in control of a group that includes the hosts. Even without three injured Lions backs – Rob Kearney, Robbie Henshaw and Keith Earls – Ireland have a settled feel and boast one of the most effective half-back combinations in international rugby in Conor Murray and Jonathan Sexton. “Ireland have threats across the backline and players of real class,” says Taylor, who was born in Northampton but qualifies for Scotland through his parents. “It is a massive challenge for us in our first game and we would make a big statement if we beat them. We have had some close games with them in recent years and we know this will be a test of where we stand. “While I am delighted to be at the World Cup after all I have been through, just being here is not enough. I want to be part of a winning side that gets through the group and into the knockout stage. “This tournament is the pinnacle for a player, something you dream of. After missing out four years ago, desperation drove me on. It will keep doing so because you want to the dream to remain for as long as possible.”