The news that Israel Folau had been approved by the Rugby League International Federation to play for Tonga in Test matches against Great Britain and Australia in the end-of-year Oceania Cup was such a surprise to members of the RLIF board that their subsequent press release stated, effectively, “this is news to us”. According to Tonga National Rugby League chairman George Koloamatangi, the matter of Folau turning out for Tonga was discussed with RLIF chief Nigel Wood at the Tanoa International Dateline Hotel in Nuku’alofa on 20 September. Koloamatangi advised Wood that TNRL would submit a list of players to be registered for two Oceania Cup Tests. The list would include the name Israel Folau. According to TNRL secretary and legal counsel William Edwards, who had been invited to the meeting but was in court, “As George communicated to the board, Nigel appeared surprised with the announcement that Israel made himself available, but not concerned.” Thus Koloamatangi, believing he did not receive “any negative response” to the revelation of Folau’s impending selection, “took the view that the CEO for the RLIF and other members of the RLIF did not object to Israel’s involvement”. The TNRL then informed Folau that he was entitled to play for Tonga, “for the reason that there was no objection raised by the CEO for the RLIF, and that having considered the rules, Israel Folau was eligible to play for Tonga according to RLIF eligibility rules,” according to a press release. Wood did ask Koloamatangi that the matter be put in writing. A letter was sent to the RLIF, according to the TNRL, “prior to the press release of 23 September 2019”. RLIF contends it has not received an official application. Asked if Folau is eligible to play for Tonga, an RLIF spokesman said: “He has not applied for eligibility therefore it’s not appropriate to comment.” A link to the RLIF’s eligibility criteria was included in an email. Folau does not appear to contravene any of the eligibility criteria. Thus TNRL, which was sought legal advice in Australia, is of the belief that Tonga can pick any Tongans they desire. At the nub of the issue is whether RLIF has veto power over Tonga’s selection of Folau in a tournament run by events management and sports promotion company Duco Events. Edwards says he his not aware of any veto power that the RLIF “may or may not have” but “would be anxious to see what rule they rely upon to refuse him a right to play”. Asked if RLIF had any veto power to stop a player representing their country, RLIF’s spokesman said: “All players are required to abide by the operational rules and participation agreements. If they do not then there are a range of sanctions available subject to investigation.” The TNRL asserts that it “knows of no rule that requires Israel Folau or any other player registered with the TNRL to apply to the RLIF to be eligible to play for Tonga. That is not the procedure for any player to participate in the end of year games.” Asked had Wood given tacit approval for – or at least had not ruled out – Folau playing for Tonga, the spokesman said: “No approval was given or implied.” Wood was contacted by Guardian Australia for comment. For his part, Folau said: “What I will do now is focus on playing great rugby league and do my talking on the field.” Presumably Folau was seeking to reassure league officials that he wouldn’t publicly repeat the homophobic social media comments that saw him sacked by Rugby Australia and subsequently launch legal action against the governing body. RLIF deputy chair Peter Beattie told Channel 9 that the RLIF board had not made a decision in relation to any registration request for Folau. “As a current member of the RLIF board, as the ARLC rep, I can assure you that this has never been discussed or mentioned around the board table,” he said. The RLIF board will meet on Thursday. Tonga is emerging as a “fourth force” in international rugby league. Yet NRL stars including Andrew Fifita and Jason Taumalolo have declared that players would boycott the Test matches unless Koloamatangi and Edwards stand down over the sacking of coach Kristien Woolf. Fifita wrote on Twitter: “As players, we will not take part in the world 9s and the 2 test matches at the end of year. Our terms are easy, get rid of these 2 men and we will play or Players will walk from the Team and bring a end to [Mate Maa Tonga].” Tonga’s Nines coach Garth Brennan subsequently resigned because of the politics. On the TNRL Facebook page there is just one post, from 6 May, which reads: “We stand with Izzy!! No matter what. God and Tonga is our Inheritance.”