Redemption was a thread woven deep into the fabric of the 2019 Super Netball season. Katrina Rore’s journey from humiliation to heroics is the most obvious case in point; as captain of the Silver Ferns, Rore was the pained public face of New Zealand netball’s spectacular meltdown at last year’s Commonwealth Games, when the once-mighty side failed to win a medal for the first time. But this calendar year, the defender, refusing to be defined by failure claimed an until-now unimaginable treble. She took an elite title at home with Central Pulse in June, World Cup gold in Liverpool in July and on Sunday added a Super Netball crown with the NSW Swifts, who she joined as a replacement player in August. A true closed loop. It was fitting that Rore, who performed a grinding shutdown job on Lightning wing attack Laura Scherian, was actually on the bench when the final whistle blew at the Brisbane Entertainment Centre. While she rushed the court, she seemed to take just a moment to soak it all in before joining the pile-on. It remains to be seen if any player will even have the opportunity to achieve the same feat. Then there was “comeback kid”, Paige Hadley, who forced Lisa Alexander to include her for the Diamonds’ World Cup campaign with a powerful first eight rounds of Super Netball, as the Swifts conquered all before them. That could have been achievement enough for the midcourter. But after getting annihilated by her direct opponent, Laura Langman, in the first final a few weeks back, Hadley had a blinder in the preliminary against the Melbourne Vixens and then played a pivotal role in Sunday’s 17-goal demolition of the Sunshine Coast Lightning in the grand final. Hadley finished with 31 feeds and 20 assists, but most significantly, she nullified the most potent force in world netball. Hadley’s body work kept Langman off circle edge, which, when combined with Sarah Klau and Maddy Turner’s superior positioning in the ring, forced the Kiwi into uncharacteristic errors. Hadley has been a “Swift for life”, so the club’s maiden Super Netball title is more than just a line on a resume for her; it’s part of her legacy. The dominant performance of the Swifts’ circle defenders, Klau and Turner – both Australians and both under 25 – may also prove important as the national side looks to rebuild its defensive stocks, which have been weakened after losing Sharni Layton and Laura Geitz in recent years. April Brandley’s pregnancy also adds to the issue. The Swifts pair, who have now played three seasons of Super Netball together, finished with 14 gains, seven intercepts and 11 deflections in the grand final, setting the victory up. Their mutual understanding was key to success, with Klau playing bad cop at the back, bringing intense physicality, and Turner the good, mainly keeping clean but working her feet beautifully out in front. Vixen Jo Weston has a lock on the Australian GD bib at present, but it will be intriguing to see who Alexander names for the four-Test Constellation Cup against New Zealand next month, given Brandley is now out of the mix. Referring to Klau and Turner, Swifts coach Briony Akle said after Sunday’s final she is a believer in “picking pairs” at the very top level, but such a theory applies equally to another defensive duo: Weston and Emily Mannix at the Vixens, who also have worked together for a number of years. Mannix, who has played just a handful of Tests, was controversially omitted from the World Cup squad in favour of debutant Klau. If Klau gets the nod again, will her good friend potentially join her? Even if Turner does get picked, as many are suggesting, it would be reward for a breakout season, not necessarily to replace Weston. But if the Swifts can build a Super Netball dynasty, as they openly talked about on Sunday, and Klau and Turner continue to grow, they could become a fearsome force for the Diamonds. They proved on Sunday that defence wins championships. And winning is something the Diamonds haven’t been able to do for two major tournaments in a row now.