Behind sugar, rugby players are the second biggest export from Fiji. Combined with Samoa and Tonga they provide almost 20% of the world’s professional rugby players. Fiji are Olympic champions in sevens and just won the HSBC World Sevens Series again. Pacific Island players regularly sweep up the end-of-year awards in all the top leagues for player of the season and nearly every top try-scorer in those leagues is from the Pacific. So it’s a no-brainer, right? Slap what’s left of your recently remortgaged mortgage on a Fiji v Samoa World Cup final on 2 November? Maybe don’t do that. Their actual fortunes in this World Cup will be very different. The average difference in scoreline of Tier 2 teams v Tier 1 teams, as well as the margin of their biggest defeats, has been coming down every World Cup since 2003. That trend may well come to a grinding halt in Japan. Steve Hansen, the All Blacks head coach, threw a few grenades at World Rugby after his side demolished Tonga 92-7 last weekend. He hit them twice – first about the lack of Tier 1 games for Pacific Island teams and then about the lack of financial support by World Rugby for those same nations. Rugby’s governing body was quick to respond to Hansen, saying a record £60m support package for Tier 2 teams had been provided for the World Cup and its preparation and that 120 of the 150 coaches and support staff involved in those teams have been identified and funded by World Rugby. Nothing was mentioned about Hansen’s first point because it didn’t have a defence. That punch landed and it is critical to finally getting a few more seats on that mahogany Tier 1 top table. Not only do the Tier 2 teams need more big games to get used to the intensity and learn from those encounters, but those top‑tier nations also need to agree to a share of the gate from those games to help significantly supplement what World Rugby provides. Do that and the beginnings of real change on the islands will be seen. Even a fraction of those profits will make a far bigger difference than World Rugby’s aid ever can. It has worked hard to finance these countries but it does not provide all the solutions. Those unions are still generally underfunded and money is not always spent in the right areas. Tonga Union is based in a two‑room shack with a whiteboard, fan and a laptop. Yes it has coaches and staff paid for by World Rugby. They will have had their preparation camps paid for too. However, the targeted funding by which World Rugby operates has led to the majority of funds in the Pacific being channelled to Fiji over the past four years – this has left Samoa and Tonga to survive on even less. This has affected their coaches’ visits to Europe and monitoring, with the knock-on effect of less communications with clubs and less access to players. Some World Rugby appointments to these unions are fantastic but some are because they could not get a job elsewhere. There is a reason for that and often local appointments are needed (on a fraction of those costs) – as much as an aspirational signpost for those local coaches and support staff. Until Super Rugby gives a Pacific Island team a spot in their competition, cohesion is always going to be an issue. Don’t get me wrong, Tonga suffers from a serious lack of governance while internal politics in Samoa has led to a high turnover of coaches and players, both of which have caused big problems for those teams, but it is now about permanent positive change, not papering over the cracks. That means the competitions and the top unions actually helping and for World Rugby to take a harder line to make that happen and to enforce the right practices, procedure and governance in those Pacific unions. In Pool D in Japan Fiji have got a real chance of knocking over Australia or Wales and going through to the knockouts. They have an excellent coaching and management team that have largely been together since the 2015 campaign. They have world‑class players, will have a good culture, won’t worry about the schedules or have high demands and they will be incredibly resilient. World Rugby instigated a “scrum factory” in Fiji a few years ago to combat their front-row problems and it has worked well. Against them is preparation time compared to Australia and Wales. They have not had the intensity of matches compared to those two either. Finally, they have been formed from clubs all over the world in many leagues, not a small handful from one league in the way their major opponents have been. Cohesion is massive in team sport and, until Super Rugby gives a Pacific Island team a spot in their competition, then it is always going to be an issue. It is unfair to just point at World Rugby and say it is wholly the governing body’s fault that the islands are not maximising their potential. The major unions need to front up as do the major leagues and those island unions also need to improve. Super Rugby’s contractual demands mean there are more than 40 players in New Zealand and Australia franchises who could be available for Fiji, Samoa or Tonga making themselves unavailable because, if they are suddenly ineligible for NZ or Australia, their contracts could be in danger. That is just one example of countless changes required but they are all possible. Maybe as a result of going backwards in the World Cup on the field, it might all mean a move forwards in the future. “Vei Lomani”, or translated into English “love each other/work together”, was the Fiji sevens motto at the Rio Olympics in 2016. For that same success in the XVs game, that is exactly what is needed across the game now. Ben Ryan coached Fiji’s sevens team to Olympic gold in 2016