How grimly symbolic of the times in which we live that it is necessary to correct the prime minister on his reference to comic book characters. Only a couple of years ago, Boris Johnson was urging the Tory party conference, in pseudo-Churchillian phrases, to “let the [British] lion roar”. Now, in an interview with the Mail on Sunday, he is invoking more primitive and aggressive imagery. If he fails to get a new Brexit deal with the EU, he will simply ignore the legislation requiring him to seek an article 50 extension: “The madder Hulk gets, the stronger Hulk gets.” Oh dear. Look, I don’t propose to detain you with a lengthy history of the green-skinned, gamma ray-blasted giant, a prominent figure in the Marvel Comics universe since 1962, when Stan Lee and Jack Kirby introduced him as a Frankenstein’s monster for the nuclear age. Suffice it to say that the Hulk has had a bit of a time of it over the decades: mostly miserable, frequently confused, and occasionally despatched to alternate dimensions. If I had to select an inspiration for UK diplomacy in the final days before the 31 October deadline, I definitely wouldn’t opt for a notoriously unstable, deeply embittered and arbitrarily violent monster. But what do I know? The prime minister’s champions insist that he is tantalisingly close to a deal and that his lurid claim that the UK will (metaphorically, one assumes) wreck the joint if it doesn’t get what it wants from Brussels is all part of yet another cunning plan. What the Hulk and the UK certainly do have in common is that both have been poisoned: the green-skinned monster by gamma rays, the nation by Brexit. The Labour party remains locked in a state of stultified indecision over our prospective departure from the EU, while the Tories become daily more wedded to an ugly populist nationalism that is shocking both in its content and the speed with which it is being imposed and enforced by No 10. It is in this very specific context that the defection of Sam Gyimah to the Liberal Democrats should be understood. Gyimah may not be a household name but he was indisputably a rising star in his former party before it transformed itself into a cult and headed to Jonestown. Indeed, only a few weeks ago he was a contender for the Conservative leadership itself. That brief campaign was a dignified bid to remind the party of its one-nation tradition generally and, more specifically, the modernising project to reconcile contemporary social liberalism with governing competence. Nor is the party simply reverting to the old-fashioned culture that prevailed before David Cameron’s leadership. Quite the opposite: it is morphing before our eyes into something new and revolting. In Johnson’s Conservative party, you must be true to a fundamentalist version of Brexit – or face expulsion. On the other hand: feel free, if you wish, to mock Muslim women in religious clothing as “letterboxes” or “bank robbers”. The law? Useful for maintaining order on the streets, of course – especially in the event of food shortages. But, as a minister, you may reserve the right to look at the detail before agreeing to obey it. Remember: legislation is produced by parliament, the enemy of “the people”. That’s why prorogation is so handy. This week, the supreme court will hear the government’s appeal against the Scottish court of session’s ruling that the present suspension of parliament is “null and of no effect” and that Johnson’s intention was “to stymie parliamentary scrutiny of government action” – which is to say that the prime minister lied to the Queen. It may well decide that the whole question of prorogation is not “justiciable”. But even if the ruling goes against the government, Dominic Cummings, the prime minister’s chief adviser, has reportedly said that “we could just prorogue again … The constitutional crisis is only just beginning.” In this vortex of procedural recklessness and demented rhetoric, it is so important not to be fooled into thinking that anything is normal any more, or to be conned by No 10’s claims that it has been forced to take regrettably tough measures only by the intransigence of anti-democratic metropolitan remainers. There is nothing normal about this government. On the one hand, it reserves the right to ignore legislation it does not like, and, if necessary, to undermine a supreme court ruling by simply repeating the original offence. On the other, it claims practically supernatural powers of diplomacy for the prime minister, hinting that he is on the verge of a spectacular breakthrough that would resolve the problem of the Irish border backstop by shifting the focus of talks (again) to the Irish Sea. During the leadership contest, Johnson said that the chances of no deal were a “million to one against”. Last month, in contrast, he said that it was “touch and go”. Now, in advance of his meeting with the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, he claims that “we will get there”. Which Johnson to believe? Frankly, all this briefing about “breakthroughs” and diplomatic “movement” strikes me as mere preparatory work for the attribution of blame as 31 October approaches. Imagine Johnson and his acolytes raging as the deadline gets near, and how they will complain that the prime minister’s superhuman efforts have been undermined – by Brussels, by remainiacs, by disloyal Tories, by judges, by Larry the cat. It will all be someone else’s fault. That, at least, is what they will say. But don’t believe a word of it. Inside the Hulk, there is and has always been a small and fearful man, wondering, with good reason, what will become of him when he loses all his strength. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist