With the window firmly shut and an international break in full swing, today’s tidbits are a story of what may be, in a distant dystopian January, and what might have been. The Mill should probably start paying Neymar commission. The wantaway/wants-to-stay Brazilian has got up through some lean times – and the latest whisper is that Juventus failed with an ambitious deadline-day move, which would have seen the forward form a deeply likeable strike partnership with Cristiano Ronaldo. That would have seen Paolo Dybala head to PSG in part-exchange, but he’s staying in Turin – for now. Spurs will get another chance to sign the unloved Argentinian forward in the winter window, which should give them enough time to sort out those pesky image rights. Juventus could fill the gap in their forward line with Leverkusen’s Kai Havertz, although they face a battle with Liverpool for the German up-and-comer. Juve are also in the market for a new goalkeeper, with David de Gea very much fitting the bill. Manchester United are eyeing up Atlético Madrid’s Jan Oblak to replace him. United must also convince Paul Pogba to sign a new contract, and tie up a move for PSG’s Thomas Meunier. Don’t expect him to arrive in January, though – the full-back doesn’t fancy a winter move: “I have the impression when transfers are done in January that they are not thought out, but rather a question of necessity.” Shh, Thomas! You’ll give the game away! Another player that Spurs failed to land this summer was Bruno Fernandes – with Sporting’s president claiming that unrealistic add-ons scuppered a deal. According to Frederico Varandas, Spurs’ offer was “€45 million, plus €20m in bonuses for winning the Premier League and Champions League. Those are difficult objectives.” Ouch. Said objectives might look slightly more realistic if Spurs can convince Christian Eriksen to sign that new contract, with Atlético and United hoping he doesn’t. Contract negotiations ahoy across North London, too, with Arsenal trying to tie down genuinely likeable strike duo Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette. The Frenchman is reportedly attracting interest from Barcelona, who could team the striker up with compatriot Antoine Griezmann, now Luis Suárez is getting on a bit. Staying with Barça, some shock news – Lionel Messi has the run of the place. Reports have emerged that his Barcelona contract contains an opt-out, applicable at the end of every season – not that he’s planning on using it. Crikey, we’re almost out of time and haven’t even mentioned Real Madrid. Gah, too late. Gareth Bale is back in Zizou’s good books and is expected to play a big part this season – before Real go all out for Kylian Mbappé next summer. It’s tough being an elite footballer these days – just ask Philippe Coutinho, who was reportedly offered to Manchester City on loan after Leroy Sané’s injury. Pep said thanks, but no thanks. Elsewhere, Hull’s Jarrod Bowen is attracting interest from Newcastle, Dinamo Zagreb’s Dani Olmo is unhappy he wasn’t being allowed to join Wolves in the summer, and Fulham – who may have a bit of a problem – have signed a player three days after the window closed. Chelsea defender Michael Hector will train with the Championship club this autumn, before signing officially in January.