Vincent Kompany announced his testimonial game with some unsurprising news for Manchester City supporters: the former captain will not be appearing in Wednesday night’s City Legends v Premier League All Stars match because he is nursing a slight hamstring injury. “Thankfully it’s a celebration game, I don’t actually need to be on the pitch,” the 33-year-old Anderlecht player-manager said. “It’s for an unbelievable cause too, so I don’t think my missing out is the most important thing, and that’s how City fans know me anyway. I’ve had to deal with a lot of injuries and absences in my career, the irony of me missing my own testimonial won’t be lost on anyone.” A crowd of around 50,000 is expected, with all proceeds going to A Bed Every Night, a charity set up by Manchester’s mayor, Andy Burnham, to support rough sleepers in the city. Former City favourites such as Craig Bellamy and Mario Balotelli will play a Premier League XI heavily drawn from Manchester United’s pool of past players, such as Paul Scholes, Ryan Giggs and Gary Neville. “We are specifically trying to deal with homelessness in Greater Manchester and you can’t do that properly unless the red side are involved,” Kompany said. “I’m glad to have them here. This place means a lot to me; I liked it here even before I signed for City and the friendly people and fans have a lot to do with that. Even though I am presently playing in a different country Manchester will always be special for me. “My missus is a Manc and a City supporter and so are my kids. We were looking for an opportunity to give something back to the City and then Andy Burnham came along. We are happy to help. As footballers we are just normal members of society. Most of us come from nothing but we are lucky to have a bigger platform to speak up.” Burnham paid tribute to Kompany, revealing that £300,000 has been raised through the Tackle4MCR homelessness charity they jointly set up. “I can’t praise Vincent enough,” he said. Kompany, asked to name the best centre-half he has seen in his 11 years in Manchester, suggested Virgil van Dijk. “I know he is only at the story of his career in the Premier League but Liverpool before Virgil van Dijk and after him is a completely different set up. You don’t see too many defenders have that sort of impact.” City have just lost an influential central defender of their own in Aymeric Laporte, a player Kompany admits will be missed. “We’ve lost a big player and you need people like that in the bigger games that come along in a season,” he said. “Having said that we have coped with key absences before – Kevin De Bruyne, Fernandinho, Sergio Agüero and myself – and the way Pep Guardiola sets the team up relies more on the system than individuals. The team has never seemed to collapse and I don’t see City weakening now.”