The top two divisions in England have taken a break for the international fixtures, but the action has not stopped in League One and League Two. With 15% of the campaign already completed, it’s a good time to assess some of the young talent in the divisions. Here are six players under the age of 23 who have really stood out this season. Having a strong academy helps clubs deal with the blow of being relegated from the Championship and that is certainly the case for Ipswich. The Tractor Boys have helped developed plenty of young players in recent years. Their former defenders, Adam Webster and Tyrone Mings, were both signed by Premier League clubs this summer and Luke Woolfenden will be hoping to emulate their success. Woolfenden had made just three league appearances for Ipswich before this season began, but he has started five of their six league matches so far this season. The 20-year-old has repaid the faith shown in him by Paul Lambert, helping the team to an unbeaten start. Woolfenden, who spent last season in League Two with Swindon, is more than capable of handling the physicality of lower-league football. The centre-back has won 24 of his 30 aerial duels (80%) so far and completed 7.2 clearances per game. No player is averaging more interceptions at this early stage. Rating so far this season: 7.49 Sticking with centre-backs in League One, Harry Souttar is back at Fleetwood for a second spell on loan from Stoke. Brother of Scotland international John, with whom he left Dundee United three years ago, the 20-year-old played youth matches for the country of his birth but has since accepted a call-up to Australia’s senior side. His commanding displays for Joey Barton’s side show why he has been sought after at club and country level. The youngster managed a goal and an assist in an impressive victory at Peterborough on the opening day. His height is a huge asset in in both boxes. At 6ft 6in, he takes some beating in the air and has won 33 aerial duels in his six games in the league so far this season. Souttar is a player you can’t help but keep your eye on and will surely be given his chance at Stoke before long. Rating: 7.38 Flynn Downes was regular for Ipswich last season, playing 29 times in the Championship appearances. It was a disastrous campaign for the club, but Paul Lambert was clearly convinced that of the 20-year-old midfielder’s talent. Downes has proven more than capable of impressing in the third tier, playing every minute of the club’s league campaign so far. Downes set up the only goal of Ipswich’s opening-day victory at Burton before opening his own account for the season in a 3-0 win over Shrewsbury. The academy graduate is very dynamic in the middle, proving important when his team are in and out of possession. Rating: 7.35 Jerry Yates’ switch from Rotherham to Swindon this summer was the fourth move of his short career, but it already promises to be his most productive. The 22-year-old spent the first half of last season on loan at Carlisle before being recalled by Rotherham in January. The young forward wasn’t utilised in the final months of last season, even though even though they ended the campaign being relegated to League Two. The club sent the young striker out on loan again this summer but, given his form at Swindon so far this season, they may regret that decision. Swindon have won four of their games so far this season: the four in which Yates has started. On top of that, the youngster has found the net in all four of those games. Rotherham fans must be looking at his form enviously; his tally of four goals this season is just one fewer than his the whole squad have managed at his parent club. Yates form has really stepped up since he moved to a central position; he only managed six goals in his 23 games last season when, more often than not, he was fielded out of position on the wing. Rating: 7.72 Having made just four substitute appearances in the Championship over the last two seasons, Bez Lubala rejected the offer of a new contract at Birmingham City over the summer and went in search of regular first-team football to develop his career. Crawley manager Gabriele Cioffi, a former Blues coach, moved fast to secure the 21-year-old’s services on a free transfer and it already seems to be an inspired signing. Lubala has started all seven of Crawley’s matches in League Two from the left flank and his confidence is sky high after an outstanding start. Like Yates, Lubala scored in his first four league outings, and he added a fifth in Crawley’s 1-1 draw at Macclesfield at the weekend. He also hit the winner for Crawley when they knocked Norwich City out of the League Cup last month. That means he has scored in six of his eight appearances for his new club. The 21-year-old has taken more shots (34) than any other player in the division and he has completed 19 of his 25 dribbles at a success rate of 76%. The youngster is making light work of League Two. Rating: 7.55 Having signed from Brentford three years ago as a teenager, Senior has since gone on to become a mainstay for the U’s under John McGreal. The 22-year-old started 40 of 42 League Two appearances last season and has played from the off in every game in the current campaign, causing havoc for opposition full-backs. The winger’s end product certainly has room for improvement, scoring six times last season but yet to get off the mark this, with one assist to his name in 2019-20. However his work rate in and out of possession can’t be questioned, averaging 2.4 tackles per 90 minutes thus far, and he keeps the ball well, completing 84.2 per cent of his passes. It is, however, Senior’s dribbling ability that makes him a nightmare to defend against. He has completed six more take-ons (30) than any other player in the division at a decent 68.2% success rate and it wouldn’t be a surprise to see the youngster – who is capable of playing from either flank – following in the footsteps of a number of players who have left Colchester for either League One or the Championship in recent years. Rating: 7.35 • Visit WhoScored for more coverage of League One and League Two• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter