John Phillips opened the Paddington Printshop in an old taxi-meter factory off the Harrow Road in 1974, and began making event and campaign posters for everybody “from the vicar to the anarchists” – what Phillips describes as the entire “rainbow coalition” of leftwing interests. In addition to promoting such international causes such as the anti-apartheid movement, many of its posters were about local housing issues in this particular corner of west London, including squatters’ rights, housing associations, hostile developers and derelict land. There was a strong poster culture. They indicated to the council and public that these were strong organisations Customers were charged at different rates: squatters simply covered the cost of material, while groups receiving grants were asked to pay a little more. Posters were generally “double crown” – that’s 20” by 30” – and screen-printed in runs of between 150 and 300 before being plastered around nearby streets. “The style was fairly eclectic,” says Phillips. “We wanted to help people express themselves or find a form of expression for the campaign that was appropriate. Many of them hadn’t picked up a pencil since childhood. For the left in those days there were only two colours in their vocabulary – red and black – and many of their images were from the 1930s, so we were trying to open people up to contemporary images.” One frequent visitor was Piers Corbyn, brother of the current Labour leader. “Piers was in the International Marxist Group with Tariq Ali and [was the] main organiser of the [nearby] Elgin Avenue squats,” says Phillips. “He often came in to have posters made. There was a very crude red-and-white stencilled one about evictions that promoted a benefit by Joe Strummer’s [pre-Clash band] 101’ers.” As well as providing a dash of background colour, the posters helped reshape the landscape of the area. One dramatic example was the creation of Meanwhile Gardens, a playground carved out of derelict land. “That was our friend the artist Jamie McCullough,” says Phillips. “He had this idea you could shape wasteland with a JCB like a sculpture. We made posters, helped set up a charity and found the workforce. Through the studio we had a very wide social network and were able to use that to help projects like Meanwhile. It was intended to be temporary, hence the name.” Another major campaign saw Phillips create the Iron Man – a businessman with the face of a digger. It began in 1986 when Westminster council tried to sell the Walterton and Elgin estates to a private developer. This happened to be the area where the Paddington Printshop was then located, and Phillips worked alongside residents to fight back, creating a range of images to support the campaign. “After six years, the tenants were allowed to set up associations to compete with developers and they put in the first proposal under that legislation and won the right to buy it,” says Phillips. “Surveys of the estate[s] show that the housing conditions are better, rents are lower, health is better – all the social indicators show that it’s a healthier and happier environment than comparable social housing and becomes a real community asset.” Other posters addressed two related issues – squatters and empty homes. North Kensington had numerous squats. There were dozens in Elgin Avenue, where Piers Corbyn was based, while the 101’ers were named after the squat at 101 Walterton Road. Over in Freston Road, the writer and activist Heathcote Williams helped create the independent republic of Frestonia, which attempted to secede from the UK. Phillips printed posters for squatter benefits; for Frestonia; for campaigns against a proposed criminal trespass law that people feared would make squatting a criminal rather than civil offence; and for a squatters advisory service that offered the squatting community legal advice as well as acting as an underground estate agent, spreading the word about empty properties. Another campaign came at the problem from a different angle. While the squatters were largely white and middle-class, poorer residents, many from black communities, were desperate for secure and clean rented accommodation. Posters called out poor housing conditions, shaming housing associations and councils. “The ‘red cross’ campaign began with people who were on the housing association boards and wanted their organisations to refurbish properties rather than buy to invest,” Phillips says. “They would give the addresses of empty properties to community workers. We’d then spray them with biblical red crosses and use posters to explain what it meant. Then the board members would attend board meeting and say ‘have you seen what’s happening out there…?’ It became a national issue.” The print shop continued to produce posters for the local community – concerts, the Notting Hill carnival and festivals – alongside more radical topics, but community activities tapered off in the 1980s as the sector’s funding dried up. The print shop formally closed in 1991 when Phillips transferred the assets to a new charitable organisation, London Print Studio. Based at 425 Harrow Road, it continues to work on community projects as well as with artists, galleries and educational institutions. Phillips made a poster for Grenfell but otherwise rarely works in that medium today. “There was a strong poster culture then,” he says. “People thought about posters and owned them and understood them. There isn’t a poster culture now. Our posters contributed to campaigns. They indicated to the council and public that these were strong organisations they were up against and they contributed significantly to internal morale.” Posters from Paddington Printshop is published by Four Corners Books Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter