I used to love watching ITV’s Stars in their Eyes in the 1990s, in which a budding singer would walk through some stage doors and emerge, minutes later, miraculously transformed into a star. It’s much the way I feel about seeing fresh-faced fennel turn into one of the most dazzling cooked vegetables in the plant kingdom after some time in the oven. Its anise flavours mellow and sweeten, its fronds crisp up and turn gold. And although it’s lovely just by itself, with backing vocals of sun-dried tomato, herbs and spelt in tow, a new star (or at least a good salad) is born. I like to eat this with a side of lemon-dressed rocket. Prep 10 minCook 45 minServes 4 1kg fennel5 tbsp olive oil ½ tsp salt 300g spelt1 litre vegetable stock 1 tsp fennel seeds1 fat garlic clove, peeled100g sun-dried tomatoes in oil (drained weight)2 tbsp lemon juice1 ½ tsp chilli flakes20g mint, leaves picked and roughly chopped20g flat-leaf parsley leaves, roughly chopped Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6. Top and tail the fennel, then quarter and slice lengthways into 5mm pieces. Keep the grassy fronds to one side for later. Arrange the fennel across two oven trays in a single layer, pour two and a half tablespoons of olive oil over each tray, and season each with a quarter-teaspoon of salt. Mix everything well with your hands and roast for 30 minutes, turning after 15 minutes. The fennel should be golden and crisping in places. If not, roast for another five minutes. Put the spelt into a medium-sized saucepan and pour over the stock. Bring to a simmer and cook for 15-20 minutes, until al dente. If there is any residual liquid, drain it (you could keep the liquid to drink or make soup with). Finally, put the fennel seeds in a mortar, coarsely bash, add the garlic and bash again. Squeeze out all the oil from the sun-dried tomatoes into the mortar, then finely chop the tomatoes and add these with the lemon juice and chilli flakes. Bash together until you have a sludgy sauce. To put together the salad, add the spelt to the roast fennel and mix in the sun-dried tomato dressing. Throw in the chopped herbs, and mix. Taste and adjust the lemon and salt as needed. Transfer to a platter and serve. Meera Sodha’s new book, East: 120 Vegetarian and Vegan Recipes from Bangalore to Beijing, is out now (Penguin, £20). To order a copy for the special price of £15, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846.