When Susan Neiman’s German friends discovered she was working on a book called Learning from the Germans, they laughed. “They told me: ‘You cannot publish a book with that title. There’s nothing to learn from the Germans; we did too little and too late.’ And there is something paradoxical about saying: ‘Well, we committed this terrible crime, but weren’t we great at coming to terms with it?’ You can’t really say that. But someone who’s a semi-outsider as I am, can, in fact, say that.” Neiman, a moral philosopher, spent part of her childhood in the American south and she has written a comparative study of how Germany has come to terms with the crimes of nazism, and why the US, in failing to confront its own human rights abuses, should take note. Ambitious and detailed, it ranges from the initial reluctance of German citizens to begin the process of truth and reconciliation to small-town Mississippi, and the shooting of nine African American churchgoers in Charleston, South Carolina, four years ago. It was that massacre, carried out by a white supremacist, that prompted Neiman, whose previous books include an examination of the concept of evil, to begin researching and writing Learning from the Germans. From her home in Berlin, where she has lived for the past 22 years, Neiman watched Barack Obama give a heartrending eulogy to the dead, and then followed as governors began to order the taking down of Confederate flags, and Walmart announced that it would stop selling Confederate memorabilia. It struck her that amid the horror lurked a hopeful moment – a moment of potential change – and that she herself had “some knowledge and experience that I could share, that might be helpful”. Neiman’s mother campaigned for the desegregation of Atlanta’s public schools – an activity that earned her, as Neiman recalls, several late-night phone calls from the Ku Klux Klan. One hot summer’s day, her mother invited an African American friend and her children over for the afternoon, and Neiman asked if they could all go to the outdoor swimming pool. No, came the answer. The lake, then? Still no. Imploring and questioning did not change the answer. In the end, the children played beneath the garden sprinklers; only years later did Neiman realise that it would have been against the law for them to have swum together. In early adulthood, Neiman went to Berlin to study Kant, leaving just before the wall came down in 1989; after a period at Yale and a return to Berlin, she spent five years living in Tel Aviv, arriving after the Oslo peace agreement and leaving before the second intifada. She smiles wryly at her strange sense of historical timing, but the underlying point is that she has lived in a succession of places in which the past lies heavy on the present. And, perhaps even more crucially, she has done so with an outsider’s perspective and the distance to ask difficult questions. (We meet in rural Ireland because she lives here, in a remote coastal town, for three months of each year, which she devotes entirely to writing; her next book is a novel.) So what is the value now of focusing on Germany’s past? “By studying what they did and what they did wrong, I don’t think we can get a road map, because every country is particular. And it’s very important to look at particular histories. But you can certainly get an idea of: number one, how hard it is; number two, that it’s nevertheless possible; and number three, that a country can come out much better on the other side. It can be a source of strength and not weakness.” Neiman does not stint on impressing on her readers the details of number one, drawing on a vast body of interviews – half, she estimates, didn’t even make it into the book – to explore how long history’s tail is. It is too easy, she argues, to believe that as soon as the second world war ended, Germany set about the process of atoning for its crimes. It simply isn’t so: after all, 10% of the country’s population had been members of the Nazi party, “and the most shocking, but also important thing, is they were not the uneducated masses. The majority had academic degrees. We like to think that education provides immunity to racist and fascist ideology. And it doesn’t.” What, then, heralded the start of Germans en masse beginning to face the past? Although some of it can be explained generationally, she replies, as people died off, “that won’t do the trick, as we’ve seen in the United States. And as we’ve seen in Britain where, you know, time has gone by, and people like falling back on national myths of greatness.” In part, she believes the Auschwitz trials marked a moment of change in which the burgeoning of mass travel connected ordinary Germans with other worldviews and there was an emergence of books by Holocaust survivors. She also notes the importance of 1968, “a moment for confronting parents and teachers … and there was a sense of a sudden real wave of disgust and rebellion: what have you done?” Neiman is also at pains to point out that this work was done more quickly and more effectively in East Germany – much of which went unnoticed because of the relentless focus on West German attempts at rehabilitation. “Whenever you say anything good about East Germany,” she says, “immediately somebody jumps up and says, ‘My God, you’re a Stalinist … ’ I’m not defending everything about it, of course. But I laboured on the chapter that talks about the east. I fact-checked it; I had somebody else fact-check it. I knew that I was going to get a lot of flak for that. But in the beginning, East Germany did a better job. They just did. On every level: in terms of bringing old Nazis to trial, in terms of teaching the period in schools, in terms of building monuments, and restoring concentration camps and making them educational.” Meanwhile, the west was so busy fighting a new conflict – “old Nazis were the best people to fight the cold war” – that efforts at serious denazification went by the board. As one might expect from a philosopher – especially one who has side-stepped the academy to work across disciplines – Neiman is fascinating and potent on how the Holocaust has functioned on multiple planes, and primarily as an example of pure evil that, by consequence, allows other societies to divert attention from their own misdeeds. “Nothing else even comes close to it. And if you haven’t done that, well, then you’re doing fairly well … you know, it’s as if we would like to have a large black hole that says, this is where you put evil and we don’t have to look at it.” She has, she says, been shocked by the lack of knowledge in Britain about the Nazi period, which naturally leads us into a conversation about the fondness of rightwing politicians for invoking the glories of the war, “this nostalgia for the empire that you see all over the place with Nigel Farage and Jacob Rees-Mogg and I suppose Boris Johnson too ... As if the empire really was a wonderful thing, as if it brought nothing but civilisation to the rest of the world.” This nostalgia that you see – it’s as if the British empire brought nothing but civilisation to the rest of the world She started to write the book before Donald Trump and before Brexit, and there have been times when she has felt “quite despairing” about whether her contribution will be of any practical use. But she has got over that. When I remark that prejudice appears to become more and more entrenched, she counters that the resistance to that prejudice is also growing. “What one can simply do is strengthen the voices, and say it is absolutely time that we come to terms with parts of our past, we can’t sweep them under the rug. And it’s possible to come out the other side. It’s not the case that all a country needs to do is beat its breast and talk about its failures and its crimes, which is, of course, what the right always accuses people on the left of doing. But if you don’t do that, you get explosions of things, like the kind of nationalism and racism that we’ve seen in so many countries lately.” In Germany, she says, there has been anxiety about the regional elections and the growth of rightwing nationalism; but she doesn’t believe the movement is so widespread as to become a problem in the way that Brexit is in the UK, or Marine Le Pen in France, Matteo Salvini in Italy or Jarosław Kaczyński in Poland. And in terms of the US, while they are not flying swastikas in Bavaria, she notes, they are flying Confederate flags in the south, encouraged by an administration that is quite happy to foster hatred and demonisation of the other. In the course of writing the book, Neiman met and interviewed vast numbers of activists and citizens in the American south. One of the key questions she wanted the book to ask was, if we insist on saying that we have to remember the Holocaust in order to learn from it, then what do we want to learn? “And what it seems to me we can learn is, be aware of the beginnings. Be aware of racism, be aware of nationalism. The Nazis went very slowly and carefully to see what the population would accept.” The idea of the long tail kept returning, and with it the fact that slavery did not end with the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863. Slavery in the US continued by other means for at least 90 years, she argues, and was sometimes even more brutal than the previous regimes. Men were deprived of their liberty by, for example, the invention of the crime of vagrancy, which was used to arrest African Americans and put them to work in mines and in factories, often with the collusion of the police.“If you start looking at the history between the Emancipation Proclamation, and Rosa Parks and the Montgomery bus boycott, it was neo-slavery or an age of racist terror rather than Jim Crow, which is a name that a lot of African Americans are rejecting. It’s just too harmless to describe what was actually happening.” What African Americans are currently withstanding – radically poorer health outcomes and inequality in education, judicial and incarceration systems, and police brutality directed predominantly towards young black men – is, Neiman argues, part and parcel of white America’s inability to face up to its past, and to the crimes it has committed against African Americans and Native Americans. Only, she says, when you decide to be an adult can you begin to effect change. “I really do see that our relationship to our nation is like a grown-up relationship to our parents. We have to sort this through and say: ‘These parts of my national history I can be proud of and I can stand by, and these parts I’m sorry for and I’d like to do my best to somehow make up for.’ And I think, once you go through a process like that, you can begin to have a kind of healthy nationalism or patriotism. Which isn’t that my country is better than all countries. But it’s mine.” • Learning from the Germans: Confronting Race and the Memory of Evil by Susan Neiman is published by Allen Lane (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.