Harry Kane insists the England goalscoring record is “a long way off”, despite reaching the milestone of 25 goals in just 40 games for the Three Lions. The 26-year-old scored a hat-trick as England breezed past Bulgaria on Saturday night and Kane credited the strength of the current squad in keeping him on his toes. As for recent instances when his feet have gone out from under him, the Tottenham forward said he has nothing to apologise for as he rejected accusations of diving. Kane is now England’s 14th highest scorer, having moved past Sir Geoff Hurst’s total of 24 goals, and is nearly halfway to Wayne Rooney’s record of 53. “When I score for England, It’s obviously something that people bring up,” he said. “But I’ve said before it’s still a long way off and there’s a lot that can happen.” Passing Hurst in the all-time list was “a great milestone to reach” Kane added. “It’s something I’m very proud of, but I’m always looking forward for the next one, the next set of goals. [I want to see] if I can get to 30 and how quick I can get to 30, and go from there. We have another game on Tuesday [against Kosovo], where I feel we will be able to create chances, so hopefully I can get a couple more. “The main thing is that we keep winning. I’m in a good place with the players I’m playing with, they are going to create chances, they are going to give me opportunities. I’ve just got to make sure I’m ready to put them away.” With Raheem Sterling taking his international tally to nine and England’s other forward, Marcus Rashford, involved in two of the goals, Kane believes the competition up front is helping push the team on. “There’s no given in this team, no one is guaranteed to play,” Kane said. “You have to make sure you are training well every camp and the gaffer has made that very clear. For me personally it’s about improving and with the players around me I’ll do that. Everyone wants to play, but it’s about the squad pulling in the same direction.” As for the brouhaha over his tumble in the penalty area during the north London derby, Kane was not in the mood to linger on the topic. “I haven’t really heard much on that,” Kane said of the ensuing controversy. “I said after the Newcastle game it’s a clear penalty from my point of view. I said after the Arsenal game it’s a 50/50 one, similar to one we got given against us at Wembley the year before. It happens in football.” He added of the incident involving Arsenal’s Sokratis Papastathopoulos: “I am someone who uses his body well, which as a striker you have to do at every level. On the halfway line it’s a free-kick every day of the week. In the penalty box you don’t always get it. People’s opinions are their opinions. I wasn’t concentrating on that sort of stuff. I’ve never felt I should apologise and hopefully I don’t have to.”