Elliot Daly Untested in defence, which is hardly his fault, but the one player who could not quite catch a break in attack. Timing slightly out, but we are quibbling. 4 Ruaridh McConnochie Not a lot to do but chase kicks for the most part, until he took his try with some aplomb just shy of the hour. Withdrawn a couple of minutes later. 6 Jonathan Joseph Even at a World Cup, just looks in a different class. Was out-and-out brilliant only occasionally, but things happen all around him, or just look as if they could. 8 Piers Francis Was a handful in attack, finding gaps and keeping the ball alive. If the citers want more to sink their teeth into, his tackle on Will Hooley will no doubt be scrutinised. 7 Joe Cokanasiga A big bundle of muscle and rawness. By the end, that was the last thing a wilting USA wanted to encounter. A little loose with his handling. 6 George Ford (capt) He really is a tease. Better defences than this will be confounded by the deftness and variety of his approach play. Looking very confident indeed. 8 (man of the match) Willi Heinz He is not going to let anyone down, no matter how people feel about his selection ahead of others. Bossed it as if this were Gloucester. Or Christchurch. 7 Joe Marler England had barely any defending to do, so left Big Joe free to focus on the scrum. Lovely. A bit of ball in hand would have been nice but can’t have everything. 6 Luke Cowan-Dickie His lineout throwing will be tested more thoroughly, but sound here. Plenty of action in attack. Hands could have been better. Took his try well enough. 6 Dan Cole He had one job, and he did it very well. Exploited early disruption to the USA scrum like the old pro he is. Might even have touched the ball once, too. 6 Joe Launchbury Typically excellent, all things to all men and must wonder who he upset to coincide with this generation of locks. Couple of handling errors, but if you offer yourself so much... 7 George Kruis Faultless on his own ball and a menace on theirs. Waded through their mauls, guided his own, constant support play and continuity. 8 Tom Curry Of the contending flankers he still looks the best, his touches in attack reminding us of what the old No 7s looked like. Does the dirty stuff, too. 7 Lewis Ludlam The fairy tale continues. Took a while (a half, in fact) to grow into game, but then you could not stop him. Bagged himself a try, too. 7 Billy Vunipola Absolutely fundamental to England’s plans. The relentless carrying was all there – and regularly decisive. Just a bit too loose, though, to graduate with a first from this one. 6 Replacements Ellis Genge (for Marler h-t) 8; Kyle Sinckler (for Cole h-t) 7; Mark Wilson (for Vunipola h-t) 8; Courtney Lawes (for Launchbury 50); Ben Youngs (for Heinz 50); Owen Farrell (for Francis 50); Anthony Watson (for McConnochie 61); Jack Singleton (for Cowan-Dickie 72). Will Hooley His night ended with a nasty injury and nearly began with one. Looked a little lost in between, possibly with good reason, struggling under high ball. 4 Blaine Scully (capt) Not much for a winger to do on a night such as this. He tackled a rampaging Cokanasiga superbly when it mattered but missed a rampaging Genge when it did not. 5 Marcel Brache USA’s centres had a lot of work to do and for the most part they did it. Brache did miss a few tackles, but he will not be the first against this lot. 6 Paul Lasike Central stone of a midfield that stood up well, despite such a paucity of possession to call its own. His were the more noticeable charges, and few went through him. 6 Martin Iosefo Interesting duel with his old foe from the sevens circuit, but the odds were stacked against him. Finally yielded as McConnochie stepped inside him for his try. 4 AJ MacGinty If only we had seen more of him with ball in hand, but he defended as manfully as any fly-half could be expected to do. Glimpses of class on a difficult night. 7 Shaun Davies One poor clearance kick in the first half, but his box-kicking thereafter was great. He is not afraid of a tackle either, which is just as well against 70% possession. 6 David Ainuu Big moment for the teenager of Toulouse mixing it with the old men of the front row. Alas, it lasted but a moment, injured at the first scrum. n/a Joe Taufete’e Throwing in not bad, with only one going west. Scrum so-so. USA just did not see enough ball for him and his mates to throw themselves round. 4 Titi Lamositele Could not get anything going. None of the rambunctious charging we see in a Saracens shirt. USA scrum secured most of its own ball but suffered on England’s put-in. 4 Ben Landry USA’s locks were beacons of industry and technical excellence. He was guilty of a couple of early errors but fought to the very end. 7 Nick Civetta If it is possible to be heroic yet dominated at the same time, this guy was it. He and his partner in engine room were manful. Solid at the lineout, too. 7 Tony Lamborn Worked hard and was USA’s top tackler, despite his withdrawal on the hour. Discipline a bit loose at times, as was his handling, but he clearly means things. 5 John Quill World Cup’s first red card and there can’t be much argument in the current climate. The game seemed to be passing him by anyway, although did his fair share of tackling. 3 Cam Dolan Not a night to be a back-row forward when on the back foot like this. He is one of USA’s classier players but no chance to show it. 5 Replacements Olive Kilifi (for Ainuu 3) 3; Paul Mullen (for Lamositele 43); Greg Peterson (for Civetta 52); Ruben de Haas (for Davies 52); Dylan Fawsitt (for Taufete’e 61); Hanco Germishuys (for Lamborn 61); Bryce Campbell (for Lasike 61); Mike Te’o for (Iosefo 73).