John Oliver looked into my eyes and cocked his head. We held each other’s gaze. On the “stage” of an upstairs room in a grimy little pub, his partner – it may have been Andy Zaltzman but this was 15 years ago – finished his opening patter. Oliver didn’t notice it was his turn to speak. “Would you like to continue?” asked maybe-Zaltzman. There was a pause. “Hey, what? No,” said Oliver. “We can’t just move on as though nothing has happened. There was a connection here.” Looking at me, he said: “I’m not imagining this, am I?” Sitting in the front row at comedy gigs has interesting consequences. I’ve had the story of how my parents met told through improvised rap by Abandoman. I’ve had my head enveloped by a giant artificial sunflower to the theme music from Stranger Things, symbolising death by Demogorgon. I’ve been serenaded by countless comedians, including Yasmine Day (Tiffany’s I Think We’re Alone Now), Terry Alderton (Cyndi Lauper’s True Colours) and Rich Hall (singing his own Fix the Porn). But with Oliver it was a brief moment in which two guys just said to hell with it, stared into each other’s souls and found acceptance. Most people steer clear of the front row as if the chairs were electrified – but comedians need you to sit there. Not to make fun of you, but because, unless you’re laughing at every single joke, they need to know what you liked, so they can improve. In the words of the brilliant Sophie Duker, they need to know “what’s funny – and what you’ll tolerate”. Standing in the stage lights, they probably can’t see your face if you sit further back. At a recent Funny Women workshop for fledgling comedians, Rachel Creeger gave this advice for new comics dying on stage: find the one smiling face in the crowd and focus on delivering to them. I love live comedy and want to support it, so I sit at the front. Frequently the acts do talk to me – which is great. I get to participate in this wonderfully crafted comedy without any pressure to be funny or clever – that’s the comedian’s job. Dan Atkinson, interviewed in Sophie Quirk’s book Why Standup Matters, remarks that the perfect audience member for participation plays it straight: they don’t try to get laughs and just answer the questions. Those may range from the completely harmless to ones that hit a nerve, to the cheap laughs of cruelty sometimes engineered by less talented comics. Good comics know that none of their audience deserves to go home having been made to feel small. Some of the randomly directed questions will highlight the truth that we’re more alike, and less alone, than we might have thought when we went into the gig. Choosing the gig helps a lot. The Quantum Leopard comedy club has a no-hate policy. You can show you consent to getting chatted to by wearing one of their green stickers. Just leave it off if you don’t want to be bothered. They fill their front row, no problem, with maybe two-thirds wearing stickers. Getting asked up on stage can be a more intense experience. Comedy duo Siblings have a radar for choosing suitable punters for this. In last year’s show, Acting Out, their “school assembly/murder investigation” sketch started with a low-key improv exercise with the audience, dressed up as a group recitation of the improbably long school motto. They chose their culprit – the audience member responsible for the killings – soon afterwards and used that same audience member for every subsequent moment requiring audience participation, no matter what the sketch, until the reason for their fixation was dramatically revealed in the ultimate scene. The random audience member went from patsy to taking a crucial role in the show’s gothic finale. It was risky but almost magical to watch. It helps if your patsy is delighted to be on stage but capable of hiding it, as in my case when they happened to pick me from the audience. (OK, I improvised a little towards the end, but mostly I just did as I was told and it was a lot of fun.) Occasionally, I see something wonderful that seems to contradict the common notion that audiences don’t like participating. In his Edinburgh fringe show, David McIver, dressed as Death, urged audience members to touch his scythe – and thus die. As each soul was claimed, the audience was rewarded with a tale from Death’s story book. The audience accepted participation – and their own deaths – as the price for each charming tale, and didn’t stop volunteering for the scythe, one after the other, in a weirdly heartwarming display. At most comedy nights, nobody in the audience needs to die. I couldn’t give John Oliver a good answer to his question but it didn’t matter – the show went on, and it was a good one. Next time you’re called on at a comedy show – only if you’re called on – I hope you’ll enjoy being part of a connection that you won’t get with a flat screen: a brief, random, miraculous and unique connection. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.