When war broke out, my father was a trawlerman in Lowestoft, East Anglia. That was a reserved occupation, like farming, so he didn’t have to fight. He spent the first years of the war fishing out of Padstow and Fleetwood – he moved with the other fishermen and their families from the east coast because it was so dangerous: it’s close to Europe, and Lowestoft was a naval base so it was frequently bombed. I think that time was very hard on my mum. She had to stay with people she didn’t know in places that weren’t familiar. My brother was born in Fleetwood and died there two months later. My dad was in the Royal Naval Reserve and, in 1941, he signed up so to see action as a crew member on a minesweeper. He took photographs throughout the war – I have no idea how, it wasn’t like you could get them developed at Boots – which show him first in England and then Egypt and Greece. In a way he did what his dad did. His father was also a fisherman in Lowestoft. He, too, served – in the first world war in minesweeping. He was killed when his boat was blown up on operations in the Dardanelles, so my dad never met him, he was born three months after his father died. Although my dad came back from the war, he was killed when his trawler disappeared. It was assumed that it was blown to bits by a bomb or a mine left over from the war brought up in the nets. He never talked about the war after he returned from it, no one did. Though there were signs of it everywhere. Not just the destruction in Lowestoft when I was growing up (I was born in 1943) but in the souvenirs men brought back. I remember going to friends’ houses and seeing displays of polished grenades and brass shell casings on their mantelpieces. When I was six, I played with my friend’s dad’s gun – a German Luger pistol brought home as a trophy, which could have been loaded for all we knew. Even though two generations of men in my family were killed by the war, indirectly or directly, I don’t think about it. Ordinary people just had to go along with war. Though I wish I’d talked to my granny about it when she was alive. She liked talking and she lost her husband and son; I’d like to know how she felt. My dad’s photo album is one of my oldest possessions and it’s good to have it. He was never home much because trawlers typically had just 48 hours off between sailing. I like looking at it because I think my dad had a good time in the war. Being a trawlerman was always dangerous – he was used to that – and his crew look jolly even though they’re on a minesweeper in the Mediterranean in grave peril. People on boats were very physically close, there’s a camaraderie. Also, when else would my dad have got to see the Acropolis or the pyramids? He loved learning so it’s great he had that chance. My father was recruited outside the central railway station in Port Louis, Mauritius. He joined up with his brother Harrydewa and they sailed with 14 other Mauritians on 11 December 1941 via Durban, Cape Town, Jamaica, New York and Belfast before landing in Liverpool in early 1942. The brothers would never have made that journey and had the chance to come to Britain if it weren’t for the war. My father served as a wireless operator and air gunner, and later became a flight officer in a Sunderland flying boat. I think the brothers signed up because they wanted to be part of the war effort, to fight for their country as part of the British empire. I turned 60 last year, and if my father had been alive he would have been 100. I never really knew my dad because he died when I was 11 but his flight logbook had always been in the family. I decided I wanted to feel what he had felt flying missions in the war. I wrote to the Royal Air Force Museum in Hendon, and asked if I could sit in a Sunderland and think about what my dad experienced. The Sunderland is an enormous plane – there are beds and a cooker in there because they flew as escorts to long-range Atlantic convoys looking for submarines. I can imagine now what it must have been like for him. Looking through his logbook I feel proud – though sad that I never got the chance to talk to him and ask all my questions. The museum has put a cutout photo of my dad into the new Sunderland exhibition and I narrate the commentary when you enter the plane. Now there’s something permanent for the family, for new generations. I’m so pleased – I don’t want my dad to be forgotten. Susan Cave joined the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (Fany) as a volunteer before the war, responding to a call for female drivers with their own cars. She was just 18 years old and felt patriotic and excited. Her open-topped sports car was enlisted with her, but proved unsuitable. As the war began Fany morphed into the ATS (Auxiliary Territorial Service), and Susan graduated to driving staff cars or larger vehicles. A diminutive figure, barely 5ft tall, she was given dispensation to carry a cushion on morning parade to use in the driver’s seat. Even so, she sometimes had to look between the spokes of the steering wheel rather than over it. She became an officer in charge of a group of women stationed on the Downs in Bristol, maintaining and driving army vehicles. She learned to be a map reader (signposts were removed to confuse an invading army), a driving instructor and a mechanic, skills she kept all her life. In the 1960s she taught me with a confidence that allowed me to drive, as a learner, from Sussex into London in her little green Simca. Because the door locks were a bit dodgy, she removed the rotor arm and put it in her pocket to make sure the car wouldn’t be stolen. She made it seem very normal. She met her husband, Ian Frenguelli, in vehicle management – he wasn’t allowed to serve on the front due to his nationality. He’d been brought up between England, Italy and France and had to decide his loyalties at the start of the war. The conflict destroyed his relationship with his Italian family, some of whom fought for the other side. He never spoke to his father again. I remember my parents as accepting and unjudgemental, at ease with people from all walks of life, hard to place in a social class. I’m sure that much of this was a result of the people they met and the values they developed during the war. They realised the strength of common purpose. Both had unconventional education histories prior to the war. It was a life changer for them that demobbed army personnel were offered further education without the need for formal qualifications – they had none. Susan did an intensive course to become a primary school teacher. The way she spoke of these two years suggests education was seen as a privilege, and colleges were infused with a sense of purpose not always present in higher education today. For some, war service was a path to improved class and status. Women especially absorbed the view that they had a right, and maybe an obligation, to train, work and contribute to remaking society in a better way for all. My grandparents lived in Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, in the 1930s. My grandmother, Marian, was married to Frederick Flatow, a Jewish man and the child of immigrants from East Prussia who’d moved to Yorkshire to work in the wool industry. Though they lived in Britain, they had relatives back in East Prussia and across Europe. Frederick’s favourite great-aunt, known as Grossmutter Weiss, lived in Holland. By the late 1930s they could see that the Nazis were becoming more powerful and threatening and they were very worried about Grossmutter Weiss. My grandparents invited her to come and live with them in Dewsbury. So that she’d feel really welcome they furnished a room for her and bought this writing desk for it. They wrote and told her they had a room ready, but she said she was too old to change her life. They asked her again but she decided to stay in Holland. After war broke out, they never heard from her again. She will have been taken by the Nazis at some point and no one has ever found out what happened to her. I inherited the desk when my grandmother died in 2000, but it still had a strange sense of newness even though it is a 1930s desk. No one had ever used it, except for storage. I inherited it as Grossmutter Weiss’s desk and her story came with it. I never met my grandfather Fred. He died before I was born so a lot of the stories about his side of the family are quite sketchy. But that’s still a part of my story and my heritage that I’m really interested in. Even as a child I connected to stories set in the war. There’s a beautiful story called Mischling, Second Degree by Ilse Koehn about a girl who has one Jewish grandparent who has to hide that during the war. I’m a mischling, second degree, and that book made me realise that, at another time, I would have been in real danger because of that. My dad finished school at 17 and was immediately drafted into the RAF. He trained in Canada for four years and qualified as an officer and navigator in 1945. The war promptly ended and he was very disappointed that he didn’t get to fight. I think he took the war personally because, although he was British, his father was a German Jew. Felix, my grandfather, had to report to the Home Office every fortnight throughout the war because he was German, even though he was Jewish. Although he had grown up speaking German, my dad found the Nazi movement so abhorrent that he erased the German language from his mind. He never spoke a word of it again after the war. I think it was a reaction to the emotional trauma. I remember once asking him for help with my German homework believing that surely he would still remember, but, even though he really wanted me to do well at school, he told me he was unable to help me as he couldn’t understand a word. My grandfather’s cousin was a high court judge in Germany – he managed to arrange for his wife and daughter (my godmother) to travel to England, but he was unable to get his sister out. She ended up in Auschwitz, where she perished. She had blamed her brother for not managing to arrange her emigration from Germany. Imagine being left with that, knowing that your late sister had held you responsible. We lost relatives on my paternal grandmother’s side, too. Her family were French, from Paris. She lost an aunt – also at Auschwitz. My aunt Joan, who’s now in her 90s, gave me my dad’s RAF pin recently – she knows it’s meaningful to me to have this. While my dad was in Canada training, she and my grandmother were evacuated from London to Worcester. Being in the RAF as part of the war effort meant a lot to my dad. He had to relinquish the chance of university because he was drafted, which was sad for him. After the war he was expected to join his father’s business straight away. However, as a trained pilot, he kept flying in small planes as a hobby until I was born in 1968.