Gregor Townsend’s Scotland have suffered a nightmare start to the World Cup, with the news that Hamish Watson has been ruled out of the tournament while there are concerns over Ali Price less than 24 hours after the dismal loss to Ireland in their Pool A opener. Scans confirmed that the Edinburgh flanker Watson would play no further part in Japan after the knee injury suffered against Ireland while Price was spotted on crutches as his team boarded a bullet train from Tokyo to their next base in Kobe. Scotland’s assistant coach, Danny Wilson, says it is too early to tell how serious the Glasgow scrum-half’s ankle knock is but it would complete a miserable 48 hours if Greig Laidlaw’s understudy is told he needs to follow Watson onto an early flight home. “He is going through the assessment,” said Wilson. “We got back to the hotel late last night and then we’ve been travelling to Kobe, but over that time the assessment process has been sorted so we should by the end of play have a bit more information. “At the moment, a minor issue around the foot and ankle area, but we’ll have to wait and see when the full assessment has been done.” Forward Watson was taken off by stretcher after suffering a serious knee injury during the 27-3 defeat in Yokohama after he was caught in the midst of a painful ruck tangle with Cian Healy and Tadhg Furlong. His Edinburgh club-mate Bradbury, who had already travelled to Japan on stand-by as a precautionary measure after fellow back-rower Jamie Ritchie suffered a facial injury, will now join Townsend’s team officially in preparations to face Samoa next Monday. Three Scottish mistakes allowed Joe Schmidt’s men to kill the game off with three tries inside the first 25 minutes. But Wilson shrugged off the suggestion it is time to lower the expectations placed on Townsend’s men. “There is only one thing you can do now, we move on to three games that are must-win games now,” he said. “If we had won last night we would probably be saying we need to win the next three games. “We now have to make sure we improve the performance against Samoa, and against the other two opposition, to give ourselves the opportunity to qualify. They become games now that we have to win, it is as simple as that. “We certainly have a consistency issue, I think that would be fair to say. We as a coaching team need to find a way of consistently producing the kind of quality rugby we need to produce to win games, and if we’re being brutally honest about it we’ve got to eradicate some of the errors we make and the pressure we heap on ourselves.” After the other game in Group A Russia’s winger Kirill Golosnitskiy was pleasantly surprised when he received a katana Japanese sword from Japan captain Michael Leitch after scoring the first try of the tournament. “It’s a plastic one, so there shouldn’t be any issue if I decide to take it home to Russia with me,” Golosnitskiy said. The try on Friday night came in the fifth minute, making it the fastest in the opening game of any Rugby World Cup. Japan rallied to win 30-10. “I was glad to make a try against the Japanese,” Golosnitskiy said. “But I don’t consider it to be an achievement as everything was done by (Russia captain) Vasily Artemyev for me.” Russia’s next game is against Samoa on Tuesday. Two sons of Uruguayan rugby great Diego Ormaechea have been included on the bench for the team’s World Cup opener against Fiji. The scrum-half Agustín Ormaechea and back-rower Juan Diego Ormaechea are part of coach Esteban Meneses’ 23-man squad for Wednesday’s Pool D game at Kamaishi Recovery Memorial Stadium. Diego scored a try in Uruguay’s win over Spain in 1999 and was the oldest player, at 40, to compete in the Rugby World Cup. Agustín Ormaechea, who started all four of Uruguay’s games in the 2015 World Cup, was replaced in one of three changes to the starting lineup that lost to Spain in a warm-up game in July. Diego Arbelo, Santiago Arata and Felipe Berchesi were promoted to start ahead of Ormaechea, Juan Pedro Rombys and Leandro Leivas. Fiji, meanwhile, have made 12 changes to the starting XV from their opening defeat to Australia. The South Africa prop Trevor Nyakane is another unlucky player to be ruled out of the Rugby World Cup after tearing his right calf muscle in the 23-13 loss to New Zealand. The Springboks have drafted in Thomas du Toit as a replacement and he is flying to Japan from France, where he was on a short-term loan with Toulouse. South Africa say Du Toit will arrive at the team camp in Nagoya on Tuesday ahead of the Pool B game against Namibia on Saturday. Nyakane will be a big loss for South Africa after giving the Boks strong momentum in the scrum off the bench in recent matches. Vincent Koch will likely move up to the bench as cover for starting tighthead Frans Malherbe. South Africa’s coach, Rassie Erasmus, said: “It’s very tough on Trevor. He has had a great season and added value whenever he took the field. It’s a blow to him and the team, but it’s also an opportunity for Thomas and for Vincent.”