Raleigh Super Tuff BurnerPrice £600, on sale October, raleigh.co.ukFrame steel Brakes Dia-Compe MX-890 It is 35 years since the now iconic MK1 Raleigh Super Tuff Burner first set pulses racing among pimply adolescents as they hopped and jumped their BMXs across suburbia. Those youngsters have now grown up, but Raleigh is giving them the chance to relive their heady teenage years by relaunching the Super Tuff Burner once again. Complete with the original gold super chrome paint job, Aeroyal saddle, top-tube guard, looptail rear and five-spoke black Skyway Mag wheels, the limited-edition bike captures all the fun, spontaneity and excitement that the 80s bike provided. It’s difficult to act your age on a bike like this – but you can always pretend you’ve bought it to share with your kids. Be sure to make them watch ET first so they get to understand the context – though topping up on Stranger Things will work just as well. Interestingly, Raleigh expects the new generation of younger riders will want to get their hands on the Burner not only for its old-school thrills, but also because of its exclusivity. Its period details will turn heads in any BMX park – and you mighy even learn some new tricks, too. Raise a smile and valuable funds with this BBC Children in Need jersey – 30% of every sale goes to the charity. So that each purchase helps to change the lives of disadvantaged children and young people across the UK. The bright and cheerful unisex jersey was created by Primal and features some impressive technical details to bring you a happier ride. The SpeedPro fabric is a plaited double knit with a micro yarn and a two-way mechanical stretch, so the jersey is lightweight and comfortable. The fabric, featuring excellent sublimation and printing, draws moisture away from the skin so you feel fresh in all conditions. Cycle jersey, £29, cyclesurgery.com Email Martin at martin.love@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@MartinLove166 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.