Inside a dilapidated, labyrinthine building in the outer reaches of south-east London, Black Midi are posing for photographs – a shoot that is 99% stony-faced nonchalance, 1% comedy boxing demonstration. This is the band’s new rehearsal space, and the establishment’s manager ambles over to let everyone know the score. This place is “under the radar”, he says meaningfully, waving a spliff around with an air of vague menace. Inside, the foursome – a group of baby-faced, scrupulously polite 20-year-olds – helpfully rearrange their practice room into an interview-friendly configuration while talking up their new base. “This whole place has only just started up,” says de facto frontman Geordie Greep. “So we’re pioneers!” Really, it isn’t through the use of rough and ready rehearsal spaces that Black Midi are breaking new ground. Instead, it’s their noisy and thrillingly unpredictable guitar music. Their debut album, this year’s Schlagenheim – which this week competes against favourites Slowthai, Dave and Idles for the Mercury prize – saw them wrestle novelty from the creaky guitar-bass-drums framework, creating catnip for music fans struggling to come to terms with rock’s cultural decline. Their sound feels impossible to place, a quality that has, predictably, seen music critics and nerdy YouTube commenters scramble to place it – usually landing on some combination of King Crimson, Butthole Surfers, Swans, Death Grips and Slint. It is a fun science: a friend describes them as “Parquet Courts meets the Darkness”. They remind me of early PiL and Captain Beefheart, but also of the ambience of the internet – a cacophonous, always shifting stream of sonic information that feels spellbinding in part because you can’t tell what’s coming next. Yet it’s Greep’s warped croon, with its hammy drama and geographically unclassifiable accent, that really gets the creative juices flowing. His voice has been described as “Mark E Smith if he were a Bond villain”, and compared to “Zed the gang leader from Police Academy”, Donny from 90s kids cartoon The Wild Thornberrys and, in these pages, Shirley Bassey. “Also, Nina Simone,” insists bassist Cameron Picton. “Can’t complain about that one!” says Greep, who attributes his bizarre singing style simply to his desire “to have an individual thing”. Even when the comparisons are less than kind, the band seem pleased. “Sometimes they’ll say it as a bad thing: it sounds like this crossed with this, terrible,” says Greep. “I’m like, ‘That sounds like a sick band, bro!’” It’s very rare, however, that Black Midi have to reckon with such criticism. Over the past two years, they have cultivated the kind of industry hype that doesn’t really happen to guitar bands any more. What started with a monthly residency at south London venue the Windmill – the only place that would have them, apparently – soon spiralled into a rumoured six-figure publishing deal, and a subsequent signing to Rough Trade. They deny any bidding war, but they might just be too embarrassed to say. At the same time, they’ve earned a reputation as the rock star’s rock stars – the Windmill residency led to a series of gigs backing Damo Suzuki of Can. Last year, fellow south Londoners Shame dubbed them the “best band in London”. By June, St Vincent was tweeting about how she was “raging” to their debut. When I meet them, Black Midi are preparing for a live performance at the Mercury ceremony, a prospect they find highly amusing. Not because they view the awards as something to sneer at – they describe their nomination as “pretty cool” – but because they’re anticipating a bewildered reaction from the public. “We’re playing something that’s different from what people would expect to be on national TV,” says Picton. “It’s just kind of funny. People are going to be watching with their grandparents or whatever.” Although there is a chance they might dangerously discombobulate some grannies on Thursday night, it’s fair to say Black Midi don’t come across like your typical bleeding-edge countercultural disruptors. It’s impossible to detect any hint of contrived cool, raging hedonism or even cliquey superiority about the group – only a sense of nerd-grade musical knowledge and workmanlike professionalism. They don’t even really seem like a gang of best mates, and look vaguely horrified when I inquire whether any of them live together, the phenomenon of rock band as lifestyle choice apparently an alien concept to these Gen Z-ers. Instead, talking to them feels like joining a class of articulate, earnest and eager-to-please A-level students. Which isn’t that far off the truth, really: the foursome are all recent graduates of the Brit school, the Croydon institution famous for producing Adele, Jessie J and Leona Lewis. Yet despite its reputation as a pop star hothouse, the band describe it as an environment that actively fostered their outre sensibilities. “The teachers are into all sorts of music, and a few were into quite out-there stuff,” says Greep. “So they were really pushing us in that direction.” It’s rare that rock history is made by teenagers trying to please their teachers, but Black Midi aren’t bothered by the lack of rebellion in their backstory. Instead, they are keener to emphasise that a Brit school education is not a marker of privilege, and that it’s free to attend. They also don’t feel it has facilitated a seamless path to success. Drummer Morgan Simpson says the band’s rise hasn’t felt “sudden” at all, and they’ve all had jobs in the brief window since school: he and Greep taught music, guitarist Matt Kwasniewski-Kelvin worked in construction, and Picton in the Wimbledon branch of Ryman, an experience he recalls with a degree of shellshock. “Basically, you’re just dealing with a bunch of pricks a lot of the time,” he says sadly. Simpson is already nostalgic for those days. “That feels like a different time, Cameron coming to rehearsal full of rage from customers.” One thing the Brit school did give Black Midi was a captive audience. Each week, there was a show-and-tell session where the group would perform their music. “It was just jokes!” they chorus. “Everyone thought it was funny because we were doing drone stuff and ambient stuff and screaming, for like, 20 minutes,” grins Greep. “We thought it was funny as well, to be honest.” The band say humour is key to everything Black Midi do. “I think the album is funny, definitely,” continues Greep. “The way the vocals are. I think all good stuff is funny, through history.” Black Midi’s comic sensibility can feel slippery and elusive, but it’s undoubtedly a core component of their sound – a kind of terminally amused detachment that gives them carte blanche to make music as weird as possible, while ensuring it’s never actually a joke. Their sense of humour connects them with many of today’s most divisive and thrilling musicians, from pop explorers such as PC Music or Let’s Eat Grandma, to the brash, obvious ridiculousness of the emo-rap scene. That said, trying to get on Black Midi’s specific wavelength isn’t easy. Perhaps the most straightforwardly comic aspect of their output is their single Bmbmbm, which samples Big Brother contestant Nikki Grahame ranting about cornflakes – although Greep says that was “just for the sound of it”, not a conceptual joke. Back to that sixth-form sonic exploration, though, which apparently didn’t just establish their status as the most cosmopolitan class clowns in Britain. It also doubled as something transcendent – a way to reach “a euphoric state that you can get to from playing for ages,” explains Greep. “It wasn’t like we were trying to start a band. We were just trying to find the most effective way of getting to that point.” The foursome are evangelical about improvisation. The tend to unearth portions of their songs via elongated jamming sessions, and attribute their proficiency to their intensive musical training (Simpson won the UK’s Young Drummer of the Year award in 2014), while Greep also credits his skills to years spent playing music in churches as a teenager. But jamming has a bad rep; the prospect of some smug guitarist noodling away for hours is normally considered the height of self-indulgence. Are they bothered by those connotations? “I think self-indulgence is where all great art comes from,” Greep says coolly. Clearly, then, Black Midi have ambitions, but it’s difficult to tell whether commercial success is one of them. They seem mildly enthused about the prospect of selling albums (although Schlagenheim peaked at No 43, selling 2,053 copies in its first week), but they certainly aren’t trying to second-guess the public’s tastes. They read the YouTube comments, but only use social media “for what it’s there for: letting people know when we’re playing” (Greep) and look blank when I mention the concept of connecting with fans online. When I ask about the details of that bumper publishing deal, the band stare into space awkwardly, before Picton tries to reframe everything in the most unassuming, logical terms possible. “I think the reason a publisher would take a bigger gamble on it is because it’s music that could get syncs on films, TV and stuff. So it’s not for its immediate commercial potential, but there’s other ways they could exploit it.” So far, “exploitation” stretches to a possible Peaky Blinders sync. Whether they actually reach the giddy heights of a BBC period drama soundtrack – and whatever the results of the Mercury – you can’t see the band getting carried away by the wild hype that has greeted their nascent career. “The contemporary response to something is hardly ever a sign of its worth,” says Greep, in a tone that perfectly balances modesty with swaggering self-assurance. “So we’ll see, innit.”