An anthology of work by the investigative journalist Lyra McKee, who was fatally shot by New IRA gunmen, will be published next year on the first anniversary of her death, Faber & Faber has announced. The 29-year-old was reporting on unrest in Derry on 18 April while standing close to a police vehicle when she was killed by activists from the dissident republican group. Both marking her loss and celebrating her work, Lyra McKee: Lost, Found, Remembered will be published in April 2020. Born in 1990 in Belfast, McKee won Sky News’s young journalists award in 2006 and wrote for numerous newspapers, magazines and websites. She was featured as one of Forbes’s “30 Under 30” and declared a rising literary star by the Irish Times. She wrote about LGBTQ and women’s rights in Northern Ireland, and her essay about growing up gay in Belfast, A Letter to My 14-Year-Old Self, went viral in 2014. She was the first reporter to be killed on duty in Northern Ireland since the Sunday World investigative journalist Martin O’Hagan was shot dead by loyalists in 2001. McKee had signed a two-book deal with Faber a year before her death. Publishing director Louisa Joyner said the plan to release an anthology of her non-fiction was first proposed in the aftermath of her death and that it aimed to capture McKee’s “generosity of spirit” and “eagerness to listen”. “Since her death we have worked with those Lyra loved to determine how best to commemorate her writing and magnify her voice. Lyra sought truth as a journalist not simply by asking difficult questions, but perhaps more crucially by listening rigorously – and open-heartedly – to the answers,” Joyner said. “Her work speaks to her subtlety of expression and her intellectual and political courage. This collection is our testament to Lyra, a celebration of her talent, and a reminder of what we have lost.” At the time of her death, McKee was working on a piece entitled The Lost Boys, exploring the disappearances of a number of children and young men during the Troubles. Faber said the manuscript was still a work-in-progress, but is being reviewed by McKee’s friends and family.