Maggie Smith plays the authoritarian Mother Superior in this nuntastic box-office smash with a hint of Some Like It Hot, featuring Whoopi Goldberg as the lounge singer forced to go into a witness protection and join a convent after witnessing a mob slaying. There is some poignancy and dramatic edge to Smith’s disapproving mien. Before Downton and Gosford Park, there was this “country house” role for Maggie Smith, with John Banville’s adaptation of Elizabeth Bowen’s novel set in 1920s Ireland as the Anglo-Irish ascendancy becomes the descendancy. With subtle melancholy and restraint, Smith plays Lady Naylor, presiding over an estate in County Cork that feels increasingly embattled as Ireland prepares to break free of the British. Smith plays Charlotte Bartlett in Ruth Prawer Jhabvala’s adaptation of EM Forster’s novel, directed by James Ivory. It is a small, but rather potent part as the wary and disapproving chaperone to her yearning younger cousin Lucy Honeychurch (Helena Bonham Carter), as they tour primly around Italy, fetching up in Florence. Charlotte is annoyed that their rooms do not have a “view” of the Arno, and her character epitomises the ironic inability to see the passionate possibilities laid out before her. Based on the life of the great dramatist Sean O’Casey, this movie has the Australian star Rod Taylor as the man himself and Smith as the demure librarian who falls for him, inspires his creative and theatrical career and then selflessly lets him fly free of her. A conventional romantic turn. Very often, Smith finds herself in Werther’s Original movies in which she is condescendingly required to be a feisty oldster. This period drama is a cut above. Judi Dench and Smith play two sisters living on the Cornish coast in the 1930s who take in a mysterious Polish stranger. His handsome brooding looks unlock dormant emotions in them both. A strong, yet nuanced performance from Smith. A complex, unrelatable role for Smith in Jhabvala’s cool, measured adaptation of the Jean Rhys novel, directed by Ivory. She plays Lois, a painter in 1920s Paris, married to a handsome art dealer (Alan Bates), a philanderer who invites a beautiful penniless young woman (Isabelle Adjani) to stay with them – for the purposes of seducing her. Lois has to become resentfully complicit in this dysfunctional non-love triangle. An eccentric comedy from George Harrison’s Handmade Films is the first of two pairings for Smith and the film’s screenwriter-star Michael Palin. He is the unworldly clergyman tasked with setting up a mission for “fallen women” in Edwardian London’s East End. Smith is the sexually voracious Lady Isabel Ames, to whose wealthy husband the vicar must apply for charitable funding. Lady Isabel effectively promises to open her husband’s chequebook in return for a night of passion with the handsome vicar. A rare but special Shakespeare on screen for Smith, who plays the hated hunchback king’s mother, the Duchess of York, opposite Ian McKellen’s Richard in Richard Loncraine’s Mosleyite-fascist staging. In some ways, it is another grande dame outing, but Smith brings to it a fierce energy and alienated anger – with a style perhaps borrowed from Queen Mary of Teck. This was the film, adapted from Graham Greene and directed by George Cukor, in which Smith first established her Wilde-Wodehousian “aunt” persona: at just 38 years old, she is playing a formidable old lady of around twice that age. It is a wacky adventure mystery in which Alec McCowen plays a bewildered chap who finds himself finagled by his mysterious Aunt Augusta (Smith) into her plan to rescue her former lover from a kidnap plot. A broad comic performance. Smith held her own against one of the biggest alpha-gorillas of stage or screen, Laurence Olivier. In that distant age, he played Shakespeare’s Othello in blackface and with a rolling, booming bass voice, while Smith played his wronged love, Desdemona, with mellifluous dignity and grace. Smith gives one of her blue-chip “aunt” performances in this excellent, underrated and under-remembered Henry James adaptation, directed by Agnieszka Holland. She is the faintly daffy Aunt Lavinia, who derives a weirdly vicarious excitement from her niece’s gentleman caller, and who – as we might say now – lives for the drama. A little gem of a turn from Smith (paired Rod Taylor) in this ensemble movie, scripted by Terence Rattigan, directed by Anthony Asquith and set in the VIP lounge of an airport. She is the mousy-yet-devoted Miss Mead, secretly in love with her employer, troubled businessman Les Mangrum, and willing to take risks to help him out of a jam. Smith gave a witty and good-natured spin on her schoolmarmish persona with this commanding performance as the teacher Minerva McGonagall in the Harry Potter franchise – and it was in the first film that she was most conspicuous. She is Hogwarts’ deputy headmistress (later to be promoted), Gryffindor house head, transfiguration professor, quidditch enthusiast and member of the Order of the Phoenix, who is to play a decisive role in Harry’s final battle with the forces of darkness. Potter is what lasered Smith into the minds of children all over the world. This adaptation of the Brian Moore novel is a delicately detailed, beautifully acted drama in which Smith delivers a star performance. She is the tragic spinster in 1950s Dublin who imagines that the attentions being paid to her by Bob Hoskins’s brash businessman mean that she is on the verge of a great romance. Perhaps it doesn’t have the lightness and waspish asperity that we prize in a Smith performance, but this is fine work. There is a certain type of online debate among Smith fans as to which is the latest film in which she is conventionally fanciable. This topic – vulgar and irrelevant as it is – has found a consensus with A Private Function, written by Alan Bennett with Smith on fiercely charismatic form as Joyce, the demanding wife of shy, retiring chiropodist Gilbert, played by Palin. In the postwar era of rationing, they abduct a pig being secretly kept by grand townsfolk for a special civic feast to celebrate the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip. “Mrs Rhoades’s ingrowing toenail has turned the corner,” says Gilbert over supper. “Please Gilbert,” says Smith acidly, “please don’t bring feet to the table.” Smith gave one of her greatest late-period performances as herself in this glorious documentary: a kind of alpha-league “dame-off” with Judi Dench, Joan Plowright and Eileen Atkins. These great stars sit round a table and discuss life, love, the stage, the screen, the way the profession has developed for women over the years – and the appalling men they have had to deal with. Smith almost upstages everyone with the revelation that her delivery is modelled on Kenneth Williams. One of Smith’s funniest, most self-aware performances – which won her a best supporting actress Oscar – came in this portmanteau all-star movie, adapted by Neil Simon from his Broadway stage play. She is Diana, a British actress returning from a catastrophic awards ceremony, desolate about her career and her “lavender” marriage to Sidney, a closeted gay man played by Michael Caine: “I’ve aged Sidney. I’m getting lines in my face. I look like a brand-new steel-belted radial tyre.” This was the film that inspired the Downton Abbey TV spinoff and gave Smith the prototype for the smallscreen role that helped make her famous all over the world. In this country-house mystery, written by Julian Fellowes and directed by Robert Altman, she is the formidable Countess of Trentham, a visitor to the great house. (In Downton, she has more or less the same persona, but promoted to quasi-chatelaine status as the Dowager Countess of Grantham.) Smith’s character delivers weapons-grade putdowns and overwhelming patrician zingers. A colossal performance from Smith as Miss Shepherd, the elderly homeless lady who chivvied Alan Bennett into letting her live in a van parked outside his house in London. She deploys the classic piercing stare of disapproval, the pinched lips and bird-like head movements as Miss Shepherd assesses the deeply unsatisfactory nature of everything around her. This one really is the crème de la crème of Smith films. Give this film to a cinemagoer at an impressionable age, or any age, and he or she is Dame Maggie’s for life. It is her classic role, which she immortalised at the age of 35 and which won her the best actress Oscar: imperious, haughty, vulnerable, unworldly, romantic, intellectual and with a distinctive hold over men. The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (the scansion of the title usually means the “Prime” and “Miss” are over emphasised; really, the last three words should be hit equally hard) is adapted by Jay Presson Allen from her own stage-play version of the Muriel Spark novel. It is the story of a charismatic Edinburgh schoolmistress (“schoolteacher” really won’t do here) with unorthodox – and indeed worrying – views and a dominating personality. Successive generations have felt as if they were Brodie’s pupils, falling under her spell. Actors playing nightmarish versions of themselves in cinema - ranked!Michael Caine's best films - ranked!The 10 best Glenn Close movies - ranked!Tom Cruise - top 20 movies - ranked!Judi Dench - every film - ranked!Ryan Gosling movies - ranked!10 best Hugh Grant films - ranked!Nicole Kidman’s top 10 films - ranked!The best and the worst Jennifer Lopez films - ranked!All Helen Mirren's 61 movies - ranked!Robert Redford's greatest screen roles - ranked!Winona Ryder's 20 best films - ranked!Movie Santa Clauses - ranked!Maggie Smith's 20 best films – ranked!Jason Statham - every film - ranked!Emma Thompson's best films - ranked! Wes Anderson movies - ranked!The Coen brothers’ films - ranked!Stanley Kubrick's best films - ranked! Biopics trashed by families, friends and fans - ranked!Purr evil: cats in movies with hidden agendas - ranked!Dog weepie movies - ranked!Top 20 J-horror films - ranked!Movies that have grossed more than $1bn - ranked!Palme d'Or winners - ranked!The scariest horror films ever - ranked!The best Shakespeare films - ranked!The 10 best movie shark performances - ranked!The best Stephen King movies  - ranked!From Trolls to Transformers: toy films – ranked!Worst holidays in cinema - ranked! James Bond on film – 007's best and worst movies - ranked!The 20 best Marvel films - ranked!Top 10 Merchant Ivory films - ranked!Pixar - every film ever made - ranked!Planet of the Apes - the best and worst of the movies - ranked!Star Wars - every film - ranked! The 20 best music documentaries - ranked!The weirdest Brits performances - ranked!Game of Thrones - every episode - ranked!Oscar nominees - the weirdest ever - ranked!Oscar snubs - the 20 greatest ever - ranked!The biggest Rock & Roll Hall of Fame snubs ever - ranked!Super Bowl half-time shows - the 10 greatest - ranked!The best X Factor finalists - ranked!From Niall Horan's toast to Russell Crowe’s jockstrap: celebrity auction items - ranked! All Abba's UK singles - ranked!Every one of Madonna's 78 singles - ranked!Kate Bush – every UK single - ranked!Missy Elliott's solo singles – ranked!Queen's 50 UK singles - ranked!Taylor Swift's singles - ranked!The Who: their UK singles - ranked! Black Sabbath - every album - ranked!David Byrne – (almost) all of his albums - ranked!Miles Davis's 20 greatest albums – ranked!Lil Wayne's albums - ranked!Every Mercury prize-winning album - ranked!Joni Mitchell's albums – ranked!The Rolling Stones – every album - ranked!10 best Paul Simon albums - ranked!Bruce Springsteen's albums - ranked!Kanye West – every album - ranked!Stevie Wonder's albums - ranked! 20 greatest breakup songs ever - ranked!Aphex Twin's best songs - ranked!Barry Manilow – all his greatest songs - ranked!Cher's 30 greatest songs - ranked!The 30 greatest Disney songs – ranked!Elton John's 50 greatest songs - ranked!From Drake to Wet Wet Wet: songs with 10 weeks at No 1 - ranked!From MC5 to Jeff Mills: the greatest Detroit tracks ever - ranked!Giorgio Moroder's 20 greatest songs - ranked!Nirvana's 20 greatest songs - ranked!The best songs from teen movies - ranked!The best UK garage tracks - ranked!The greatest banned songs of all time - ranked!The greatest ever female rap tracks - ranked!The greatest pop music dance crazes - ranked!All 43 Spice Girls songs - ranked! The 30 best boyband members - ranked!The greatest Scottish indie bands - ranked!Quincy Jones's greatest ever moments - ranked!