Antonio Brown continues to lose endorsement deals from head to toe as Nike says it no longer represents the New England Patriots wide receiver, according to the Boston Globe. “Antonio Brown is not a Nike athlete,” a spokesperson for the shoe company told the newspaper. The exact date when Brown’s deal with Nike was officially terminated is unknown. Helmet manufacturer Xenith already severed ties with Brown earlier this month, one day after the player’s former trainer, Britney Taylor, filed a civil suit accusing Brown of three incidents of sexual assault or rape over a two-year period from 2017-18. The lawsuit described Brown’s troubles balancing the responsibilities of his endorsement deals with Nike, Campbell’s Soup, Pepsi, Pizza Hut, AT&T/DirecTV, Rite Aid and others, saying he “showed up late to events he was required to attend for those sponsors or otherwise failed to hold up his contractual obligations”. Brown appears to have signed his Nike contract shortly before last NFL season, according to YouTube video published in June 2018 in which he describes a lifelong passion for sneakers, especially the Nike brand. Says Brown in the video: “I am getting a huge Nike deal, which is opening up leverage for a lot of other guys and a lot of up-and-coming players to get in the marketing world and making money off the field.” In February, Nike introduced the Nike Tech Trainer Antonio Brown shoe, which listed for $100. As of Thursday morning, the shoe was no longer available on Nike’s website, though several Pittsburgh and Oakland jerseys with Brown’s name and No 84 were still available. Brown’s turbulent 10-month stretch goes back to December when he complained of his role with the Pittsburgh Steelers and reportedly got into an argument with quarterback Ben Roethlisberger. Brown was traded to the Raiders in March but was ultimately released near the start of the season after issues with a helmet that no longer was approved by the NFL, and his complaints after he was fined by his new team for skipping practice in protest. He asked for his release in an Instagram post and it was immediately granted. Brown signed a deal with the Patriots at the start of the season and made his debut with the Super Bowl champions Sunday, catching four passes for 56 yards and a touchdown against the Miami Dolphins. On Wednesday, it was revealed Brown won’t face criminal prosecution on the accusations because of the statute of limitations, according to Pittsburgh-area law enforcement. “Our office, along with the Allegheny county police department, made contact with counsel for the plaintiff in the federal lawsuit involving Antonio Brown,” the Allegheny county district attorney’s office wrote in a statement. “Procedurally, it appears there is a statute of limitations issue in moving forward with any inquiry involving the Allegheny county allegation mentioned in the lawsuit.” The NFL has interviewed Taylor and continues to investigate, but it is not known whether the league will interview Brown. Brown, 31, is a 10-year veteran out of Central Michigan University who was drafted in the sixth round by the Steelers in 2010. He has 841 career receptions for 11,263 yards and 75 touchdowns, including a career-best 15 with the Steelers last season. He recorded 686 catches and 9,145 receiving yards over the past six seasons with the Steelers, the highest totals for a receiver over a six-year span in NFL history. Nike has been active in severing athlete endorsement contracts in recent years amid negative press, terminating deals with cyclist Lance Armstrong, eight-division boxing champion Manny Pacquiao, sprinter Oscar Pistorius and running backs Adrian Peterson and Ray Rice.