No – not least because the backbench-launched bill on no deal could only ever obstruct it as an option, not entirely remove it. But the cross-party plan has passed all stages in the Commons, and will now head to the Lords on Thursday. Boris Johnson has maintained his unenviable 100% vote loss record as prime minister, begun on Tuesday night when MPs voted to take control of the agenda and tackle the bill. It passed the second and third readings in a single afternoon, by 327 to 299 and 329 to 300. Yes – and in yet another curious and dramatic twist, this happened without most MPs immediately knowing how or why. An amendment led by Labour’s Stephen Kinnock, which would resurrect Theresa May’s three times-rejected Brexit plan as a possible focus for any extension, looked likely to be defeated in a vote. However, the government did not provide any “tellers”, the MPs who count votes, for their side, the noes. That meant it was passed by default. Whether that was an accident or planned was not clear. However, the amendment did not stop the bill passing the third reading, so MPs seemed unbothered. At time of writing, they were attempting to be – at least, those supporting the bill were – by seeking to set out a fast-track timetable for Thursday. The upper house has fewer restrictions on endless speeches, amendments and other time-wasting tactics, so opposition peers were digging in for a long night. The Lib Dem leader in the Lords, Richard Newby, tweeted a photo of himself arriving armed with “duvet, change of clothes and shaving kit”. While supporters were hopeful that the way would be cleared, the process was dragging. Johnson reacted to Tuesday night’s defeat by promising to call a vote on having an election on 15 October via the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, allowing governments to break the standard five-year period between polls. But under the act, this requires two-thirds or more of MPs to support the measure. Labour and opposition parties mainly abstained. The motion won by 298 votes to 44, nowhere near the 430-plus threshold. This was a point made by Johnson at his inaugural prime minister’s questions earlier in the day, calling Jeremy Corbyn “frightened”. But Labour says it will only back an election when it can be completely sure that Johnson will be unable to force a no-deal Brexit on 31 October. The party is consulting lawyers and other opposition parties, which they say is necessary because they do not trust the PM to keep his word or to follow constitutional norms. It’s anyone’s guess. Labour is still examining the possible idea of backing Johnson’s 15 October poll in a later vote once the backbench bill has become law, if it is reassured that it can avoid any government ruse to force no deal. This seems to be the preferred SNP option, as well as arguably the one favoured by Corbyn’s team. However, it remains possible that Labour could even then insist on a post-31 October election date. Not great, at least in party discipline terms. At a meeting of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tories, he faced criticism for ejecting from the party the 21 rebels who backed Tuesday night’s vote. Later, the One Nation group of Tory MPs, which includes cabinet minister Amber Rudd and Nicky Morgan, formally wrote to Johnson seeking their reinstatement.