Tottenham have picked up where they left off last season, where high Champions League drama came as standard and they appeared to have an addiction to doing things the hard way. After half an hour in the Athenian port of Piraeus they had twice enjoyed what visiting teams here crave – the brief sound of silence. First Harry Kane, from the penalty spot, and then Lucas Moura with a firecracker from distance cut through the bedlam whipped up by the Olympiakos diehards to put Spurs in charge. It was a lead that flattered Mauricio Pochettino’s team and one they could not preserve in the face of a spirited Olympiakos performance and a wall of noise from the stands. Spurs have entered some hostile environments over the past five years under Pochettino but, in terms of decibel levels, nothing quite like this. From start to finish, there was a frenzy inside this single-tiered bowl, where the sound swirls without release. Daniel Podence, the most eye-catching player on display, damaged Spurs with an excellent finish just before half-time and Pochettino’s team would cave in to concede the equaliser early in the second period. As passions raged in Spurs’ defensive third, Jan Vertonghen went through the back of Mathieu Valbuena – a clumsy and needless foul. It felt as though the prickly heat of the moment had got the better of him. Valbuena picked himself up to beat his friend Hugo Lloris from the spot. The idea from a Spurs point of view was that they would make a bold statement on the opening night of this Champions League group and avoid the edgy game of catch-up that defined their progress to the last 16 last season. It is sometimes overlooked that Spurs only qualified and went on to reach the final – which they lost against Liverpool – after Internazionale failed to beat PSV Eindhoven at San Siro on the final night of group matches. This was not the worst result given that Olympiakos are an authentic European force on their own turf but it was a substandard performance, one that was undermined by a lack of aggression and intensity. Pochettino complained that his players did not respect his gameplan and, certainly, they afforded Olympiakos too much space, particularly in the first half. It is never a good look to lose a two‑goal lead and everyone at Spurs is conscious that Bayern Munich and Red Star Belgrade are still to come. The club’s supporters must buckle up for another wild ride. Pochettino wanted to fight fire with fire with his 4-2-3-1 starting system, in which Christian Eriksen pressed close to Kane; to carry the game to Olympiakos. It did not go to plan at the outset and there was the sight of the manager angrily gesticulating in his technical area as the hosts broke in the 18th minute. They went within inches of taking what would have been a deserved lead. Kostas Tsimikas skipped around Harry Winks too easily to cross and Podence chested down for Miguel Ángel Guerrero. The striker’s low shot beat Lloris only to come back off the far post and, on the rebound, Guilherme’s shot bounced over the crossbar. Olympiakos called the tune for the opening quarter, with Podence getting into good areas off the right wing and it was difficult to recall Spurs entering the final third. They sorely lacked control. And yet, in what felt like the blink of an eye, everything changed. Kane bundled past Yassine Meriah as he attacked the right-hand side of the area, getting the break of the ball and, in real time, it was difficult to see what had caused him to go to ground. The referee, Gianluca Rocchi, spotted it and his decision to point to the spot would be vindicated by the replays. Meriah had panicked and stretched back a leg, serving to trip Kane. The striker coolly scooped his penalty up the middle and into the roof of the net. Olympiakos were reeling and they caught the second part of the sucker combination punch moments later. Ben Davies, on his first start of the season, stepped up to win the ball high in the Olympiakos half and when he fed Moura, the Brazilian fizzed an unstoppable drive past José Sá. How Spurs needed to reach half‑time at 2-0. They could not do so. Giorgos Masouras had fluffed a volley when well placed on 34 minutes but Olympiakos were rewarded for their front-foot football when Podence swapped passes with Valbuena, surged into the area and shot low into the far corner. The pace and the precision of the exchange was too much for the Spurs defence. The visitors needed to show composure but at the first sign of pressure around their area in the second half, they cracked. They could not clear their lines and it was Vertonghen who got too close to the back of Valbuena, treading on his foot to send him over. The game descended into an end-to-end power struggle and Spurs did have the chances to win it as they finished as the stronger team. Dele Alli, who had a goal ruled out for offside in the 49th minute, caught a break to burst through only for Sá to tip his shot around the post while the substitute, Érik Lamela, also worked the goalkeeper. Spurs deserved no more than the point.