The All Blacks coach, Steve Hansen, has revealed World Rugby have altered the process around head injury assessments at half time to avoid another debacle like the one in which Sam Cane was denied the right to play the second half against the Springboks. During New Zealand’s World Cup opener at Yokohama, Cane was told to undergo an HIA test at half time by the independent match doctor after taking a knock in the first half. Cane passed the test, but debate then ensued on the sideline between members of the All Blacks management and World Rugby officials about whether the flanker could return to the field or not. Eventually, Cane’s return was rejected as half time lasted for 15 minutes, five more than the maximum time any player is allocated to undergo HIA testing. Hansen was understandably miffed at this situation after his side’s 23-13 victory and on Sunday revealed it would not be repeated after receiving assurances from World Rugby that the process would be amended. “We’ve had a notification that they’re going to modify the time keeping so instead of it happening when they say there’s going to be a test the clock doesn’t start until you get to the actual room itself,” Hansen said. “Last night was an exception to the rule. Normally an HIA will happen during the course of the game and they’ll take the player off and normally that’s when it starts. “Last night Sam was back in our changing shed and they decided they were going to do one so he then had to go to the other side of the stadium, basically, and then do the test so it wasn’t any fault of his. It was the actual test that took longer than it should’ve. “It wasn’t anything we could control so I think they’ve now worked out that’s not common sense is it? “We’re here to look after the athlete so they’ve modified it which is great, good response. They’ve shown good leadership and changed it. “I’m glad they’ve sorted it out. I wasn’t overly happy about it last night, one of your best players missing 40 minutes of the game but it is what it is. They’ve acknowledge they haven’t got that part of it right and they’ve changed it so you can’t ask for more.” Having virtually assured they will top their pool, the All Blacks now plan use their full squad in the next two matches against Canada, in 10 days, and Namibia four days later. As they did four years ago, New Zealand will also train at an intensity that leaves them fatigued for these matches, before then tapering back for the quarter-final stage. Hansen planned to watch Ireland’s match against Scotland, one of whom will be New Zealand’s quarter-final opponents, and England against Tonga. “We’ll definitely watch that game because we might be playing one of them and because of my friendship with Eddie I’ll watch England but I won’t watch too many of the others until we need to.”