Trump aides and allies went on the offensive on Sunday, over what the president claims is un-investigated corruption involving Joe Biden and his son in Ukraine. In return, the Democratic chair of the House intelligence committee said the president’s reported conduct in the matter may make impeachment “the only remedy that is coequal to the evil”. Donald Trump’s reported pressuring of the Ukrainian president to investigate claims about Biden, the Democratic presidential frontrunner, has clouded the White House in scandal. On Saturday, Biden, who has denied all wrongdoing, accused Trump of an “overwhelming abuse of power”. On Sunday, leaving the White House for Texas and Ohio before continuing to New York and the United Nations, Trump denied wrongdoing and told reporters he was “not looking to hurt Biden, but he did a very dishonest thing”. Aides and allies attacked more fiercely. We may have crossed the Rubicon “Swamp media says Biden corruption disproven,” Rudy Giuliani, the former New York mayor now Trump’s personal attorney, wrote on Twitter. “Typical lie.” The claims about Ukraine concern Hunter Biden’s work for a gas company in the country and a visit by the then vice-president in March 2016, in which he pressed for the firing of the country’s top prosecutor. “You don’t get to approve a prosecutor in a foreign country unless something fishy is going on,” Giuliani claimed on Fox News Sunday. The firing of Viktor Shokin was in fact an aim of the US, its allies, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, regarding his failure to combat corruption. An investigation into the company for which Hunter Biden worked was dormant at the time of the vice-president’s visit. In May 2019, the Ukraine prosecutor general told Bloomberg, “We do not see any wrongdoing” by the Bidens. In a disjointed interview with Fox News Sunday, Giuliani also tried to link the former vice-president to investigations into a company run by the billionaire philanthropist George Soros, a hate figure on the right; to the production of a notorious dossier of opposition research on Trump by Fusion GPS; and to “the $1.5bn that the Biden family took out of China while that guy was negotiating for us”, all claims made without offering evidence. “This will be a lot bigger than Spiro Agnew,” Giuliani said, perhaps ill-advisedly referring to Richard Nixon’s vice-president who resigned in 1973, amid the Watergate scandal that would bring down the president, after being indicted for taking bribes. Giuliani has admitted seeking to pressure Ukrainian authorities to investigate. The Wall Street Journal reported on Friday that in a 25 July call with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Trump asked eight times for the Bidens to be investigated. The call is reportedly the subject of an intelligence services whistleblower complaint which the White House is refusing to release to Congress. It has been suggested that Trump may have threatened to withhold US military aid to Ukraine if it did not accede to his demands. About a month after the call, $250m in military assistance to a country fighting Russian-backed separatists was delayed. The aid was released this month, after the existence of the whistleblower complaint became public. Chris Murphy, a Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, told NBC’s Meet the Press on Sunday: “The timing is obviously incredibly suspicious.” I do think if Vice-President Biden behaved inappropriately …we need to get to the bottom of that Trump has denied such a move. On Friday the Ukrainian foreign minister said the aid was not discussed in the July call, which he characterised as “long and friendly”. But Trump has not denied asking Zelinskiy to investigate the Bidens. On Sunday he said his conversation with the Ukrainian leader was “perfect” and there was “no quid pro quo”. The former vice-president, who in Iowa on Saturday said “Trump is using this because he knows I’ll beat him like a drum”, has called for the transcript of the call to be released. So have allies of Trump. It is not certain the call is the subject of the whistleblower complaint. Against legal precedent, Trump’s acting director of national intelligence, Joseph Maguire, has refused to release the complaint to Congress. Adam Schiff, the Democratic chair of the House intelligence committee, told CNN’s State of the Union on Sunday: “Clearly [Trump] is afraid of the public seeing such things.” Treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin told CNN and NBC showing the complaint to Congress “would be a terrible precedent”, as conversations between world leaders should be confidential and not released after “political complaints”. Mnuchin repeatedly said he did not know what was said on the call between Trump and Zelinskiy. Secretary of state Mike Pompeo went further, telling ABC’s This Week: “I do think if Vice-President Biden behaved inappropriately, if he was protecting his son and intervened with the Ukrainian leadership in a way that was corrupt, I do think we need to get to the bottom of that.” Schiff made unusually strong remarks about the prospects of Trump being impeached over the Ukraine issue, as reports of the president’s behaviour meant “We may have crossed the Rubicon”. Of Giuliani, he said: “Betraying your country … is one thing when it’s done by the court jester, another thing when by the man who would be king.” House Democrats are already exploring impeachment proceedings over Trump’s links to Russia and Moscow’s interference in the 2016 election. Russia, which annexed Crimea in 2014, backs separatists in the Donbass region of Ukraine. The Washington Post cited a former senior US official as saying Trump thought military aid to Ukraine “was pointless and just aggravating the Russians”. “The president’s position basically is, we should recognise the fact that the Russians should be our friends, and who cares about the Ukrainians?” Schiff cited Senate Republican opposition to impeachment as one reason for House Democrats still to go slow, and said his party needed to establish public support. Trump and Zelinskiy are due to meet on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York next week.