The BBC has paid out about £2m in legal costs to Sir Cliff Richard, ending one of the most expensive and embarrassing legal cases in the broadcaster’s recent history, though the singer has still been left out of pocket after spending about £4.5m, not all of which could be claimed back. Richard last year won a landmark case against the broadcaster after it used a helicopter in 2014 to film a police raid on his home and reported that he was being investigated over historical child sexual assault claims. He was never arrested or charged and later decided to sue the BBC for invading his privacy. A lengthy trial revealed embarrassing emails between BBC journalists, leading a judge to conclude the broadcaster had been driven by a desire to avoid getting scooped by a rival outlet. The case established new legal precedents that have made news outlets more reluctant to name individuals who are under investigation but have yet to be charged. Richard has since dedicated himself to a campaign to ensure suspects are given anonymity before they are charged and said people still wrongly believe there is “no smoke without fire” as a result of the original media coverage. The five-year legal battle has left the BBC nursing heavy costs. The corporation was initially ordered to pay £210,000 in damages to Richard for the invasion of his privacy, including additional damages for the decision to nominate the story for a “scoop of the year” award. The corporation had already handed over £850,000 to cover Richard’s legal costs but the final bill, first reported by the Daily Mirror, rose to about £2m. This is in addition to the £315,000 in legal costs the BBC has paid to the co-defendant, South Yorkshire police. A spokesperson for the BBC said: “We are pleased Sir Cliff Richard, the BBC and South Yorkshire police have reached an amicable settlement of Sir Cliff Richard’s legal costs. The BBC’s costs are within the scope of our legal insurance.” The entire cost of both sides’ fees and the damages will be covered, although the BBC will have to pay an excess to its insurer. During the trial the court heard that the BBC reporter Dan Johnson had approached South Yorkshire police with a tip about Richard, which led the police to become convinced he knew more about their investigation than he actually did. The police then agreed to cooperate and tipped off the BBC when they raided Richard’s home in Berkshire. The BBC chose to defend the case, arguing it had followed standard journalistic practice. However, the case raised questions about the judgment of senior BBC staff including the current director of news, Fran Unsworth, who was the most senior editor on duty when the story broke and signed off the decision to use the helicopter footage. At the time of the verdict, several lawyers and media executives defended the right to name individuals before charges were brought, arguing that publicity previously allowed the police to build cases against individuals by encouraging other witnesses to come forward.