Huddersfield have been fined £50,000 after admitting a charge relating to the Football Association’s kit and advertising regulations. The club were widely criticised for a sash-style shirt which bore the logo of a bookmaker when they unveiled it as their home kit in July. They wore the shirt in a friendly against Rochdale on 17 July, with the logo appearing to exceed the Football Association’s guidelines of 250 square centimetres, and were charged with misconduct. Huddersfield and the bookmaker admitted it was a stunt before the Championship club brought out a sponsor-free kit for this season. On Thursday the FA confirmed the club had been sanctioned and warned over their future conduct. The bookmaker, Paddy Power, tweeted: “1st August: The FA fine Millwall £10,000 for supporters’ racist chanting. 5th September: The FA fine Huddersfield Town £50,000 for wearing a fake shirt in a pre-season friendly.” 1st August:The FA fine Millwall £10,000 for supporters’ racist chanting. 5th September:The FA fine Huddersfield Town £50,000 for wearing a fake shirt in a pre-season friendly. The FA’s written reasons included a statement from the referee Martin Coy, who said Huddersfield’s chairman, Phil Hodgkinson, had asked him to ban the kit, which “could then potentially be good publicity and part of the advertising campaign”. Coy said he was “uncomfortable with this and felt it was not my place to ban the kit”. Huddersfield’s operations manager, Ann Hough, told the FA the shirt was a one-off spoof and had been kept from the Huddersfield board until the day of the match, with the club’s case “that apparently no thought was given to the FA’s kit regulations as it was assumed or presumed they did not apply to pre-season friendlies”. Huddersfield were informed on the afternoon of the match by the FA that if the shirt were worn they may face action. It had been decided a training kit would be used instead but when the bookmaker was informed Hodgkinson, according to the FA’s written reasons, said: “We were threatened with legal action and the sponsor said that it would be deemed to be a material breach of the sponsorship agreement if the team did not wear the oversized logo.” The chairman added: “This is an unfortunate event but we accept responsibility and offer a full apology.” In reply to the FA’s submissions Hough said: “At the time, and under time pressures, we felt that the ramifications (not just financial) of litigation were potentially very damaging to the club and this affected our judgment.” The bookmaker has been contacted for comment by PA Media.