Conservative peers planning to stall the expected Brexit delay bill from being debated in the House of Lords have been criticised as childish and irresponsible. Brexit-backing Tory peers have tabled more than 100 amendments to the motion tabled by Labour’s Hilary Benn should the bill pass its Commons stage on Wednesday. The Liberal Democrat leader in the Lords, Dick Newby, said: “This is not even a subtle attempt at wrecking, it’s complete straightforward wrecking. It’s a very childish and irresponsible strategy.” Among the peers to table “wrecking amendments” are the former Conservative leader Michael Howard, Michael Dobbs, Michael Forsyth and the party’s former deputy leader Peter Lilley. With a lack of rules on the time given over to debates by peers, Labour’s leader in the Lords, Lady Angela Smith, tabled a motion to be debated on Wednesday that ensures Benn’s bill is debated on Thursday should it pass in the Commons, and then complete its final stages by 5pm on Friday. However, Tory peers have tried to amend this so that precedence is given to a raft of private members’ bills, ranging from legislation on bat habitation, land drainage, local elections, medical records and marriages taking place in a chapel. None of these private members bills are expected to pass due to Labour and Lib Dems having a majority in the Lords but they will significantly slow down the parliamentary timetable. Each amendment has to be debated, then a vote held on whether to close the debate, and the subject matter itself. Every time peers head through the voting lobbies it takes at least 15 minutes. Once the amendments are voted on, Benn’s bill can then begin its passage through the Lords. Peers were expecting to sit at the weekend to ensure it passes all its stages in time for Monday. Lord Newby, who tweeted a picture of himself saying he had packed a duvet in his suitcase for expected late sittings, said: “This is going to take at least 72 hours. We do hope they’ll give up. It’s OK doing this at 3pm in the afternoon but at 5am the following day … “The government here has time on its side but ultimately we have the numbers.” Smith said she tabled her motion to make sure the Conservatives did not use their peers to scupper the legislation. However, in effect, it is her motion that is due to be beset by hold-ups. She said: “My business motion invites peers to debate and discuss the bill in an orderly way, including an additional sitting this Friday, to allow full consideration of the proposals before next week’s scheduled prorogation of parliament.” 