Aidan O’Brien extended his remarkable dominance of the Beresford Stakes at The Curragh on Sunday when Innisfree got up in the final strides to give the trainer his ninth successive win in the Group Two contest and his 19th victory in all. It was a hard-fought success for the 4-6 favourite, however, and he is quoted at 33-1 to become the first Beresford winner since John Oxx’s Sea The Stars to take the Derby at Epsom in his three-year-old season. Shekhem, who was a neck second behind Innisfree in a maiden at Galway in July, was again the main market rival to O’Brien’s runner and Chris Hayes set out to make it a test for the favourite on rain-softened ground. Shekhem was two lengths in front two furlongs out and though Innisfree made smooth progress towards the lead soon afterwards he did not find as much as looked likely when Donnacha O’Brien, his jockey, asked for a finishing kick. Shekhem held him off until well inside the final furlong, when Innisfree finally edged in front, winning by a neck again. O’Brien’s astonishing list of Beresford Stakes winners stretches back to Johan Cruyff in 1996 and includes the outstanding St Nicholas Abbey in 2009 as well as the subsequent Group One winners Capri, Saxon Warrior and Japan in the past three renewals. “He’s got plenty of pace, brought me into the race really nicely and stuck his head out in the last furlong,” Donnacha O’Brien said. “I was impressed with Shekhem in Listowel when he won [this month] and I knew he’s no slouch. I knew he’d take a bit of beating but my lad has improved from his maiden as well. There is still improvement in him and nicer ground will see him step up again. He’s a nice horse going forward.” Ger Lyons took a maiden event earlier on the card at The Curragh and reported afterwards that Siskin, who was withdrawn from the Group One Middle Park Stakes at Newmarket on Saturday after getting upset in the stalls, was a “bit stiff and sore” on Sunday morning. “None of us know what happened,” Lyons said. “Colin [Keane, his jockey] can’t put his finger on it and he was on him. I’d say we’re more than likely finished for the year but we won’t make a call on that until next weekend. Hamilton 1.50 Burmese Blazer 2.20 Conga 2.55 Makyon (nap) 3.25 Twentysixthstreet 4.00 Art Power 4.30 Autumn Flight Bath 2.00 Gleeds Girl 2.30 Passing Fashion 3.05 Capriolette 3.35 Firenze Rosa 4.10 Scoffsman 4.40 Good Impression  5.10 Bay Watch (nb) Wolverhampton 5.25 Twittering 5.50 Amnaa 6.20 Brad The Brief 6.50 Peachey Carnahan 7.20 Acclaim The Nation 7.50 Love Explodes 8.20 The Dancing Poet Tips by Greg Wood