Jordan Pickford Exposed when Keane’s errant pass led to Kosovo’s rapid opener. Would be badly let down by Maguire later on. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold  The Liverpool right-back was tested by Kosovo’s left side. Defended well but his crossing lacked its usual fizz. 6 Michael Keane The latest to falter while trying to play out from the back. Made amends with an assist for Sterling. 4 Harry Maguire The Manchester United defender got himself into a tangle and conceded a penalty after tripping Muriqi. 4 Ben Chilwell The Leicester defender had an encouraging game. However his crossing could have been more accurate. 6 Declan Rice The 20-year-old kept Celina quiet, but his sloppy pass led to Berisha making it 5-2. 6 Jordan Henderson Tried to be adventurous with his passing. Unable to cut out Muriqi’s cross for Berisha’s second goal. 6 Ross Barkley The Chelsea midfielder flattered to deceive despite winning a penalty. Selfish and wasteful in the final third. 5 Raheem Sterling The forward’s header settled England’s nerves. Superb assists for Kane and Sancho. Oozed class and confidence. 9 Harry Kane The captain used his supposedly weaker left foot to put England ahead. Had a tame penalty saved. 8 Jadon Sancho Preferred to Rashford, the youngster opened his England account with two close-range finishes. Forced Vojvoda’s own goal. 8 Substitutes Mason Mount N/A (83min), Rashford N/A (85min) Arijanet Muric He will always cherish saving Kane’s penalty. Received scant protection from a wheezing back four. 6 Mergim Vojvoda Tormented by Sterling, his night went from bad to worse when he scored at the wrong end. 2 Amir Rrahmani The captain lost out to Keane for England’s equaliser, was embarrassed by Sterling and conceded a penalty. Booked. 4 Fidan Aliti The centre-back fumed after Vojvoda’s own goal. He wanted play to stop after colliding with Alexander-Arnold. Booked. 4 Florent Hadergjonaj The Huddersfield defender was quick to attack early on but he soon had his hands full with Sancho’s raids. 4 Idriz Voca The midfielder struggled to contain England’s fast attacks and was substituted early in the second half. 5 Besar Halimi Always wanted the ball and used it well at times. Worked hard. A decent performance. 6 Florent Muslija Should have given the flailing Vojvoda more protection on the right. Substituted at half-time. 5 Bersant Celina The Swansea attacker found it hard to escape Rice. Unlucky to see a late effort curl just wide. 5 Valon Berisha Two fine finishes from the Lazio winger gave Kosovo something to remember and exposed frailties in England’s defence. Booked. 7 Vedat Muriqi The burly striker had a good game. Created both of Berisha’s goals before winning and converting a penalty. 7. Substitutes Leart Paqarada Introduced at half-time. Booked for protesting too much about England’s penalty. 6 Anel Rashkaj Helped to restore order after replacing Voca in the 59th minute. Booked. 6 Florent Hasani N/A (85min)