The Scottish supporters who trudged out of the ground in the pouring rain wondering how an eagerly anticipated showdown against their Six Nations rivals turned into such a miserable letdown would not have been heartened to hear Gregor Townsend explain his players’ no-show in what, for many of them, should have been the biggest match of their careers. Lesson one in the manual on how to beat Ireland is to cherish the ball. Scotland must have downloaded the Japanese version as three mistakes in their opening 25 minutes when they were in possession were converted into tries by their opponents and a 16-point interval deficit. They came back from nearly double that against England at the end of this year’s Six Nations at Twickenham, but there was never the remotest prospect of a repeat here, with Ireland at their meanest throughout. “We did not start with the energy, accuracy or aggression required to beat Ireland,” said Townsend. When asked why, he had no explanation. A coach may have no control after his players have left the dressing room for the playing field, but Scotland started as if determined to live up to an ideal, paying little heed to the deteriorating conditions or the effectiveness of Ireland’s defenders in closing down the outside-half Finn Russell. There was a telling statistic on an evening that left Ireland in control of the group and on course for a quarter-final against South Africa. The possession was roughly shared, 51-49 in Ireland’s favour, but they kicked from hand more – 43 compared with 33 – and they made 92 passes, compared with Scotland’s 169. They played the conditions and their opponents – the reason they started the tournament at the head of the world rankings while Scotland were eighth. They were prompted by Conor Murray, who looked back to his sharpest after an injury-ravaged season. The manner in which he set up his side’s bonus-point try 15 minutes into the second half defined the game: it was his maliciously weighted kick that Ryan Wilson spilled and when Jordan Larmour set up a ruck, Murray quickly spotted Andrew Conway had space on the right and passed to him with alacrity. Scotland had started as if trying to emulate New Zealand here less than 24 hours before, but when Duncan Taylor’s pass to Sean Maitland on halfway went straight into touch after three minutes, Murray launched an attack before Ian Henderson’s rampaging run took Ireland close to Scotland’s line. A few snipes later, James Ryan forced his way over and the game had not reached the 10-minute mark when Grant Gilchrist lost the ball just inside Ireland’s half and Larmour counterattacked. Ireland were awarded a penalty that they kicked to touch and Rory Best twisted his body under pressure from Wilson to somehow ground the ball. Scotland’s possession had yielded two tries to their opponents and although Greig Laidlaw stemmed the flow with a penalty, almost immediately Finn Russell failed to find Tommy Seymour breaking into the line on his inside. Conway hacked on and forced Stuart Hogg to concede a five-metre scrum after the ball bounced off a post. CJ Stander set off from the base and after Peter O’Mahony made another metre, Tadhg Furlong found a surprising gap between Jonny Gray and Stuart McInally to claim his side’s third try, all scored by front-five forwards. It was in effect the end of the match, and although Scotland tried to be more patient after the break and take play through phases, they lacked a ball-carrier in the mould of Stander or Henderson and still kept spilling passes. They lost their flanker Hamish Watson after 37 minutes when his right knee buckled as he was cleared out of a ruck by Ireland’s two props and left the field in a buggy. Townsend hoped Watson would be scanned on Sunday night but his tournament looked over. Scotland have Magnus Bradbury in Tokyo on standby. Ireland lost Bundee Aki and O’Mahony to head injuries in the opening 26 minutes. They both failed their assessments six days before their side’s second match against Japan. Jonathan Sexton was taken off in the third quarter, when the game was won, but had not aggravated an old groin injury. Victory over Japan would all but guarantee Ireland finish at the top of the group with Samoa and Russia to come but Scotland face the prospect of having to defeat the hosts to make it to the last eight. Since their win against Ireland at Murrayfield in 1991, they have only once beaten a fellow tier-one nation in a group match: against Italy in 2007 – and then they needed their opponents to miss a late penalty. While they were not fancied to defeat Ireland, they were expected to make a game of it. Had they shown half as much zeal as the largely amateur Russia had against Japan on the opening night, it would have been something. “Disappointed,” said Townsend when asked how he felt. His side’s supporters preferred something stronger.