When it comes to sparkle application, the women crewing up Glitterbox’s “glitter stations” are used to outlandish requests. “We’ve heard it all!” explains the scouse woman who is currently smearing specks of blue on my face. As a season-long employee of Ibiza’s most dazzling party of the decade, she has learned to set some ground rules. Long beards are a no-no, they use up too much product. And she recoils in mock horror at the thought of getting stuck into a hairy chest. “But girl’s chests are fine” she says. Anything goes at Glitterbox, within reason. Birthed in Ibiza in 2014 and currently held at the superclub Hï, the weekly house and disco night aims to distil the ephemeral hedonism of classic disco nights, such as New York’s Paradise Garage, with a little of Mudd Club’s scuffed-up edge, diverse bookings and a rotating phalanx of resplendent LGBTQ+ dancers. That’s a bold approach in Ibiza, the global epicentre for commercial dance that’s still dominated by older male DJs such as Carl Cox, Martin Garrix and, sadly, David Guetta, with his excruciatingly titled party Fuck Me I’m Famous. But the ethos is working for Glitterbox: punters pack out Hï’s 5,500 capacity every Sunday in the summer, and the night also hosts one-off events at London’s Ministry of Sound and New York’s House of Yes. Glitterbox’s ultra-inclusive policy to unite “all ages, persuasions and walks of life on the dancefloor” is made flesh by the dazzling dancers, who clamber onto podiums to create focal points across the club’s three dancefloors (including one with a DJ booth in the unisex loos). The performers include shirtless hunk Raven, the Shirley-Temple-on-acid drag of TeTe Bang, and Lucy Fizz, a transgender dancer whose vivacious attitude and turbocharged moves have made her Glitterbox’s most beloved regular. After an uplifting set from Joey Negro, the ensemble swarm onto podiums to dance behind Honey Dijon as she whips between disco-house rarities and unexpected pop moments such as Lizzo’s body-positive hit Juice. As they flank tonight’s other DJs – Todd Terry, DJ Harvey, Nightmares on Wax and more – the performers can make you feel as if you’re in a mad immersive theatre production; as if Punchdrunk did nightclubs. When Glitterbox was founded five years ago, it was a welcome respite from the electronic dance music and techno nights that dominated the island’s nightlife. “I remember going to Ibiza in 1986 and 1988 and the dancefloors had real personality,” says Simon Dunmore, Glitterbox’s driving force and the founder of house label, Defected. “It was real hedonism, and there were real fashionista personalities. We wanted to bring that back.” After a few disastrous first nights (Dunmore blames a clash with that summer’s World Cup games), Glitterbox was getting 1,200 people through its doors by September. That number has grown, summer-on-summer, since then. Ibiza has over a dozen gay bars in its Old Town, but it’s still trying to shake the reputation that one friend described to me as “aggressively heterosexual.” Glitterbox seems like the closest thing to a queer party here, but given that the island is a majority-straight destination, LGBTQ+ clubbers, such as myself, are a minority at the night itself. As it reaches its 3am apex, I find myself surrounded by tanned English twentysomethings in floral prints and shimmery mesh outfits and briefly wonder if I have been teleported to Love Island’s Casa Amor. Hearteningly, I spot a group of gay guys on the dancefloor, but it’s an odd sensation to be the only person singing along to Madonna’s Vogue. “Yeah, it is predominantly heteronormative,” says trans DJ and producer Dijon, speaking about Ibiza nightlife in general. “But there are a lot of queer people here. They’re just more interspersed throughout the parties. I think it’s great that they can come and feel comfortable in these spaces that aren’t specifically queer.” Maybe it’s the serotonin and sangria, but Glitterbox’s atmosphere feels friendly and safe. At the night’s fun pre-party at Cafe Mambo, I chat to Reece Le Beau, a 21-year-old dancer with a flawlessly beat face. He has performed at gay parties at London’s Heaven and Metropolis, but says they “don’t compare” to Glitterbox. He becomes tongue-tied when trying to find the words for the night’s particular magic. “I can’t explain it,” he says. “I just feel special.” Fizz, clad in some kind of Bob-Mackie-for-Cher-esque fabulosity, jumps in. “As a trans woman, I really understand the importance of having dedicated LGBTQ+ spaces,” she says. “But I think there’s so much more wealth to be added to nightlife when everyone comes together and celebrates the music.” And as for the island’s lads-lads-lads reputation? Undeserved. “I grew up with all those Ibiza Uncovered-type programmes,” says Fizz. “It put me off. Then I came with Glitterbox and I’ve seen this other side of the island. I feel more comfortable going out to the straight nights here than I do in London. I see less fights, less dickhead laddish behaviour.” Dunmore says that Glitterbox’s accepting vibe is largely self-regulated. “I think everyone who’s not comfortable with us being LGBTQ+ friendly probably isn’t going to come,” he says drily. But the evening doesn’t come cheap. Entry is an eye-watering €50, or €40 for an early entry ticket. Gin and tonics – they only serve doubles – are a hefty €18. No wonder so many people are clutching water bottles and chewing gum. It’s undeniably a good thing to make all clubbing a little less heteronormative, as well as to remind audiences – including LGBTQ+ fans – that dance music’s roots are queer, black, and Latinx. But Glitterbox illuminates tension between those who are rightly protective of LGBTQ+ spaces and culture, and those who celebrate when boundaries between gay and straight nightlife are weakened. On the night, it felt a bit like a gay night for straight people. I asked Dijon what she thought, as a more seasoned clubber. “I don’t think they’re trying to introduce queer music to a straight audience,” she replied. “I think they’re just reflecting the way that house music has always been. Having dancers, vibrancy, and drag artists – this has always been a part of dance music culture.” As a straight man, Dunmore seems to be hyperaware of charges of “pinkwashing”, the cynical kind of corporate money-grubbing that perhaps reached its nadir during Pride month this year with Listerine’s rainbow-packaged mouthwash. “I’ve noticed that the community has been very vocal about corporations tagging LGBTQ+ on everything and using it gratuitously,” he says. “We certainly don’t want to do that, or use that as a marketing angle.” “I don’t think it necessarily needs to hold up a flag,” says Dijon, speaking of Glitterbox branding itself as inclusive. “If you look at the flyers for their parties [showing] women of colour and queer people ... it just speaks for itself.” As I leave I think back to Reece. On the dancefloor he seemed nothing like the shy kid that couldn’t find his words. The crowd parted as he strutted bare-assed in a neon body harness and spiked boots, and smiled wide while dancing with hands aloft as confetti fell. Through the haze of a half-dozen gin and tonics, I tried to think of when I last saw someone who looked so free. Debbie Jacobs – Don’t You Want My Love (Remastered) “It was never a commercially successful disco record but it had high energy and was a turntable hit [on its original release in 1979]. It rocked discerning dancefloors. It’s a real clubbers’ anthem with an amazing vocal.” Horse Meat Disco and Kathy Sledge – Falling Deep in Love “Horse Meat Disco have DJ’d with us from the get-go. We actually got in touch with Kathy Sledge [of Sister Sledge], we asked if she would record for us and she came over and co-wrote the song. I’ve met her several times over the years, and she’s performed three times for us this summer. She’s very iconic, she’s amazing.” Aeroplane featuring Tawatha Agee – Love On Hold (Dimitri from Paris DJ Friendly Re-Touch) “The vocalist Tawatha Agee was in a classic disco band called Mtume, and she’s done backing vocals on a lot of the great disco records. Aeroplane delivered the record and Dimitri remixed it in a very authentic, almost Larry Levan-esque, Paradise Garage way, with lots of delays on the drums and breakdowns.” Fiorious – I’m Not Defeated, Pt II (Honey Dijon’s Undefeated Dub) “It’s a real statement, this record. I heard it when Cassius played it last summer and when I looked online, I saw this video that he’d made. We contacted him and asked him to come and perform for us. He’s an amazing performer. If you check the video, you’ll understand what I’m talking about.” JKriv featuring Adeline – Yo Love “We’ve just released this. It’s a very 80s, electric, boogie disco record. I think that if that was a record that was released on Prelude and mixed by François Kevorkian or Shep Pettibone, no one would argue with that. It sounds really authentic. This is what we were trying to achieve when we started the Glitterbox label: we wanted to create contemporary disco records that were played on our dancefloors.”