The Antonio Brown era in New England is over after just one game. The Patriots released the embattled wide receiver on Friday after a second woman accused him of sexual misconduct. “The New England Patriots are releasing Antonio Brown,” the team said in a statement. “We appreciate the hard work of many people over the past 11 days, but we feel that it is best to move in a different direction at this time.” Brown, one of the NFL’s biggest stars, has been accused of rape in a lawsuit by a former trainer. He is also accused of exposing himself to a painter he had hired. He has denied the allegations. Thank you for the opportunity @Patriots #GoWinIt Earlier Friday, Patriots coach Bill Belichick briefly addressed Brown before cutting short his regular media availability amid repeated questions on the receiver. “We take all the situations with our team very seriously,” he said. “There are some things we are looking into but I’m not going to have any comment on the off-the-field situations.” Asked if he expected Brown to play Sunday against the New York Jets, Belichick said, “He’s on our roster.” But when more questions about Brown followed, the coach walked out. Following several questions about Antonio Brown, Bill Belichick ends his press conference after just a few minutes pic.twitter.com/TIFNePYPY8 Brown’s second accuser came forward in an SI.com story published earlier this week. The woman who was hired to paint by Brown says she “received a group text message that appeared to come from the same phone number Brown provided to her in 2017. The text chain, with four other phone numbers on it, included photos of her and her children, with the person she believes is Brown encouraging others in the group to investigate the woman. The texter accused the artist of fabricating her account of the 2017 incident for cash.” The 31-year-old Brown, who became one of football’s most prolific offensive players with the Pittsburgh Steelers, was traded to Oakland in March but signed a contract with New England on Monday afternoon following a tumultuous offseason that culminated with his release from the Raiders without having played a single game for the team. Brown recorded 686 catches and 9,145 receiving yards over the past six seasons with the Steelers, the highest totals for a receiver over a six-year span in NFL history. He caught four passes for 56 yards and a touchdown on Sunday in his only game for the Super Bowl champions.