The easy-peasy clear glossy eye as seen at Christopher Kane AW19 is perfect for the time-poor. Also, it embodies high-low makeup: it works for cocktail parties and isn’t too ridiculous on a Co-op jaunt. Still, don’t take its simplicity for granted. Apply with your fingers and there’s a chance you’ll just look like you’ve smudged your makeup. A brush offers more precision and lashes won’t get so sticky. To top up the ante, layer colour pre-gloss and team with a coloured shiny lip, but don’t be tempted to use lipgloss on your lids. It smears, it seeps. It stings. A lot. 1. Kitaka Natural Gloss in Pink Sapphire £16, kitakaoflondon.co.uk 2. NARS Multi-Use Gloss in Relentless £20, narscosmetics.co.uk 3. Surratt Lid Lacquer in Kira Kira £35, spacenk.com 4. Kevyn Aucoin Exotique The Exotique Diamond Eye Gloss in Moonlight £30, lookfantastic.com 5. Tom Ford Lip Gloss Luxe £38, tomford.co.uk The Face Place facial, from £100, harveynichols.com The cynical beauty editor in me struggles with hype surrounding beauty treatments. That said, I am a sucker for facials said to be popular with the Hollywood set – I mean, if it’s good enough for the red-carpet walkers whose pores are going to be scrutinised by millions, surely it must be brilliant. Well, not all the time. I’ve had so-called ‘loved by A-listers’ facials where I’ve left with a greasy, filthy face. But at the Face Place, however, my skin went from congested to pores so clean you could eat off it. It is a no-nonsense facial with a clinical approach, which I love – anything floaty is a waste of money. The key is extractions (a facial without extractions is like a car without wheels). Be warned, a heated dome is placed on your face to prepare it for this process, so claustrophobes may struggle. The current used encourages collagen production. A facial massage gets rid of excess fluids, toxins and puffiness. A vitamin C and zinc infusion provides the glow, particularly after a skin peel (yes it tingles, but not unbearably so). The result is decongested, contoured, glowing skin and no downtime. Which is exactly why Hollywood loves it. Turn up the base All dewy-skin fans will love this liquid foundation. It’s medium to full cover, but is feather light, oil-free, goes on like a serum and comes in 50 shades. The dream. Anastasia Beverly Hills Luminous Foundation, £43, selfridges.com All-day ready Created with cutting-edge technology, this skin-loving formula (infused with SPF and antioxidants) adapts to skin so you get a ‘just applied’ finish – all day long. Shiseido Synchro Skin Self-Refreshing Foundation, £39, shiseido.com The gentle touch The calming properties of blue lotus and camomile in this ‘flex’ foundation (no creases or caking) make a long-wear base that’s perfect for sensitive and acneic skins. Milk Flex Foundation, £32, cultbeauty.co.uk Funmi Fetto is in conversation with Sali Hughes at a Guardian event on 30 September. To book tickets and for more information go to membership.theguardian.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.