On my phone I discover a contact called Francois Oven. I must have done this deliberately, knowing that if I stored Francois under his actual surname I would forget why I had his phone number. Also, I didn’t know his actual surname. I’m still surprised to find it because I have no memory of putting it there. I had been scrolling through my contacts, more in hope than expectation, looking for the number of someone my wife insisted was called Gervais. There remains the problem of how I introduce myself to Francois on the phone after all this time. It’s unlikely he has me listed under Tim Broken Function Selector Switch. Francois, it turns out, has a much better memory of our last encounter than I do. He recalls all the technical details of the repair, and only needs me to text him my address as a reminder. Later that afternoon, my wife finds me reading in the kitchen. “Have you rung Gervais?” she says. “No,” I say. “Why not?” she says. “It’s been two weeks!” “I didn’t ring Gervais because he’s not called Gervais,” I say. “He’s called Francois Oven.” “No, he isn’t,” she says. “A remarkable coincidence, I know,” I say. “He’s coming tomorrow after 11.” Confronted with skilled tradespersons, I tend to adopt whichever persona – curious onlooker, bewildered idiot, fellow central heating enthusiast – best suits the moment. With Francois, I naturally assume the role of apprentice. He seems to expect it. “I’m pretty sure,” I say as Francois unscrews the base plate of the hob, “that it’s the same problem as last time.” “We’ll see,” Francois says. “Please turn off the power at the wall.” I am right: the function selector switch has burned out. Again. “That should not happen,” Francois says. “I know!” I say. “It was only 18 months ago that we bought this one!” “Parts are not very well made these days,” he says. The doorbell rings. “And as I recall,” I say, “a new function selector switch isn’t cheap.” I only sort of recall this. “Let’s see what we can do,” Francois says. “Hand me that screwdriver.” My wife is having a loud and unfathomable conversation at the door. It stops suddenly and another door shuts. I leave my station to look down the hall. “What’s happening?” I say. “The postman is just using the loo,” she says. “He’s in a hurry.” I return to Francois, who shows me how to reconfigure the wiring so the switch will operate temporarily. He is patient and methodical, as if I have a forthcoming exam on this very repair. The postman comes out of the loo and into the kitchen. “You write for the papers, don’t you?” he says. “Uh-huh,” I say. How does he know? “What’s gonna happen with Brexit?” he says. “I don’t know,” I say, with confidence. “It’s mad, isn’t it?” “It is,” I say. “So this is the neutral wire,” Francois says. I walk to the door to wave off the postman, but he stops. Under the guise of eliciting my opinion about Brexit, he gives me his. He is articulate and he is furious: with the government, the opposition and anyone who would invoke Britain’s wartime spirit in support of No Deal. “The people who fought in that war,” he says. “They know why we joined the EU!” “Exactly,” I say. Wasn’t he in a hurry? An hour after the postman finally leaves, the youngest one comes downstairs and peers into the fridge. “The oven works,” I say. “Thanks to Francois Oven.” “Was he the guy who hated Brexit?” he says. “No, that was the postman,” I say. “Does he do that at every house?” he says. “I don’t know,” I say. “It turns out he’s not even our regular postman.” An hour later I get a text from the oldest one asking if I want to join that day’s protest outside parliament. I decide to go along, because in these dark times, the hardworking people of the nation need to be represented by those of us who haven’t got much on in the afternoon.