Italy required a late penalty to extend their 100% record in Euro 2020 qualifying with a 2-1 win over Finland in Tampere. Finland looked to be heading for a shock point when Teemu Pukki scored from the penalty spot in the 72nd minute, cancelling out Ciro Immobile’s 59th-minute opener. But the Italians hit back and claimed the points eight minutes later when the Chelsea midfielder Jorginho converted a spot-kick after Sauli Vaisanen was penalised for handball in the box. Also in Group J, Dennis Salanovic scored four minutes from time to earn a rare point for Liechtenstein in a 1-1 draw against Greece in Athens. A much-changed Spain lineup extended their perfect record in Group F with a 4-0 stroll against the Faroe Islands. Rodrigo slid home the opener in the 13th minute but the visitors put up some sterling resistance until the same player extended the lead six minutes into the second half. Paco Alcácer put some gloss on an underwhelming Spanish performance by doubling Spain’s tally with two goals in added time. Sweden held on to second place behind Spain after Emil Forsberg’s 58th-minute strike salvaged a 1-1 draw against Norway in Solna. The Norwegians had gone ahead on the stroke of half-time when Josh King pounced on a desperate mistake by Andreas Granqvist and squared for the captain, Stefan Johansen, to fire home. A George Puscas header early in the second half proved just enough for Romania to cling on to their qualification hopes in Group F with an unconvincing 1-0 win over Malta in Ploiesti. Denmark had to a settle for a frustrating goalless draw against Georgia in Tbilisi, with substitute Christian Gytkjaer hitting the bar and Georgian goalkeeper Giorgi Loria making a series of good saves. The Danes remain second in Group D behind the Republic of Ireland, with Switzerland in third place with a game in hand after their 4-0 win over Gibraltar. The Swiss needed 37 minutes to break the deadlock but ultimately cruised to victory with goals from Denis Zakaria, Admir Mehmedi, Ricardo Rodríguez and Mario Gavranovic. Henrikh Mkhitaryan, who has just joined Roma on loan from Arsenal, scored twice as Armenia claimed a 4-2 win over Bosnia-Herzegovina in Group J which prompted the resignation of the Bosnia coach, Robert Prosinecki.