Thursday’s debate was difficult to get through, kind of like watching season five of a sitcom you used to like. Scenes are dragging on, characters you came to love have grown tiresome, but still you keep tuning in.Like sitcom characters, the Democratic candidates tried to awkwardly slot in their favorite punchlines: Kamala Harris blasted Trump looking for a meme-able moment (“you can go back to watching Fox News”), Beto started talking unprompted in Spanish, Bernie threw in a “I wrote the damn bill!” for good measure. Through it all, I started to think about how other countries did their elections. The longest election campaign in Canadian history lasted 74 days. The French can’t be bothered to deal with this stuff for more than 14. Yet our series never seems to end, no matter how bad it gets. For much of the debate, it would have been hard for someone tuning in for the first time to tell the candidates apart. A Julián Castro outburst aside, most Democrats stuck to banal slogans that most party backers would agree with. They spoke about their personal experiences, shared suspiciously pithy lessons imparted from their parents, and other inspiring cliches (“A house divided will not stand”). The glimmers of life, however, came because of the presence of one them in particular. The entrance of Bernie Sanders has injected new life into the show. As Clinton supporters were keen to remind people in 2016, “he’s not even a real Democrat.” But maybe that’s why his presence has had such an impact in the party. It’s hard to imagine what the opening portion of the debate – an actually lively discussion around healthcare – would have sounded like without him. Though most rejected his call for Medicare for All and favored some form of public option instead, Sanders was actually invoked respectfully by most candidates (no doubt aware of his own popularity and that of the proposal). Bernie himself was hoarse and not his usual self. But his impact was exactly what he had in mind when he decided to run for president in 2016. “Four years ago,” he told ABC after the debate, “I decided that I didn’t want the Democratic primary to be a place in which the needs of working people were not represented.” He discussed how his key issues – Medicare for All, climate change, good jobs – had become mainstream. And how he wants to continue to lay out the “need to take on the very powerful corporate elite”. But in the long period in the middle of the debate, when he was seemingly iced out by the debate moderators, the Democrats sounded like, well, Democrats. They spoke to their base, they took few strong stances, they entirely avoided income inequality and the financial pressures that cause so much anxiety for working people. The economy eventually played a role, starting in the last hour, but only on issues of trade, with Trump’s tariffs at the forefront. The triangulated statements meant to offend as few people as possible that the ensuing discussion inspired sounded like the party debates I’ve heard for decades. Early on in this primary season, many Democrats have tacked to the left. But tonight was a reminder that the equivocating core of the party has not yet been vanquished. The debates will hopefully get more substantive as the race narrows. Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren will have to take a more confrontational approach with Biden, and also differentiate themselves from each other. But for now, we’re stuck shifting through interminable debates to find a few glimmers of politics. The issues being discussed couldn’t be more urgent. Over 2 million Americans are in prison, 30 million don’t have health insurance, 40 million live in poverty, millions more are overworked and one disaster away from total destitution. But you don’t hear that anxiety or that sense of anger from the “mainstream” candidates. What you hear is the sound of people trying hard not to lose.We’ve already seen where that approach leads. Bhaskar Sunkara is the founding editor of Jacobin magazine and a Guardian US columnist. He is the author of The Socialist Manifesto: The Case for Radical Politics in an Era of Extreme Inequality