Britain’s homelessness crisis is out of control, with the numbers of homeless people and rough sleepers at their highest levels since 2010. Every day on the commute to work, the school run or shopping trips we pass the tent cities, flattened cardboard boxes lining doorways and paper cups resting on pavements. Homelessness is now part of all our lives. It leaves many of us feeling compelled to help, but unsure of how to do it in the right way. I’ve experienced homelessness. I slept rough in a campsite and on a bridle path for three weeks before living in hostels for more than 18 months. These experiences haven’t provided me with any special wisdom on the matter. In fact I’m probably just as unsure as most of you are. But one thing I am sure about, and that my own experiences underlined, is that homeless people are just that – people. Take that as your starting point: treat them as you would want to be treated if you ever found yourself in that situation. An estimated 800 homeless people died in Britain in the 18 months before March 2019. Over the next few months, G2 and Guardian Cities will look behind this statistic to tell the stories of some of those who have died on Britain’s streets. We will tell not just the story of their death, but the story of their life – what they were like as kids, what their dreams were, their hobbies, what people loved about them, what was infuriating. We will also examine what went wrong with their lives, how it impacted on their loved ones, and if anything could have been done differently to prevent their deaths. As the series develops, we will invite politicians, charities and homelessness organisations to respond to the issues raised. We will also ask readers to offer their own stories and reflections on homelessness. We want the stories we tell to become the fulcrum of a debate about homelessness; to make a difference to a scourge that shames us all. It is time to stop just passing by. Here are my thoughts on what the rest of us – the passers-by, the lookers-on, those who feel anxious and powerless – should do. Some of my suggestions are controversial and, as I said, I don’t feel I’ve got all the answers, but I’ve tried to be honest about the way I feel and about the lessons I learned from being on the streets and from talking to other people in a similar situation then and since, as part of my work with Simon Hattenstone on The Empty Doorway series. What should you do if you see a rough sleeper whose immediate welfare you are concerned about? In England and Wales, the official advice is to inform StreetLink, the national referral service run by St Mungo’s. This seems like a no-brainer: contact StreetLink and they will send an experienced person along who will attempt to get that person off the streets. But even this isn’t straightforward. St Mungo’s, in co-operation with the government’s hostile environment policy, were found to be recording the details of those they help and passing that information to the Home Office. This was stopped in 2017, but rough sleepers still don’t trust them. Many of the rough sleepers I’ve spoken to, even British citizens, refuse help from StreetLink over privacy concerns. This lack of trust is having a big impact in stopping rough sleepers getting the help they need. It’s vital that homelessness charities demonstrate their independence from government and start winning back trust. We also need to better understand what the practical results of referrals to these types of services are. There is evidence that a large proportion of the people referred are already known to the authorities, which suggests that the services to which StreetLink are supposed to refer them are already failing. It also proves difficult in many instances for StreetLink to identify or locate the person who has been reported. That’s why it’s crucial, if you have decided to report, to give as accurate and detailed a description of the person and their location as possible. If you are worried that a homeless person is in immediate danger, perhaps suffering from hypothermia or the effects of drugs, then you should call an ambulance or contact the police. That is doubly true if the person is under 18, as StreetLink only deals with adults. If you are reporting someone to the emergency services, it is best to stay with or close to that person until the police or ambulance crew arrive. But if your anxiety is more generalised or if, as is often the case, it is someone you see on your street frequently and whose condition is perhaps deteriorating, engage with them. Try to understand their situation, see if they want to be referred – give them as much agency as possible. Help that person make informed decisions; don’t try to impose your decisions on them. It can be daunting to approach someone on the street you are worried about. One thing that irritates homeless people is when you talk to them as though they are children. There is nothing more humiliating than having someone stooping over you, literally talking down to you. Sit down, share a drink or fag or bar of chocolate with them; tell them about your day; ask them about theirs, whether they’re getting enough help and if there’s anything else you can do. Obviously use your judgment. If they don’t seem receptive to conversation don’t thrust it on them. Maybe just give them a few quid and get on with your day. The big homelessness charities are almost unanimously against people handing over cash to rough sleepers. The argument for this is perfectly cogent: a lot of rough sleepers suffer with substance dependency, and giving them money allows them to buy more drugs and alcohol, which makes their lives worse. But put yourself in their position. Do you reckon you might want a wee tipple to take the edge off sleeping rough? Of course you would, so why shouldn’t they? In fact why not share a can or two with your new homeless mate? Remember, they’re just people after all. If you’re really worried about donating a fiver that turns out to be lethal, you can always offer to buy them some food or drink. Don’t pre-buy these. Ask the person what they want. It’s nice to be given choices when you feel like your life is out of control. It restores your humanity. And of course if you don’t want to donate directly to someone on the streets, charities will be happy to take your money (and will argue that donations, particularly regular ones, help them to plan and provide longer-term support). Their shops are also very pleased to receive good-quality products they can sell on. And as temperatures start to drop, there will be plenty of one-off appeals for you to donate a warm coat you no longer need, for example. If you’re convinced that handing over cash is not the way, you can volunteer for one of the many homelessness charities . For a start, there are outreach teams you can join, where you’ll work with like-minded people to distribute food, drink and clothes. Lots of people volunteer for Crisis at Christmas, and that’s great, but this is a year-round emergency. Charities are always looking for long-term volunteers to work in their shops and fundraise but also to act as mentors and night shelter workers. They will usually try to make use of any particular skills you have – cooking, IT, advocacy and legal knowledge. More challengingly, some charities look for hosts who are willing to give short-term emergency accommodation to homeless people, especially young adults. This will not be for everyone and demands a high level of commitment on the part of the volunteer, who may often have social work or other relevant experience, but the success of the Nightstop UK scheme shows what can be achieved. If your concerns go beyond what you see on the streets and you want to help find long-term solutions to this mounting crisis, you could always write to your MP with your suggestions, or join – or better still, organise! – a campaign aimed at putting pressure on the government or your local authority. One of the most worrying things I discovered when I experienced the care system and homelessness was the fact that many of the essential services tasked with helping people had been outsourced by local authorities and were now the remit of the third sector. Although there are many good third sector providers, including charities and voluntary organisations, they all have their own philosophies and practices, making the quality of support pot luck from region to region. These organisations often fall outside statutory regulation, meaning mistakes go unreported – and as a result we learn nothing from them. Also, because they are not public they don’t have to be transparent and can ignore things like freedom of information requests. For this reason I’d suggest that returning many of these services to public hands and giving them proper investment should be the focal point of any campaign to combat homelessness. If you agree, make some noise about it. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter