How far will China go to end Hong Kong’s unrest, now in its 13th week and still growing? Senior officials have spoken not only of “terrorist acts” but of “colour revolution characteristics”, making it clear that they have ruled out compromise. So far they have relied on the Hong Kong government to suppress the protests, but the banning of rallies, brutal police tactics, thug attacks, the arrests of high-profile activists and metro line closures have failed to dampen the unrest. On Sunday, thousands of activists descended on the airport. “They are trying very hard to scare people off the streets. It has only made people angrier,” said Ho-fung Hung of Johns Hopkins University, whose research areas include protest in China. The protests were triggered by a controversial bill that would have allowed extraditions to mainland China, where the Communist party controls the courts, but have since evolved into a broader pro-democracy movement. Public anger – fuelled by the aggressive tactics used by the police against demonstrators – has collided with years of frustration over worsening inequality and the cost of living in one of the world's most expensive, densely populated cities. The protest movement was given fresh impetus on 21 July when gangs of men attacked protesters and commuters at a mass transit station – while authorities seemingly did little to intervene. Underlying the movement is a push for full democracy in the city, whose leader is chosen by a committee dominated by a pro-Beijing establishment rather than by direct elections. Protesters have vowed to keep their movement going until their core demands are met, such as the resignation of the city’s leader, Carrie Lam, an independent inquiry into police tactics, an amnesty for those arrested and a permanent withdrawal of the bill. Beijing’s influence over Hong Kong has grown in recent years, as activists have been jailed and pro-democracy lawmakers disqualified from running or holding office. Independent booksellers have disappeared from the city, before reappearing in mainland China facing charges. Under the terms of the agreement by which the former British colony was returned to Chinese control in 1997, the semi-autonomous region was meant to maintain a “high degree of autonomy” through an independent judiciary, a free press and an open market economy, a framework known as “one country, two systems”. The extradition bill was seen as an attempt to undermine this and to give Beijing the ability to try pro-democracy activists under the judicial system of the mainland. Lam has shown no sign of backing down beyond agreeing to suspend the extradition bill, while Beijing has issued increasingly shrill condemnations but has left it to the city's semi-autonomous government to deal with the situation. Meanwhile police have violently clashed directly with protesters, repeatedly firing teargas and rubber bullets. Beijing has ramped up its accusations that foreign countries are “fanning the fire” of unrest in the city. China’s top diplomat Yang Jiechi has ordered the US to “immediately stop interfering in Hong Kong affairs in any form”. Lily Kuo and Verna Yu in Hong Kong That has stirred fears that the authorities will resort to more extreme measures as 1 October approaches. Many see the date as Beijing’s deadline for ending the unrest, believing it would not tolerate anything overshadowing nationwide celebrations for the 70th anniversary of Communist rule in China. Memories of 1989’s crackdown on Tiananmen Square’s pro-reform movement shadow the current unrest, raising the question of how far authorities will go to crush the challenge. Margaret Ng, a pro-democracy activist former legislator, said that protesters were very aware of the risks. “Going forward may put them in the fire, but stopping is not going to save them.,” she said. For Beijing, “the question is whether they want to destroy Hong Kong. If they interfere directly it spells the end of one country, two systems”. Jean-Pierre Cabestan, an expert on Chinese politics at Hong Kong Baptist University, said that this arrangement – which is supposed to guarantee the region a high degree of autonomy – is useful to Beijing too. But he added: “It’s hard for the Communist party not to be tempted to interfere. It’s a political organisation, not just about management. On the one hand they are overconfident and on the other they are paranoid. They want to prevent Hong Kong becoming a base for subversion, and that trumps everything.” The Hong Kong government has hinted that it may invoke the emergency regulations ordinance which hands wide powers to the chief executive. Some fear it could be used to shut down the internet or allow mass detentions over 1 October to prevent protests that day. Officials and pro-establishment politicians have suggested limited uses of emergency powers, such as banning masks or targeting sites or platforms the activists use. Simon Young, a professor of law at the University of Hong Kong, noted that some restraints also remained on the executive. Courts can issue injunctions to halt measures and the legislative council can amend regulations, but it is in recess and not due to sit again until October. It is also stacked in Beijing’s favour. 1 July 1997: Hong Kong, previously a British colony, is returned to China under the framework of “one country, two systems”. The “Basic Law” constitution guarantees to protect, for the next 50 years, the democratic institutions that make Hong Kong distinct from Communist-ruled mainland China. 2003: Hong Kong’s leaders introduce legislation that would forbid acts of treason and subversion against the Chinese government. The bill resembles laws used to charge dissidents on the mainland. An estimated half a million people turn out to protest against the bill. As a result of the backlash, further action on the proposal is halted. 2007: The Basic Law stated that the ultimate aim was for Hong Kong’s voters to achieve a complete democracy, but China decides in 2007 that universal suffrage in elections for the chief executive cannot be implemented until 2017. Some lawmakers are chosen by business and trade groups, while others are elected by vote. In a bid to accelerate a decision on universal suffrage, five lawmakers resign. But this act is followed by the adoption of the Beijing-backed electoral changes, which expand the chief executive’s selection committee and add more seats for lawmakers elected by direct vote. The legislation divides Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp, as some support the reforms while others say they will only delay full democracy while reinforcing a structure that favors Beijing. 2014: The Chinese government introduces a bill allowing Hong Kong residents to vote for their leader in 2017, but with one major caveat: the candidates must be approved by Beijing. Pro-democracy lawmakers are incensed by the bill, which they call an example of “fake universal suffrage” and “fake democracy”. The move triggers a massive protest as crowds occupy some of Hong Kong’s most crowded districts for 70 days. In June 2015, Hong Kong legislators formally reject the bill, and electoral reform stalls. The current chief executive, Carrie Lam, widely seen as the Chinese Communist party’s favoured candidate, is hand-picked in 2017 by a 1,200-person committee dominated by pro-Beijing elites. 2019: Lam pushes amendments to extradition laws that would allow people to be sent to mainland China to face charges. The proposed legislation triggers a huge protest, with organisers putting the turnout at 1 million, and a standoff that forces the legislature to postpone debate on the bills. Opponents say using legislation designed to suspend basic rights is inherently drastic and would end Hong Kong’s status as Asia’s premier financial centre. Limited measures would also probably escalate. “The ordinance is not an across-the-board declaration of martial law. It’s piecemeal, as required, but with very sweeping powers,” said Steve Tsang, the director of the Soas China institute. “Once you invoke it you have crossed a threshold and it is far harder for the government to exercise self-restraint … I think they see it as a way to avoid sending in troops without realising that it will finally result in the People’s Liberation Army [PLA] and People’s Armed Police [PAP] coming in.” The region’s Basic Law allows the Hong Kong government to request the help of the PLA garrison in the city. Troops arrived across the border this week, though state media said it was a regular rotation. Some wonder if soldiers might initially be used to guard buildings such as the Central Liaison Office, with the justification that they are central government institutions and Hong Kong police are overstretched. The paramilitary police, also part of the armed forces, would be a more obvious choice because their job is domestic security. State media have covered their recent drills near the border heavily, but because they are not stationed in Hong Kong their use would require a national-level order saying that national laws applied, Young said. That would leave one country, two systems dead in the water, and might not end unrest. There is growing talk of the “Northern Irelandisation” of the city, a long-term troop presence on the streets with continuing resistance and inevitable violence. “The PAP are trained to beat people, not to crush them with tanks,” Tsang said. “But it will be a painful messy process that will provoke stronger international responses than I think Beijing is calculating at the moment.” Joel Wuthnow at the centre for the study of Chinese military affairs at the National Defense University in Washington suggested that the use of Chinese troops was Beijing’s last option. He told a Center for Strategic and International Studies podcast that it would look terrible and undercut China’s narrative, citing the Tank Man photograph from 1989: “Everyone has a smartphone … You could have hundreds of tank men and women, unarmed men and women standing in front of heavily armed Chinese troops.” A deployment could also easily escalate, he said. “You can’t rule out the possibility of an inadvertent incident, something that spins out of control.”