Samoa survived being reduced to 13 men for almost 10 minutes in the first half and battled past a limited and exhausted Russia team to open their Pool A campaign with a bonus-point 34-9 win at Kumagaya Rugby Stadium. The Pacific islanders scored six tries – but did themselves no favours in a scrappy game in which Lee‑Lo and Motu Matu’u were shown yellow cards for high tackles within two minutes of each other. Russia’s Kirill Gotovtsev was also sent to the sin-bin for a similar offence. Gotovtsev’s tackle on Amosa while he was scoring Samoa’s second try resulted in a serious knee injury to the No 8. Matu’u also failed a head injury assessment and could miss the game against Scotland in Kobe on Monday. “It was a tough game,” the Samoa captain, Chris Vui, said. “We knew the Russians were going to come in the first 20-40 minutes, we just had to stick it out and I’m really proud of the way the boys came back in the second half. We’re here to create a legacy.” They will have to be a lot more accurate to stand any chance of matching the trailblazing Samoan quarter-finals of the 1990s with Scotland, Japan and Ireland to come, even after some impressively worked tries for Lee-Lo, Afaesetiti Amosa and two each for wingers Alapati Leiua and Ed Fidow. After going at Japan hard in the tournament’s opening game and giving the hosts a scare in the process, Russia set out with the same gameplan and again held their own for the opening exchanges in front of a crowd packed with enthusiastic local fans. The noticeably fresher Samoans struck first, though, after a fine skip pass from Clermont Auvergne’s Tim Nanai-Williams found Leiua and the Bristol man, who shifted to the wing in a late injury-enforced change, jinked his way over in the corner. But the Russian set-piece and kicking game that concerned Samoa coach Steve Jackson before kick-off tested his side’s discipline and as the penalty count ticked up the Russia fly-half Yury Kushnarev knocked two over for a 6-5 lead. With World Rugby publicly criticising the officiating over the first weekend of the World Cup shortly before kick-off, Romain Poite had a decision to make on 28 minutes when the centre Lee-Lo went in high on Russia captain Vasily Artemyev. Poite and his television match official deemed that Artemyev had dipped slightly into the tackle and made the same call two minutes later when a near identical tackle sent the hooker Matu’u the sin-bin. Their opponents were unable to make anything from the two-man advantage, something Artemyev rued after the game as the punishing four-day turnaround from the Japan defeat began to show among their unchanged side in the second half. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales Amosa put the Samoans back in front with a try just after the break and Gotvotsev’s yellow card for catching him high just as he was about to score ended Amosa’s night too after his knee buckled in the collision. Samoa showed how to use the 10-minute advantage and put the game out of sight by the time Gotvotsev returned, first with the kind of flair Vui promised before the game as the replacement hooker Ray Niuia’s delicious no-look reverse pass put Fidow through. The winger got his second minutes later before Lee-Lo and Leiua rounded the score off against the Russians, who now have nine much-needed days off until they meet Ireland in Kobe.