Paris Saint-Germain slumped to a shock 2-0 home defeat against Reims, the champions’ second loss in Ligue 1 this season. Hassane Kamara headed Reims into a first-half lead and Boulaye Dia made sure of all three points for the visitors in the fourth minute of stoppage time. PSG, who beat Real Madrid at the Parc des Princes in the Champions League last week, went down to their first defeat of the season at Rennes in August. Thomas Tuchel’s side remain top on goal difference, ahead of second-placed Angers. Rachid Alioui scored two late goals as Angers maintained their impressive start to the season with a 2-0 win at Toulouse. Alioui fired Angers into an 88th-minute lead direct from a free-kick and made sure of his side’s fifth league win of the season by finishing off a swift counter-attack in the fifth minute of added time. Lyon are without a win in five league games after being held 2-2 at Brest. Moussa Dembélé’s opener for Lyon was quickly cancelled out by Yoann Court, who fired a late equaliser after the visitors had regained the lead through Maxwel Cornet. In La Liga, Real Madrid took advantage of Athletic Bilbao’s slip to go top with a 2-0 win against Osasuna. Bilbao’s 1-1 draw at bottom side Leganés left top spot up for grabs and although Atlético Madrid briefly seized pole position earlier in the evening, their city rivals overtook them. The Brazilian teenagers Vinicius Junior, with his first goal since February, and the debutant Rodrygo scored the goals midway through either half in a 2-0 win over Osasuna which put Real clear of Atlético by a point. Atlético won 2-0 at struggling Real Mallorca thanks to goals from Diego Costa – his first since March – and João Félix, although they finished the game with 10 men after Álvaro Morata was sent off after receiving two quick yellow cards. Internazionale returned to the top of the Serie A table thanks to a goal from Danilo D’Ambrosio - but Antonio Conte’s side were ultimately lucky to squeeze past Lazio 1-0 at San Siro. D’Ambrosio headed in a Cristiano Biraghi cross in the 23rd minute to set Inter on their way to a fifth win from five, yet the hero of the match was their goalkeeper Samir Handanovic, who repelled endless Lazio attempts. Failing to keep up with the pace-setters were Napoli, who fell to a surprise 1-0 home defeat by Cagliari. Dries Mertens hit both posts during the second half before Cagliari substitute Lucas Castro scored with a free header against the run of play in the 87th minute. Kalidou Koulibaly was sent off for dissent after the goal. Atalanta’s fine start to the season continued as substitute Duván Zapata and Marten De Roon scored in a 2-0 win at Roma that took the Bergamo side up to third.