Bernd Leno Had to do better with Lamela’s low, soft effort. Saved well later to prevent Son making it two. 6 Ainsley Maitland-Niles Steady performance from a player who looks increasingly mature defensively. Early shot blocked. 7 Sokratis Papastathopoulos All at sea before Eriksen’s goal. Thought he had won it but Kolasinac was ruled offside. 6 David Luiz Lack of positional awareness was laid bare early on when Eriksen scored and Son went close. 5 Sead Kolasinac Inches from scoring early in the second half but was not quite at his rampaging best on the left flank. 6 Lucas Torreira Tigerish and dogged, attributes that helped Arsenal get a foothold in the game before he was subbed. 7 Granit Xhaka Only he will know what he was doing with the daft lunge on Son that could have cost the match. 5 Mattéo Guendouzi Fine ball for Aubameyang’s goal and was denied one of his own by Lloris. Positive showing. 7 Nicolas Pépé Drilled an early effort over and snatched at one later on. Flashes of promise but clearly not at full tilt yet. 6 Alexandre Lacazette  Explosive finish reignited the game, and tireless work all over the pitch. Went off with a knock. 8 Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang Had rarely got close to goal before timing his run perfectly to poach Arsenal’s equaliser. Also a wide threat. 7 Substitutes Dani Ceballos (for Torreira 63) 7, Henrikh Mkhitaryan (for Lacazette 67) 6 Hugo Lloris Minor wobbles with the ball but made thrilling one-handed stops from Guendouzi and Ceballos. 7 Davinson Sánchez Uncomfortable from the outset in an unfamiliar right-back role but just about got away with it 5. Toby Alderweireld Diced with danger when playing out and stretched frequently as Arsenal roared back into the game. 6 Jan Vertonghen Initially offered stability on his return to the side but let Aubameyang run off him for equaliser. 6 Danny Rose Made a crucial back-post block from Pépé at 1-0 but struggled after that, not helped by a booking. 5 Érik Lamela His low shot led to Eriksen’s goal and movement was clever throughout. Subbed on the hour. 7 Moussa Sissoko Needed to offer more of his physicality and ability to carry the ball. Missed late chance to win it. 6 Harry Winks Smart play in buildup to the penalty award but struggled to get on the ball during the second period. 6 Christian Eriksen Early tap-in seemed a perfect way to banish the summer’s issues, but was subdued after a sparky start. 6 Harry Kane Involved in Spurs’ first goal, rammed in the penalty and was so unlucky to rap the post later on. 7 Son Heung-min The best forward on show by a distance before the break but reduced to scraps as the game went on. 8 Substitutes Dele Alli (for Lamela 60) 6, Giovani Lo Celso (for Son 79) 6,