I see Shakespeare’s been at it again. This time he’s helped to get us in trouble with the French, the very dernière chose we need right now. But we must hope that Brigitte Macron, who last week opened the newly revamped Centre for Medieval History in Agincourt (yes! The French still refurbish museums!), will have mercy on us. More, at least, than Shakespeare’s Henry V, who shut up the gates of mercy so that “the flesh’d soldier, rough and hard of heart / In liberty of bloody hand shall range / With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass / Your fresh-fair virgins and your flowering infants”. And that was before he even went into battle. Shakespeare’s vision, according to historians, did not quite accord with the reality – particularly in its portrayal of English troops, galvanised by their gung-ho monarch, securing victory against far greater French numbers. In fact, they argue, there was less of a chasm in manpower than previously thought, and certainly not the five-to-one of myth; nor were Henry’s archers drawn from quite the impoverished ranks of society that has been suggested. The director of Agincourt’s museum, Christophe Gilliot, hopes that the renovated museum will encourage us to reject the cliches, and thereby usher in a new era of Franco-British cooperation and understanding. A laudable and timely ambition, of course. But before we rush to brand Shakespeare an arrow-happy propagandist, let’s do that most unpopular of things and read beneath the headlines. Much of our perception of the play has, as we know, been shaped by Laurence Olivier’s portrayal of the king in the 1944 film adaptation, released at a time when patriotism had a real and urgent purpose. The play may end with glory, but the relationship between the English and the French did not end there And yet, when we remember Shakespeare’s “happy few” and his “band of brothers”, we forget other more equivocal passages of the play, and especially its fourth act, when Henry, in disguise, walks through the English camp, as its soldiers “Sit patiently and inly ruminate/ The morning’s danger, and their gesture sad/ Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats/ Presenteth them unto the gazing moon/ So many horrid ghosts.” Is it right, asks the Welsh soldier Fluellen, that if their enemy is “an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb”, that the English should follow suit? One could argue that all this is swept away by the bombast of victory. But though the play may end with glory – and the acquisition of a wife – the relationship between the English and the French did not end there, as indeed the Chorus’s final words, looking forward to Henry VI and his advisers’ bloody losses, make clear. In short: don’t blame the Bard. Instead, reflect on the ability of literature and art to present history not by soundbite but in layers of meaning and interpretation. Which brings us to the next reincarnation of Henry V, forthcoming courtesy of Netflix and Timothée Chalamet. If the trailer is anything to go by, there is to be a great deal of brooding on the nature of power and responsibility. Will it portray the events of St Crispin’s Day in a more historically accurate fashion? We’ll see. But whether you get your fix of Lancastrian monarchs from the pages of the Arden Shakespeare or the telly, remember not to take it all at face value. • Alex Clark writes for the Guardian and the Observer