At last, a companion syndrome to the affliction of journalists complaining about tiny inaccuracies in fictional TV portrayals of their industry. It is Met police chief Cressida Dick, who is absolutely outraged about – can you guess what? – supposed misrepresentations of the police force in smash-hit tellybox shows Line of Duty and Bodyguard. But first, a word on the first affliction mentioned. As you may have noticed, it is impossible for a journalist to appear on screen, ever, without hundreds of real-life journalists taking to social media to point out minuscule inaccuracies in how they are being depicted. Even if the show in question is a comedy, there really is no greater comedy than this: some hack who has just come off the wrong side of a £250,000 legal bill for claiming a former Hollyoaks star shags donkeys or whatever explaining why, actually, that specific level of reporter just wouldn’t be at morning editorial conference, or why that fictional headline layout doesn’t fit the page properly. These monstrous and heartless inaccuracies must end. Apparently Bodyguard drove everyone at the Met 'absolutely up the wall' As a journalist myself, I am too caught up in this faultless industry to feel anything other than inchoate outrage at the fact I have just watched a telly show in which a certain type of political story makes the splash when it would probably only get the page 3 lead. Ghastly beyond words. But you, as civilians, must really feel the pain even more. It must be absolutely maddening to watch Her Majesty’s press traduced in these infinitesimal ways, with such presumably immense consequences for something or other, and only 1,547 of them online, as it’s being broadcast, to rage about it. Do weep for the plight of the journalist who KNOWS that real newsdesks have MUCH more paper piled on them than that, but somehow has to watch a marginally unrealistic version happen on ITV1, slightly pissed, and with no means of correcting the grotesque error with similar prominence. I mean, you’re fighting a behemoth. They’re not going to give you a six-part drama where you can redress the wrong, are they? The damage is done. But you know, could they? Could they actually give you a six-part drama? Do telly bosses have the balls? is the question. Because you have a brilliant idea for a screenplay about a journalist not entirely based on you, and you are in fact open to writing it for TV, in this golden age of the medium. You know, in January, when you’re not drinking. Can’t be that hard, can it, considering there are about as many words in 15 minutes of telly as there are in your most recent newspaper feature, Man City Stars and Their Cars. They could do so, so much worse than commission your drama instead of all the shit they have on instead. What’s that? Write a treatment? No, I mean, you’ve already got a recognised byline, haven’t you? You can’t be doing with all that fuss. You’re more used to the proper way: pitching a two-line angle and getting out of the office for the day to see if it stacks up. But you will divulge to the TV network that it’s like an actual cinema verite look at this endlessly fascinating news-based world. Like that one where Gerard Butler plays the world’s leading meteorologist – but with newspapers. And with heart. Can you have eleventy hundred thousand pounds development money please. Anyway: Cressida Dick. The Met chief is now Dame Dick, thanks to Theresa May’s resignation honours list. At work, I’m not sure whether she is formally ma’am or guv – I only know this stuff off the telly – but Ma’amguv is very cross about how the police have been depicted on Line of Duty and Bodyguard. Both shows are, of course, ratings smashes, created by the highly acclaimed Jed Mercurio. Over to highly ennobled Cressida’s Radio Times interview for more. First of all, let me say I’m very glad she’s done the chat. The best response to that tired old question: “Why aren’t you out catching criminals?” is: “Because I’m giving an interview to the Radio Times.” It seems the Met commissioner decided to sample Line of Duty after sitting next to one of its stars, Vicky McClure, at a dinner. Did she love it, and have a series of insidery theories as to who H was? “I was absolutely outraged by the level of casual and extreme corruption that was being portrayed as the way the police is in 2018-19,” explains Cressida. “It’s so far from that. The standards and professionalism are so high.” I know the temptation is to ask: are you the same Cressida Dick who was the senior officer in charge of the botched operation that killed Jean Charles de Menezes, which saw an innocent man shot on his way to work by police marksmen, and in the wake of which found the Met briefing all sorts of lies, such as the fact he’d vaulted the ticket barrier and so on, to deflect from their catastrophic failings? But you can’t ask that, because that’s not in the spirit of a Radio Times interview. Alas, I am shocked to see that Mercurio doesn’t understand the dramatic licence that should be afforded to appearances by police chiefs in the Radio Times, and has consequently decided to respond to Ma’amguv’s comments online. “My inspiration for creating Line of Duty was @metpoliceuk shooting an innocent man and their dishonesty in the aftermath,” Jed states crisply, “so thanks to Cressida Dick for reminding me of our connection.” But there is more, because it turns out our top copper is also furious about Jed’s show Bodyguard, staring Keeley Hawes and Richard Madden, which went out last year and was the BBC’s most-watched drama in a decade. Apparently it drove everyone at the Met “absolutely up the wall”. “I actually did have to switch it off after about 20 minutes,” the Met Chief tells the Radio Times, having made very similar comments to Good Morning Britain last year. “The moment when the home secretary [Hawes] made a pass at the protection officer was just beyond me, I’m afraid,” she says. I am sorry to hear that. A mindset where it is impossible to think oneself into the position where two extremely hot people on a screen might get it on, to the delight of the viewer, does rather close one off to about 70% of the popular dramatic canon. Still, in his attempts to address her critique, Mercurio is also good enough to post a Private Eye cutting referencing Dame Dick’s earlier GMB comments. On that occasion, she had sniffed of the Bodyguard romance: “This is ridiculous. I have a lot of personal protection officers, and I’ve got to look after them.” Private Eye reminds us that one such officer who Cressida Dick was specifically in charge of, as head of the specials operations directorate at the time, was the PPO who was dismissed from his job for allegedly starting an affair with the wife of the then-home secretary, Alan Johnson. “And here’s the inspiration for one story element in Bodyguard,” notes Mercurio. Ah. How to smooth over this rather one-sided row (even though I’d be happy for it to break out entertainingly again with each new series)? I wouldn’t have the questing heart, and pockets, of a journalist if I didn’t ask: is there any way Cressida could get, like, a story consultant credit on the shows? Doesn’t have to be separate title card, on both. But at least one. And a seat and a plus-one for the Baftas. In return, perhaps the Met chief could push for what the people really deserve: a landmark public inquiry into TV misrepresentations of Britain’s most beloved professions.