It’s been almost three years since Nintendo launched its diminutive NES Mini console and discovered a vast audience for stylish retro hardware. Since then, it has re-released the NES Classic Mini and launched an SNES sequel, while Sony has clambered artlessly on to the bandwagon with an uncharacteristically mediocre offering, the PlayStation Classic. Now Sega has joined the fray, its official Mega Drive Mini set to banish memories of the fairly awful Mega Drive retro consoles produced by third-party manufacturer At Games. The result is a wonderfully cute and detailed reproduction of the original Mega Drive model, sensibly priced at £70. Although it’s small enough to fit in the palm of your hand, it packs in accurate cosmetic features such as a volume switch, side grille and extension port, closely mimicking the ghetto blaster form of the 1988 machine. It is kind of a shame that the volume control is non-functional – a headphone port would have been a lovely extra, but doubtless prohibitively expensive to include. The USB ports on the front support the two control pads supplied, which are perfectly modelled to resemble the authentic controllers. You can’t plug in your old pads, sadly, which means if you want to use a six-button pad to get the most out of titles such as Street Fighter II Special Champion Edition and Eternal Champions, you’ll have buy the separately available updated version. Switch it on and you get a simple but authentically 1990s-styled menu, which shows each of the 40 games with their original box art. There’s even a wonderfully nostalgic score by Yuzo Koshiro, who used the original Yamaha YM2612 sound chip for his jaunty composition. A settings menu lets you swap between widescreen and original 4:3 ratio, and there’s also the choice to add CRT-style scan lines to the image, although the emulation is so good you don’t need to bother. Veteran Tokyo developer M2 has handled the process, building on its work with the brilliant Sega Ages retro game collections for the Xbox, Switch and PlayStation. The result is a crystal clear, smoothly animated reproduction of the Mega Drive experience that is sympathetic to the machine’s processing capabilities and colour palette while making the games feel fresh and lively. Importantly, we’re offered key benefits of modern gaming: the Mega Drive mini lets you save games at any point so you don’t have to complete the whole of Gunstar Heroes in one sitting. Unlike the Nintendo machines, there’s no rewind function, but it’s still a huge step up from the PlayStation Classic and it makes a lot of these incredibly demanding titles more accessible to today’s spoiled players. The real beauty of this machine, however, is the thoughtfully curated games library. There are 42 built-in games to discover (Tetris and Darius were never released and get their debuts here) – that’s twice the number offered on the PlayStation Classic or Nintendo SNES Mini. There are plenty of bona fide classics: the first two Sonic Titles, Ecco the Dolphin, ToeJam and Earl, all as slick and colourful as veterans will remember. From here, we get a great spread of the console’s key genres, with shooters such as Gunstar Heroes and Thunder Force III, action RPGs Light Crusader and Story of Thor, and scrolling platformers Dynamite Headdy and Castle of Illusion. Every one of them still has pleasure and spectacle to offer. It’s also noticeable that Sega has chosen the best titles in long-running franchises, rather than always opting for the originals – so we’re offered the far superior Streets of Rage 2 and Shinobi III. There’s also the option to play the Japanese versions of all the titles, which in some cases – including Probotector (known as Contra Hard Corps in Japan) – have key differences. After years of second-rate retro consoles besmirching the Mega Drive name, the official Sega Mega Drive Mini is a delightful surprise. It is well constructed and reverential to the work of hardware designer Mitsushige Shiraiwa, who modelled the original machine on expensive audio equipment and sports-car interiors. It also has a generous selection of titles that have been skilfully emulated, many of which are hard to buy or ruinously expensive in their cartridge form. Hearing the haunting Probotector soundtrack, seeing the giant colourful Shinobi sprites, watching Mickey Mouse skipping through the corridors of the Castle of Illusion, will bring back warm memories for those of us around at the time, and have lasting aesthetic charm for those who weren’t. The Mega Drive, already well served by the more high-end and specialist Mega Sg, now has a mainstream update for everyone. This is the machine that did what Nintendo didn’t – and that legacy has been truly honoured here.