Manchester City were handed a tricky tie in the Champions League last-16 draw, with Nick Cushing’s side set to face the Spanish champions, Atlético Madrid, as Arsenal were paired with Slavia Prague. City cruised past the Swiss side Lugano 11-1 to reach the second knockout round but they will be out to make amends after the team whimpered out of the competition to Atlético in the round of 32 last season. Toni Duggan, who switched from Barcelona to the Spanish capital in the summer, will come up against her former club. Atlético, though, are already slightly off the pace in the league this season. The reigning champions sit a point behind Barcelona and Deportivo de la Coruña in first and second respectively, and suffered a bruising 6-1 defeat to Barça on 21 September. They have also struggled in the Champions League, needing a 90th-minute winner in the first leg against the Serbian side Spartak Subotica, who came from two goals behind to level, and a late goal to salvage a draw in the second fixture. The Women’s Super League champions, Arsenal, managed again to avoid the big guns of Lyon, Wolfsburg and Barcelona and will instead face the Czech side Slavia. The Gunners overcame the Italian league runners-up, Fiorentina, 6-0 over two legs in the last round, their first European outing in over five years. Arsenal were unseeded in the draw and initially came out of the pot against Manchester City but teams cannot face clubs from the same nation until the quarter-finals. With the ties played over the 16-17 and 30-31 October, Arsenal’s squad will be put to the test with the first leg falling after they play Chelsea away and the second leg following the visit of Manchester City to Borehamwood. Glasgow City, who beat Chertanovo Moscow to reach the last 16, will play Danish champions Brøndby. Glasgow City v BrøndbyBarcelona v FC MinskBIIK Kazygurt v Bayern MunichLyon v Fortuna HjørringPSG v BriedablikWolfsburg v TwenteSlavia Praha v ArsenalManchester City v Atlético Madrid The holders, Lyon, also travel to Denmark, to play Fortuna Hjørring. The French side put 16 past the Russian team Ryazan-VDV in the previous round with Ada Hegerberg scoring five to put her within two of Anja Mittag’s record 51 goals in the competition.