What were you hoping for?I’ve kind of lost faith with gay dating, so I was hoping to have my faith in humanity (even just partially) restored. First impressions?Handsome. I went in for a handshake. He hugged me. What did you talk about?From current affairs to Kim Woodburn, no stone was left unturned. Any awkward moments?He talked at length about Fleabag, which I had heard of but knew nothing about. I must have looked like a glazed, uncultured potato. Good table manners?He dropped a bit of sweet-and-sour sauce on the table, but he’s veggie, too, so he was forgiven. Best thing about Ollie?His energy. He encouraged me to ask for a second bottle of free wine – a good quality in a person. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yeah, I think so. Turns out we have a few mutuals already. Describe him in three wordsBourgeois. Intellectual. Handsome. What do you think he made of you?He hinted I undo more buttons on my shirt. I think he thought I was sex on legs, to be honest. Did you go on somewhere?Yes, to the nearest Wetherspoon. We were out until 1am. I’m exhausted just thinking about it. And... did you kiss?Multiple times. For quite a while, tbh. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We wouldn’t have moved on to beer. Bad idea. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Why not? What were you hoping for?To avoid being publicly shamed. First impressions?Well-dressed, friendly and very attentive. What did you talk about?Masculinity, Grindr, the appropriate number of shirt buttons to undo on a first date. Any awkward moments?Trying to fleece a second free bottle of wine from a very lovely waiter – not our best moment. Good table manners?We were both outshone by Kelly Holmes on the table next to us, who lent us some chopsticks. Best thing about David?A great conversationalist and a lot of fun. He asked interesting questions. Would you introduce him to your friends? For sure. Describe him in three wordsThoughtful, warm, handsome. What do you think he made of you?Hopefully, open and relaxed, although he did say I didn’t seem used to first dates. Did you go on somewhere?Soho ’Spoons, of course. And... did you kiss?Yes. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?For him not to have the same name as my dad. And probably to have drunk a bit less. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I hope so! • Ollie and David ate at The Banana Tree Soho, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com