The clock showed 89.30 when Kieran Trippier’s corner bent into the penalty area and Héctor Herrera, a second-half substitute, leapt into the air to head the ball into the net. It was loud enough already, but somehow the sound reached another level. From 2-0 down, Atlético Madrid had come back to draw 2-2 with Juventus, Diego Simeone screaming down on the touchline, supporters shouting all around him. It had been quite a way to start the European season – and it was almost taken from them, too, when Cristiano Ronaldo flashed a shot just wide deep into injury time. One hundred and 10 days later, the Champions League returned to the Metropolitano. Only one player remained from the night that Liverpool won their sixth European Cup here and the early signs were that Trippier might enjoy this night rather more than that one. Yes, he had Cristiano Ronaldo in front of him, but … well, that wasn’t entirely true: most of the time he had Ronaldo behind him. For all the cliches about Atlético, Trippier’s duties at his new club are far from solely defensive. Diego Simeone’s full-backs are pushed very high and very wide, sought out early and often. Within five minutes, there had been four crosses already – two from Trippier, two from Renan Lodi on the other side – and that pattern continued. While Lodi ran at Juventus, Trippier tended to sneak in behind Alex Sandro, an eye always on the passing line that could reach him. Together, they saw a lot of the ball as Atlético carried the weight of the game, Thomas Partey leading them out from deep, Diego Costa running, and Koke providing that moment of pause in possession that made sense of it all. Twice José Giménez leapt for headers and a cross that the Englishman stood up found João Felix close in by the far post, only for Wojciech Szczesny to save. In truth, though, that was a simple enough stop and there were few real chances. A Ronaldo shot bounced a little awkwardly but didn’t concern Jan Oblak, Giménez headed away Miralem Pjanic’s effort, and Blaise Matuidi scuffed his shot horribly, laughed at by thousands. The one genuine save of the first half came from Szczesny, when João Felix started a superb run 20 yards inside his own half. At one point he had five opponents around him in a circle but he turned, slowed, started again, and progressed into the area, working just enough space to release a shot with his toe. The former Arsenal keeper was down sharply to his left. From the corner, Giménez’s header came close. And then a goal came, just two minutes into the second half. Trippier slotted the ball into Costa but he lost out and there, from just outside his own area, Leonardo Bonucci bent a long, long pass up the left with the outside of his boot. Suddenly, Gonzalo Higuaín was racing away. Ronaldo was running through the middle to join him. And Juan Cuadrado was heading up the right. As Atlético’s players dashed back, Higuaín slowed, and played it behind the returning reinforcements to the Colombian, who cut back and struck a superb left-footed shot, bending into the top corner past the striped shirts. Danilo wasted the chance to make it two, his shot harmless when a pass to Ronaldo, alone at the far post, might have been deadly. Atlético’s next move should have been, and they paid for it almost immediately. A wonderful exchange between Koke, Stefan Savic and Trippier worked the game’s clearest opportunity for Giménez, via five, sharp first-time passes, but he was forced to reach back a little for the ball and the shot from close range flew over the crossbar. There was only time for the referee to go down, hit in the face by a wild Sami Khedira hack, before Cuadrado and Ronaldo sent Sandro away. His cross was perfect, an invitation that Matuidi accepted, heading past Oblak. Hope returned fast, Savic heading in from Koke’s free-kick to set up the finale and turn the noise up loud.