Until the arrival in the late 1970s of Abdul Qadir, cricket’s most arcane discipline – leg break bowling – appeared to be in terminal decline. In the first-class game no one had much bothered with its difficult subtleties for more than a decade, and there were no players at international level who could hold a candle to former exponents of the art such as Clarrie Grimmett and Richie Benaud. Many teams contained no leg break bowlers at all, and commentators routinely wondered whether, outside club cricket, they might be heading for extinction. Qadir, who has died aged 63 of a heart attack, changed all that. In 67 Tests for Pakistan between 1977 and 1990 his magical talent as a “leggie” – spinning the ball with the wrist rather than the fingers, thereby turning it more dangerously away from, rather than into, the right-hander – fired the imagination of a new generation of cricketers. Among them were a fellow Pakistani, Mushtaq Ahmed, Anil Kumble of India and the young Australian Shane Warne, who went on to become one of the greatest bowlers of all time. Leg breaks became sexy again and, although wrist spinners are still a rare breed, no one talks any more about their extinction. Qadir’s importance extended well beyond his influence on others, however. In his own right he was a magnificent bowler, unarguably one of the best spinners of all time and, in the eyes of some (including the former England captain Graham Gooch), better even than Warne. Only 1.65m (5ft 5in), with a bouncy, enthusiastic run-up – left elbow high, flicking the ball from hand to hand – he was unusually accurate for a wrist spinner and possessed an almost mystical aura as he confused batsmen with a mind-boggling variety of different deliveries, appealing to the umpire with exuberance. He took 236 Test wickets at an average of 32.80 across his 13-year career, including the best ever bowling figures by a Pakistani, a devastating nine for 56 in Lahore against England in 1987. He also demonstrated that leg spin could be highly effective in one-day cricket, taking 132 wickets in 104 matches at an average of 26.16. His long period at the top was ended only by the emergence of Ahmed, whom Qadir had inspired and generously mentored, and who ensured that wrist spin remained an important element of Pakistan’s armoury for a further decade. Qadir was born into a poor family in the Dharampura district of Lahore, and after attending Arif high school and Government College in the city, made his first-class debut in Karachi, playing for Habib Bank against United Bank in 1975. His first match for Pakistan came in 1977, in the first Test against England in Lahore. He grabbed six of England’s first-innings wickets for 44 runs in the following Test at Hyderabad, but was unable to fully establish himself in the side until Imran Khan was made captain in 1982 and ensured that he became a regular. England proved to be Qadir’s favourite opponents: he took 82 wickets in 16 Tests against them at an average of 24.98, and his nine for 56 against Mike Gatting’s team in 1987 helped Pakistan to an innings victory in the first Test. He had taken seven for 96 against England at the Oval a few months earlier, and followed up his Lahore spectacular with a five-wicket haul in each innings of the third Test at Karachi. He also tasted plenty of success against West Indies, taking six for 16 against them in their second innings in the first Test at Faisalabad in 1986, and returned figures of seven for 142 against Australia at the same venue in 1982, bowling a phenomenal 50.5 overs during that innings. However, he was less successful against India, whose batsmen generally displayed a better understanding of spin. With Ahmed snapping at his heels, Qadir’s last Test came against the West Indies at Lahore in 1990, and his final one-day international was in 1993. He continued playing for Habib Bank until 1996, finishing with 960 first-class wickets at 23.24 and with best figures of nine for 49. In retirement he ran the Abdul Qadir Cricket Academy in Lahore, did some television commentating, provided coaching and mentoring to various young bowlers (including Danish Kaneria, Shahid Afridi and Imran Tahir) and in 2008 became Pakistan’s chief selector – although he resigned from the post after six months owing to conflicts with administrators. He is survived by four sons, Rehman, Imran, Sulaman and Usman, who each also played first-class cricket, and by a daughter, Noor. • Abdul Qadir Khan, cricketer, born 15 September 1955; died 6 September 2019