There’s no official news that a Princess Bride remake is in the works – don’t panic – but the mere mention of the idea has been descended on by fans of the original, with the actor Jamie Lee Curtis, the film’s original star Cary Elwes, and even the US senator Ted Cruz among those declaring it “inconceivable”. The drama began with a Variety profile of the film’s producer Norman Lear. In the article, Sony Pictures Entertainment’s chief executive, Tony Vinciquerra, was quoted as saying: “Very famous people whose names I won’t use, but they want to redo The Princess Bride … Not a month goes by when we don’t have an idea coming from some very big name wanting to do things with Norman.” It was a tiny sentence in a small paragraph of a large profile but it was also the quote that Variety used to share the piece. This led to an outcry, with Elwes – who played Westley in the 1987 Rob Reiner cult classic – among many who took to Twitter to lament the idea. “There’s a shortage of perfect movies in this world,” he tweeted. “It would be a pity to damage this one.” There’s a shortage of perfect movies in this world. It would be a pity to damage this one. https://t.co/5N8Q3P2e5G Curtis, who married another of the film’s stars, Christopher Guest, also joined the fray, saying “there is only ONE The Princess Bride”. Oh really? Well, I married the six fingered man, obviously why we have stayed together for 35 years and there is only ONE The Princess Bride and it’s William Goldman and @robreiner’s. “Life is pain highness. Anyone who says differently is selling something!” https://t.co/hv33UIZKN3 And Cruz called the film “the greatest thing in the world”, adding his own quote from the original. NOOOOOOOO!!!!!! Sonny, The Princess Bride is the greatest thing, in the world—except for a nice MLT, mutton, lettuce and tomato sandwich, where the mutton is nice and lean and the tomato is ripe. They’re so perky, I love that. DON’T MESS WITH PERFECTION. https://t.co/A2lWFlq2yB Climbing further up the Cliffs of Insanity, Seth Rogen was forced to deny his involvement in the project. I would never dare. Others noted that attempting to remake the widely beloved and famously quotable film, which the Guardian said was the 23rd best sci-fi and fantasy film of all time, was inadvisable in the extreme. You've fallen for one of the two classic blunders! The first being never get involved in a land war in Asia but only slightly lesser known: never go in on a Princess Bride reboot! https://t.co/1AZkr41gDI Based on the 1973 novel by William Goldman, the original film wasn’t a box office hit when it debuted in 1987 but has since become beloved as a cult classic. To do it over, many believe, would add insult to injury to a generation who have been smothered by remakes. Aladdin, The Lion King, Dumbo and The Dark Crystal – whose original was released four years before The Princess Bride – are among the latest examples of the film industry’s pitch for the nostalgia buck, a strategy which has mixed success. I’m rarely a “don’t remake this” kind of guy, because I make an effort to be near-pathologically optimistic, and I try very hard to believe that there may be some genius version of a remake that I lack the vision to imagine. All that said, don’t remake the Princess Bride. https://t.co/5LvQmoBe12 The Princess Bride vs. any potential remake. pic.twitter.com/Bs7XPdhcoV Do not touch The Princess Bride. Do not remake it. Do not enhance it. Do not remaster it. Keep you damn dirty hands off The Princess Bride. pic.twitter.com/VgbWCnOBUI As one Twitter user put it: “I like that in these chaotic times we can all put aside our differences and agree that no one should remake The Princess Bride.”