Todd Phillips’ Joker spins the tale of a pathetic loser who ends up a winner, the low-class upstart who upsets the applecart and explodes the establishment. Nobody – least of all Joaquin Phoenix’s snivelling party entertainer – believed he stood a snowball’s chance in hell. But his message hit home and the voters clamoured change and we live in interesting times where the old rules don’t apply. As with the man, so with the film. Since its grand unveiling at the Venice film festival last weekend, Phillips’s revisionist comic-book blockbuster - charting the formative years of Batman’s nemesis - has had the critics worrying at it like a ham-bone tugged between a pack of dogs. It’s been hailed as a fiery socialist call-to-arms and damned as a cynical instruction manual for incel vigilantes. It’s been seen as left-wing; it’s been seen as right-wing. Its politics are so turbulent, so unrefined - and yes, arguably garbled - that they sprawl and crawl beyond traditional party boundaries. Much, it might be said, as real-world politics has a tendency to do these days. “Is it just me or is it getting crazier out there?” asks Phoenix’s antihero near the start of the film. And this was a question that - with variations - was being posed again and again on social media as Lucrecia Martel’s Venice jury decided to hand the Golden Lion to Joker ahead of the numerous other, more favoured candidates. Most onlookers were fine with Martin Eden’s brooding Luca Marinelli winning the best actor prize and Gloria Mundi’s Ariane Ascaride being named best actress. And you could almost hear the collective sigh of satisfaction when the directing award went to Sweden’s Roy Andersson for his inimical About Endlessness. In any other year, the decision to lavish the Silver Lion – effectively the event’s second prize – on the disgraced Roman Polanski for his historical thriller An Officer and a Spy would have provided the night’s biggest controversy. Except that the jury had a final twist in store. Is it the wrong choice: Europe’s oldest film festival falling over itself to honour a Hollywood studio blockbuster? Only insofar as Joker hardly needs the attention and there are other, smaller productions (off the top of my head: Pablo Larrain’s Ema and Haifa al-Mansour’s The Perfect Candidate) which would have benefited from a leg-up. But if the remit is to reward the competition’s most bold and ambitious production, then why not Joker? Phillips’s film is slippery, divisive and borderline irresponsible in its climactic call to arms. But it’s also exuberant, exciting and at times genuinely radical – the sort of movie that takes a gleeful delight in pushing the envelope; in taking three steps further than you imagine it will. I loved the film when I saw it and it’s been buzzing in my head ever since. Joker’s set-up was fabulous and its punchline was devastating. But tonight’s killing joke is what really brought the whole house down. 