Barry FlanaganA welcome retrospective of the 1960s conceptual artist who later became a figurative sculptor of leaping animals. Hare raising.• Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, 18 September to 24 November. Science City 1550-1800This newly opened gallery explores how the scientific revolution shaped London and how the city shaped science. From Elizabethan magic to the Royal Institution’s laughing gas experiments that had the capital in the early 19th century in stitches.• Science Museum, London, ongoing. Henri Matisse: Master of LineThe modern master of colour was also a genius at taking a line for a walk, reveals this seductive show of his graphic works.• Holburne Museum, Bath, 18 September to 5 January. Pushing PaperAnish Kapoor, Rachel Whiteread and Richard Deacon are among the artists demonstrating that drawing ain’t dead.• British Museum, London, until 12 January. Bauhaus: Utopia in CrisisJudith Raum, Liam Gillick and more investigate the troubled legacy of the Bauhaus in this pensive group show.• Camberwell Space, London, 16 September to 9 November. The Virgin and Child With Saints, circa 1435-41, by PisanelloNature is caught and then flamboyantly reinvented in this joyous dream of a painting. The details of St George’s complicated late medieval armour – precisely modelled on the kind of flanged metal sheeting knights wore in 15th-century Europe – show Pisanello’s brilliant ability to mimic real volume with shading. He has looked at the world around him closely. But as George and his fellow Saint, Anthony Abbot, stand guard, the Virgin Mary appears in the sky in a gold nimbus right out of Byzantine art and sends heavenly light shimmering in waves of gold and blue through the atmosphere. This abstract wave effect magically disrupts the painting’s creation of a real world. Pisanello can see clearly, but his imagination reaches far beyond the visible.• National Gallery, London. Peter Doig’s paintings have the heightened feel of dreams and movie stills, meshing the landscape and people of his adopted home of Trinidad with personal history and pop culture. This work, Bather (Night Wave), is his most unsettling interpretation. Read the story. Robert Frank, the outsider-genius photographer who changed the history of the art form, has died aged 94 … but there was so much more to him than the Beat-era images that made his name Photographer Christopher Anderson captured an intimate moment with his wife and son Sydney Contemporary 2019, Australia’s largest art fair, is scaling back A new documentary reveals a scandal at the heart of global architecture David Hockney is moving to France – but still won’t be allowed to smoke in restaurants Peter Doig, Jasmine Thomas-Girvan and Chris Ofili are bringing new colour to London galleries Uruguayan photographer Federico Estol has documented the masked shoe-shiners of Bolivia Manchester Art Gallery is tackling art history’s gender representation gap … while a Texan gallery is tracing the history of transgenderism in art The London School of Economics’ new building has shades of the Pompidou The architectural historian Kerry Downes, who wrote definitive books on Hawksmoor, Wren and Vanbrugh, has died aged 88 Rock photographer Ethan Russell captured the Beatles, the Stones, Hendrix and Joplin at unguarded moments … while a new biography reveals Lucien Freud in his youth To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.