The UK’s manufacturers have recorded the sharpest drop in factory output for seven years as mounting concerns over no-deal Brexit and the slowing global economy hit orders across the country. The monthly snapshot from IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply, which is closely watched by the Treasury for early warning signals from the UK economy, showed that activity plunged in August to the lowest levels since July 2012. The report found that EU-based customers are shunning British manufacturers as the risk of no-deal Brexit mounts, rerouting supply chains away from the UK as the likelihood of border disruption after 31 October increases. Orders from the US and Asia have fallen as the world economy slows, in a sign of the tough challenge facing the UKto strike new trade deals outside the economic bloc. The IHS Markit/Cips manufacturers purchasing managers’ index (PMI) plunged to 47.4 in August, down from 48.0 a month earlier. Anything above 50.0 separates economic growth from contraction. Rob Dobson, a director at IHS Markit, which compiles the survey, said: “The current high degree of market uncertainty, both at home and abroad, and currency volatility will need to reduce significantly if UK manufacturing is to make any positive strides towards recovery in the coming months.” Neil Foster, a research and policy officer at the GMB trade union, said: “Crashing out of the EU without a deal would cause mayhem, delays and increase costs for our importers, exporters and their supply chains. “The government should be working to rebuild confidence, instead ministers are risking more and more decent manufacturing jobs with their reckless approach.” There were steep reductions in new orders across several industries, against a backdrop of heightened political chaos and falling export demand across the world amid the US-China trade war. Global factory output has plunged into recession in recent months as the trade war between the world’s two biggest economies intensifies, which has dented economic growth in several major industrialised nations. The UK has fallen to the bottom of the G7 growth league table, while growth in Germany has gone into reverse and Italy stalled over the second quarter.