British Airways will operate more than half its normal flight schedule next Friday after a strike by pilots was called off. Although BA had stopped selling tickets for 27 September and started cancelling bookings, it will merge some services and operate more than 400 flights on the day. It is also offering to rebook thousands of cancelled passengers. The airline emailed passengers on 12 September to confirm cancellations, just before a 14-day notice period when it would have been liable for additional compensation payments under EU regulation. A BA spokeswoman said: “We are offering all customers whose flights were cancelled due to next week’s planned industrial action the option to rebook on to a British Airways flight, with a schedule of services to our daily destinations on 26, 27 and 28 September.” Passengers whose travel was cancelled and who were refunded can rebook at their original fare, and those rebooked on to other carriers by BA may also have the option to return to one of its services if available. However, passengers who booked their own alternative travel will not be refunded if they choose to fly with BA after all. Pilots walked out for two days this month, costing the airline an estimated £40m a day after all but five daily flights were cancelled. The British Airline Pilots’ Association announced on Wednesday that it had called off the 27 September strike, saying it was “time for a period of reflection before the dispute escalates further and irreparable damage is done to the brand”. The union has called for “meaningful new negotiations”, although BA has said it is only available for talks without preconditions in the long-running pay dispute. Balpa has a mandate for industrial action until January and said it could announce further strike dates. Pilots had asked for a profit share rather than a three-year pay increase worth 11.9%. The union said pilots were seeking recognition of sacrifices they had made for BA during years when the company was making a loss, given BA was recording profits of more than £2bn a year. Meanwhile, UK pilots at Ryanair have called off five days of strikes scheduled over the next nine days – on 21, 23, 25, 27 and 29 September – after failing to affect operations in three days of walkouts this week. Balpa said it was “taking the moral high ground” in ending the strikes, although it said relations were “acrimonious”. The union said: “Instead of engaging in negotiations Ryanair has reverted to type, electing to punish pilots by withdrawing their travel benefits.” It did not rule out setting new strike dates if talks did not take place.