Mario Abdo Benítez has announced plans to amend Paraguay’s constitution to allow the military a greater role in the battle against increasingly brazen and powerful Brazilian crime gangs. But Paraguay’s president’s announcement on Thursday prompted concerns for civil liberties in a country which only emerged from military rule in 1989 – and skepticism that a militarized crackdown could succeed in reining in the violence after similar strategies have failed in other Latin American countries. Benítez’s announcement came a day after the dramatic escape from custody of Jorge Samudio, an alleged leader of the notorious Brazilian cartel Comando Vermelho (Red Command). “We can’t wait any longer” said Abdo Benítez, “we have resources that we aren’t using, and we need to put them to work to strengthen our security policy”. Samudio was being returned to jail in a police-escorted vehicle after a scheduled court hearing in Asunción was cancelled at the last minute. Witnesses reported that approximately eight gunmen disguised as anti-narcotics officers opened fire on the convoy, killing a police officer and injuring two other officials and a bystander, before Samudio and the assailants made their getaway. The Paraguayan National Drugs Secretariat (SENAD) claimed that Samudio – a Paraguayan national – had been responsible for flying up to $20m of drugs per month into Brazil from Paraguay prior to his arrest. Government representatives admitted that protocol for transporting high-danger prisoners had not been followed and Abdo Benítez later tweeted that he had accepted the resignation of the Justice Minister and would substitute the National Police Commander. The escape was the latest incident in a growing wave of violence unleashed by Comando Vermelho and rival Brazilian cartel Primeiro Comando da Capital (PCC, First Capital Command) in Paraguay in recent years – especially within the country’s extremely overcrowded prisons. The scale of the problem was laid bare in November, when a Comando Vermelho boss, killed a young woman who was visiting him in prison in an attempt to avoid extradition to Brazil. In June this year, 10 prisoners were killed in a bloody riot involving PCC members. Just last week, the security chief of a jail in the region of Itapúa was taken captive by PCC prisoners. As they expand their reach across the border, the Brazilian cartels have largely outgunned Paraguayan groups to take control of the country’s booming drug trade, employing aggressive recruitment strategies – especially within jails – to rapidly expand membership. Paraguayan authorities have considered a range of responses, including the construction of specialised jails for cartel members. But opposition Senator Jorge Querey said that Paraguay needed a much more profound reckoning. Since its return to democracy in 1989, Paraguay has not managed to strengthen its public institutions, giving great advantages to criminal groups both outside and inside of prisons, he said. “At present, we have a Ministry of National Affairs and a national police force that are highly penetrated by corruption and have even become components of organised crime,” he said. Vidal Acevedo, of the NGO Service for Peace and Justice, said the employment of the armed forces represented a dire threat to citizens’ human rights, pointing to a recent report demonstrated that the deployment of the military against the leftist guerrilla group the Paraguayan People’s Army has already produced widespread human rights violations. Acevedo also said that the militarisation of anti-crime policy in other Latin American countries such as Mexico and Brazil had only led to more violence, and argued that Paraguay should concentrate on reforming and equipping its police forces. Such shortcomings were clearly illustrated on Wednesday: while the gunmen who freed Samudio were equipped with assault rifles and bulletproof vests, police officers had minimal equipment and had not been informed of the danger represented by the Comando Vermelho leader in their midst.