Like a dandelion in a daisy-chain, I slotted in with the fashion editors to talk to Romain de Tirtoff, dit Erté. Their sallies pealed up from the clearing among the nettles where they took wine with him in his publisher’s garden, but his part of the dialogue was inaudible. I expect he was telling them that for a woman to be fashion’s slave is an offence against nature. When my turn came to share heel-taps with the wasps, I found his tones were still somewhat faint at two yards. This should not be surprising from an 82-year-old being milked for his maximum publicity yield, but I prefer to think the real cause was a natural joy in quiet asides. This and his dreamy little chuckles make an atmosphere of assignation. I asked him when he gave his first interview to a fashion editor, and he whispered that it must have taken place about 1915. in Paris, when he worked for that attractive monster, the couturier Poiret. Who was a European sensation in 1911. Who looked like an Assyrian bull and did away with corsets. That was in his “Directoire” phase, making the female form once again malleable, as a designer basically sees it, says Erté. Then Poiret had his “Oriental” period and caused another sensation with his jupes-culottes. The Assyrian bull wore Chinese brocade jackets and Erté designed Eastern fantasies. For which, he tends to point out, he has a natural affinity being by blood a Tartar. As a result of his costumes for Richepin’s The Minaret and Diaghilev’s Sheherezade every modish girl wanted to look like a lampshade. One of these, costumed for the stage by Erté, was Mata Hari. He describes her as sensuous, but a little vulgar. Not really beautiful but, he adds, one cannot argue about legends. Sensation after sensation of anti-naturalism on the stage, and the coups de théâtre spreading out into the parterre, the salon and the costume ball. The establishment of a particular range of colours for each act of a show. At five he’d designed a wearable evening dress for his mother. At 22 he designed the first all-lamé dress – for Spinelly. Sensation. He designed another one, for himself, to wear at a ball at the Opéra. With pearly wings and black silk chiffon cape. Coup de foudre. He pretended to be a Poiret model In a box at the theatre. The cynosure of all eyes – he was much in demand to show off dresses. He dared to use orange, known as Tango. Poiret was emboldened to use oriental pink, called Rose Ignoble. Years later Elsa Schiaparelli had a line in shocking pink. Plus ça change, plus c’est la même rose. In his 60 years of creating a frisson, have the interview questions altered much? Oh yes, he says, they are no longer predictable. Sometimes they are not even questions. The fashion was for an absolute set pattern of inquiries, journalists jostling around the gang plank to know above all which was the most beautiful woman in the world. To which he had consistently replied, Lina Cavalieri. Whom he’d adored from afar at 14 in Russia, of a rare slenderness among prima donnas, whom he saw over years sing almost every role, but never met until he was 40 and the designer for La Princesse Lointaine. Aussi belle que jamais. Well then, I asked, to break new ground, who had been emphatically the most successful jolie-laide, in the sense of turning the tables on nature? Ah, this was extremely difficult…it was true, he said, that he had always insisted that women with certain defects were more interesting to present than classic beauties. A great impact could be had from exaggerating the stranger elements. He has dressed so many women – among them Mistinguett (too grand to pay), Gaby Deslys (whose partner Harry Pilcer kept a shrine to her after her death, with candles always burning), La Belle Otero (who gambled away 20 million dollars at Monte), Aileen Pringle (one of many for MGM)… He showed Lillian Gish the door for the pretentiousness of saying her skin would only tolerate the finest silk. The stories he tells about them are not so much witty – his wit has been expressed in his painting and in certain theatrical sets – but they have an impish camp edge about the extravagance of character. Continue reading