For good or ill, after 32 years serving on the frontline of radio news presentation for the Today programme, John Humphrys has become an emblem of BBC journalism. One of the corporation’s journalistic attack dogs, he has been the interviewer that political leaders, notably Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn, are keenest to dodge. This week, Humphrys is finally to bow out in the company of a former prime minister. David Cameron will brave an interview on the eve of the publication of his memoir – and it promises to be a vintage encounter. The avowedly impartial BBC, which Humphrys joined in 1966, regularly deploys the defence that it must be doing something right because it is equally unpopular with Remainers and Brexiters, with one-nation Tories and radical socialists, and with feminist activists and reactionary misogynists. And as Humphrys leaves Radio 4’s flagship news show at the age of 76, he could certainly make a similar claim. Since February, when his decision to step down was announced, public criticism of his performances has cranked up a gear. It is as if Today listeners are racing to fit in their complaints now that time is short. As a result, 2019 has brought a series of fevered reactions, for instance, to an antagonistic interview with the Labour MP Andy McDonald, to an inappropriate quip about domestic abuse shared with the Conservative MP David Davis and to a traditionalist suggestion that women “do a better job” of caring for babies. Assailed on all sides, Humphrys nevertheless has remained, like Auntie, a venerated feature of Britain’s media culture. Andrew Gilligan’s report, 2003 BBC correspondent Gilligan told Humphrys he had been informed by a reliable source that a dossier warning the government of the threat posed by Saddam Hussein had been deliberately “sexed up”. The exchange, Humphrys later said, “nearly brought down the BBC”. And it also shook the nation. The suicide of the story’s secret source, Dr David Kelly, followed, as did the resignation of the BBC’s director-general, Greg Dyke, and its chairman, Gavyn Davies. The Hutton inquiry and, latterly, the Chilcot inquiry into the war in Iraq, came in its wake. Julian Assange, 2010 Once the Wikileaks founder, Julian Assange, had been freed on bail by the high court, he had to face questions about his sexual experiences from Humphrys. The presenter did not hold back, repeating the claims of two Swedish women that Assange was a sexual predator who preferred having sex with young women without a condom. Assange famously replied: “A gentleman does not discuss his private life.” Asked how many women he had slept with, he answered: “A gentleman does not count.” George Entwistle, 2012 As BBC director-general, Entwistle survived only 54 days in the role due in part to the grilling he received from Humphrys after revelations about the crimes of the late Jimmy Savile. Dubbed by the Guardian as the “dead-man-walking interview”, in it Entwistle revealed his lack of knowledge about a Newsnight report that wrongly implicated a Tory peer in other allegations of sexual abuse. You don’t want to see somebody facing that sort of interview … I didn’t set out to humiliate him, of course I didn’t Part of the interview ran like this: Humphrys: “The Guardian yesterday carried a front-page story, which we now know was right, that cast doubt, serious doubt, on the BBC’s Newsnight programme … You didn’t know that actually happened?” Entwistle: “No, I’m afraid I didn’t.” Entwistle resigned 12 hours later. Humphrys later told Radio 4’s Broadcasting House show: “It wasn’t a happy moment, and not just because he was a colleague, which of course he was, and I both like and respect him, but you don’t want to see somebody facing that sort of interview … I didn’t set out to humiliate him, of course I didn’t.” Return to Cardiff, 2010 An assignment on the streets of his home city, Cardiff, shocked the broadcaster. Humphrys was upset to hear from pub clientele that the “whole point of the evening is to get drunk – on cheap booze”. He said: “In my local a pint of bitter is well over £3. In these hideous places, guarded by bouncers, it can be less than £1.” Four years previously, he had admitted drinking too much during his 20s and early 30s. “I got hugely fat and was on the verge of becoming an alcoholic,” he had said. Glastonbury, 2013 As a festival first-timer, Humphrys received a VIP tour from Worthy Farm’s owner and music impresario, Michael Eavis, and he met the Rolling Stones. A reluctant convert to music-festival culture, the euphoric veteran reporter said he found the experience “extraordinary”. Clare Hollingworth, 2015 In a piece celebrating the life of the influential and groundbreaking foreign correspondent, Humphrys admitted she had scared him when they worked together, saying: “She absolutely terrified me.” Her abrasive style was clearly an influence. The Queen, 2013 Humphrys’s efforts to “doorstep the Queen” with an impromptu question when she visited the BBC went down badly with some. He ventured a bland comment about Prince Philip “looking well yesterday”. “That’s because he’s not ill,” Her Majesty replied curtly. Later, offering the monarch a digital radio as a gift, he was told: “I don’t get an awful lot of chance to listen to the radio.” Michael Gove, 2017 The broadcaster’s apparent enjoyment of an ill-judged joke made by guest Michael Gove about the behaviour of the serial sexual abuser Harvey Weinstein was one of Today’s least edifying moments – and it was supposed to be marking the show’s 60th anniversary. The then-environment secretary later admitted he had made a “clumsy attempt at humour”. Coming into a studio with Humphrys, Gove had said, “is a bit like going into Harvey Weinstein’s bedroom. You hope to emerge with your dignity intact.” Barry Gardiner, 2018 The presenter faced a barrage of criticism after a combative interview with Labour’s shadow energy minister, Gardiner, in which Humphrys appeared to muddle degrees of temperature with percentages. The Green party’s co-leader Jonathan Bartley later said:“It’s a real shame that the Today programme didn’t think to have a Green voice on to help John Humphrys get his facts right this morning: a 1.5% increase is not the same as a 1.5 degree increase.” A spokesperson for Today later pushed back: “At no point did John Humphrys challenge or undermine the suggestion that action was needed.” Temperature-gate, 2015 Sometimes a comparatively innocuous comment has rebounded on the Today presenter. Coverage of a report that suggested women in offices often have to put up with low temperatures because men prefer it that way led his co-presenter, Sarah Montague, to hint she had a running battle with Humphrys over the setting on the studio thermostat. The public response to their altercation ran on through the following week. Gender pay scandal, 2018 Following the revelation that Humphrys had a salary of £600,000-£649,000 and that Jon Sopel, the BBC’s North America editor, earned £200,000-£249,999, an off-air bit of joshing between the two was made embarrassingly public. The former China editor Carrie Gracie had recently complained that her salary was not comparable. Humphrys joked that his first question would be about how much of Sopel’s salary he was prepared to hand over to Gracie. Sopel replied: “I mean, obviously if we are talking about the scope for the greatest redistribution I’ll have to come back and say: ‘Well yes Mr Humphrys, but … ” I’ve handed over already more than you fucking earn but I’m still left with more than anybody else Humphrys responded: “And I could save you the trouble as I could volunteer that I’ve handed over already more than you fucking earn but I’m still left with more than anybody else and that seems to me to be entirely just – something like that would do it?” Humphrys subsequently took another salary cut. David Dimbleby, 2018 The former Question Time host David Dimbleby guest edited the Today programme last December and argued with Humphrys over who was the “poshest” when Humphrys claimed Dimbleby was “quite posh”. “Sorry John, there’s a typical sneer in that question. You’re quite posh, I’m about as posh as you are. I come from Wales, you do. I’m not posh, I happen to have been a broadcaster for a long time,” the former Question Time presenter said. Rival definitions of poshness gripped the nation. Brian Redhead, 1987 Early in his Today career, a young Humphrys presented alongside Brian Redhead, a broadcasting titan who Humphrys said “expected everyone to be as sharp and clever as he was. All the time.” According to the junior presenter, the two almost came to blows on air. “I had foolishly tried to defend myself against his latest (probably well deserved) … criticism by daring to suggest that one of his own recent foreign reports was unlikely to trouble the Sony Award judges either. How we got through the rest of the programme is still a mystery to me. But afterwards he put his arm around my shoulders and all was well.” George Osborne, 2016 When bleak public finances were made public, Osborne, the then-chancellor, was asked to explain how he had missed two of his three key economic targets. Humphrys repeatedly asked why the debt had not gone down as a share of GDP, and he wanted the reasons behind a decision to break Osborne’s own cap on welfare spending. “I suppose what I’m asking is – what’s a bloke got to do in your job to get the sack?” he concluded. Alexandra Shulman, 2017 The outgoing Vogue editor Shulman, while being interviewed about her views on fashion, was given a far from easy ride. “I unexpectedly found myself having to defend the fashion industry from all manner of evil, such as promoting anorexia among young girls,” said Shulman, adding: “Suddenly I was confronted by a grey-haired guy in chinos hectoring me on the business I had worked in for a quarter of a century and which he neither knew, nor cared, much about.” Humphrys later claimed he was right to ask about Shulman’s influential role in promoting certain images of beauty: “It was massively interesting, and actually a rather important subject, particularly if you advance the proposition, which I did, that magazines like Vogue and the fashionistas in general, pushed the idea for many years, and are still pushing it, though they deny it, that in order to look nice you’ve got to be stick-thin.” Ed Miliband, 2019 In the spring of this year, the former Labour leader hoped to draw attention to the growing climate emergency but was asked to account for his views at every point. “During the war, we had rationing, we couldn’t go anywhere because there was no fuel and so on – are you telling us we shouldn’t fly, we shouldn’t drive, we should change the way we eat?” asked Humphrys. Miliband listed new ways to heat homes, but was challenged again by Humphrys: “Where are we gonna get that gas from? We’re not going to get it from fracking because that’s not going to be allowed any longer.”