1 Major Japanese sports, particularly baseball, keep spectators lubricated thanks to vendors who patrol the stands dispensing beer into cups. Known as Uriko, they are key to organisers’ plans to meet the demand for beer, a significant logistical issue since bars were drunk dry before kick-off when Australia visited in 2017. The Japanese brewery of Heineken, the tournament’s official beer sponsor, increased production by 80% – “We’ll try not to run out of stock no matter what,” they say – while briefing sessions were held in host cities, where restaurant and hotel operators were warned against debilitating booze shortages. “We hope they will take care to ensure enough beer is in supply during the event,” said an official from Oita prefecture. 2 Ticket designs have borrowed from traditional Musha-e art – which typically depicts warriors in battle scenes – to show rugby players in action. The CEO of the organising committee, Akira Shimazu, says they are “incredibly symbolic for Japanese people … The noble warrior, fighting with every inch of their body, mind and spirit is a fitting comparison to the modern, elite rugby player.” 3 Eye-catching kits include Australia’s “indigenous-inspired” away shirt, which they will wear in their pool match against Uruguay and perhaps again in the semi-finals if they get the chance, and features a “durable iconic collar”, and Argentina’s Nike-produced change shirt, with its central stripe that starts off gold, turns blue, ends up white and is decorated with a hot pink swoosh. New Zealand set out to “bring together Japanese and Maori cultures” and did so by getting a Japanese designer, Yohji Yamamoto, to come up with “hand-drawn koru and fern motifs”. The result is approximately as pleasing as a garment that is basically black could be. In further cross-cultural news, the Kiwis’ training top features a fuko neko (a lucky cat, though it seems mainly to be angry). 4 The only stadium that has been specially constructed for the World Cup is the Kamaishi Recovery Memorial Stadium, which will host two group games. It was specially constructed with not enough seating, which meant that temporary extra stands had to be specially constructed too – bumping up the capacity to 16,000, not far off 50% of Kamaishi’s 35,000 population. The eponymous recovery was from the earthquake and tsunami of 2011, which destroyed the schools that used to occupy the site. 5 In only slightly creepy news, journalists attending games at either Tokyo Stadium, which hosts the opening game, or International Stadium Yokohama, which hosts the final, will be able to get into the ground without showing tickets or identification thanks to the freshly installed facial recognition system, which will already know exactly who they are. The system is due to be used for every accredited person – athletes, media, staff and officials – at next year’s Tokyo Olympics. 6 The two mascots are shishi – “mythical creatures that are said to bring happiness and ward off evil”, which look like very pale outsized Ewoks. Ren-G, apparently, were “born when this ancient spirit met the five values of rugby – integrity, passion, solidarity, discipline”. Eagle-eyed readers will notice one particularly special thing about the five values of rugby is that there are only four of them (the missing one is apparently respect). Anyone who meets one of these creatures should bear in mind that “when they are happy they will swing their hair in a circle and break out into the Ren-G dance”, so would be well advised to keep their distance, or failing that to take active measures to ensure that the shishi remain unhappy. 7 Toshio Yasuda, 88, is the oldest of the 13,000 World Cup volunteers, parsed from 38,000 applicants, officially dubbed Team No Side. “I get a lot of energy from the young people,” he says. All applicants were interviewed, after participating in a group problem-solving exercise that involved passing a ball around using plastic piping. “It was a lot of fun,” said one participant. “There were people who I thought looked quite uptight at first, but then they came up with a lot of ideas.” The volunteers’ uniforms are blue with yellow lines that symbolise “unity, smiles and memories”. 8 This year’s World Cup ball is called the Sirius. It is almost exactly the same as the ball for the 2015 World Cup, except that Gilbert, the manufacturer, has “been able to get much more definition on the pimple”. The clever thing about this year’s pimple, the company explains, is that it has made the ball less slippery without making it less aerodynamic. The ball shares its name with the seventh-closest star to Earth, with which it apparently “shares important characteristics”, at least with a little gentle crowbarring. For example: “Sirius [the star] is actually two stars and Sirius [the ball] comprises two star-shaped pimples of different heights that aid grip and water dispersion.” 9 Organisers have had to plan for the possibility that games will be affected by earthquakes or other natural disasters, particularly with the tournament starting before the end of typhoon season. Alan Gilpin, the tournament director, has admitted that “we’re likely to have some issues” and reassures fans that contingency plans are in place. While knockout matches can be rescheduled, pool games cannot; any not completed will be declared drawn. 10 The official World Cup anthem is, once again, World in Union. This time it has been performed by Kiyoe Yoshioka, lead singer of the Japanese band Ikimono-gakari. Yoshioka previously had a minor part in the film Pokémon the Movie: Genesect and the Legend Awakened, for which she also contributed the theme song, Smile. “I have really enjoyed working with the music and lyrics, giving them what I hope is a unique, Japanese interpretation,” she said. “World in Union captures the spirit of global friendship and respect that rugby epitomises. I’m happy to be able to help spread this wonderful message throughout Japan and to the world.”