When, with six American flags at her back, Nancy Pelosi stood in the hallway at the Capitol and, at 5pm on Tuesday, announced an official impeachment inquiry, it was the moment many Democrats had been waiting for. It was also the moment many allies of Donald Trump had been waiting for. While Democrats have spent months on internal debates over whether to impeach the president, Republicans and conservative media were ready to march in lockstep and mobilise a strategy to weaponise impeachment for their own electoral advantage. Following Pelosi’s announcement, they launched an offensive on multiple fronts to discredit her, throw fresh dirt at Joe Biden and paint the Ukraine affair as a Russia hoax redux designed to overturn the 2016 election – and raise cash via a swiftly launched “Official Impeachment Defense Task Force”. Far from the consensus that eventually led to the downfall of Richard Nixon, the whiff of impeachment merely inflamed a sense of divisiveness, alternative realities and an ugly political brawl that could make last year’s clash over the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the supreme court look positively tame. Impeachment plays into Trump’s performance of victimhood and grievance against the political establishment. Accused of inviting a foreign government to interfere in American democracy, he tweeted about “a total witch-hunt scam by the Democrats” and claimed “presidential harassment”. Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, followed up with a statement that Democrats’ “attacks on the President and his agenda are not only partisan and pathetic, they are in dereliction of their Constitutional duty”. At the sound of the klaxon, Trump’s troops ran to their battle stations. His son Donald Trump Jr and lawyer Rudy Giuliani used a favourite tactic of accusing the accusers, recycling baseless allegations against Biden. Don Jr tweeted: “Amazing that Biden gets the pass on using his office to enrich his son, but the mere chance to somehow make it about @realDonaldTrump is all the Dems need to go all out. JOKERS!” Giuliani added: “Dems have no basis for impeachment. They should be investigated for obstructing justice. Their whistleblower may turn out to have no direct evidence. The story is so far off it sounds like another Dem-Media frame-up. Only crimes are Biden-Kerry pay for play. Thank you.” No evidence has emerged to support Trump’s claims that Biden improperly used his position as vice-president to push out a Ukrainian prosecutor in order to help his son. Republicans shrugged off the central allegation that Trump pressured the leader of Ukraine to investigate Biden’s son after withholding military aid. They made clear that, even if Trump is impeached by the House of Representatives, they have no intention of convicting him in the Senate and removing him from office. Article 1 of the United States constitution gives the House of Representatives the sole power to initiate impeachment and the Senate the sole power to try impeachments of the president. A president can be impeached if they are judged to have committed "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors" – although the constitution does not specify what “high crimes and misdemeanors” are. The process starts with the House of Representatives passing articles of impeachment. A simple majority of members need to vote in favour of impeachment for it to pass to the next stage. With a full house, that requires 218 of the 435 representatives to vote. Democrats currently control the house, with 235 representatives. The chief justice of the United States then presides over the proceedings in the Senate, where the president is tried, with senators acting as the jury. For the president to be found guilty two-thirds of senators must vote against them. Republicans currently control the Senate, with 53 of the 100 senators. Two presidents have previously been impeached, Bill Clinton in 1998, and Andrew Johnson in 1868, though neither were removed from office as a result. Richard Nixon resigned in 1974 before there was a formal vote to impeach him. Martin Belam The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, accused Democrats of a rush to judgment. “It simply confirms that House Democrats’ priority is not making life better for the American people but their nearly three-year-old fixation on impeachment,” he said. A slew of other Republicans issued statements joining the condemnation. Liz Cheney, chair of the House Republican conference and daughter of the former vice-president Dick Cheney, accused Pelosi of jumping the gun without firm evidence. “She has announced a formal impeachment inquiry of the President of the United States based on news reports of a phone call and a whistleblower,” Cheney said of the speaker. “The Speaker and House Democrats have lost all credibility and, most tragically, have abdicated their duty to the Constitution and to the American people.” The Republican National Committee was also circling the wagons. Steve Guest, its rapid response director, wrote in an email: “The Democrat-led impeachment inquiry is not based on facts, it solely stems from their political vendetta against President Trump. “Reminder: Democrats already tried once with a failed Russia hoax and as we all know: No Collusion. No Obstruction. So now they cooked up a ridiculous Ukraine hoax even before they have read the transcript of the call.” Meanwhile the Trump-Pence campaign for 2020 sent out fundraising emails. One began: “Nancy Pelosi just formally called for the first step towards my impeachment! This is just another smear job and pathetic attempt by Democrats to rip the power from the people. I’ve done nothing wrong. Trust me, you’ll see the transcript.” It announced the launch of the “Official Impeachment Defense Task Force” and sought donations. Some Democrats have long feared that impeachment could backfire by rallying Trump’s base and deepening a sentiment of “us versus them”. Trump’s backers certainly hope so. Brad Parscale, his 2020 campaign manager, said: “Democrats can’t beat President Trump on his policies or his stellar record of accomplishment, so they’re trying to turn a Joe Biden scandal into a Trump problem.” On Tuesday night, Tucker Carlson, a host on Rupert Murdoch’s Fox News network, played dazed and confused, saying he had been trying all day to understand what Democrats were alleging. “Even allowing for the hysteria of the moment,” he said, “this seems pretty reckless.” An hour later, his fellow host Sean Hannity, who is friendly with Trump, was predictably incensed. “The psychotic anti-Trump hysteria, it has now completely overtaken the entire Democratic party,” he told viewers. “What is happening is dangerous to this country. It is grossly political, will forever alter how any president in the future in his constitutional role as commander-in-chief will be able to communicate freely with other world leaders.” An entire rightwing ecosystem had kicked in, demonstrating how difficult it will be for the impeachment case to penetrate the Trump universe. Kurt Bardella, the president of the strategic communications firm Endeavor Strategies and a former congressional aide, said the entire Trump presidency had proved “nothing will deter the majority of Republicans and their propaganda platforms from standing by their man. “Trump’s support of a serial sexual predator like Roy Moore didn’t do it. Trump’s refusal to acknowledge Russia’s efforts to undermine our democracy didn’t do it. Trump’s relentless campaign to profit from his presidency didn’t do it. Trump’s blatant displays of racism didn’t do it. Certainly the president’s plot to hold foreign aid hostage in order to extort an investigation into a political rival won’t change the equation for the GOP.”