Australian standup Hannah Gadsby’s 2017 show Nanette bagged a clutch of awards, took Netflix by storm and threw down a gauntlet to comedy. Now it’s achieved a still more remarkable feat, by provoking Frankie Boyle to publicly reconsider his scorched-earth sense of humour. Boyle is on his first tour of his native country for a decade, to coincide with the filming of BBC show Frankie Boyle’s Tour of Scotland. Full Power features favourite routines from his recent Prometheus albums and finds the Glaswegian interrogating comedy – his own in particular – in the age of Nanette, trolling and the performative taking of offence. On either side of that, there’s more of the big-hitting, bad-taste standup we expect of the New World Order frontman. And a dash of intimate material, too, prompted perhaps by Boyle’s being among – well, if not friends, compatriots at least. Several routines are prefaced by commentary on the different receptions they receive north and south of the border. English audiences are aghast at tales of his hardbitten Glasgow upbringing – whereas to many Scottish crowds, Boyle reports, they sound practically genteel. But if his childhood wasn’t really brutal, his comedy still is. The show starts with a tour of the 2019 landscape, as Boyle delivers jaundiced takes on the Michael Jackson documentary, Comic Relief and white saviours, and on that gift to comedians, Liam Neeson’s vigilantism. For those of us who adore his sometimes visionary New World Order sermons, Full Power is fairly light on politics. But there’s fine material on the stupidity and bad faith that swirl around Brexit, and a deathless one-liner explaining Jacob Rees-Mogg’s appearance. One striking routine counters the latter’s homophobia with an image of Jesus struggling to reattach a leper’s penis – then doubles the laugh by imagining a Question Time panel interrogated on the subject. Another pictures our political leaders engaged in “hierarchical sodomy” at boarding school. (“The last time this cabinet saw eye to eye was over the back of a weeping first-year.”) There’s milder stuff – like the material on Boyle’s Donegal-born parents, a rare foray into his personal life. But the most eye-catching section – which shelves the vitriol for something more reflective – addresses comedy in sensitive times. Partly, that’s an excuse to call out those acts who rail at PC and pretend their free speech is being policed. Having mocked those who identify as trans, Ricky Gervais is himself mocked for identifying as a standup comedian. But it feels equally like a sincere attempt on Boyle’s part to appraise – with reference to Gadsby and to Bill Hicks – the value of his own brand of humour. At a time when violent speech has gone mainstream, has his antagonistic comedy become conformist? Can comedy operate as a vehicle for the truth – or just for “funnier lies”? And if comedy is about surprise, is it possible to “surprise people politely”? It’s an inquiry in progress, and it’ll be fascinating to see where it leads. Not, one suspects, towards any dilution of Boyle’s baroque vision, which in Full Power’s closing stages conjures the Queen plotting to revert to her dragon body, the chilling moment when young Frankie lost his childhood innocence, and the corpses of abused children being cast from the yachts of the super-rich. It’s another strong set from Boyle, combining old but gold material with new thoughts on the purpose of his comedy. At King’s theatre, Glasgow, 19-21 September and 1 October. Then touring. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.