Home Office minister Brandon Lewis (Letters, 10 September) writes: “EU citizens are our friends … and the EU settlement scheme has been designed to make it straightforward for them to get the immigration status they need.” Really? I am a French citizen who moved to the UK in 1965 and have lived here continuously ever since. I qualified as a teacher here and worked in the state education system. I have been in receipt of a UK state pension for over 20 years which has always been paid into my UK bank account. The process for applying for settled status seemed simple enough according to the government website. All I needed to do was upload a copy of my passport and a photograph, give them my NI number, fill out a form and all would be hunky-dory. Er… no. This wasn’t enough. I now have to prove that I have lived in the UK for the last five years, which required me to upload copies of my annual bank statements and council tax bills going back to 2013. I’m not a hoarder, and so don’t keep documents for seven years. Now I have to chase my bank and the local authority to get the necessary copies. Perhaps, as a foreigner, I don’t understand the meaning of the word “straightforward”. Please enlighten me, Mr Lewis.Jacqueline GilbertSt Ives, Cornwall • I have just read Brandon Lewis’s article (The Home Office’s message to EU citizens living here: we want you to stay, theguardian.com, 6 September) in respect of the need for us EU citizens living in the UK to apply for settled status, mainly to prove to the authorities that we have lived permanently in the UK for more than five years and are permitted to stay after Brexit. I would dearly like to know what proof the authorities need from me, as someone who has lived in the UK since 1964, married a British citizen in 1968, and produced two quite intelligent and useful British citizens who in turn are contributing to society and are taxpayers? The Home Office should really know me by now. I have a national insurance number, an NHS number and a British driving licence. I have a tax reference number because, believe me, I pay large sums to HMRC. I draw a UK state pension. The information that I am still a German citizen (in my head always an EU citizen) can be found in the electoral roll. Why, after all this, do I need to comply with a requirement to prove that I have existed in this country not merely for five but more than 55 years? Does this speak of incompetence by the Home Office, or rather a desire to belittle and humiliate EU citizens? That is certainly what it feels like.Marlies BranstonBedford • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition