I had set my eye on 10 Heddon St even before the lease was signed or chefs Chris Leach and David Carter had begun perusing bowls. Then they announced that the address they’d be occupying – which, for less able detectives, is number 10 on Heddon Street, just off London’s Regent Street – would be a temporary home only. This meant that if I told you about their seaweed butter tagliatelle or their roast pink fir potatoes with smoked cod’s roe, by late autumn you’d have to track down Leach and Carter at their new place in Soho, which will go under a different name. But my readers are resourceful, and 10 Heddon St sounded promisingly like exemplary pasta, which is something of which we’ll never tire. In a gimmicky restaurant landscape, the queue at Padella in London Bridge still snakes right around the corner half an hour before it opens (such dedication is one reason they announced this week that they’re opening a second branch in Shoreditch in early 2020). On a recent road trip to Berkshire to check out fancy, multi-course fine dining, my happiest meal turned out to be a bowl of spaghetti alla puttanesca at Newbury’s big-hearted, family-run Mio Fiore. Pasta is a complex thing to do well, but when it is done well, it’s restorative. Leach, formerly of Pitt Cue and Kitty Fisher’s, is someone to trust with flavours; the same goes for Carter, whose brainchild, the “grown-up” barbecue joint Smokestak, is one of the UK’s biggest street-food-turned-bricks-and-mortar success stories. Their joint venture promised handmade pasta and in-house charcuterie. Things can get pretty piggy here, so if you’re not into pork, you’ll have to dance around the Leach and Carter appreciation of Gothelney Farm pigs, and their transformation of the shoulders into coppa and speck, the belly into pancetta, and so on. The menu is changeable, but expect the likes of fresh garganelli with a ragù made of spicy pig tail or grilled pork chop with a fresh peach mostarda. We went for Sunday lunch just before the weather shifted rapidly autumn-wards and sat outside, with damp backs of knees, in this glorified back lane. It’s a location that, despite decades of visiting to eat at the likes of Momo, Sabor and Titbits, I will never find truly loveable. Al-fresco dining is a chore that many of us feign to enjoy, so thank God we’ve said goodbye to it for another year. Give me a booth at the back, in the dark, and without wasps and accordion-playing buskers. This is the time of the year where goths, grumps and sun-phobes come into their own. And anyway, I’ll get all the sunshine I need from 10 Heddon St’s herb and fennel salad, which on paper sounds like something you’d order sheerly out of conscience. Wrong: it is heavenly – a fantastic, bold alignment of chilli, mint and sharp citrus; in fact, it feels churlish to shame it with the dowdy term “salad”. The fresh focaccia is outstanding, too: pillowy, crisp and doused in the highest echelon of extra-virgin olive oil. Those crisp fir potatoes served with a thick pool of what is essentially hoity-toity taramasalata are one of the feelgood hits of 2019. We ordered two plates and fought over them impolitely. There’s a sense here that nothing leaves this kitchen that hasn’t been puzzled over and preened to make it perfect. Yes, it’s just pasta and sauce, and no one’s reinventing the wheel, but then the tonnarelli cacio e pepe, which as a buzz dish was the toast of a thousand Instafeeds a few years ago, is back once again like the renegade master: saucier, pinker and heaving with fresh crab. The prettiest dish of all must be the plump, pretty parcels of sweetcorn ravioli delightfully teamed with girolles and peppery nasturtium leaves. Tagliatelle with seaweed butter is slippery, salty and glorious, with a pale green dusting the colour of a mermaid’s bouffant. I’m not drinking at the moment, because all critics need a point of enforced drying out before marching into the breach of Christmas, so thank God that 10 Heddon St’s array of “house-made softs” features jasmine and peach ice tea and a good, fresh, old-style lemonade. They also offer a selection of shaken, stirred and spritz-style amaros, which is a trend I can only see growing over 2020. What, you don’t like Cynar, Campari, Liquore delle Sirene? Too bitter? Catch hold of yourself, because they are going to be unavoidable. 10 Heddon St is a heady blend of the new and trendy mixed with something that will never get old – a full stomach. Wherever Leach and Carter set up next, I’ll be sure to follow. • 10 Heddon St 10 Heddon Street, London W1 (no telephone booking). Open Mon-Sat, noon-3pm, 5.30-10.30pm. About £25 a head for three courses, plus drinks and service. Food 9/10 Atmosphere 7/10 Service 8/10