Chris Hammer’s career as a political advisor was meteoric and very, very short. Three weeks after he started a job with Labor MP Stephen Jones, he got “this fantastic book deal”. “I was laughing and crying, it was just unbelievable,” he says. That was a Friday. On the Monday, he resigned. “Stephen was most gracious about it all.” Shortly after that, the international and television rights to Scrublands, Hammer’s debut novel, were sold. Overnight he had became that rare, elusive thing: a writer who could make a decent living from fiction. Yet even now he has difficulty calling himself an author. “It is even more difficult to say I am a novelist,” he tells Guardian Australia. We meet in the piano bar of the showy Emporium hotel on Brisbane’s South Bank in the lead-up to publication of Hammer’s second novel, Silver. The hotel is a nice perk of being a bestselling author travelling on book business.Prior to Scrublands, Hammer had written two non-fiction books about the Australian landscape: The River (2011) and The Coast (2013), both of which were well received but didn’t make him any money, and he still felt as if calling himself a “writer” was unwarranted. “I found I couldn’t describe myself as a writer because I wasn’t making a living out of it,” he says. Scrublands is an epic, atmospheric crime novel, full of the ferocious heat of the drought in the Riverina, a scorched landscape flattened by hardship. The revelations come in layers and nothing is as it first appears. The book proved as popular with audiences as publishers had hoped, sitting in bestseller lists for months. Not too shabby for a “bit of a hobby retirement project” written in “stolen moments here and there”. “I deliberately didn’t aspire to some sort of literary masterpiece,” says Hammer. “It is genre fiction, crime writing. I thought you would have a launch, your friends would come and slap you on the back and then it would disappear without trace.” Hammer was a journalist for more than 30 years, including for Fairfax and SBS current affairs project Dateline, the last of those years spent amid the agonising decline of print media. Working in print journalism gave him the discipline required to write a novel in his spare time. “You don’t romanticise it, it’s just something you do. You don’t say ‘I won’t write today because I’m not feeling inspired.’ Imagine a journalist ringing an editor and saying ‘I can’t file today because I am not inspired.’ You are in the habit and if you don’t do it, you don’t feel right.” In Silver, Hammer brings back his flawed Scrublands protagonist, journalist and former foreign correspondent Martin Scarsden. Scarsden returns to Port Silver, the town in which he grew up, to live with his girlfriend, Mandalay. He arrives to discover his old school friend, lying on the floor of Mandalay’s house with a knife plunged into his back and a postcard in his hand. Hammer’s writing is enveloping, lyrical, evoking a profound sense of place. While Scrublands was parched, Silver is about the sea, a fecund place, lingering on the natural beauty of the coast and its pristine bays threatened by ruthless developers. The plot, meanwhile, is complex, sometimes just this side of preposterous as the body count rises. “It is like a portable Midsomer,” Hammer jokes. Silver also draws out the details of Scarsden’s troubled childhood, a history that Hammer is quick to remind readers is fiction. “Martin’s life was quite traumatic, whereas mine was boringly suburban. I don’t have post-traumatic stress, I have been married for 21 years,” he says. “But when I travelled I ran into people like Martin who were traumatised by covering conflict zones, natural disasters like the tsunami in Aceh. If you are doing it all the time it is going to mess you up.” Silver’s plot is full of twists and turns, raising inevitable questions about its author’s planning process. “I have learned that crime writers are divided into plotters and [seat of the] pantsers,” Hammer explains. “Pantsers are people who just start writing and don’t know how it is going to end.” Hammer says he is definitely at the pants end of the spectrum. “I rewrote the end of Scrublands – the last 40,000 or 50,000 words – twice, because I got a better idea. There are some days where it just flows out and it’s almost like you are reading the book rather than writing it, and you can’t wait to get up and start writing because you want to know what happens next.” For as many people who die on the pages of Hammer’s books, there are more who died before they even got there. “You often hear in writing circles about ‘killing your darlings’ when it is something you really love and you’ll find difficult to let it go. I am a serial killer. I kill my darlings left, right and centre. I threw out at least 100,000 words writing Scrublands. If it doesn’t work, it goes.” Earlier this year he signed another two-book deal with Allen and Unwin, and a separate two-book deal with Headline in the UK. Daunting as this is, he says he is still learning and hopes this doesn’t represent his career peak. “I want to do better. I would be really disappointed if in 10 years time Scrublands was my best book.” • Silver by Chris Hammer is out on 1 October through Allen & Unwin