Name: Steve WardlawAge: 50Occupation: Lawyer and chairman of insurer Emerald LifeIncome: £60,000 salary, £150,000 a year from investments I might be what some might call “wealthy” but bizarrely I’ve become a lot more frugal since starting my own business a few years ago. I’m more conscious that money has to last. I’m also trying to make sure other people are provided for. I want my nieces to go to university and the cost of that will fall to me. I worked as a senior oil and gas lawyer in Moscow for eight years and was on a low tax rate of about 13% which allowed me to save and invest in small businesses and build a seven-figure investment portfolio that now produces about £150,000 a year. The life I have now is a very different life to how I grew up. My mother worked in a fish and chip shop and my dad was a cab driver. I was the first one in my family to go to university. I quit the oil and gas industry to set up Emerald Life, which specialises in offering insurance for the LGBT community. I’m chairman of the company, which means I’m the poster child of the business, which I co-founded with my friend Heidi. I take home £120,000 a year from the company, which is part salary and part debt repayment. I also earn income through my buy-to-let portfolio. I own two properties in Edinburgh which are very popular at this time of the year. They’re just short-term lets; at their peak they’re rented out for £240 a night, but in the winter it’s much less. I let out one in London for £1,700 a month, and then the other two are in Cape Town. My partner, Ian, and I also have a few other businesses including a renovations company and a record label – M Rex. That came about as a friend who is a singer wasn’t getting a good deal so I just set it up. Ian and I live in both Kent and London. Our Kent property is a converted oast house, which has three chimneys and looks like a cross between a hobbit house and a Disney princess’s castle. It’s lovely, you open the back door and you see nothing but fields. I bought it for £610,000 and it’s probably worth north of £1m now. We spent about £200,000 renovating it, which involved moving a few walls, adding a dog-friendly shower room, and a new staircase. We did buy another small piece of farmland to add to the garden which was a learning experience. The mortgage is about £800 a month and is tied into our investment portfolio. I love to collect British classic cars and have about 10 in total but only five are good to drive at the moment. They all serve a different purpose. For example, if I’m off to the opera I’ll take the Bentley, if I’m driving down the coast I’ll take the Jaguar. If I’m honest, I have too many. I’m getting gentle pressure from Ian to rationalise them. It’s a silly amount of cars. The Emerald office is located right next to Borough Market in London, which is a nightmare. I spend about £300 a week on food shopping. About £40 of this is on very expensive dog food. Our two dogs eat more healthily than we do. They have sardines while we’ll have a pizza in the oven. I used to dine at fancy restaurants when I was a lawyer but now I’m happy to visit Pizza Express. Before I’d easily get carried away and spend £200 on a bottle of wine but now I have a startup I’m more conscious about money. We tend to go on two long-haul holidays every year. We use Elton John’s travel agency and they’ll often find us good deals. You get spoilt travelling business class – we’ll spend about £6,000 on flights for two of us to fly to Cape Town. But often we take UK trips to places like Gloucestershire with the dogs. Ian also collects Doctor Who memorabilia and Egyptian artefacts. For our wedding we each bought a picture for the other – two of a set of 50 by the artists Jake and Dinos Chapman, who took a series of original Goya etchings and over-painted them to look like grotesque cartoons. My mother hates them! I don’t see myself retiring. I’ll probably buy small businesses that make less money but are more fun. I want to keep myself occupied.