It may well be a stretch for Wigan supporters to concede they have been thoroughly outplayed from their great opponents from across the Billinge Hill - but for everyone else, this was about as close to a perfect display of play-off rugby from St Helens as you are likely to find. This, their fourth win of the season against Wigan, ensures they are the first team to book their place in the Grand Final - for a record-breaking 11th time. But should the Warriors defeat Salford next week to set up a fifth meeting of the year, history has shown us that Wigan have produced their best on the biggest stages. “I don’t want to think about two weeks too much but if we get another crack at them, it will be completely different,” Wigan’s coach, Adrian Lam, said. Even he could not deny afterwards that his side were comprehensively outplayed by the Super League leaders in every department here. Led by the no-nonsense approach from their pack, the seven tries Saints scored were of the highest class. This was not so much a progression to Old Trafford as it was a procession. By half-time, they had already scored four of those tries to lead 26-6 and even so early in the contest, it was difficult to plot a way back for the Warriors. Theo Fages and Kevin Naiqama broke the deadlock and, coupled with three goals from Lachlan Coote, the hosts led 14-0 in as many minutes. Wigan’s one and only breach of the St Helens line in that first half temporarily reduced the gap to ten when Liam Marshall finished a Chris Hankinson break, but normal service was quickly resumed. The outstanding Luke Thompson restored their 14-point lead, before Jonny Lomax’s wonderful solo try realistically put the result beyond doubt even at such an early stage. The critics had pondered whether a week off in the opening round of the play-offs as a result of finishing top would hinder, rather than help, Saints. This was as emphatic a response as anyone could have hoped. “I was delighted we had the week off, and I guess it’s good we’ll get another next week,” Justin Holbrook, the St Helens coach, said afterwards. This was also a poignant night for Holbrook, his final home game in charge before heading to the NRL next year to coach Gold Coast. Fittingly, given the way he has revived St Helens’ fortunes, his farewell will be at Old Trafford. Any lingering doubts over whether they would reach the final were quickly extinguished after the break though, when Coote’s wonderful pass sent Zeb Taia over. That made it 32-6 in the Saints’ favour: and it was the catalyst for Holbrook to withdraw his big names with half an hour remaining. However, the hosts weren’t done, and two wonderful handling moves close to the Wigan line enabled Mark Percival to cross for two well-taken tries. By then however, many visiting supporters had made their way for the exits. This wasn’t their night. By the time Bevan French scored a consolation for the Warriors in the dying seconds, St Helens supporters responded with chants of “Salford, Salford.” They know who they want to meet in a fortnight’s time - but the danger for whoever wins that final eliminator is that if the Saints replicate this performance, it will take an almighty ask to defeat them. St Helens Coote; Makinson, Percival, Naiqama, Grace; Lomax, Fages; Walmsley, Roby, Thompson, Taia, Peyroux, Knowles. Interchange Amor, McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Ashworth, Smith. Tries Fages, Naiqama, Thompson, Lomax, Taia, Percival 2 Goals Coote 6 Wigan Hardaker; Marshall, Hankinson, Gildart, Burgess; Williams, Leuluai; Clubb, Powell, Partington, Isa, Farrell, O’Loughlin. Interchange Byrne, Flower, French, Smithies. Tries Marshall, French Goals Hardaker Referee C Kendall Attendance 14,508