Antonio Conte has insisted Italian supporters must “improve” after Romelu Lukaku was subjected to racist chanting on Sunday night in Internazionale’s 2-1 victory over Cagliari. Lukaku was handed the opportunity to seal the win from the penalty spot with 20 minutes remaining after Stefano Sensi was fouled and he kept his cool despite large sections of the crowd aiming clearly audible monkey chants at the former Manchester United player. “I think that in Italy we must improve a lot and be more educated and respectful towards those doing their job,” said Inter’s coach, Conte. “In other countries you support the team; you don’t insult the opposition like this. There must be the maximum respect. Today I was treated well and wasn’t insulted, other times it hasn’t happened like that and it’s not nice.” It is not the first time the Sardinian club’s supporters have targeted an opposition player, with Everton’s Moise Kean suffering similar treatment when he played against Cagliari for Juventus last season and both Blaise Matuidi and Sulley Muntari having previously suffered racist abuse. Cagliari escaped punishment over Kean after the Italian Football Federation ruled the chants had “an objectively limited relevance”. Lautaro Martínez had earlier opened the scoring in the 27th minute before the hosts levelled through João Pedro five minutes after the break. Inter are now top of Serie A on six points after two rounds along with Torino and the champions, Juventus. Elsewhere Luis Alberto struck the equaliser as Lazio claimed a 1-1 draw against Roma in a lively derby, also in Serie A. Roma, for whom Chris Smalling was an unused substitute, went ahead with a penalty from Aleksandar Kolarov after 17 minutes following a handball by Sergej Milinkovic-Savic. Nicolo Zaniolo also hit a post for Roma. Ciro Immobile and Joaquin Correa both hit the woodwork as Lazio pushed for a leveller and it eventually arrived when Alberto struck just before the hour. Lazio finished strongly with Marco Parolo hitting the crossbar and Manuel Lazzari having what would have been a late winner disallowed for offside. “There are inevitably regrets, because we had so many chances and you have to win games like that,” Lazio coach Simone Inzaghi said. “We could have used a bit more luck. But we played great football.”