What were you hoping for?A night out with someone exciting. First impressions?Very pretty, and a brilliant choice of cocktail. What did you talk about?My weird name, travelling, food, families, the waiters’ uniforms and, obviously, gynaecology. Any awkward moments?Georgia suggested some post-date homework, which was a first. Good table manners?Faultless. The sharing finger food was a great leveller. Best thing about Georgia?Her smile and sense of humour. Would you introduce her to your friends?For sure. They would like her more than they like me. Describe Georgia in three words?Funny, intelligent, intriguing. What do you think she made of you?Confident, friendly and honest. We laughed a lot, so hopefully fun, too. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub. And... did you kiss?Yes, we did. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Order more of the sashimi tuna tacos. Marks out of 10?8.5. Would you meet again?My fingers are firmly crossed for a second date. What were you hoping for?I had asked for newly single Liam Hemsworth, but was happy to have an evening of free food and wine. First impressions?He wasn’t American, which threw me. What did you talk about?The origins of his name, the benefits of watching Love Island, and the weirdest items I’ve seen at work. Any awkward moments?Early on in the evening, I had already set him homework. The waiter found it very amusing. Good table manners?He kept my wine glass well topped up. Best thing about Bud?Extremely easy to get along with and very complimentary. Would you introduce him to your friends?My friend says that no one is trustworthy unless they have a 26-30 railcard. I can only assume that he doesn’t. Describe Bud in three words?Youthful, engaging, zestful. What do you think he made of you?We hadn’t managed to finish the main course before he asked for my number. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub for a final drink before curfew. And... did you kiss?All good dates end with a kiss. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We should have ordered more food. It was amazing. Marks out of 10?A strong 9. Would you meet again?The age gap means I don’t think this is the start of a Bud-ing romance. • Bud and Georgia ate at Bloomsbury Street Kitchen, London WC1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com