South Africa’s electric wing Makazole Mapimpi scored two tries as the Springboks eased to a nine-try win over their neighbours Namibia, but it was a far from polished performance in their Rugby World Cup Pool B meeting. There was only ever going to be one winner despite what Rassie Erasmus, the Springbok coach, having picked what he called a fringe selection. Namibia simply could not cope with South Africa’s physicality, with their only points coming from a Cliven Loubser penalty. The hooker Bongi Mbonambi (two), François Louw, Schalk Brits and Siya Kolisi, Warrick Gelant and Lukhanyo Am also crossed for tries, but there was a lack of cohesion and, at times, quality to the Bok play that will be a worry for Erasmus, whose side lost their opening game to New Zealand last Saturday. Not that Brits, the captain for the day, saw much wrong in the performance. “I’m really tired but it was a great performance by the boys, I’m really happy and it’s a great game we’re playing,” he said after starting in an unfamiliar No 8 role. “I’ll just play wherever the coach wants me to play. Just to be on the pitch with such a great bunch of guys is phenomenal.” They are next in action on Friday against Italy in a crucial match in Shizuoka that should decide second place in the pool. Erasmus said: “Now we’ve got this big Italy game, which probably will determine if we go to the quarter-finals or not. This will give us a nice springboard to get into that game. I know Namibia are probably targeting the Canada game so they rested a few players. So we won’t read too much into the score.” The number of unforced errors made by the Boks, especially in the first half, was high and Elton Jantjies did little to suggest he is pushing Handré Pollard for a starting place at fly-half with some poor decision-making and execution. Namibia, made up almost entirely of amateur players, never stopped trying to run the ball but did not manage a single line-break. South Africa produced four monstrous attacking scrums early on to show their dominance, with the referee, Mathieu Raynal, showing restraint as Namibia buckled and wheeled under the pressure. The first three tries were all from rolling mauls following lineouts, two for Mbonambi and one by Louw, before Mapimpi secured the bonus-point inside 27 minutes with a neat finish out wide. The fly-half Loubser replied with a penalty before Am crossed to send the Boks in with a 31-3 half-time lead. They took almost 10 minutes to find their rhythm after the break but added a sixth try as Am sliced through a gap in the defence, Gelant finishing the move off. Mapimpi crossed for his second out wide and then Kolisi came off the bench to canter in before Brits added the ninth with 16 minutes remaining. “For us, we’re just trying to build on our momentum and today was a good test,” Namibia’s captain, Tjiuee Uanivi, said. “They played a great physical game and it’s good to measure ourselves against that. We’re just going to go back and look at the positives and negatives and fix that. “It doesn’t get any easier. New Zealand move the ball quicker, an all-around good team and you can expect quality everywhere.”