A generation of viewers will always associate Supermarket Sweep with bunking off school. The quiz show, originally hosted by the late Dale Winton, ran for most of the 90s and returned briefly in 2007. For children of a certain age, it was a classic sick-day treat. In accordance with the “if people remember it fondly, we can flog it” approach to contemporary television commissioning, nostalgia has gone wild in the aisles and ITV has brought it back to life, despite the fact that we are surely only a generation away from schoolkids asking, “Daddy, what’s a shop?” Giving your time to Amazon Prime doesn’t have quite the same ring to it. I love a bit of camp tat and was ready for this to be as much fun as I remembered, which is the food that nourishes nostalgia in the first place. Instead, I felt as if I was walking around a 24-hour supermarket at 3am. It is over the top in its gaudy brashness and somehow also stilted, as if they have bought a massive glitzy helium balloon but forgotten to put the gas in. The format is largely the same, though stretched out, unflatteringly, to an hour. Three teams of two answer general knowledge questions, in order to add time to their clocks, which will determine how long they have to tear up the fruit’n’veg section and do the most expensive shop they can. The winning team gets to Super Sweep – a sort of frantic treasure hunt for the big cash prize. The losers get a jumper and, in a nod to eco-friendliness, a bag for life. They also leave with a touch more dignity. Rylan Clark-Neal has taken over hosting duties and you would think it would be a perfect fit. He is a strong presenter, funny and quick, but he seems frozen by the format; by having to get through the admin of asking questions and adding time. He works best when he is winging it – here he seems to have gone method and plays the haughty shop manager a little too well: instead of telling jokes, he complains about the mess the contestants have left on the floor and says “I’m fumin’,” a lot. There is a moment of self-mockery when he refers to himself as one of Britain’s best pop stars. When he warms up to the task, let’s hope for more of that and less “HR will deal with this later”. The three teams, at least, are up for it. Elisha and Michelle are best friends who met doing Saturday jobs 17 years ago. Kyle and Brendan are best friends from university. But my favourites are Adam and Natasha. Adam is a Michael Bublé impersonator and, don’t worry, he does treat us to a little rendition. Adam wooed Natasha on Tinder by telling her she was the most beautiful girl he had seen on Tinder and here they are now, trying to win £50 by accurately filling a bag of pick’n’mix to 500g and accepting the outrageous notion that “Indiana Jones” rhymes with “headphones”. Spoilers coming up so if you plan to watch later … The Supermarket Sweep questions make the Tipping Point look like University Challenge – but even so there is room for upsets. “A vital ingredient in Caesar salad?” “Salad.” It wasn’t the right answer but, really, was it the wrong answer? On reflection, I think Natasha was robbed. There is a mystery shopper segment, in which shadowy famous people grab frozen potato waffles from the freezer and we have to guess who it is. There are two people, in the shape of Eamonn Holmes and Ruth Langsford. “I’m pretty sure it’s Eamonn Holmes and someone else, but I can’t remember the woman’s name,” says Adam. And the contestants have to guess the celebrity from items on a till receipt. The answers are Johnny Depp, Justin Bieber and Maura from Love Island. Only one is a special guest in the studio and you won’t believe who (Maura from Love Island). Of course, it’s all about the Big Sweep and the Super Sweep. When I first watched Supermarket Sweep in the 90s, I fantasised about doing a trolley dash of my own. But as the contestants frantically lobbed sanitary towels into trolleys, I realised that the dream, like my youth, is dead. The prize fund is only £3,000. I went back to an old episode on YouTube, from 1995, to check how well the economy is going. It’s what Keynes would have wanted. The prize fund 24 years ago was £2,000. Perhaps I should have watched this reboot with the full sick-day treatment – under a blanket, mainlining tinned tomato soup. The full sensory experience might have kicked the necessary nostalgia into life. Instead, I was simply fumin’.