One of the more welcome publishing trends of the past two or three years has been the glut of thoughtful books about modern masculinity. These include memoirs such as Howard Cunnell’s moving account of his daughter’s gender dysmorphia and reassignment, Fathers and Sons; and Thomas Page McBee’s The Amateur, which recounts the author’s preparations for a boxing bout against a cis male after transitioning. Several recent debut novels, including Garth Greenwell’s What Belongs To You, Daniel Magariel’s One of the Boys and Matthew Sperling’s Astroturf, have also explored this terrain. The perniciousness of masculinist ideology is a recurring theme in Edouard Louis’s fiction – The End of Eddy, History of Violence and Who Killed My Father – and is also at the centre of Ben Lerner’s forthcoming third novel, The Topeka School. JJ Bola’s contribution is unusual in that it is explicitly aimed at younger people. Before becoming a writer – he has three poetry collections and a novel, 2017’s No Place to Call Home, to his name – Bola spent many years as a youth worker helping young people with behavioural and mental health problems, so he knows a thing or two about the feelings of insecurity and low self-esteem experienced by many young men today. While self-help gurus of the Jordan Peterson type nudge their readers towards the consolations of chauvinism – and, in so doing, fuel a grievance culture – Bola insists the only solution is to dismantle the entire concept of maleness as we have hitherto known it and replace it with “a masculinity that sees the necessity of the equality of genders for it to not only survive, but to thrive”. He is under no illusions about the scale of this task, which will require “a collective cultural and social transformation and shift in consciousness”. To this end Mask Off seeks to bridge the gap between two constituencies: the scholarly and activist milieux, which have their own established vernacular of critique and dissent; and the wider community of uninitiated younger readers who, while potentially sympathetic to feminist politics, may find some of its terms of reference opaque or intimidating. This slim primer is part of a new Pluto series called Outspoken, which the publisher describes as comprising “punchy political books for young people”. Bola introduces the reader to concepts such as slut-shaming, male privilege, emotional labour, victim-blaming and intersectionality. Mask Off is interspersed with pertinent autobiographical vignettes. Bola was a basketball player in his youth, competing in national-level tournaments before a bout of severe depression put paid to his ambitions. In recent years a number of high-profile athletes have spoken openly about their mental health struggles, something which would have been almost unthinkable barely a decade ago. The “mask” of the book’s title refers to the pretence of brutish insentience men are conditioned to adopting from an early age. Shedding this facade made Bola happier in himself: “I even sneak a cheeky cry while chopping onions to cook, so I can get all my cries out at once.” • Mask Off: Masculinity Redefined is published by Pluto (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.