Milan’s nightmare start to the Serie A season reached a new low after a 3-1 home defeat by Fiorentina. The Rossoneri slumped to a fourth loss in six matches and had Mateo Musacchio sent off for a nasty lunge on Franck Ribéry. The defeat will leave a huge question mark over the future of their manager, Marco Giampaolo, with reports in Italy claiming he would be sacked were they to lose on Sunday night. Giampaolo said: “I believe in my ideas but this Milan team looked like it turned up without ever having a training session together.It played badly on an individual level, with no organisation or sense of collective responsibility. “There are some players who are young and can try individual moves but they can only get you so far. When things aren’t going well, you must have the strength to cling to your identity as a team.” Goals from Erick Pulgar, Gaetano Castrovilli and Ribery did the damage for Fiorentina, who also missed a penalty through Federico Chiesa, with Rafael Leão pulling one back. Napoli survived a second-half comeback from a Mario Balotelli-inspired Brescia to win 2-1. Carlo Ancelotti’s side led through strikes from Dries Mertens and Kostas Manolas before Balotelli pulled one back with his first Brescia goal. Lazio ran riot against Genoa with goals from Sergej Milinkovic-Savic, Stefan Radu, Felipe Caicedo and Ciro Immobile wrapping up a 4-0 victory. Edin Dzeko’s header from Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s cross secured a 1-0 win for Roma at Lecce, whose goalkeeper, Gabriel, saved a penalty from Aleksandar Kolarov, but Lecce could not find an equaliser, with the Manchester United loanee Chris Smalling impressing in the visiting defence. In Spain Sevilla battled back from behind to secure a 3-2 win in a thrilling match against Real Sociedad. A fourth-minute Mikel Oyarzabal strike put the visitors ahead, but the lead lasted less than 15 minutes before Nolito hit the equaliser for Sevilla. In the second half Sevilla looked to dominate and established a two-goal lead with goals from Lucas Ocampos and Franco Vázquez. Portu halved the deficit three minutes from time to bring Sociedad back into the game, although they were unable to find the equaliser. The result saw Sevilla climb up to sixth, having lost their previous two games. Alavés moved further away from trouble at the bottom of the table thanks to a second-half penalty from the former Arsenal forward Lucas Pérez, with Joselu adding a second four minutes from time to make it 2-0 against Mallorca. In France Marseille stretched their unbeaten run to seven league games and moved up to fifth in Ligue 1 following a 1-1 draw at home to Rennes. The visitors went ahead in the 19th minute when Hiroki Sakai turned the ball into his own net under pressure from M’Baye Niang. Valentin Rongier volleyed wide for Marseille before the hosts levelled seven minutes after half-time, Duje Caleta-Car heading in Bouna Sarr’s corner.