It was classic Graham Henry. In the lead up to an All Black-Wales Test in Cardiff, well before the Warren Gatland-led revival had fully cemented, a columnist from the New Zealand Herald, the country’s largest newspaper, questioned the status of the match. How, the Herald argued, could it be called a Test, when Wales had not beaten the All Blacks since 1953? Asked for his view at the pre-game presser, the former All Black and one-time Wales coach’s response was cutting. “Every village has its idiot,” Henry said. The Herald’s angle was undoubtedly disrespectful, although the writer concerned could point out that even today, after three Grand Slams, Wales are still to beat the All Blacks since 1953 and are unlikely to win a Rugby World Cup until they do. But if Wales cannot, what hope do Canada, Namibia and Italy have, in potentially lop-sided matches that might make the remainder of Pool B meaningless? Between them, the three countries have lost all 22 matches against the All Blacks, conceding an average score of 57-6. While the eras might have changed, the gap has not. Canada, who get the first crack of the trio when they play at the Oita Dome on Wednesday, have lost to New Zealand six times, conceding in excess of 60 points in the last four. Namibia were outclassed 58-14 in the two countries’ only previous meeting, during the last tournament, while the Italians have lost to the All Blacks 15 times. This includes five previous World Cup defeats where Italy have let in an average of 69 points per outing. The lack of competitiveness of many of the pool games is one of the tournament’s on-going weaknesses. New Zealand have won all 28 they have played with an average score of 60-12. Such statistics are not ideal preparation for knockout play, so where does this leave the class of 2019 ahead of a three-game stretch that, while sure to be full of points, will ultimately be “pointless”? • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales Their priority will be to prepare for every game as if it were sudden death. That may be easier said than done, but that is what the All Blacks will be striving to do. It maintains their internal standards, keeps everyone on edge, and reinforces that the games are no park run around for the players wearing the jersey. For the second stringers, this will be their World Cup. They won’t get to play once the knockout phase begins unless there are injuries. They need to show now they are ready to go. A key consideration for the whole squad, playing or not, will be not to take it easy. The All Blacks did that while breezing past Romania, Portugal, Italy and Scotland, 12 years ago. While running up 339 points in four games, the squad incorporated a quick break in the south of France into the schedule, prior to the quarter-final. We all know what happened next. They would never admit it, but the All Blacks got comfortable, and it undoubtedly contributed to their shock tournament exit in the first knockout round. The fact they have never pulled such a stunt mid-tournament again suggests the brains trust recognised the folly of that exercise. Canada, Namibia and Italy are not going to beat New Zealand, but they will be physical and can do some damage. Veteran prop Tony Woodcock was invalided out of the last tournament against Tonga, which ended his Test career. Dan Carter got rubbed out in 2011, albeit in training leading up to the pool game against Canada, while Tana Umaga’s exit against Italy in 2003 had serious repercussions for that campaign. Injuries are a fact of contact sport, but against opponents with nothing to lose and who are prepared to put their bodies on the line in the biggest game of their careers, history suggests the injury liability is greater than usual. So too is the risk of loosening up, as the scores mount, and the yards get easier to make. This is where the internal discipline comes in; where the leaders must step up, to ensure habits they reinforce at training are ingrained and that the “hero” plays kept are to a minimum. That leadership was in evidence in the All Blacks’ opener against South Africa, most notably around on-field discipline, where they conceded just four penalties – an unheard of total, given their recent history. If the All Blacks stick to their structures, play with patience and back their systems when the pressure is low, chances are they will replicate the habit in later matches where the consequences are far greater. It may mean the scores are lower than might otherwise be expected, but if they keep embedding their game, you can expect a squad of happy campers. At each of the last two World Cups, the All Blacks scored less from the pool outings than their historic average yet got what they needed out of the games and went on to win the tournament. In 2003 and 2007, their pool accumulations were well above the historic average, but the comfort gained proved illusionary when it mattered. The All Blacks can’t win the World Cup in the next three games but, as the past has shown, they can develop some bad habits that could help them lose it. We are expanding our coverage of New Zealand. Please help us by supporting our independent journalism