These avant-garde rock’n’roll lashes (as seen at Dior AW19) look like falsies. They are, but they’re the hand-drawn type. Which is kind of fun. Start with an eye primer – it creates a velvety canvas. Post priming, makeup artist Peter Philips covered the entire upper lid with an intense inky black liner (go hard or go home and all that), scrawled spider legs along the lower lash line and finished with lashings of everything-proof mascara. That’s it. Actually it’s not. You’ll also need a steady hand. 1. Anastasia Beverly Hills Eyeliner, £21, beautybay.com 2. Revlon So Fierce Vinyl Eyeliner, £6.99, lookfantastic.com 3. Shiseido Kajal InkArtist, £22, shiseido.com 4. Dior’s Waterproof Eyeliner Crayon in Noir Trinidad, £22, dior.com 5. Stila Magnum XXX Mascara, £19, stila.co.uk There are parallels with the condition of my skin and toddler behaviour. When it’s good, it is beautiful to look at and one could bathe in the flurry of compliments. When it is bad, it is difficult, exasperating and a pain in the proverbial. That’s the toddler moment my skin has been having of late that no amount of makeup can disguise. Unearthing the culprit is a process of elimination. Changed your life, products, or diet of late? It was an excessive coffee spell that left me with beastly breakouts and cavernous pores. So while weaning myself off caffeine (God help me), I began using Medik8’s excellent blemish range. The Clarifying Foam is an antibacterial wonder that cleanses, unclogs pores and exfoliates. Don’t be alarmed by the word foam – it barely musters a lather. Additionally, it is non-stripping, non-drying and non-irritating. My standout product, however, is the clear and efficacious blemish gel that you dab on problem areas. It decongests pores, balances oil and diminishes blemishes while acting as a hyperpigmentation inhibitor (particularly useful for darker skin tones). I followed this with the oil-free moisturiser and my skin was back to normal in record time. Alas, I don’t think it works for bad-tempered toddlers. Medik8 Clear Skin Discovery Kit, £25, medik8.com Karl Lagerfeld’s farewell This makeup collaboration is one of the last projects the great designer Karl Lagerfeld worked on before his death in February. It has collectors’ item written all over it. Karl Lagerfeld x L’Oreal, from £9.99, asos.com Supreme curl cream Tracee Ellis Ross is an Emmy-winning comedy actor, producer and, yes, Diana Ross’s daughter – and now you can add beauty entrepreneur thanks to this hair-care line for curls. Pattern, from £7, patternbeauty.com Spiced up makeup The minimalist Victoria Beckham aesthetic has been impressively translated into the designer’s foray into beauty. Super wearable, excellent pigments and eco-conscious, it’s impossible not to love. From £20, victoriabeckham.com Funmi Fetto is in conversation with Sali Hughes at a Guardian event on 30 September. To book tickets and for more information go to membership.theguardian.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.