I believe Charlotte Edwardes had her thigh squeezed by the prime minister because I have been round the block myself. Not his particular block, let me hasten to add, although I have been on press trips with Boris Johnson when he was a “journalist”. Any woman who has reported on politics will have experienced the underhand leg manoeuvre. At one conference dinner, I had it from both sides simultaneously. I pulled their hands together under the table so that they were fondling each other. It was the least I could do. They both twitched slightly, and then everyone carried on discussing the decline of the “proper” family. Johnson denies Edwardes’ allegations, but his sexual incontinence is not news. We know full well how he treats the women around him; how easily he betrays them. He cannot tell us how many children he has. All of this is presumably “priced in” and part of his incomprehensible “charm”. Also accepted, somehow, by broadcasters is his whiff-whaff lies. We now need contemporaneous factchecking. Half of what Johnson said to Andrew Marr on Sunday was demonstrably untrue. Forty new hospitals? Patent rubbish. The belated realisation by his sister and Amber Rudd that his language is an unacceptable incitement to violence rings hollow. Rats leaving a ship that sank low so long ago that it is crumbling with rot. Johnson lives in a world where what he says carries no consequences, whether he is talking about Muslim women or a murdered MP. On he barges, thug life. Does any of this new information matter? We are operating in a world of post-truth mythmaking. Johnson is said to be egged on by his girlfriend, Carrie Symonds, and the unbuttoned freewheeling genius of Dominic Cummings. This bloke is simply a spad who got lucky, and we are in danger of mistaking ruthlessness for genius. Just because he twice saved Michael Gove’s skin, and has rocked up at the right time with the haiku-like wisdom of “Get Brexit done”, doesn’t mean we all have to believe the hype. History is driven by more than such crash-and-burn obsessives. It makes me miss Peter Mandelson. Almost. Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn are both said to be surrounded by malevolent advisers who control them. David Cameron has recently been boring on about how Johnson and Gove turned out to be untrustworthy. Oh, you don’t say! Are all our leaders nice guys held hostage by sociopaths? Johnson breaks that narrative. Johnson is a liar who disrespects women; he breaks the rules. We know that this claim to be antiestablishment appeals. We can point out the privilege, but the rightwing media have long groomed the public with millionaires posing as ordinary blokes, from Jeremy Clarkson to Richard Littlejohn. Part of the problem is that remainers don’t acknowledge how establishment many of them are. I was astonished to read the novelist Ian McEwan admitting that he lived in a remainer bubble while also saying: “Let’s stop pretending there are two sides to this [Brexit] argument … There aren’t.” If you think that Brexit is a symptom of a complex and systemic breakdown (as I do), you cannot simply dismiss half the country. This remain arrogance astonishes me not just culturally but tactically. And now an unelected cheat is taking us into uncharted waters – but he is not unknown as a public figure. He has squandered public funds before. Hello, Joanna Lumley and the ludicrous Thames garden bridge. This is a man happy to buddy up to someone accused of sexual assault: Donald Trump. One casualty of these post-truth times is women’s testimony. When is the link between being “antiestablishment” and being serially disrespectful to women in your private life and political life going to be made? Having witnessed the macho posturings at the Labour party conference, this cuts all ways. I believe Edwardes totally, but that will not bring Johnson down. The payments to an American businesswoman may do (although, again, Johnson denies any impropriety). I have long called him Borisconi as none of this was hard to spot. I hope, though, that what Edwardes says is taken seriously, because women matter. All evidence so far suggests they are simply part of another power grab. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist