Yesterday’s behaviour from Johnson was deliberate, strategic, calculated and designed specifically to appeal to certain voters and newspapers. It’s landed and he’ll consider it job done. He’ll probably tone it down a little bit in the commons now because he has people to carry it on for him elsewhere. He’ll then ramp it up again when an election campaign has officially started. Other Tory MPs, especially backbenchers, will be considering whether or not they want to be associated with it. GatehouseAmi It doesn’t feel right to keep the PM as PMINO, after he desecrated the house, the rule of law, blew off legitimate concerns for toning down his language and having the audacity to say in order to respect Jo Cox the right thing to do is to leave. My blood was boiling. I was disgusted at the way the Tory front bench was just smirking. Absolutely shameful. I think we need to install an interim PM now. We cannot wait, because if we go into an election with Johnson, he stands a chance of lapping up the far right Brexit votes. Because yesterday was played out as parliament v people. He can’t stay. BojackHorseman19 I am sick and tired of this. As a person in their 30s who works just as hard as those around him, I deserve some hope. Our parents had hope and so did theirs. They had a future. Boris is a shameful, abhorrent nightmare and he, together with his whole party, have robbed us all of hope. Feeling this way because of those people and their actions takes its toll. I am sick of it. I’m sick of their impetuous actions and unwavering loyalty to whichever extreme arrogant fool takes charge. Their words, their lack of thought; they couldn’t care less about the people or the “will of the people”. I think we should all be sickened. EpicNinjaCowboy As a Greek, I remember the toxic political climate in my country during the peak crisis years. There were many similarities. Unprecedented scenes and foul language in parliament, lack of decency. I thought it could not get worse, at least not in a “Western” country where law and order are considered values deeply embedded in the fabric of public life. Now I am deeply and honestly worried about the UK, a country I love and the place where I spent five of my best years in my early 20s. What is happening now in your parliament is by far scarier and more sinister. I cannot find the right words to describe it. It is evil, nasty and dangerous. The yeast that gives life to coups, the spark that ignites civil unrest, and – the worst – the poison that can irreparably damage the unity of a country. I really hope that sense will prevail at some point, I cannot dare to think of the alternatives. kostop I was watching parliament last night and have to admit I was totally shocked at Johnson’s language. I switched it off and thought – I hope people heard that. Indeed they did. If any Conservative stands by that rhetoric, then as far as I am concerned, they are beyond redemption. Never have I seen a more disgusting govt. Heliopower Johnson’s response of “humbug” to Paula Sheriff’s concerns over the use of words such as “surrender”, “traitor” and “betrayal” highlight how completely unsuitable he is for the post of PM. I fear the country is heading for one of the darkest periods in our history and Johnson is totally lacking the skills to navigate us successfully through what may well be the defining years ahead. SofaActionary You have to give Boris some credit, just when you think that he cannot stoop any lower, he proves you wrong and does just that. HarryofOz It’ll be interesting to see how many voters stick with Johnson after that truly repulsive display of who he really is. If he has that level of contempt for parliamentarians, do they not get an inkling of how he regards ordinary voters? Or do they still imagine he’s “on their side”? mannyklein Surely we haven’t sunk this low as a nation where a vocal minority, encouraged by a rabble-rousing prime minister, have politicians potentially coerced into making snap decisions on the future of our country as well as stoking further violence against our politicians. The man is an absolute disgrace. SosijDawg Yesterday Johnson held parliament in contempt. He held the nation in contempt. Don’t get mad. Get even. Hold Johnson in contempt and vote him out. Vote in a government of national unity, get a deal with the EU and put it to the people. Implement the result. Then give the Conservative and Brexit party an election. Who leads the government is not so important. But yesterday shows it ought to be someone non-divisive who can de-escalate and tone down the rhetoric. EnviroCapitalist