As America barrels down the road toward presidential impeachment, late-night hosts recapped another bizarre day in Washington, in which the Trump administration released a partial transcript of Donald Trump’s 25 July phone call with Ukraine’s leader, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. And, according to the notes: “Not only did Trump definitely ask the president of Ukraine to work with his personal lawyer/vampire henchman [Rudy Giuliani] to investigate Joe Biden, he also tried to rope in the United States attorney general,” said Trevor Noah on The Daily Show. Impeachment: the constitutional way to swipe left on a president. Will Trump’s Ukraine call make it happen? pic.twitter.com/ibzZvjCioH The revelation is a “big deal” because “the president can’t just go around using the justice department has his personal TaskRabbit”, Noah added. “You might be wondering: if this phone call is so damning, why did Trump even release the transcript? Only an idiot would do that! Exactly, and also this is what Trump does,” Noah explained. “Trump is the only person who would do something so bad, right out in the open, that it makes you question whether it’s actually bad. Noah was unequivocal on the transcript’s importance. “This transcript is bad,” he said. “But as bad as this seems for Trump, this transcript has turned into a political Rorschach test. Democrats see a smoking gun that proves Donald Trump abused his power and deserves to lose his job. Republicans see a man who is innocent and is just passionate about cracking down on corruption in Ukraine.” Republicans, he assumed, would quickly spin the call as a “nothingburger”, because there’s no explicit quid pro quo. “But let’s be honest, you don’t need to be explicit to set up a shady deal,” Noah said. “If you’ve watched any mafia anythings, you know that explicit is the opposite of what they do.” “Get out your compass,” Stephen Colbert said on The Late Show, “because we are in uncharted waters. After two and a half years of the Trump presidency, we’ve finally spotted the great orange whale and let me tell you: thar he blows.” Colbert also dove straight into the notes from Trump’s call with Zelenskiy, released by the White House on Wednesday. The notes, Colbert said, “make Trump look – and I don’t want to get too technical – uh … bad”. Colbert then summarized the contents of the call. First, Trump congratulated Zelenskiy on his election victory, then immediately reminded him how much Ukraine owes the US. “The United States has been very good to Ukraine,” Trump said, according to the notes. “I wouldn’t say that it’s reciprocal.” Zelenskiy then discussed Ukraine’s appreciation for military aid, which Trump had delayed prior to the phone call. “Zelenskiy says he wants those missiles,” Colbert explained, “and here comes the quid pro quote: Trump immediately says: ‘I would like you to do us a favor, though …’” Colbert then mimicked a gameshow host announcing a winner in a bit from The Price is Right: “The phrase that pays the Ukrainian in exchange for political favors. Tell the president what he’s won! It’s protracted impeachment inquiries! A permanent stain on his already shameful legacy, and a lovely Broyhill dinette set.” In all seriousness, Colbert pivoted, the meaning of the call seemed clear: “‘We do a lot for you, like military help. I need a favor, though: investigate Biden.’ There it is. Pressuring a foreign country to provide dirt to influence our election.” Full Frontal’s Samantha Bee had two words for the House’s impeachment inquiry: “Fucking finally! “Look, I know it’s easy to dismiss the call to Ukraine as just another Trump scandal,” Bee said, “yet no matter how burnt out we feel, we should be as disgusted by Trump trying to pressure foreign powers to investigate his rivals as we are disgusted that Stephen Miller has a girlfriend.” Bee seemed determined to impart the severity of Trump’s abuse of power, even if the administration downplayed it as normal or unremarkable. “Today, Trump and his team were running around like chickens with their heads cut off, but remember: they’re actually very good at shaping the public narrative,” Bee said. “Over the next few weeks and months, we’ll see a lot of people moving the goalposts about what constitutes an impeachable offense.” Many Trump allies, she continued, would express outrage over even considering impeachment proceedings without “footage of Trump literally exchanging a sack of cash in exchange for dirt on his enemies”. But, Bee pointed out, “threats don’t have to be spelled out to be threats”. For example, she offered: “‘Hey tiny country, please look into my rivals’ isn’t an innocent request any more than ‘Nice pizza joint, shame if anything happened to it’ is a simple, flattering Yelp review.”