It’s hard to shake the “back to school” mindset we’ve been indoctrinated with. Even in beauty. Which is tedious if you’ve spent summer bare faced. Done but understated (like Max Mara AW19) will get you back in the game. A teeny dab of foundation or concealer blended across the skin provides evenness without heaviness. A lengthening mascara adds definition without being OTT. Keep to a tone-on-tone nude across lips, eyes and cheek. Finish with shaped brows – it pulls everything together. Enjoy your first day back at school. 1. Tom Ford Lipstick Girls in Edie £31, tomford.co.uk2. Esteé Lauder Sumptuous Rebel Length + Lift Mascara £26, esteelauder.co.uk3. Westman Atelier Baby Cheeks in Choucette £46, netaporter.com 4. Surratt Dew Drops Foundation £70, libertylondon.com5. Benefit Boi-ing Cakeless Concealer £18.50, benefitcosmetics.com One of the most frustrating things about flying with a budget airline – there are a few – is the draconian luggage restrictions. Astuteness and self-control are required to get it right. I love layering multiple skincare products, so my attempt was doomed from the start. I streamlined to the absolute essentials and new products to trial, but failed to pack correctly. I inadvertently left many in my hand luggage. All the wrong size. In the bin they went. The one thing I had packed correctly was this lightweight serum. Don’t let the watery nothingy texture fool you, this powerhouse is perfect if you are suffering from post-summer dry/dehydrated skin. The liposomes – made from phospholipids, a skin-mimicking component crucial for keeping skin hydrated – have teeny molecules so they absorb below surface level. It works on a time release, so your hydration is boosted over time and it has a high IQ so it knows exactly which parts of your skin needs more hydration, hence you get a wonderfully balanced effect. Normally post-holiday, my skin is parched with patches of oiliness. This time I have a plump super-hydrated glow-fest. You may baulk at the price, but there’s no denying, this has been my skin’s saving grace. I guess I didn’t need all those extra products after all. Decorté Hydration Boosting Serum, £85, harrods.com Last seduction Mandarin, blossom, vanilla and neroli were among the ingredients perfumer Anne Flipo used in creating this hyper-feminine but super-sexy fragrance. YSL Libre, £78, yslbeauty.co.uk (out 14 Sept) Post summer This unusual blend of poppies (with rose, violet and blackcurrants) and rustic barley grains will keep you feeling summery long after it’s passed. Jo Malone London Poppy & Barley Cologne, £48, jomalone.co.uk Berries from heaven Less floral than its 2017 predecessor, this olfactory variation of Gabrielle now has a hint of citrus, a boost of berries and a base of sandalwood, vanilla and white musk. Chanel Gabrielle Essence, £86, chanel.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.