There were plenty of shaking heads on the opposition benches when Sajid Javid claimed that his review of Whitehall spending meant “we are turning the page on austerity and beginning a new decade of renewal”. The thinktanks that pore over the government’s finances were kind to the chancellor, agreeing that a £13.8bn, above-inflation increase in Whitehall budgets meant a page had been turned. But they emphasised that there was a long way to go before ministers would see the back of austerity. The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) and the Resolution Foundation, which vie to have the last word on tax and spending policies, agreed that an average increase of 4.1% in Whitehall budgets represented a chunky boost, if only for the 2020-21 financial year covered by the review. They were less convinced that the money on offer was enough to restore Britain’s battered public services and shrinking welfare state. Downplaying the impact on most departmental spending, the IFS said that, excluding health, the additional boost would be enough to reverse only around a quarter of the cuts since 2010. Worse, if the calculation takes account of the UK’s rising population, the increase claws back just 15% of cuts in spending since 2010 on a per-capita basis. Arguably, government thinking is limited by a narrow focus on the UK’s older voters, whom the Tory party needs to keep inside the fold as an election approaches. Increasing strain on the health system, which warranted a large slug of the extra spending, comes mainly from an ageing population. Likewise, a rise in funding for local government was mostly directed at social care, a service required mostly by older people. Even the money set aside for 20,000 extra police officers can be seen as a sop to the old, who fear crime beyond anything that shows up in the figures. The huge number of trainee positions is well above what police chiefs asked for. And so it is assumed the excessive figure is part of Boris Johnson’s voter-friendly policy playbook. It is assumed the huge number of new police trainees is part of Boris Johnson’s voter-friendly policy playbook As an election tactic, it probably works well. But ministers should be spending wisely and rethinking some of the priorities of 10 years ago, not simply pushing staff numbers back to previous highs. Education is another case of spending with an election – rather than the sustainability and success of public services – in mind. Javid said that he would restore funding lost in recent rounds of cuts, adding £7.1bn over three years to the schools budget. Will that funding be sensibly spent? The Department for Education wants to expand teacher recruitment, yet without addressing why surveys show that a fifth of teachers expect to leave the profession in the next two years. There are also concerns that the money will be directed at schools in Tory shires, leaving many pupils from low-income families in the big cities unprotected from further budget cuts. These are not plans for a “new beginning”. They are slanted too much to short-term gain for that. Making matters worse, the spending plans are based on economic forecasts dating back to the spring and, without tax rises or other ways of raising money, are unfunded. Whether there is a last-minute Brexit deal or the UK crashes out of the EU on 31 October, the economy is weaker than it was in spring and government receipts will be lower than in those forecasts. All this means that when Javid swaps his Scrooge outfit for a Santa suit and shakes the magic money tree, he is neither deploying his funds sensibly, nor being prudent. The announcement that HS2 would cost £88bn instead of £56bn was a revelation that surprised no one. According to the conclusions of the current chairman of HS2 Ltd, the first train services will be at least two years behind schedule and final completion could lag by seven years to 2040 – timescales which almost certainly imply further cost spirals ahead. The new transport secretary, Grant Shapps, did the right thing in releasing the report. Whatever the government may eventually decide after the short Oakervee review into HS2’s costs and benefits, part of the ugly truth is in the open. Transparency is essential, both from HS2 and government. Both bear a portion of the blame for the current mess. Doubtless, HS2 Ltd has allowed swollen salaries and controversial payoffs that, at the very least, contravened public sector rules. Ministers cannot have been unaware of the pressure on budgets, and it was wishful thinking or wilful blindness to dole out concessions such as generous property compensation while claiming the budget ceiling could never be broken. It now transpires that geological surveys along much of the 330-mile route were yet to be conducted before HS2 decided how much it would cost to build the railway. But letting the sunlight in on HS2 Ltd should not blind us to the project’s virtues. As with any public expenditure, the game of finding more deserving causes is easy. But HS2 has gained as much consensus as any infrastructure scheme, been legislated for, and is now under way to the tune of £7bn. Even if a cheaper project might have been better in hindsight, any alternative would now spend another decade in the purgatory of planning and debate. For all its faults, eventually the high-speed line will enhance Britain. The nation will be best served by ploughing on, however reluctantly, with HS2. Critics of the controversial ticket resale website Viagogo have been left scratching their heads after the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) suspended its legal pursuit of the company for contempt of court. The consumer watchdog resorted to the courts this year, after accusing Viagogo of repeatedly flouting laws designed to protect the public from sharp business practice. The CMA now says Viagogo has mended its ways but music industry groups and ticket industry sources insist that they’ve seen examples as recently as last week that should test the regulator’s confidence. It took the CMA far too long to act, but when the regulator finally stirred it gave Viagogo – a well-resourced multinational company – plenty of time to make changes that it should have made voluntarily. Now, after a £2m investigation, the CMA appears to have given in. In its statement, the regulator said its tussle with Viagogo lent weight to its campaign to be given greater regulatory powers. It’s hard not to think its weedy approach was always intended to highlight its impotence and bolster its case for better enforcement tools. Even if Viagogo were fully compliant with consumer law, there remains a debate to be had over the morality, rather than the legality, of the secondary ticketing market. The recent experience of Ed Sheeran fans, who were left unable to sell tickets they couldn’t use due to unfair resale restrictions, shows some form of market must exist for fans to recoup some, or all, of their money if they can’t go to a show. But permitting resale at vastly marked-up prices only ends up hitting devoted fans in the pocket, undermining efforts made by some artists to keep ticket costs down. It is the owners of secondary ticketing websites – and the parasitic touts who use them – who reap the rewards of this skewed marketplace. What role do such people have in the music industry, other than to exploit fans’ passion for their profit?