Whenever a team sheet appears featuring the name “Marsh” these days, you can hear a distant rumbling begin. It gathers pace across the Australian continent, growing in volume and intensity, as the voice of cricket followers swells into a storm of discontent. Bloody Marsh again, is the general tenor. How many times? What dirt does he have on the selectors? And so on, and so on. Whether the selection in question involves Mitchell, as in the fifth Ashes Test here at the Oval, or his older brother Shaun, who was part of Australia’s World Cup campaign, the response isn’t entirely unfair. Both come from a prominent cricketing family, and both have had more chances at the top level than others who don’t. Whether those two things are related isn’t quantifiable, but there is certainly an impression that they are. There is also antipathy born of frustration. Shaun has made a few of the most brilliant Test hundreds of the last decade but can also slump like no other – barely a specialist batsman in history has scored in single figures as frequently. Mitch has shown glimpses of 90mph bowling and heavy run-scoring, but has never strung them together and at times has been abandoned by both. Predictably, his selection in this Ashes squad in July brought complaints, as did his mooted selection for the fourth Test at Old Trafford, and confirmation of his eventual selection for the fifth. There must have been a moment of double-take in the Australian morning for some of his detractors who woke up to see his first-day figures of four for 35. Those wickets spared his captain Tim Paine from suffering the effects of a major backfire after winning the toss and putting England in to bat. The rationale for bringing Marsh into the side was to bowl a decent number of overs in support of Patrick Cummins and Josh Hazlewood, in their fifth and fourth Tests of the series respectively. In the first instance though Marsh was needed to provide a buffer for the recalled Peter Siddle, who began the innings bowling and catching like someone who has spent a few weeks on the sidelines. With the frontline bowlers struggling to make inroads at 130 for two, it was Marsh who started to shape the game after lunch. Sometimes being unfancied can work in your favour against a player whose confidence is brimming, as England’s talisman Ben Stokes lined up a massive pull shot against a ball that barely got as high as his thigh pad. The resulting steeple was caught at point. Cummins bowled a beauty to knock over Joe Root for 57, but the wickets still refused to tumble. It was the unlikely figure of Marsh after the tea break who finally started the avalanche. All day he had been swinging the ball more than anybody, and in this particular spell it grew even more pronounced. Marsh was averaging swing across the day at 2.5 degrees, whereas the average across the series for all fast bowlers is 0.7. His spell thoroughly surpassed the next best on the series list, which was when Ben Stokes averaged 1.7 degrees of movement in the first innings at Headingley. In fact, the only bowlers to ever swing the ball more on the first day of an Oval Test were Bhuvneshwar Kumar and Chris Jordan in the same match in 2014, and the hoop specialist Ryan Sidebottom in 2007. Marsh was outdoing all others on record. Recognising the movement, he persisted in bowling a mostly fuller length to extract as much as possible. Jonny Bairstow kept flirting with danger, trying to cover‑drive balls that weren’t full enough and beat his edge. Marsh set him up, moving the ball away consistently outside off stump before slipping in a straighter ball. This was so full that it hit Bairstow just above the boot, and despite him calling for an umpire review the dismissal was a formality. Two overs later, the left-handed Sam Curran threw his bat at a ball he would have missed by a mile had it gone straight. Instead it swung back in, taking his edge to slip. In the over that followed, Chris Woakes was done with a ball similar to Bairstow’s. Jos Buttler’s rearguard could yet cause trouble for Australia on the second day, but without Marsh’s intervention the score of 271 for eight could have been far worse. Often Marsh has been a peripheral figure in Test teams, chipping in a token spell. Instead on this day he bowled 16.1 overs, a proper bowler’s shift, to the point that he had to leave an over unfinished to go and get treatment for cramp. Then he came back and kept going. In this innings at least, the all-rounder bowled like Stokes. The chance of him batting like Stokes is a lone firefly in a broad night sky, but part one of his contribution at least has been made.