US Coast Guard rescuers found four South Korean crew members trapped inside a massive cargo ship by rappelling down the side and drilling a hole through the hull. “The early indication is they are on board and OK,” Lt Lloyd Heflin said. Heflin said the rescue team was communicating with the trapped sailors through the hole they drilled, but getting them out remained quite challenging. The capsizing of the Golden Ray in Georgia’s St Simons Sound early on Sunday caused fires and smoke. While the flames were apparently out on Monday, the huge ship was listing at roughly 90 degrees, with more than 4,000 vehicles inside it. A South Korea foreign ministry statement said the crew members were alive and isolated inside an engine room. It said 10 South Koreans and 13 Filipinos had been on board, along with a US harbor pilot, when the ship began tilting over. The 656ft vehicle carrier was stuck in the shipping channel, closing the busy Port of Brunswick. US Coast Guard crews lifted 20 people into helicopters on Sunday before rescuers determined the smoke and flames and unstable cargo made it too risky to venture inside. Rescuers were able to climb aboard on Monday after officials determined it was stable enough for a helicopter to land on the hull, Lt Kit Pace of the Coast Guard said. The Coast Guard said it was notified of the capsized vessel by a 911 call at about 2am on Sunday. The cause remained under investigation. Hurricane Dorian was already well beyond the Georgia coast, where it blew past last week before being downgraded to a post-tropical cyclone. The ship channel was closed to vessel traffic. The Coast Guard said the overturned ship had not released any pollutants so far, but clean-up efforts were ready if needed. The ship is owned by Hyundai Glovis, which carries cars for automakers Hyundai and Kia as well as others. Brunswick is one of the busiest US seaports for shipping automobiles. Nearly 614,000 vehicles and heavy machinery units moved across its docks in the 2019 fiscal year that ended on 30 June, according to the Georgia Ports Authority.