• Sajid Javid announces £2bn for Brexit delivery next year. There will be more support for business readiness and to prepare Britain’s ports for a no-deal Brexit. • The Treasury will work with the Bank of England to coordinate a fiscal and monetary response for the UK economy. • Javid says that day-to-day spending will increase by £13.8bn next year. • The chancellor says £1.7bn will be added to capital spending. • He says the increase in spending is the fastest accounting for inflation for 15 years. • The chancellor says he will “review our fiscal framework to ensure it meets the economic priorities of today, not of a decade ago”. • Javid says the rule change comes ahead of the budget. Richard Partington, economics correspondent: Economists including those from the Resolution Foundation have warned that Javid would break the Conservatives’ spending rules. Under the current rules, national debt must fall as a percentage of GDP, while borrowing as a percentage of national output, adjusted for economic fluctuations, must remain below 2% of GDP. The government must also produce a balanced budget by the mid-2020s. • Javid says there will be a 6.3% increase in real terms Home Office spending – £750m - to fund the first year of the government’s plan to recruit 20,000 new police officers. There will also be an extra £45m provided so recruitment can start immediately getting 2,000 officers in place by end of March. • He also announced a 5% real terms increase in resources budget for the Ministry of Justice as well as confirming the extra £80m for the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). • To protect religious and minority communities, the chancellor says he will double a fund to protect places of worship. Jamie Grierson, home affairs correspondent: Boris Johnson kicked off his premiership with promises to tackle the scourge of crime on the streets of Britain by boosting the number of police officers. The recruitment drive simply restores some of the 20,000 plus officers cut since 2010. • Javid says that local councils will get £1.5bn for social care next year. • He says the overall departmental spending on local authorities will be the largest increase in local government spending power since 2010. • Javid promises £54m of new funding to address homelessness and rough sleeping. • He also announces £3.6bn for the new towns fund to put more money into local communities, including in the north of England. • The chancellor says there will be £432m in additional funds for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to tackle climate issues. • Javid says there will be money earmarked for climate issues when the government publishes an infrastructure strategy review later this year. • Javid says school spending will increase over three years by £7.1bn. • The chancellor says every secondary school will be allocated a minimum of £5,000 for every pupil next year. Every primary school will be allocated at least £3,750 per pupil, on track to reach £4,000 per pupil next year. • The government will provide an additional £700m to support children with special educational needs next year. • Teachers’ starting salaries will rise to £30,000 a year by 2022-23. • There will be a £400m increase in further education funding next year. Sally Weale, education correspondent: The government knows it has a problem with schools, which lost them a significant number of votes at the last election. Boris Johnson will be hoping he has done enough with this pledge to head off further protests. There are already concerns that schools in Tory rural and marginal constituencies will benefit most, ahead of those in deprived areas. • Javid says he has earmarked £200m for buses. “We’re putting the wheels back on the great British bus,” he says. • The chancellor says he will increase NHS spending by £6.2bn next year. • He says there will be £210m for frontline NHS staff. • The Treasury will invest more in training and professional development for doctors and nurses. • Javid says there will be more than £2bn of new capital funding – starting with an upgrade to 20 hospitals this year, and £250m for new artificial intelligence technologies. • Javid promises an extra £2.2bn for defence next year, a real-terms increase of 2.6%. • This ensures that defence spending not only stays above the Nato target level of 2% of GDP but increases its share from the existing 2.1%. • He also announces £7m of funding for the Normandy Memorial Trust and confirms funding for new Office for Veterans’ Affairs, previously announced at £5m. Dan Sabbagh, defence and security editor: Defence had been tipped to be one of the losers in the spending round in early briefings, but the prime minister intervened, markedly raising the proposed increase from about £800m. That allows Boris Johnson to stay on side with Donald Trump, who has been repeatedly lobbying for Nato countries to increase their defence spending. 