Boris Johnson is under pressure to quell a storm that is building over his language in parliament after he dismissed appeals from MPs to moderate his words during the acrimonious return to the Commons on Wednesday. Following the supreme court’s ruling that the prime minister’s advice to the Queen to suspend parliament was unlawful, MPs criticised the nature of proceedings and urged Johnson to exercise restraint. There was uproar in the Commons on Wednesday as Johnson repeatedly berated MPs, rejected calls to temper his language and said the best way to honour the murdered Labour MP Jo Cox – an ardent remainer – was to “get Brexit done”. The controversy spilled over on Thursday morning with the former Tory MP Sir Nicholas Soames telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that he was “absolutely appalled” by the language used in the Commons and echoing a plea from Cox’s husband in which he implored MPs to avoid leaving a “toxic legacy”. “I believe the job of the prime minister, even under difficult circumstances, is to try to bring the country together. And what [he] did yesterday was to drive it further apart. This is not the way to carry on our public debate,” Soames said. “I’ve never felt such a poisonous atmosphere and I deeply regret it and I apologise for it.” Cox told the same programme he was “shocked” by the language Johnson used, but noted that the prime minister’s remarks were said “in the heat of the moment”. Cox said: “I’m sure, on reflection, it’s something that he would probably wish he hadn’t said. I think it was sloppy language and the wrong thing to say, but I don’t think that he is an evil man. “What isn’t legitimate is to co-opt her memory or her beliefs for things that she didn’t believe in or didn’t say. I was thinking about how Jo would respond to it last night. She would have tried to take a generosity of spirit to it. And thought about how in this moment, you can step back from this growing inferno of rhetoric.” Soames said: “We do live in an era of consequences, and this language that is being used is doing so much damage to our democracy and union with Scotland and Northern Ireland. All these potential consequences are being thrown into the air, by this appalling inflamed rhetoric, and I think the prime minister is taking some very, very bad advice.” Other MPs spoke of the consequences outside parliament of some of the language used by politicians. The Lib Dem leader, Jo Swinson, said she had been forced to call the police over a death threat to her child on Wednesday. “That has been dismissed as humbug,” she said. “This is a disgraceful state of affairs.” The Labour MP Jess Phillips said Johnson’s declaration that he would “rather be found dead in a ditch” than not deliver Brexit had been quoted to her in a death threat. “For him then to use the memory of my dead friend, who was murdered in the street, to try and hammer home one more time his point . The only person who has surrendered anything is Boris Johnson, and he has surrendered his morality,” she told ITV’s Peston. Julian King, the European commissioner for the security union, tweeted a transcript of Johnson’s rejection of Labour MP Paula Sheriff’s plea not to resort to “offensive, dangerous or inflammatory language”. King said: “Crass and dangerous. If you think extreme language doesn’t fuel political violence across Europe, including UK, then you’re not paying attention.” The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, said Johnson’s behaviour had deterred MPs from offering cross-party support to a Brexit deal. “I have spoken to people who might want to consider a Boris Johnson deal, but that is over,” she told Today. But the Conservative party chair, James Cleverly, defended Johnson’s comments to MPs in the Commons. He denied that the PM called opposition MPs “traitors”. “The accusations thrown at him yesterday were deeply unfair,” Cleverly said. “He was accused of calling people traitors – he has never done that.”