Jen Malia Walk on (frozen) water at Maligne CanyonStrap on your ice cleats and get ready for an afternoon journey through the frozen Maligne Canyon. During the summer months, visitors pass high over the canyon on a series of bridges, but once the river freezes over, the real adventure becomes possible. Trek over the ice and into the frozen depths of the canyon, and witness sheer icy cliffs on either side of the path – you’ll have definitely earned a mug of hot chocolate by the end. Become a fringe theatre fanatic in EdmontonFirst-timers at Edmonton International Fringe Theatre festival are often surprised to learn that Alberta’s unassuming capital city hosts the second-largest fringe theatre festival in the world (after Edinburgh). Those in the know, however, can attest to the massively fun explosion of wackiness and dramatic creativity that add colour and life to Edmonton’s hip Old Strathcona neighbourhood for 10 days each August. See Indigenous history at Writing-on-Stone provincial parkAlberta’s most recently minted Unesco world heritage site, Writing-on-Stone provincial park, is near the southern border in the area known as the Canadian Badlands. Tall, imposing rock formations called hoodoos populate the plains near the Milk River. On the rock walls are carvings and drawings that record the dreams and stories of the Áísínai’pi (Blackfoot) people, who have been in the area for the past 10,000 years. You need a guide to take you out to the art on the stone – book online to reserve your spot. Challenge yourself with the Crypt Lake Hike in WatertonThe trailhead of the Crypt Lake Hike in Waterton national park is accessed by boat, which is the first clue that this is not just going to be a walk in the park. Follow the trail up the mountain (approximately three hours each way) past four alpine waterfalls over a loop that runs roughly 11 miles. Avid hikers are, of course, drawn to the trail for the challenge of negotiating obstacles such as the 60-metre tunnel through the mountain – but it is the thrilling cliffside stretch near the top, which features stunning views down the ravine of the crystal-clear blue Crypt Lake, that truly makes this adventure something special. Photograph ice bubbles at Abraham LakeSometimes nature does some trippy things, like make a lake that freezes with bubbles in it. Decomposing matter forms methane bubbles in Abraham Lake in central Alberta. When it’s really cold, the bubbles get trapped in the ice rather than bursting at the surface. High winds can polish the ice and clear the snow away, making for perfect bubble viewing conditions. Go underground with a Canmore Cave TourJust outside Banff national park is the town of Canmore. It has all the trappings of a charming mountain community, plus a little extra: Rat’s Nest Cave. The name is straight out of a horror movie, but a tour of Rat’s Nest – one of Canada’s longest caves – is a perfectly safe way to get your thrills. Challenge yourself with the four-hour Adventure tour, or for something more moderate opt for the two-hour Explorer tour. If you are feeling extra adventurous you can book a private “solitude” experience. View larch trees in Banff and KananaskisEastern larches, a variety of pine also known as tamaracks, turn a deep golden yellow or rich copper for a short season – generally mid-September to mid-October – before dropping their needles for the winter. Pack a bright coat to pop against the colours in photos and head out to viewing hotspots like the Sentinel Pass in Banff’s aptly named Larch Valley, or the more easily accessible Chester Lake in Kananaskis country outside Calgary. Play palaeontologist at the Royal Tyrell MuseumDedicated to all things dinosaur, the Royal Tyrell Museum is Canada’s home of palaeontology, featuring one of the world’s largest collections of dinosaur displays alongside more than 130,000 fossils and an unbeatable programme of special exhibits and interactive learning experiences. Located just an hour-and-a-half drive out of Calgary, the Royal Tyrell Museum offers a great day trip out of Alberta’s largest city for people of all ages, not just kids. Touch the top of the world in Lake LouiseIf skiing isn’t your cup of tea, or you need a break from carving down the mountain, the Lake Louise Ski Resort offers a different kind of alpine experience – snowshoeing! Book a tour with a guide who will lead you off-piste for a peaceful snowbound hike around the summit, taking in panoramic views of some of the most stunning scenery in the Canadian Rockies from the spectacular vantage points dotted across the trail. Star gaze in Wood Buffalo national parkIn the far north of the province, with an area larger than Switzerland, lies the largest national park in Canada, Wood Buffalo national park. It is also the world’s largest dark sky preserve, making it the perfect spot to escape light pollution and star gaze or hunt for northern lights. With about 18 hours of daylight in the summer months, you will need to be a night owl to stay up for the show, or consider a visit in the autumn, winter or spring. So what are you waiting for? With all these fantastic experiences and so much more, surely now is the time to explore the vast – and vastly beautiful – province of Alberta. Start planning your trip with Canadian Affair