Neil Black, the British Athletics performance director, has defended the decision to select 800m runner Kyle Langford for the world championships in Doha this month despite the 23-year-old’s well-publicised misdemeanours this summer. Langford, who finished fourth at the world championships in London in 2017 as a teenager, was fined £1,000 and given a final warning in July after appearing to grab a 74-year-old race official by the throat. He is now the subject of a further complaint from the athlete James McCarthy, whom he is alleged to have called a “fucking pussy” after finishing eighth at the UK trials in August. However, Black sidestepped questions about Langford’s behaviour and whether he was an adequate role model – and instead insisted he deserved to be picked in the 72-strong team on his ability. “The discussions in the selection meeting focused purely on performance,” Black said. “The selectors decided that Kyle’s performances merited selection and we believe he’s going to go forwards to Doha and perform really well.” He added: “If a complaint has been received I am sure it will be dealt with in the correct manner. But there are clear processes to be followed. The other factors are dealt with by other organisations and other processes.” Black was on far firmer ground when it came to discussing Dina Asher-Smith, who he believes could become the first British athlete to take three medals in one world championships, in the 100m, 200m and 4x100m relay. “I think it is possible for her to win medals in all three events,” he said. “That is probably the expectation she puts on herself. We all know she’s a very special athlete and I think she’s got her focus on all three events. The 100m is probably the biggest challenge but it’s not unrealistic for her to be aiming for all three.” However Black was slightly less upbeat about the prospects of another serious contender, Laura Muir, who is only just back running sessions again after tearing a calf muscle at the Anniversary Games in July. Black did say, though, that with just over three weeks to go before Doha she still had time to get into the shape to win a medal at 1500m. “She’s at the stage of actually starting to run sessions, and the beauty of Laura and her coach Andy Young is that they’re brilliant at planning,” he said. “They know from the past what Laura needs to do to get in shape to run medal-winning performances, which is anywhere from 3.55-3.57. They know what it takes to win a medal. That’s the plan. It’s just a different preparation. She is going to be there and she is going to be competitive.” As expected there was no Mo Farah in the British team, with the 36-year-old deciding against running in the 10,000m in Doha to concentrate instead on defending his Chicago marathon title, for which he will be handsomely remunerated. However Black defended UK Athletics’ decision to keep funding Farah despite a growing number of critics pointing out that he has not run in a British vest since 2017. “I understand people thinking that way,” Black said. “But we’ve been really clear from the start that the marathon is the event and I think he’s on a mission. He’s really enjoying it. It’s providing him with that challenge that he’s constantly striving. He wants to find out what he can do. “Would I have been surprised if he had called me yesterday morning and said I really want to run in the 10,000? I wouldn’t have been. But he didn’t.”