The construction of a huge fertiliser mine in the North York Moors has been thrown into doubt after the company behind it pulled plans for a $500m (£403m) fundraising. Sirius Minerals had postponed the planned junk bond issue last month and the company’s chief executive, Chris Fraser, said Sirius would not be able to go ahead with it due to “ongoing poor bond market conditions”. He also blamed a lack of government support, saying a request for this was turned down. The company’s shares plunged 52% to 4.8p after the announcement on Tuesday. Sirius has been forced to slow development of the project and will carry out a review of its business, while looking for a strategic partner for the digging of the world’s biggest polyhalite (multi-nutrient fertiliser) mine near Whitby in North Yorkshire. Russ Mould, the investment director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: “This is terrible news for a very large number of retail investors who had put their faith in the company. Many of these shareholders live close to the mine and invested as a show of support in a project that had the potential to greatly improve the local economy.” Sirius will explore alternative financing ideas mooted by a number of investors and advisers, and said the company had enough cash in the bank at £180m to see it through the next six months. Fraser said: “The company will now conduct a comprehensive strategic review over the next six months to assess and incorporate optimisations to the project development plan and to develop a different financing structure for the funds required. “This is the most prudent decision to give the company the time necessary to restructure its plans to move the project forward. The process will incorporate feedback from prospective credit providers around the risks associated with construction and will include seeking a major strategic partner for the project.” Credit providers are concerned about the risks associated with deep shaft construction, Sirius said, prompting it to explore how the building of the shafts and other major aspects could be rescheduled to reduce this perceived risk. The plans involve sinking two shafts to a depth of 1,500 metres (4,920ft) – equivalent to about 20 times the height of York Minster – and building a 23-mile (37km) underground tunnel with a conveyor belt to a port in Teesside. Graham Spooner, an investment research analyst at the Share Centre, said: “With cash running out fast, investors will be fearing for the future of the mine and remain cognisant that the recent history of mining in the UK has been littered with failures.”