Enable’s path to a third Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe success has become slightly smoother with the news that the Japanese star Deirdre will not oppose her on Sunday. A shock winner of the Nassau Stakes this summer and an unlucky fourth in the Irish Champion Stakes last time, Deirdre was seen by some observers as an interesting alternative to the hot favourite for the Longchamp race. Her connections, however, have decided against stumping up the six-figure sum required to enter her at Wednesday’s supplementary stage. Instead, Deirdre will add international lustre to British Champions Day at Ascot a fortnight on Saturday. “The plan is for Deirdre to go for the Champion Stakes,” said Oisin Murphy, who has ridden Mitsuru Hashida’s mare in her past two races. “Her connections are pleased with her since the Irish Champion Stakes, where she should have finished closer. She’s a very good mare and it’s great we are getting another opportunity to see her in Britain.” Deirdre is a general 16-1 shot for the Champion Stakes, the last of the 20-1 having disappeared during Monday. It is hard to be sure what quality of opposition she would face there as the top four in the betting – Japan, Magical, Ghaiyyath and Enable – are all expected to run in the Arc, so their presence at Ascot would depend on what happens this weekend. A tilt at the Breeders’ Cup in the US next month must be a possibility for Deirdre, especially as she is thought to appreciate fast ground. But Murphy believes Ascot is the main target for her owner and trainer, at least for the time being. There are 16 horses left in the Arc, following Monday’s declaration stage, including three Japanese representatives in Fierement, Blast Onepiece and Kiseki. Britain has the same number of possible runners in Enable, Mehdaayih and Ghaiyyath. Ayr 1.50 Highway To Heaven 2.20 Rattling Jewel 2.50 Single 3.20 Retirement Beckons 3.50 The Big House (nap) 4.20 Sagittarius Rising (nb) 4.50 Fannie By Gaslight 5.20 Iconic Code Sedgefield 2.00 Ormskirk 2.30 Jatiluwih 3.00 Saint Freule 3.30 Snookered 4.00 Murphy’s Law 4.30 Squouateur 5.00 Order Of Thistle Southwell 2.10 Joly Maker 2.40 Kildaven Spider 3.10 Princess Nearco 3.40 Applaus 4.10 Nordican Bleue 4.40 Nifty At Fifty Kempton 5.10 Jaganory 5.40 Too Hard To Hold 6.10 Queens Road 6.40 Lyricist Voice 7.10 Dubrava Enable came safely through her final serious bit of work on Monday morning, when she covered seven furlongs on Newmarket’s Limekilns gallops. “Frankie [Dettori] was happy with her and hopefully we can get through the next six days,” her trainer, John Gosden, told the Racing Post. Meanwhile, Jean-Claude Rouget offered little help to punters as he discussed the Arc chances of his French Derby winner, Sottsass. “I am going into the Arc with confidence, but with a horse who has never encountered Enable, who has never encountered Japan, who has never really met anyone,” he said. “So I have no reference. I can’t say he is going to take his revenge or anything. I don’t know. What I do know is that the horse is looking good, he is in good form. Everything is all right.”