Crime statistics can often be lacklustre and impenetrable, but in recent weeks they have painted a vivid and shocking picture of how our criminal justice system is letting down rape victims at every stage. Today’s new figures, published by the Guardian – which show that thousands of rape allegations have been recorded inaccurately by the police over the last four years – are only the latest evidence that there are serious inconsistencies in how different police forces are handling rape allegations. If reports of rape are being filtered out before any real investigation has taken place, this not only raises huge concerns about how victims are being treated, but increases the risk that rapists are going unpunished, free to rape again. The latest figures from the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), published last week, show that despite a significant increase in the number of rapes being reported each year, there has been a terrifying drop in the number of alleged perpetrators being prosecuted. This situation is prompting victims’ groups to argue that rape is being effectively decriminalised by the very people upon whom victims rely to enforce the law, because so few cases are actually taken to court. This year, from 58,657 reports of rape, only 1,758 accused perpetrators were even charged with an offence, let alone convicted, which raises the question of what on earth the criminal justice agencies are doing. It is particularly tragic that at the same time as the prosecution rate has been falling, there has been a huge increase in complainants who are willing to report their cases to the police. For years, victims have been urged to come forward, and the investigations into Jimmy Savile and others have given victims confidence that, whoever the perpetrator was, they would be listened to. This means that tens of thousands of complainants have been encouraged to turn to the criminal justice system, only to be let down by it. What is not conveyed by these statistics is the trauma experienced by someone who has been raped, and the enormous impact this is likely to have on their physical, emotional and psychological well-being. Thousands of these vulnerable victims are being denied justice, risking an even worse level of trauma. The introduction to the government’s victims’ strategy asserts that trauma “must never be compounded by an individual’s experience of the criminal justice system – they have the right to know that the state is on their side”. While I do not doubt ministers’ real concern, we need to see a clear direction from the government to the responsible agencies – particularly the police and the CPS – to get a grip on this problem. By denying it exists or passing the buck back and forth, more and more cases will fall by the wayside, leaving victims without recourse to justice. To give credit where it is due, the government does seem to be taking this issue seriously. There is a comprehensive review into the prosecution of rape, which I am fully supporting. My role is to promote the rights of victims and witnesses, and I am clear that victims must be involved in this review at every stage; it must be thorough, independent and accountable if it is to make a real and lasting difference. There have also been announcements this week from the Ministry of Justice promising more funding for rape support centres and an increase in the number of independent sexual violence advisers to support victims. These are all excellent steps towards providing more support for victims but they will not correct the defects of the criminal justice system in this vital area of its work. The history of rape prosecutions is littered with examples of the negative impact of myths and stereotypes about rape and those who come forward to report it. It is time to focus on getting it right for victims. • Vera Baird is the victims’ commissioner for England and Wales