Some men, as middle age heaves into view, buy motorcycles and zip around the countryside pretending to be Peter Fonda. Others allow greetings at the school-gate to turn into a furtive affair. For Serge Pizzorno of Kasabian, the looming 40s have brought the desire to shed the skin of the rock guitarist and become a hip-hop star. The rapping part isn’t as important, though, as being able to swagger across the stage in a white vest and thick chains, knees bent, arms straight, and Pizzorno does a lot of that. He also puts on a suit and appears behind a presidential-style podium for Meanwhile … at the Welcome Break, suggesting that the part of him that doesn’t want to be Tupac quite fancies being Pete Townshend and knocking out the odd rock opera. It’s tremendous fun in a faintly ridiculous way, not least because, whether or not he’s having a midlife crisis, he knows how to knock out a tune, and also because the presentation – at one point Stephen Graham appears on a screen fronting a faux shopping channel video – is more ambitious than one normally gets in midsize venues. Most of what Pizzorno offers on his first solo album as the SLP isn’t a million miles away from his main band – it’s a bit heavier on the borrowings from R&B, house and, yes, hip-hop, but then Kasabian have always had a bit more imagination than most of their ladrock brethren. Here though, it’s all about bringing the focus to him alone. For almost the entire evening, the band are hidden behind screens, while Pizzorno repeatedly clambers into the crowd and chivvies them in to cheering for him. It speaks of someone needy for love and attention, and it is offered to him. “Go on, Serge!” is shouted, repeatedly, as if he’s a football player. The album is played in its entirety and then Pizzorno is gone. It’s just the right length – an hour or so – to marvel at how rock music can still throw up genuine eccentrics willing to throw all their ideas at the wall in the hope that some of them will stick. Crucially, you never get bogged down in the ones that don’t.