The last time Japan caused a major shock at a Rugby World Cup they made a movie about it. The 2015 Miracle of Brighton was supposed to have been a complete one-off, never to be repeated. Now, suddenly, there is a blockbuster sequel that could generate even more at the box office. For the tournament organisers and everyone else seeking to promote rugby in Asia, this was the stuff of oval-shaped dreams. It will also hopefully transform a few perceptions elsewhere in the world. As anyone who watched this game will know, this was not some opportunist smash-and-grab raid but a richly deserved, fully justified victory over a team who were recently ranked No 1 in the world. Japan are supposed to be unworthy of so-called tier-one status but they have just harpooned one of the biggest whales in the sport. What ripples this result will generate, across the sport and, crucially, beyond. As recently as 2011 Japan were so far down the pecking order that their best result was a draw with Canada. Now they are in with a chance to qualify for the quarter-finals ahead of Ireland and Scotland unless the latter can summon up something special in Tokyo in a fortnight. When the next set of world rankings are released this coming week they will be up to eighth, ahead of Scotland. That, in itself, makes this a historic moment. In some ways the Shizuoka sensation is even more significant than the Springbok surprise, so famously masterminded by Eddie Jones. The received wisdom was that only Jones could have conjured up such an extraordinary outcome, that Jamie Joseph’s current team had an impossible act to follow. Not so. Ireland were beaten fair and square, outplayed by opponents who seemed to have plugged into an alternative energy source. By the end, Ireland were content to kick the ball out and retreat with a losing bonus point. Pragmatic, sure, but hardly what they envisaged when they flew east. Ireland have had plenty of World Cup disappointments but nothing like this. It remains possible they will still top the pool but any semblance of green impregnability has evaporated into the humid Japanese air. There remains a nagging sense Joe Schmidt’s side peaked a year ago and here was further evidence to support the prosecution’s case. This, though, was primarily a Japanese triumph, not some generous Irish gift. Not everyone in Japan is a rugby fan by any means but this is how to attract new admirers. In fan zones and bars across this extraordinary country, the outpouring of joy was something to behold. Respect and honour are everything here and Joseph’s team are suitably full of samurai warrior spirit. Not every host nation is inspired by the extra pressure of a World Cup on home soil. The opposite was true of England in 2015 and, four years on, there was more than a hint of nerves during Japan’s slightly stuttering opening night victory over Russia. There was absolutely nothing tentative, however, about their second-half display in Shizuoka. Once ahead only they looked like seizing the day. Ireland, lauded for their purposeful forward effort against Scotland, were plodding through treacle by the end. No one, on this evidence, will want to play the Brave Blossoms in the last eight. If nothing else it will hopefully be the emotional bullet train that delivers rugby to a whole new audience. Historically, rugby has often been too insular in its outlook, making decisions primarily for the few and not the many. In certain respects that is still the case but Uruguay’s victory over Fiji, Russia’s defiance, the United States’ growing appetite for the sport and now Japan’s glorious uprising have offered a tantalising glimpse of exciting new horizons. The decision to stage the tournament in Japan has certainly been vindicated. Ticket sales were already healthy but, at this rate, interest levels will disappear off the scale. Perhaps the night’s most striking image was of youthful Japanese fans in the crowd almost beside themselves with open-mouthed excitement. The best sporting events have their unforgettable snapshots and the first World Cup on Asian soil is now guaranteed to leave an indelible impression. Not only the greatest World Cup upset of all time, but the Miracle of Brighton was also the biggest shock in rugby history. Two-time winners South Africa fell to an injury-time try by Karne Hesketh for the rank outsiders to make it Japan 34 South Africa 32. The win effectively secured Eddie Jones, then Japan’s coach, the England job he now holds.