The much-vaunted increase in education spending through to 2022-23 should be viewed with deep scepticism (Schools to get £14bn in Javid’s spending review, 31 August). Leaving aside that this would merely bring – in cash terms – the spending power back up to 2009 levels, there is something much more subtle going on here. Many people have already spotted that the so-called “levelling up” across the country overwhelmingly – 143 out of 153 constituencies – benefits sitting Tory MPs. What has not so far been commented on is the fact that this rapid uplift will have a perverse impact not only by denying hard-pressed schools in the most deprived areas of substantial increases, but also as a magnet damaging them in other ways. The most obvious is in pulling teachers into the schools benefiting most from the distribution formula. Even with the uplift in starting pay, there is a clear teacher shortage, and time will be necessary for any substantial recruitment, so the schools able to afford additional teachers will be the ones in the most leafy suburbs or rural areas. Any claim to want to level up results and therefore raise standards, particularly in the north of England, has a totally hollow ring about it when the deliberate policy pursued by the government will have the opposite effect.David BlunkettFormer education and employment secretary • I must give credit where credit is due and praise Sajid Javid for the £400m college funding announcement. Colleges are pivotal to delivering the education and training needs of the country, and finally we seem to have a chancellor who understands that. His own experience as a college student makes him well placed to appreciate why colleges matter so much. Colleges have suffered a decade of neglect. They have been overlooked, poorly understood and looked down on by too many people in power who took the golden path from a good school experience into university and on to a graduate job with opportunities for promotion. Their understanding of why colleges matter is weak and our #LoveOurColleges campaign has started to change that. But the chancellor’s funding announcement must not be a one-off. Funding for 16- to 19-year-olds will still lag every other OECD country even with the £400m, and notably absent from the announcement was much-needed funding for adult education. This government must harness the talent of those returning to education later in life.David HughesChief executive, Association of Colleges • So the Johnson government is now prepared to loosen the purse strings and replenish the services the Tories have been vandalising with neglect for the last decade (A brief harvest from the magic money tree, 2 September). Like a parent who suddenly wants to enjoy the company of an adult child, having ignored them for their entire childhood, the Tories will find there is a hefty percentage of a generation who will never trust them or vote for them. This week, I took my 20-year-old son, who is midway through his degree, for an eye test and dental check. He spent the day telling me not to bother as it was all too expensive. He wanted new lenses in his wonky frames to save me an extra £45 (I teach in further education so I’m pretty strapped for cash, and this hasn’t been lost on him as he’s grown up). These young people, during their formative and experimental years, have become adults in a haze of guilt and anxiety infused with an absence of hope. They have been rewarded with debt for working impeccably hard academically, infantilised by their inability to become homeowners despite working full time in professional roles (that they achieved through gaining university degrees and then doing unpaid internships to prove their value), and now many of them are choosing not to have children because they fear the future of the planet is one of biblical atrophy – floods, storms, fires. And the media questions why rates of depression and suicide have soared – is it that much of a puzzle? A government that penalises its weak, its ill, its vulnerable for not being feisty and selfish enough to “get on” in a capitalist society is nothing new, but one that punishes its young is a new kind of cruel. I hope the Tories reap a harvest of disdain from this generation for their punitive and casual neglect of the kids born in the 1990s. The young deserve investment and should be allowed, at the very least, to hope.Sophy MacDonnellLondon • The £1.5bn for social care announced in the spending review is a much-needed but temporary lifeline, as the sector battles funding pressures and workforce challenges. We welcome the commitment to tackling this important issue, but we need details about when this money will be available, whether it will reach the providers that deliver these services and the timeframe for subsequent long-term funding to urgently address this crisis. Since the social care green paper was first promised, more than 50,000 older people have died waiting for reform. The government must now deliver on the prime minister’s “clear plan” for reform, promised in his inaugural speech. Anchor Hanover’s research shows that an alarming 68% of people do not trust the government to deliver social care reform. To restore trust, we need sustainable long-term solutions – social care cannot survive on emergency cash injections. We support plans for a cross-party approach to reform social care, but this must be delivered as a matter of urgency. Action now can secure a positive future for today’s and tomorrow’s older people.Jane AshcroftChief executive, Anchor Hanover • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition