A child actor who appeared alongside Tom Hanks and Halle Berry in Cloud Atlas was killed by misadventure at her family home, an inquest has ruled. Mya-Lecia Naylor, 16, died after being found in a marquee at her home in south London in April. Emergency services were called to the property in South Norwood at about 10am on Sunday 7 April to reports of a teenage girl in cardiac arrest. Ninety minutes later Mya-Lecia was pronounced dead at Croydon University hospital. Mya-Lecia, who at the age of nine played Miro in the film adaptation of David Mitchell’s science-fiction epic Cloud Atlas, was due to sit her GCSEs this summer. She was described by the BBC as a “huge talent” after starring in a number of CBBC shows including Millie Inbetween and Almost Never. Her first role was an appearance as a toddler in the sitcom Absolutely Fabulous. More recently she was a member of the band Angels N’ Bandits. Before she died her parents had been told by her school that her grades were lower than expected. Her father, Martin Naylor, told South London coroner’s court: “She had not been her normal self … she was stressed about her exams. She knew she needed to get on with her revision and she had plans scheduled out for her revision.” Mya-Lecia’s parents had told her to try her best and not get overly worried about her exams. At the time of her death they believed the issues had been tackled, they told the inquest. The inquest heard that just before her death Mya-Lecia had been banned from attending a party, and she had spent the previous night watching a film with her family that included a scene of suicide. Her father, who saw the teenager on the morning of her death, said: “I genuinely believe she did not mean to do it … She clearly had plans for the future.” The assistant coroner, Toby Watkin, concluded that the teenager did not intend to end her own life and that her death was by misadventure. A toxicology report found no evidence of drugs or alcohol in Mya-Lecia’s body, and searches of her phones, laptop and social media accounts did not present anything suspicious. At the time of Mya-Lecia’s death, Alice Webb, the director of BBC Children’s, said the team were “distraught and so terribly sad”. She said: “She was so hugely popular with our audience.” CBBC said Mya-Lecia was a “much-loved part of the BBC Children’s family and a hugely talented actress, singer and dancer”. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found atwww.befrienders.org.