I’m no lover of the political views held by some of these 21 Conservatives who crossed the floor. But I would sure walk across the aisle, shake their hands and stand shoulder to shoulder with them through what is going to come. They have the guts to stand up for what they believe to be the best interests of the country. Decent human beings and worthy opponents in the process of dialogue that lies at the heart of our democratic system. hughfromalice ‘Corbyn gave one of his best Commons performances today (thought on his feet, had solid attack lines) – just as Johnson gave his worst since becoming PM. A reminder that if there is a snap election, it won’t be plain sailing for the Conservatives.’ Labertha Trickle ‘Johnson thinks his party can simply ditch the likes of Benyon, Hammond, Letwin, Vaizey, Stewart, Soames, Gyimah etc without suffering any electoral consequences – I reckon he’s in for a nasty surprise if he manages to force an election. Plenty of Southern Tory constituencies are ripe for a swing to the Lib Dems and he’s going to lose plenty of seats in Scotland. He’s a dangerous, reckless fool – there are plenty of Conservatives who are still – well – conservative and they’re not going to like the way he’s behaving.’ Abobrinha ‘Corbyn is positioned as remain by siding with the remain voters so the Labour leave voters will go to the Brexit party. Boris now looks like he has his hand forced to be able to deliver any Brexit, so Nigel backs Boris and the manifesto says repeal the Benn amendment which has a delivery date of 19 October which is after the election. Maybe he wins the election, maybe he doesn’t but if he had to go to the polls, there aren’t any more metrics he’d want in his favour. Remain Tory voters are now looking at the risk of a Corbyn premiership which will split some of the remain, while leave is possibly united as long as the Brexit party vote is behind Boris.’ trazer985 @UKLabour⁩ for a deal have decided to try and revive Theresa May’s thrice-rejected deal ‘What is it with these people? They don’t seem to have any political nous whatsoever. Jeremy Corbyn and his team have done a fantastic job in very difficult circumstances to hold the Conservatives to account and bring about a situation where we have a real chance to stop or mitigate Brexit. Then at this crucial time, they go off in their own direction without any thought for the party and what it is trying to achieve or how their cack-handed tactics could undermine Labour’s standing. Totally disrespectful of the party’s leadership team, the members and the voters.’ kaboios ‘We continually fail to address the elephant in the room ... more elections of MPs to decide whether or not we want Brexit is surely not the answer. Another referendum is the answer.’ paulmarkj ‘Our elected parliament has had three years to sort this out, both within the UK and with Europe, without managing to reach an agreement and now at the end of the line are thrashing about trying to save their bacon it seems. Disappointed to say the least. What do we pay MPs for, to deliver guaranteed (oh that suggests accountability) good results for all of us, a bit of a punt (it will be alright on the night) or snafu?’ Paul Mott