China marks 70 years of communist party rule on Tuesday with a major military parade in Beijing and celebrations nationwide, but protests in Hong Kong are likely to cast a long shadow on the festivities. Chinese authorities have left nothing to chance in their meticulous planning for the biggest national anniversary since president Xi Jinping came to power. The capital has been put on lockdown, with bans on everything from kites and homing pigeons to drones. People who live along the parade route have lived with curfews all week, and were asked to leave their homes ahead of national day. The military are expected to use the day to unveil several powerful new weapons including a hypersonic drone and an intercontinental ballistic missile that can reach the United States, in a parade that will include 15,000 soldiers, chosen for their near-uniform height. Xi will watch the parade from a gate on Tiananmen square, where his predecessor Mao Zedong stood to announce the establishment of the People’s Republic of China on 1 October 1, 1949. Then China was so poor and battered by civil war that some of its 17 war planes were reportedly ordered to fly by twice, to make the airforce seem larger than it was. Today it is a major world power, and the carefully-choreographed celebrations are expected to show off its economic and military might. Xi who has spent years consolidating his grip on power and now holds more authority than perhaps any Chinese leader since Mao himself, will also address the nation. His speech is likely to underline the party’s role restoring China to international super-power status. After more than 20 years of civil war, Mao Zedong leads the communists to victory over the nationalists, and proclaims the founding of the People's Republic of China on 1 October. China launches a five-year economic plan, the "Great Leap Forward",  collectivising farming and investing in heavy industry. The plan is abandoned after two years after poor harvests lead to starvation and millions of deaths. The 10-year "Cultural Revolution" causes economic and political upheaval, as Mao attempts to purge communist China of remaining capitalist and traditional elements of society, and enforce Maoism as the dominant and permanent ideology. Chairman Mao dies. China's "one-child policy" is introduced to curb population growth. Troops fire on protesters in Tianaman Square who had been campaigning for greater freedom and democracy. The uprising is crushed. The opening of the Shanghai and  Shenzhen stock exchanges symbolise the increasing economic liberalisation of China. Control of Hong Kong is handed back to China from the UK. Two years later Portugal transfers the sovereignty of Macau back to the Chinese. China joins the World Trade Organization. Yang Liwei becomes the first Chinese astronaut. Within 10 years the country will successfully deploy a robot rover on the moon. After years of tension, including riots over how Japanese schoolbooks are accused of portraying the events of the second world war, and tensions over territorial claims in the South China Sea, Wen Jiabao becomes the first Chinese prime minister to address Japan's parliament. Beijing hosts the Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games. China overtakes Germany as the world's biggest exporter of goods. The following year it becomes the world's second-largest economy, over-taking Japan. The Chinese economic "miracle" falters, as growth falls to its lowest level for 25 years. China becomes increasingly embroiled in a trade war with the US. A series of major pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong challenge Chinese rule there. The country's human rights record also comes under scrutiny for its treatment of the Uighurs, with claims that more than 1 million of them have been detained in camps the Chinese have euphemistically called “vocational education centres”. For the party, this is one of the most consequential celebrations of its national day. The communist state has now outlived the Soviet Union that was once its sponsor and supporter; Chinese officials for years have studied the collapse of the USSR in a bid to avoid a similar fate for the PRC. But it also comes as Beijing faces the most serious challenges since the 40th national day in 1989, which was marked in muted fashion just months after the military killed thousands of pro-democracy protesters in and around Tiananmen square, plunging the country into international isolation. A trade war with the US threatens both the American and Chinese economies, there is growing international unease at Xi’s aggressive projection of power beyond China’s borders, and domestic problems belie the government’s attempt to united its 1.4 billion people around the president’s vision of a ‘Chinese Dream’. The detention of over a million people in far Western Xinjiang region, in concentration camps that the Chinese government describes as re-education centres, has caused international outrage and condemnation. And months of protests in Hong Kong have shown that not all Chinese citizens support the direction in which the communist party is taking the country, effectively offering economic prosperity without political freedoms. To prevent anything marring the special day, there has also been a fierce crackdown among those who criticise the government. Normally outspoken activists and critics have been ordered not to speak to foreign media. Some, who have expressed support for the Hong Kong protests, have had to promise they won’t travel to the city until well after the anniversary. In Hong Kong, official celebrations were muted, including a morning flag raising ceremony closed to the public, with guests and dignitaries watching from a live broadcast inside a conference centre, where a reception was held afterwards. A small group of demonstrators gathered outside with a banner saying “There is no national celebration, only national mourning. End one party rule.” Larger protests linked to the city’s nearly four-month old movement were expected in the afternoon, although they were refused police permission for an official march. Thousands are expected to come out into the streets anyway, with fears of violence. At least three of Hong Kong’s metro stations were closed, and with protests expected to spread across the city many shopping centres will shut to avoid becoming battlegrounds.