About 1,400 riders from 90 countries competed in the UCI road world cycling championships, which ploughed through the Yorkshire dales, culminating in Harrogate. A Dutch fan under two flags Warming up for the women’s elite individual time trials The women’s junior road race was marred by a number of crashes along the route Left: Tom Pidcock, who was edged out of the medals, was later awarded bronze in the under-23s race after another rider was disqualified. Right: Annemiek van Vleuten wins the women’s elite road race Nearly 2 million spectators turned out to watch the 2019 Tour de Yorkshire and 4 million fans visited the county to support the Tour de France Grand Départ in 2014, among the largest crowds ever for cycling events in the UK. The peloton climbs Parliament Hill, in Harrogate Spectators urge on the riders on Norwood Edge hill climb Annemiek van Vleuten crosses the line The peloton rolled out to the north of Bradford before the first categorised ascent on Norwood Edge, a winding ramp which distanced some of the weaker climbers. A final undulating approach into Harrogate and two laps of the city circuit proved a war of attrition before Annemiek van Vleuten won the world champion title Members of the Dutch team celebrate their victory The Belgium rider Frederik Frison (left) and the British competitor John Archibald warm up Fans in Harrogate cheer on competitors in the inaugural UCI mixed relay race Members of the Italian team at the finish line Exhausted German riders Yorkshire hosted the first ever team time trial mixed relay, with national teams consisting of three male and three female riders. The men set off first and the women replaced them on the road as soon as the second male rider crossed the finish line. Final timings were taken when the second female rider crossed the line. Alex Brooke-Turner (centre), the winner of the men’s MH4 para-cycling road race Left: Fans line the route. Right: Dame Sarah Storey, who took the women’s world title. British rider David Stone (centre) at the finish line It was the first UCI-sanctioned international para-cycling event to take place alongside the UCI road world championships and was used as a qualifier for the Tokyo 2020 Paralympics. Nils Politt of Germany Clockwise from top left: Rúnar Örn Ágústsson (Iceland), Ryan Mullen (Ireland), Ján Andrej Cully (Slovakia), Luke Durbridge (Australia) The route headed in a south-westerly direction out of Northallerton, followed by a short, sharp ascent on the outskirts of Masham. After a fast section into Risplith, there was barely a flat metre of road. The riders had to keep something in reserve before one last blast into Harrogate and up to the finish line on Parliament Street. The distinctive gold helmet and bike of Belgium’s Greg Van Avermaet Fans cheer on their riders in the mens elite road race Relentless rain resulted in organisers shortening the men’s road race from 281km to 261km (162 miles) The Danish rider Mads Pedersen took the gold after more than six sodden hours in the saddle Mads Pedersen became Denmark’s first road world champion. “When I saw the finish line I hoped the pain would be gone and I could do a good sprint. After six-and-a-half hours on the bike there is not much left. You have to be focused and stay in front. Don’t get any bad luck. It’s every rider’s dream to wear that jersey. For me to do it now is unbelievable.”