It has been quite a week for Boris Johnson, Brexit and politics more widely. So where are we now? And, more importantly, what happens next? It began with a cross-party group of backbench rebels threatening to seize control of the Commons timetable to push through a bill seeking to block a no-deal Brexit. Downing Street warned that any Tory MPs backing the plan would be ejected from the party, and if it succeeded Johnson would call for a general election. On Tuesday, 21 Tories helped the timetabling motion pass, and were duly kicked out. The next day the bill passed the Commons and Johnson tried to call for an election but failed to reach the required two-thirds majority vote. By Thursday, with the bill going through the Lords, Johnson used a rambling speech in Yorkshire to pledge he would try again to push for an election. This was just after his own brother had quit the government. The week ended with opposition parties agreeing to again thwart any snap election attempt, and Johnson wrangling bulls in Scotland. The brief answer is: probably yes, but not yet. Johnson is adamant that an election should happen before the crunch European council summit on 17 and 18 October, with 15 October being his preferred date. Labour and the Scottish National party initially seemed minded to support this, provided they could secure guarantees against government ruses to crash out of the EU on 31 October. But after much thought the combined opposition view is to only agree to an election once a Brexit delay has been definitively secured – meaning it would happen later in October or November. Johnson has been seeking an election under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, which requires the backing of two-thirds of MPs, meaning it is in the opposition’s gift. Other methods of forcing an election are possible, but have significant drawbacks. It would seem not. The rebel bill, due to get royal assent on Monday, dictates that if by 19 October the government has neither passed a new deal or received MPs’ consent for no deal, it must seek an extension to 31 January (longer if required by the EU and agreed by parliament). This will be the law. The prime minister insists not, saying candidly that he would rather be “dead in a ditch” than do so. However, he has also said he would follow the law. There is, obviously, a contradiction in this, and the way out remains unclear. One theory would involve Johnson resigning – No 10 has not explicitly ruled this out – and allowing opposition parties to try, and potentially struggle, to form a temporary government before an election. More unlikely proposals include someone other than Johnson being sent to Brussels to agree to the extension, with options including the Speaker, John Bercow, or even the Queen. For now, it seems to be the venerable political tradition of ploughing on day by day in the hope something turns up. Publicly, officials will not look beyond Monday’s second attempt to spark an election, and the associated media blitz aimed at labelling Jeremy Corbyn a coward, complete with mocked-up chicken pictures. It is entirely plausible that they still do not know quite what to do if compelled to seek a new Brexit deadline. Beyond the planned vote about an election on Monday, the timetable is opaque. The controversial suspension of parliament for five weeks is due to begin at any point up to Thursday, but can be decided on day by day. MPs will be buying open return rail tickets. With the important caveat that many voters pay little attention to cries of “Chaos!” from SW1, it’s not been great. The culling of 21 generally loyal and some very senior MPs has gone down badly with a fair section of the parliamentary Conservative party, who view it as another sign of the malign influence of Johnson’s chief aide, Dominic Cummings. Johnson has also now lost every Commons vote as prime minister, had his own brother, Jo, leave government, and delivered one of the more rambling and chaotic speeches in recent UK politics, which infuriated police for being a nakedly partisan address against a backdrop of uniformed officers. On the same day, one of his ministers, Jacob Rees-Mogg, angered doctors for comparing a senior medic who raised worries about no deal to a disgraced anti-vaxxer. Both groups are influential and, more importantly, generally seen by voters in a much more favourable light than politicians.