Nutshell, the new modern Iranian restaurant on St Martin’s Lane, central London, perched close to Nelson’s column, requires a personal battle of one’s own to reach on a Saturday evening. Theatreland in full yahoo merges with tottering hen parties, meandering mini-breakers, school trips, emergency response vehicles and bin trucks. You are either insane to open a classy, innovative, Persian restaurant here, serving ornate new spins on meze, grills and stovetop stuffs, or you are very, very clever. For passing footfall, Nutshell may seem slightly mysterious. Words like jojeh, borani and kubideh have yet to slip into regional UK parlance for chicken chunks, dip or minced meat. Frankly, Britain has as yet accepted the aubergine only very tepidly in all its bulbous, purple majesty. Yet here on the Nutshell menu, one will find it stewed with pearl onions and split chickpeas in a khoresht bademjan; or pulverised and strewn with feta, crisp shallot, blackcurrant and walnuts in a sublime take on baba ganoush. Similarly, walnut, which Brits admire mostly in a whip, is loud and proud in Nutshell’s panir sabzi, in the lamb meatballs, and diced roughly under the grilled cauliflower fesenjun. Of course, if you’re one of the UK’s 70,000 Iranian-born residents, you may think: “Nutshell, a new cool place! I’ll take my father as a treat!” knowing in your heart he’ll say: “I don’t want Caspian olive tapenade with rainbow radish. Why did Azerbaijan in Hammersmith shut? I want kalle-pache with the boiled sheep’s head looking at me! Now that was Persian food.” But Nutshell is definitely worth a gander, whichever way you come at it. Head chef Jeremy Borrow came from The Palomar, a place of clanking pots, a noisy kitchen squad and freeflowing labneh and fattoush. The Palomar is kind of half Ottolenghi/half 5am Portuguese squat rave – I mean that in a good way. Before that, Borrow spent 25 years cooking in Tel Aviv. And before that, he came from Carlisle, just like me, and has said he was raised, also like me, mainly on overcooked cabbage. There’s something about a 20th-century north-west English childhood that makes you run helter-skelter, arms wide into strange, delicious, foreign flavours. At Nutshell, Borrow’s skills mix with the dream project of Tehran-born Mohammad Paknejad and wife Marwa Alkhalaf, formerly chef at The Greenhouse. Nutshell is named after the Paknejad family’s pistachio orchards. Nutshell is not nightclubbish or semi-unruly like The Palomar; it is elegant, brightly lit and colourful, hewn from Persian patterns and a palette of greens and pinks. Most of the noise is from the kitchen brigade who “Yes, Chef” in unison from the lower-floor open kitchen. The menu is small; really, it’s merely a list. We started with freshly baked, delicious “bazaar bread”, which was a high point: a long, slender, salted loaf, to scoop through the very good Caspian olive tapenade and the soothing yoghurt-based mast-o khiar, prettily bejewelled with pomegranate and pistachio. An inky dish of beluga lentils with barberries flew under the radar. The smoky aubergine meze with feta is unmissable. We drank very good Bodega Cecchin Malbec at £7.50 a glass. I enjoyed the meze more than the main attractions: lamb chops, served pink as possible in a puddle of sour cherry jus, was quite muted flavourwise. A grilled half of baby cauliflower on a nutty puddle wasn’t anything really to shout about. It was all nevertheless prettily plated, and service throughout sweet and bright. The puddings, however, were a joy, especially the very elegant take on Persian zulbia: deep-fried swirls of batter, a sort of doughnutty, churros-like, carbohydrate-heavy safe space. These zulbia are neater and slightly drier than commonplace ones, but come with a bowl of incredible, fig-infused cream. It’s this heartstoppingly good, thigh-expandingly evil fig cream, plus the fresh bazaar bread, the olive tapenade and aubergine meze that would take me back to Nutshell. The Persian sundae is one of the capital’s prettiest puddings: zesty ice-cream, hints of basil, large black cherries with accompanying goo. It’s a pudding that sweeps me away, from my window vantage point in this corner of London’s West End, away from the staggering women in hen-party sashes, the crash of the emptying bottle banks and the arguing mini-breakers who mooch to the door of Nutshell, scan the menu and remember that he doesn’t like walnuts or aubergine and she doesn’t like rose water or cardamom. Let these people eat boiled cabbage. Pull up a chair; there’s a lot to love in here. • Nutshell, 30 St Martin’s Lane, London WC2, 020-3409 7926. Open all week, lunch 12pm–2.45pm, dinner 5pm–11pm. About £40 a head, plus drinks and service. Food 7/10Atmosphere 8/10Service 9/10