What has become a gruelling battle of endurance for Ferrari this season may just be approaching the sprint finish they desperately desire. Defeated by Mercedes at the majority of meetings, they have staunchly battled their way to the shores of the Black Sea for the Russian Grand Prix. Here their efforts may finally be rewarded. Better still, if they are, Formula One has reason for optimism of a proper fight next year. The Scuderia have struggled with grip and balance into corners. Their engine is the best of the field but it has not been enough to counter a Mercedes that has been fearsomely strong through the turns. Mercedes have 10 wins from 15 races and for Ferrari the championship has gone. Lewis Hamilton leads by 65 points from his Mercedes teammate, Valtteri Bottas, and Ferrari trail the Silver Arrows by 133 points. Yet the team, confident the fundamentals of their car were strong, have stuck at trying to unlock the SF90’s potential. With their engine power, wins at Spa and Monza for Charles Leclerc made the most of their strengths but Sebastian Vettel’s victory at the last round in Singapore was a potential game changer. The expectation was that Ferrari would again suffer through Marina Bay’s slow corners. Instead with a series of upgrades, intriguingly including opting for the “cape” aero design just behind the nose that Mercedes first pioneered in 2017, they went flying through the night and returned a one-two finish. Now it was three wins from three across both slow and fast tracks. A week later in Sochi the key question is can they repeat it on a circuit that sits very much in the middle ground? The team’s sporting director, Laurent Mekies, summed it up on Friday. “Here will be, I guess, a real answer for us when it comes to what’s going to be the pace from now until the end of the season,” he said. Crucially if Ferrari can repeat their form here, with the regulations unchanging for next year, they will be confident of being in the fight from the off in 2020. Sochi is a compromise track, mixing two straights and the high-speed turn three, with a range of 90-degree slow to medium-speed corners. On the straights Ferrari know they have the edge but their problem has been understeer. They have lacked front-end downforce, a problem that looked to have been solved at Singapore. With the balance it brings, Leclerc in particular could throw his car into the corners. He enjoys oversteer and in first practice was fully loading his front wing to maximise his speed on turn-in and, as in Singapore, it was paying off. The 21-year-old was quickest in the morning session. Whether he, Vettel and Ferrari can translate it into a race win will be fascinating. In Singapore the tyres were of the softest compounds, which suit the car. In Russia they are one step harder, if they find their window here it will be a major achievement. The team principal, Mattia Binotto, acknowledged after Singapore the tyres had been a factor. As was Ferrari’s decision to set up their car for single lap pace to take advantage of track position at Marina Bay. In Sochi they must have race pace as well. Vettel recognised the advance they had made but was cautious before more concrete evidence was available in Russia. “Singapore was not expected to be that strong,” he said. “Hopefully we can come here and be equally strong in terms of fighting for pole and in the race as well. But it would be wrong to think that now because we’ve won on two different types of tracks, that we can win everywhere.,” Indeed, nothing can be taken for granted. Max Verstappen found the pace Red Bull lacked in Singapore, with the fastest time in practice two, three-tenths up on Leclerc with Bottas and Hamilton six-tenths down. But while Mercedes, who have never been beaten at Sochi, have time to find the right setup, the Ferraris looked better than they have on this type of track all season. Leclerc was once again hugely impressive on his flying laps and the team have repeatedly gone quicker again on Saturday mornings. If they are to return to winning ways Sochi is the Scuderia’s signpost.