Warren Gatland has vowed his Wales team will shrug off Rob Howley’s World Cup departure and thrive once again in the wake of yet more off-the-field controversy. The Welsh Rugby Union has revealed they were first made aware of Howley’s suspected breach of World Rugby’s betting regulations – for which he has been sent home from the tournament in Japan – last Wednesday. It followed contact from one of the gambling industry’s integrity teams. Gatland, the head coach, admitted on Wednesday that the news on Howley had sent shockwaves through his team as they prepare for their World Cup opener with Georgia next Monday. Howley, the 48-year-old assistant coach, left Wales’s World Cup camp on Monday and will be investigated over a suspected breach of World Rugby’s regulation six. That regulation covers anti-corruption and betting. The investigation into Howley is the latest storm in Welsh rugby and follows the abandonment of a proposed merger between two of the country’s regions, Ospreys and Scarlets, in March. Wales brushed that off to win a Six Nations Grand Slam. Gatland plans to circle the wagons again and get his team back on track in Japan. The New Zealander was forced to deal with Howley’s departure on his 56th birthday and when asked if the incident had galvanised his players, he responded: “It’s probably a Welsh trait and I’ve seen that in the last 24 hours with how close they’ve been. They know it’s a difficult period, but we need to respond pretty well. We’ve got to focus and we know there is going to be some speculation in the next 24 hours. We have to deal with that and I have had better birthdays for sure. We were shocked. “The union are dealing with this and my focus has to be on the next five days in terms of preparing the squad for the first World Cup game against Georgia. You have to deal with adversity at times and it’s how you respond to that. I must say the players have been incredibly responsible and resilient. Sometimes this brings teams closer together. “We have got to draw a line in the sand on this and really focus on preparing the team for the next five days. It took a bit of time for this to sink in. There was concern from the coaches and the players about Rob’s welfare. We have to let the formal process take its course and hopefully that can continue outside our preparation. At the moment these are allegations and obviously Rob was devastated by them.” Speaking from Wales’s World Cup base in Kitakyushu on Wednesday morning, the WRU chief executive, Martyn Phillips, outlined in detail the timeline of how Howley came to leave Japan. “We were contacted informally on Wednesday of last week to suggest there was a potential breach of regulation six. It came from one of the betting company’s integrity teams,” he said. “We were then contacted formally with further information on Friday evening and at that point we informed World Rugby there was a potential breach and we would be seeking face-to-face time with Rob. We reached the decision on Saturday that we were best placed to come out to Japan. “That triggered the formal process we’re now in and it will carry on back in Wales. It is a serious allegation about Rob. He’s our employee and we have a duty of care to him. I can assure you that has been a major factor we’ve considered over the last few days. “Rob is back in Wales and we have put the necessary support around him. We’re checking in on his wellbeing as we formalise our processes to get through the investigation.” Wales flew to Japan last Wednesday, but the WRU insist it didn’t know of Howley’s alleged regulation six breach before the team’s departure which came in the early hours of the morning. Howley was on the plane from Heathrow and was part of Wales’ World Cup preparations in Kitakyushu. He was at Gatland’s team’s open training session which was watched by 15,000 locals on Monday but left Japan before Wales’ official capping and welcome ceremony that evening. Howley returned to Wales on Tuesday, but it is understood he is spending some time away with his family before the investigation begins. When it does, it will be led by WRU chiefs, but Phillips admitted an independent judicial panel is likely to be involved. “There will be an investigation and that’s confirmed. I’d be far more interested in quality not speed,” he said. “I wouldn’t put any pressure on anyone to do things quickly. I will be putting pressure on them to do it right.” The former Wales fly-half Stephen Jones will arrive in Japan on Thursday to replace Howley. Jones was set to succeed Howley as Wales attack coach after the World Cup, but he has been pressed into action sooner than expected and will meet up with Wales in Toyota. Wales face Georgia there in that first game. “I spoke to Stephen about his availability and he was willing to help. He has either played or worked with two thirds of the squad,” said Gatland. “He will bring his own personality and have the opportunity to have his input. That’s important. We have to make it as seamless as we possibly can.”