Over the last 20 years, Cornwall’s Red River Dialect have been twisting together folk-rock, Americana and spiritualism. Ringleader and songwriter David Morris is the son of an Anglican priest, brought up near Tintagel; he’s now an active Buddhist, having recently emerged from a nine-month retreat. His band’s last two albums – 2015’s Tender Gold and Gentle Blue and 2018’s Broken Stay Open Sky – played like moving responses to the sudden death of his father. Their fifth (and second on the lovingly curated North Carolina independent label, Paradise of Bachelors) appears as a wide-eyed, curious creature, willingly alert to the world. Nowhere better is this articulated than on Red River, an ornately produced track full of shivering strings that traces the roots of the band’s name (a Canadian creole language combining English, Orkney Scots, Scottish Gaelic, Cree and Ojibwe). As it explores and criticises colonialism – “I take the name”, Morris sings – his voice sways between lushness and anxiety, the lyric simultaneously seducing and disquieting. Fans of Will Oldham will find succour in Morris’ quivering, occasionally out-of-tune croon, which works best in the contemplations of Salvation (“Salvation has a hold / On the mind that is not bold”), and when the lyrics suggest faltering on Slow Rush (“looking for shortcuts, hopping the lakes”). Although it sounds and feels transatlantic, British inspirations flood this record, from its Mabinogion-referencing artwork to its recording in rural Carmarthenshire. A meditation on Wales’ highest peak, Snowdon, is momentous, if a shade over-earnest, Joan Shelley’s backing vocals giving welcome lightness (her recent album Like the River Loves the Sea is a slow-burning beauty). Two White Carp also feels thick with the mud of a familiar river, but the spaciousness in the arrangements of Piano and Blue Sparks, allowing in silence like Talk Talk did in their later songs, lets the spirituality of the songs filter in. Yet another Alasdair Roberts album, and a profoundly moving one. The Fiery Margin (Drag City) explores Europe through the story of a Nazi prisoner, contemporary politics and peace, medieval mystics on False Flesh, and the death of a child on the shattering A Keen. Welsh-born duo Peiriant’s self-titled LP (NAWR Records) sculpts startling instrumentals from the bones of folk music, guitar delays and deep drones. An odder, sweeter couple are Ralph McTell and Tony Visconti, who join together for McTell’s Hill of Beans (Leola), a luxuriant take on his warm, familiar songwriting.