Philanthropist, mental health ambassador and rugby league player. Stevie Ward is not your average 25‑year-old, but then again, very little about his life as a professional sportsman could be considered ordinary. “I probably didn’t think this would have been the path I’d have taken when I was teenager, but life works in mysterious ways,” the Leeds Rhinos second-rower says. While most players prepared for the remaining rounds of Super League’s regular season in the traditional manner of rest, recovery and training, Ward was combining mental health seminars with his work to recover from a six‑month knee problem. The injury is the latest setback to halt the career of a player many believe to be one of the most talented English forwards in recent years. But Ward remains pragmatic. “The tough times you deal with hold you in good stead for what’s to come across the rest of your career,” he says. “It’s allowed me to get involved with all sorts of different stuff like workshops with businesses and the NHS. There are lessons you can learn, for sure.” Ward’s outlook is refreshingly positive, especially considering the lows he has experienced. He has spoken candidly about suffering with depression in his early 20s following injury problems. That prompted him to establish the online magazine and podcast Mantality, aimed at encouraging more men to be open about their mental health problems. But having since experienced two further long-term layoffs in the past couple of years, even the toughest of individuals would have been tested by what Ward has had to endure. “Mentally, it’s unbelievably challenging,” he says. “Physically you probably get better at dealing with it, but you do have to keep asking yourself why you’re doing this. Viewers of the game probably don’t grasp how serious a question that can be until you find yourself in that position, with the amount of work you have to put yourself through, especially mentally.” Ward returned from his latest injury, a knee problem that required two different operations, in the loss on Friday against Salford. With Leeds safe from relegation with two games of the season remaining, Ward insists there was little pressure from the Rhinos to return this season. Having been out since February, he has his own motivation to get back playing. This week, Leeds-born Ward was included in the Great Britain squad for the upcoming tour of the southern hemisphere. It is a show of faith from the Lions coaching staff in a player who has been absent for so long and a sign that his season, however frustrating it has been, may not be over just yet. “I could have left it until next season but I’m ready,” he says. “I’m ready to show people I can be out there again. To be anywhere near the Great Britain setup is incredible after everything that’s happened. But I’ve got to finish this season with Leeds and try and show my worth to everyone. “I’m in the train-on squad, which is amazing, but there’s a few more hurdles to clear yet. It’s been a tough year for the club, battling relegation, but I’d like to think I’ve been able to help off the field in other ways.” Even though his playing career is back on track again, Ward will not relent in his mission to spread the message of how it is OK to talk. “This year has been another reminder that we can only respond to what’s thrown our way in tough times,” he says. “But rugby league is the best vehicle for me to live to my values and though there’s been challenges I get better from each one. “It’s a message I want to keep reminding people about, that you can draw from your tough times.”