The British Airways owner IAG has warned of a 6% drop in annual profits after taking a €170m (£150m) hit from recent strikes that led to more than 2,000 flight cancellations. BA pilots walked out for 48 hours on 9 and 10 September, in a long-running pay dispute, causing most flights to be cancelled. The airline also axed flights on 27 September, before a second strike was called off last week. A total of 4,521 flights were cancelled over seven days, IAG said, although 2,196 flights were reinstated leaving 2,325 cancellations. BA also allowed passengers on other flights left unaffected by the industrial action to rebook or receive a refund. The financial impact of those pilot strikes is put at €137m. In addition, threatened strikes by ground staff at Heathrow airport cost IAG a further €33m. The company said it had also been hit by lower bookings at its low-cost carriers Vueling and Level, resulting in a further €45m hit. This means its 2019 operating profit, excluding one-off items, will be €215m lower than last year’s €3.48bn. IAG warned that further strike action would hit profits again. Willie Walsh, IAG’s chief executive, told analysts: “Clearly, BA bookings have been disrupted by the industrial action.” IAG said there had been no further talks between BA and the pilots’ union Balpa. The airline’s offer of a 11.5% pay increase over three years still stands and had been accepted by BA’s other unions who represent 90% of the carrier’s staff. IAG is cutting capacity, like other airlines. It now expects capacity to grow by 2% in the fourth quarter, less than previously predicted, and full-year capacity growth is expected to be 4% rather than 5%. Walsh said: “We’ve seen a number of [airline] failures across Europe and there will be further failures. Most airlines are moderating their capacity growth plans for the fourth quarter and 2020.” He said IAG would be looking at acquiring Thomas Cook’s slots at Gatwick airport following the travel company’s collapse, adding he was “pleased with the slots acquired from Monarch” when it went bust two years ago.