Shawn Mendes and Camila Cabello are rubbing up against each other like two postage stamps trapped inside a wallet, which must only mean one thing: ’tis the season of the 2019 Video Music Awards (streaming on MTV Play), a sort of cultural ground zero where new celebrities are introduced like larvae before the cocoon, medium-sized celebrities are vaunted like icons and exactly one over-40 is allowed to briefly be on stage. I am assuming you are reading this because you are over the age of 18, because what kind of teen reads this far, so I feel confident saying the following: 90% of the names of the people relevant here you are not going to know. I think that is important, though. The VMAs provide a vital cultural service in that, a little bit like opening night during the heyday of Big Brother, they tell us broadly who is going to be famous for the next five years, and they do that by throwing a mess of crap at the wall and seeing which bits of it stick. So for example: Lil Nas X will be famous, and Rosalía. Megan Thee Stallion will still be about, as will Normani. Ava Max, not so much. Lizzo, yes. And then there’s Tana Mongeau, arguably one of the most fascinating personalities on the planet right now, not because of her actual personality but due to her sheer, naked desire to be seen as one: turning up in diamond-frame sunglasses with a snake round her shoulders on the red carpet, weeks after her not-fake fake wedding to vlogger Jake Paul in a Los Angeles mall, fresh from her MTV blockbuster show Tana Turns 21, simply screaming of that early-aughts famous-at-all-costs energy that saw everyone release a sex tape and a self-titled perfume. We criticised Kim Kardashian for it, didn’t we, and now we bow at her knees like a queen. We had a pop at Jodie Marsh for doing more or less the same and … well. She’s got her thing going on. It is impossible to know where Mongeau will be in the year 2024: she’ll either be selling footpics on OnlyFans or she’ll be a world-dominating billionaire. Whichever way, we will be forced to watch it happen. But we all know the real reason the VMAs exist, which is to get cutaway shots of Taylor Swift dancing just a little bit out of time to the beat before getting her on stage to receive five to six awards for something. The first ceremony was in 1984, five years before Swift was even born, but you feel that, even then, it was designed with this culmination in mind: that Madonna performing Like a Virgin in a wedding gown was actually just careful groundwork laid so that Taylor Swift could accept the best visual effects award for that weird crap snake in the ME! video. The deep truth of the VMAs, whatever year it happens to be, whatever as-yet-unborn celebrity they Red Carpet Intro next year, whichever currently obscure pop-adjacent rapper is right now uploading the SoundCloud hit that will, in 12 little months, see them headlining the stage, is this: Taylor Swift will be there, affecting a look of shock at winning a best video award, every year for ever, until the sun burns out of the sky.