According to the latest figures, convictions for rapes and sexual assaults are at their lowest  in the UK for more than a decade. There are just 919 convictions for the 60,000 reported attacks. The situation in the US is even bleaker, with an estimated five people convicted for every 1,000 offences. It doesn’t help that some people still believe that rape isn’t a cut-and-dried crime – that maybe the victim was “asking for it” or that they are simply lying. Netflix’s new eight-part drama, Unbelievable, attempts to explore this situation. It’s an adaptation of a Pulitzer-winning article from US investigative site ProPublica, about a young woman from Lynnwood, Washington, who claimed she had been tied up and raped in her bedroom before changing her story and eventually denying that the attack had ever happened. We follow Marie Adler (Booksmart’s Kaitlyn Dever), an 18-year-old who is fresh from “a million” foster placements, living in a kind of halfway house for people transitioning out of care. She cuts a vulnerable figure and is an unreliable narrator, alternately panicked and disinterested. But did she make up the attack, or was she merely bewildered by intrusive, endless questioning from the police? And how does the work of two female detectives (Karen Duvall, played by Merritt Wever, and Toni Collette’s Grace Rasmussen) three years later affect the situation? Unbelievable could have ended up a nasty, voyeuristic programme full of gratuitous violence. Sexual assault, after all, isn’t something TV always deals with sensitively – just look at Game of Thrones, where rape, particularly that of Sansa Stark, sparked outrage from viewers and even a US senator. Or it could’ve been another drab procedural, heavy on cliches borrowed from a thousand crime stories before it. Thankfully, it manages to find another way, by focusing on the grey area of its title – showing the propensity for those around Adler to assume her guilt from the outset, and to marry her “acting out” with the rape allegation. Scenes with the police are reminiscent of those in other Netflix originals – namely documentaries Making a Murderer, When They See Us and The Confession Tapes – heavy with leading questions and assumptions. Why, ask those first (male) detectives, would Adler keep changing her story unless it had all been an invention? Does she understand the gravity of false reporting? The repetition of such scenes emphasises the administrative nightmare of the situation, while a parallel event in the second episode – another girl, a college student, claims to have been attacked in similar circumstances – shows how Adler’s class and background affect her treatment. Elsewhere the series does well to temper swift flashback scenes of Adler’s alleged attack with a fleshed-out portrayal of somebody in crisis. There’s a True Detective feel to the scenes between Wever and Collette, as they try to piece together something they can’t quite make sense of. Like Adler’s recollections, their own lines of inquiry are fuzzy. But unlike Adler, they have social status on their side. There’s an inherent feminism in watching these two women fight for other women, even if the “not just a mother” trope is sometimes hammered home a little too heavily: in one scene, while her husband prepares dinner and her children potter around, Duvall continues to telephone neighbouring police departments cut off from the domesticity around her. Unbelievable isn’t a programme about whether Adler was telling the truth. It’s about who gets to have their story heard, who is allowed to be believed. It’s about the power dynamics that underpin the criminal justice system and society at large. “Am I in trouble?”, Adler asks the police who take her first statements. The answer for her, and so many others like her, is a resounding yes.