The renegade restaurateur Gary Usher has made a name for himself by opening no-frills bistros in unlikely places in the north-west: Hoole, Heswall and now Prescot. This documentary follows the straight-talking Usher as he crowdfunds the venture, to the background chorus of incredulous locals. Usher is captivating as he veers from cooking demonstrations to tense budgetary negotiations. It is a mouthwatering watch and proof that good food is a universal language. Ammar Kalia Anyone wondering how the Conservatives went from being the party of Churchill to one of risible chicken memes might find answers in this two-part series. Tonight: the aftermath of the May 2015 election in which the alarming prospect of “chaos with Ed Miliband” was narrowly averted. Phew. Phil Harrison The harrowing testimony of two escapees from Auschwitz who revealed the truth of the concentration camp’s existence is dramatised with expert narration in this film. The central question, a moral quandary of whether to destroy the camp altogether, is a troubling “what if”. AK The Big Yin’s latest US trek has not disappointed, offering the expected mix of easy comedy and deep respect for ordinary struggles. The last leg moves from Virginia to Tennessee, taking in moonshine, Elvis and the route of the underground railroad that took hundreds of slaves to freedom. Jack Seale The British music industry’s most coveted prize returns for its 28th year with a shortlist that features jazz outfit SEED Ensemble, Welsh psych-rocker Cate Le Bon and pop-rockers the 1975. The bookies have their money on the rappers Slowthai and Dave, but it is a ceremony known for its surprises. AK There has always been a campy element to Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk’s horror anthology series. The 80s-set ninth season makes it literal, assembling a bunch of excitable teens and harried adult chaperones at a camp for some Friday-the-13th-style snogging and slashing. Graeme Virtue Prometheus (Ridley Scott, 2012) 11pm, Film4 Scott’s long-awaited prequel to Alien explores the genesis of the space monster. Noomi Rapace’s Dr Elizabeth Shaw is the Ripley figure among the crew of the Prometheus, on a mission to locate the creatures who may once have visited Earth. The film’s breathtaking vision blasts it over the narrative lapses. Paul Howlett European Tour golf: The PGA Championship  10am, Sky Sports Golf. The first day of one of the tour’s most prestigious events. Europa League football: Eintracht Frankfurt v Arsenal 5.30pm, BT Sport 2. Manchester United’s big clash with Astana follows at 8pm. Super League rugby league 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A clash between Warrington Wolves and Castleford Tigers from the play-off round.