Boris Johnson compares himself to Churchill, but his unconvincing bluster at the dispatch box (Humiliated Johnson plays his next card: a snap election, 4 September) makes Alan Partridge a better fit. Johnson is better seen as the anti-Churchill; the ejection from the Conservative party of Churchill’s grandson, Sir Nicholas Soames, is a vivid symbol of this. Churchill’s positive vision in the darkest days of the second world war started from a ruthless acceptance of reality, no matter how painful. Johnson’s “cakeism” offers instead a witless blind denial of the challenges ahead.Dr Martin TreacyCardigan, Ceredigion • Boris Johnson’s threat to punish disobedient MPs (Tory rebels tell how Johnson’s deselection threats backfired, 4 September) suggests the Emperor Caligula may be one of his role models. The eccentric Roman who appointed his horse to the office of consul also liked to say of his subjects “oderint dum metuant” (let them hate me so long as they fear me). Geoffrey BindmanLondon • Surely the prime minister should immediately resign now that he has lost his majority? I am sure that used to be the rule. I know Boris Johnson thinks he is above the usual rules of democratic government, no doubt encouraged in this by Dominic Cummings, having prorogued parliament for five weeks, but he should now be firmly told to resign.Valerie CrewsBeckenham, London • Six weeks ago you reported that Boris Johnson was seen “carrying a thick book about war strategy” (Accounts of ‘unsteady’ Johnson on return flight, 27 July). If, as widely reported, he and Dominic Cummings are studying Sun Tzu’s The Art of War to develop their political strategy, Jeremy Corbyn might add to his bedside reading the thoughts of General Võ Nguyên Giáp. Giáp’s strategy played a major part in the defeat of the Americans in Vietnam. The words of one sentence are worthy of much meditation: “If the enemy masses his forces, he loses ground; if he scatters, he loses strength.”Robert LumleyLondon • Katy Balls (Journal, 2 September) says “Dominic Cummings told aides they could learn from Kennedy’s space programme” and that “there’s an official Apollo dashboard”. It may have escaped Mr Cummings’ notice, but the Apollo programme was a very expensive dead end, which was terminated prematurely.Prof Keith HaywardFellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society, London • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition