David Cameron has admitted he was wrong to insist his Downing Street communications adviser Andy Coulson was innocent until proven guilty over phone hacking at the News of the World, suggesting he should have removed him in 2010 before the scandal snowballed and “brought the coalition close to collapse”. The former prime minister admits in his memoir For the Record, published on Wednesday, that he considered the former editor of the Sunday tabloid “a good guy, a nice guy” but he allowed his judgment about employing him at the heart of his No 10 operation to be swayed by wanting to believe Coulson’s repeated assurances that he knew nothing about hacking. As the extent of phone hacking at the Rupert Murdoch-owned tabloid emerged in 2010 and claims about Coulson’s involvement became “more lurid”, with claims he encouraged hacking, Cameron admitted his “stubbornness [in not acting to remove him] had been misplaced”. “It wasn’t only that I believed his assurances, it was that I very much wanted to believe them,” he wrote. “And that always affects your judgment.” He said he seemed to be “someone of integrity: moral, upstanding, proper”. The phone-hacking scandal and the subsequent Leveson public inquiry into the press brought “my premiership to the precipice”, Cameron said, revealing that it also came close to sparking a punch-up between him and the deputy prime minister Nick Clegg when the pair disagreed over the shape of future press regulation. The extent of phone hacking, exposed by the Guardian in 2009, resulted in the closure of the News of the World, and Coulson being jailed in 2014 for conspiring to hack phones. Cameron details how he was racked by anxiety about his hiring of Coulson (“an Essex boy done good”) to the extent that he recorded his feelings on tape. As the scandal developed, with the resignation of the Metropolitan police commissioner Sir Paul Stephenson, who had hired the former News of the World executive Neil Wallis as a press adviser, and the arrest of Rebekah Brooks, News International’s chief executive, he said: “The worst thing I can be accused of is believing someone I shouldn’t have believed. I didn’t bring someone in to government who did terrible things in government, but I do feel … it shook me in that it’s very personal because you feel your own integrity is being questioned … He was a good guy, he was a nice guy, he did a good job for us, but it was a risk I suppose we shouldn’t have taken.” Then came the Guardian’s revelations that the News of the World had hacked the phone of the murdered teenager Milly Dowler in the summer of 2011, which Cameron said were “gut-churning”, “despicable and wicked”. The government’s response to the subsequent Leveson inquiry, which Cameron ordered, placed huge strain on the coalition government, he wrote. Cameron did not want to create a new regulator with statutory underpinning because he feared it would put parliament or the government in charge of what the press could or couldn’t do. But Clegg wanted just that and threatened the rest of the government’s programme to get it in a meeting where they “nearly came to blows”. Cameron recalled that Clegg told him “no piece of legislation matters as much to me as this and I am prepared to fuck up all the legislation in order to get what I want on this”. “Staff outside raised their eyebrows as they heard shouting inside my office,” he said. A compromise was reached with the use of a royal charter to establish a new regulator but Cameron regretted other aspects of the fall out of the hacking scandal, he said. “The decision to prosecute journalists for paying for information was misdirected,” he said. “It’s a journalist’s job for public officials to find out important things and print them.” He said Leveson was wrong to pay so little attention to online content because “people will not assume that what they read on the internet is trustworthy”. “If anything, the established press and broadcast media are even more important in acting as a bulwark against fake news.” 