Dominic Raab has said Tory rebels kicked out of the party for backing a Brexit delay carried out an “act of vandalism” against democracy as he admitted there was likely to be a court challenge to legislation that holds up the UK leaving the EU. The foreign secretary praised his party’s whips for restoring discipline and said the 21 MPs had known the consequences when they voted against the government to “hand control” of parliament to the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn. Amber Rudd has become the latest high-profile party figure to desert Boris Johnson, resigning both from her cabinet role as work and pensions secretary and as a Conservative MP with stinging criticism of her party’s drift towards no deal and the axing of colleagues. Here is the list of the 21 Conservative MPs who voted with the opposition and against the government on Tuesday night’s motion to seize control of the parliamentary timetable in order to pave the way for a bill to block a no-deal Brexit. Guto Bebb, Aberconwy Richard Benyon, Newbury Steve Brine, Winchester Alistair Burt, North East Bedfordshire Greg Clark, Tunbridge Wells Kenneth Clarke, Rushcliffe David Gauke, South West Hertfordshire Justine Greening, Putney Dominic Grieve, Beaconsfield Sam Gyimah, East Surrey Philip Hammond, Runnymede and Weybridge Stephen Hammond, Wimbledon Richard Harrington, Watford Margot James, Stourbridge Sir Oliver Letwin, West Dorset Anne Milton, Guildford Caroline Nokes, Romsey and Southampton North Antoinette Sandbach, Eddisbury Sir Nicholas Soames, Mid Sussex Rory Stewart, Penrith and The Border Edward Vaizey, Wantage Asked to comment on her remark that the Tory leadership had carried out an act of “political vandalism” on Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday show, Raab said: “They were told in advance it would be a confidence issue, so I regret it, but it was their choice and they did it knowing what the implication would be first and foremost to the country. That’s the real vandalism to democracy that’s going on … so I regret it and we need to keep the family together, but the prime minister was very clear.” Rudd told the BBC on Sunday morning she felt she had little choice but to resign after colleagues had lost the whip for backing Hilary Benn’s bill instructing the prime minister to ask for a delay to leaving the EU on 31 October and in effect blocking a no-deal departure. “I know I couldn’t carry on in the Conservative party at such a high level and see 21 of my colleagues who are good, moderate people, who also want a deal, excluded from it, and I just needed to move and stand by them,” she told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show. She said there was a “huge machine” preparing for a no-deal Brexit, which was taking up “80-90% of government time”, but when she had asked No 10 this week for an update on the work going into the negotiations, she had been sent a one-page summary. “There is a huge amount of planning and preparation around no deal. I have attended a number of those meetings. We are really stepping it up, which is the right thing to do, but I have not seen enough work going into actually trying to get a deal.” Rudd said she did not regret joining Johnson’s cabinet, which required signing up to his plan to leave the EU by 31 October, come what may. “I entered in good faith, had frank conversations with the PM, and when I said I supported him on his strategy I was absolutely genuine.” Raab said his former cabinet colleague had signed up to Johnson’s plan to leave the EU at the end of October come what may, and that extensive no-deal planning was crucial to getting a deal, but that the government was also working on solutions to present to the EU. This included plans being worked up on technological “possibilities” on the Northern Irish border to avoid using the backstop arrangement. Asked by Ridge if the prime minister would ignore the legislation passed in parliament asking him to seek a delay to Brexit, Raab said the government would test its legality to the limits and could not rule out that a legal challenge would be brought in the future. He said the prime minister was absolutely committed to not asking Brussels for an extension. He said: “We will adhere to the law but also this is such a bad piece of legislation … we will also want to test to the limit what it does actually lawfully require. We will look very carefully at the implications and our interpretation of it.” The court challenge may come from outside government, he added. “We can’t necessarily control that,” he said, on exactly who would bring a legal case. “People at various points challenged the government over Brexit. We had two legal challenges last week alone and we won both of those,” he said. On whether the prime minister would resign rather than ask for an extension to Brexit, he ducked the question and said: “We are always going to behave lawfully as a government.” Accusations that the prime minister’s chief strategist, Dominic Cummings, is not a Conservative party member were also batted away by Raab. Cummings has been blamed by many Tory MPs this week for the much stricter treatment of Brexit rebels and for narrowing down the party’s appeal by focusing solely on leaving the EU. He said: “I don’t know. You’d have to ask him.”