Shaun Edwards has spoken for the first time about his decision not to become Wigan’s coach after finishing his 12-year stint with Wales in union as well as the prospect of joining France’s revolution after the World Cup. Edwards made a verbal agreement last year to join Wigan – the club where he enjoyed considerable success as a player – but changed his mind in April, after Wales had won the Grand Slam. The Welsh Rugby Union then offered him a new contract but he turned it down because it contained a break clause after two years. France, whose manager after the World Cup will be Raphaël Ibañez, a player at Wasps when Edwards coached the club, were in May reported to have agreed a four-year contract but nothing has been said since. Asked if he and his fellow Wales coaches had extra motivation because it was their last World Cup, Edwards replied: “I will be at the next World Cup because I am going to France. Seriously we have done a lot of good things in the last 18 months and we have to take it on to the big occasion, doing it when it really matters. “Nothing has been announced with France. There are a few things to sort out, so it is not definite. I have gone into the last two World Cups not knowing if I will have a job afterwards. I used to sign one-year contracts with Wigan. I prefer to be on the edge.” Edwards said he decided not to take over at Wigan because he questioned his experience for the role. “It was very difficult and it is best not to say too much. I said Wigan needed a more experienced rugby league coach than me and I was right. They are doing well under Adrian Lam and I think they will win the Super League again this year.” The Rugby World Cup is one of the few trophies Edwards has not picked up in his playing and coaching career. “I am sick of watching everybody else in the finals, that’s how I work. I have set myself the target of getting into the final and taking it from there. “When I started with Wales, if a northern hemisphere union beat a southern hemisphere one in the autumn, it was big news. There are now a lot more of us beating them. We are working hard on our tackling technique because one thing I have learned is not to have a player sent off. A slightly mistimed challenge could cost you.”