After being thwarted by MPs in every single Commons vote he has faced so far, Boris Johnson is in an apparent bind – likely to face a rebel law obliging him to seek a Brexit extension, but unable yet to call the election he now wants. What are his options? This seems most likely, and could happen on Monday, after the rebel backbench bill receives royal assent, but before parliament is prorogued. Under the FTPA, passed in 2011, breaking the set five-year gap between elections needs two-thirds of MPs – 434 of them – to back the plan. When Johnson tried it on Wednesday night only 298 did, with opposition MPs mainly abstaining. Things could be different on Monday – Labour say they want an election, but only after no-deal Brexit on 31 October is ruled out. However, even if Jeremy Corbyn feels sufficiently reassured following the passing of the bill, he could still seek a later election than the 15 October date sought by Johnson. One mooted alternative plan would be for the government to try to pass a simple one-line bill amending the FTPA to say that in this one instance, an election would happen. The advantage for Johnson would be that this would need a simple Commons majority to pass, meaning a handful of opposition rebels could sway it. However, No 10 is not keen on the idea for one reason – any such bill could be amended by the opposition, for example to set a particular election date that Johnson might not want. Some have mischievously suggested other amendments could include extending the vote to 16-year-olds and EU nationals – this wouldn’t happen, but it illustrates the can of worms that could be opened. This was, in the era before the FTPA, the nuclear option for a beleaguered prime minister – call a confidence vote in which MPs could back the PM or face an immediate election. These days it is less straightforward. The FTPA does give provision for the opposition to call a confidence vote, and while in theory this could be done by the government, it would be seen as unusual. In this case it could end up in the bizarre situation of Johnson and his MPs voting against his own administration, with Labour supporting it. But even if it passed, the FTPA does not stipulate an immediate election, but a 14-day period where an alternative government could be formed. Johnson could thus face being replaced by a caretaker administration headed by Corbyn – or even someone like the newly purged Kenneth Clarke. This is the phrase used by some in Labour for what they would like Corbyn’s tactics to be – only seek a general election for after 31 October, and in the interim allow Johnson to get by with no majority, albeit also with a five-week suspension of parliament from the start of next week. However, there could be advantages here for Johnson, for example time to hammer home his key messages that Corbyn is scared of an election, and that he is being frustrated by a remain-minded parliament in delivering Brexit.