Saturday Night Live has added its first Asian cast member, and in the interest of balance, also added its first openly anti-Asian cast member. 🚨 Season 45 Alert 🚨Welcome to the cast, @chloefineman, @Shanemgillis, and @bowenyang! Bowen Yang, who is Chinese American, has been a writer for the show since 2018, and has had acting credits on Broad City and High Maintenance. He co-hosts the podcast, Las Culturistas. The casting is significant for Saturday Night Live, which has been criticized in the past for its historical lack of diversity. Previous cast members Fred Armisen and Rob Schneider are both part Asian. Chloe Fineman, who is known for her celebrity impressions, was also added to the cast. unbelievable that SNL still has firsts in terms of writers/cast members. at its big big age While congratulations rolled in for Yang and the show on social media, the freelance journalist Seth Simons uncovered a clip of Shane Gillis, another of the show’s hires announced on Thursday, making unquestionably racist comments about Chinese people. today SNL announced the hiring of its first cast member of East Asian descent, and also this guy pic.twitter.com/0FAGJZJUkK In the clip from September 2018, which Simons noted was deleted, Gillis mocks Chinatown and refers to Chinese people by slurs. He imitates the way Chinese people pronounce English words, and complains about having trouble communicating with a Chinese waiter. “An Asian trying to learn English bothers me more than someone listening to, like, Lil Uzi Vert while I’m trying to eat my fucking dinner,” he laughs in a second clip. this, again, is from September 2018 pic.twitter.com/inYFT22zjl The clips came from Matt and Shane’s Secret Podcast. In addition to what Gillis says in the clips, he also laughs and engages with the other comedian when he talks about how Chinese food is “dishonest” and full of chemicals, and sexualizes Asian women. Officials from Saturday Night Live did not immediately respond to requests for comment about the hiring of Gillis.