Link’s Awakening has always been a curio in the grand history of the Zelda franchise. The first Zelda game for a portable console, it was missing a number of series mainstays – no triforce, no ganon … heck, no Zelda – and took glee in replacing them with bizarre twists, like the plethora of cameos from other Nintendo games or the ability to steal items from a shopkeeper (incurring the penalty of having your saved game renamed THIEF). So it’s delightful to see the game getting a remake after being repeatedly overlooked for re-releases in favour of its more conventional cousins such as Link to the Past and Ocarina of Time. And it is the sort of remake that sets the standard for what we should expect: every single thing fans love about the original game is here, except rather than a four-colour GameBoy screen, it’s beautifully rendered in 3D with another 25 years of Easter eggs added for those dedicated enough to find them. Link’s Awakening sees Link washed up on shore of the mysterious Koholint Island and tasked with gathering eight magical musical instruments to awaken the Wind Fish and return home. It’s the 2D Zelda formula at its purest: enter dungeon, find item that unlocks path to next dungeon, rinse, repeat. There’s no Link to the Past-style twist here: simply fitting the game as it is on an old GameBoy cartridge was feat enough. That means the game, in particular the overworld, is a masterpiece of efficient design, packing as many secrets as possible into any given screen. Which is good, because you’ll be back-tracking a lot, even once you unlock the fast-travel system a few hours in; it’s nice to notice, as you trek a path for the fifth time, that now you can pick up that boulder and see what’s underneath it. There are a few more fast-travel points than in the first game – and more secret seashells to collect, and more heart pieces, and a whole figurine-collecting subgame that is completely ignorable – but by and large, this really is the same game. If, like me, you played Links Awakening until the cartridge broke, you’ll probably be able to navigate on hazy memories alone. But the problem with being such a faithful recreation of a 26-year-old game is, well, it’s still a 26-year-old game. And occasionally it shows. For instance, sometimes the doors will lock in a dungeon and you need to defeat all the enemies to get them to unlock. That’s fine, until you hit some bosses who need bombs to defeat. Bombs you may not have, and which you can’t get in the now-locked room. Time for either a deliberate death or a hard reset! Some enemies can only be hurt with your spin attack. There is no way of telling which ones these are, short of remembering to try your spin attack in the middle of hectic boss fights – at the same time as trying the magic dust, and the bombs, and boomerang and arrows and fire rod and everything else – because this era of Zelda really likes you using the right weapon on the right thing. Some frustrations have been softened. The extra buttons on the Switch mean that now your sword, shield, power bracelet and Pegasus boots are always equipped once you have them, limiting the endless item-swapping of the GameBoy version (although reducing some previously complex fights to triviality). Other new introductions have fared less well. Worst is Dampé, a new character who lets you piece together new dungeons from rooms you’ve previously encountered. Supposedly a mini Zelda Maker, a prototypical twin to Super Mario Maker, it ends up as a horrible grindy mess. You know the solutions to all the puzzles and can’t do anything more interesting, so end up simply finding the minimal new creation required to fulfil each of Dampé’s challenges, then ambling through the same 10 rooms you use each time, to get a few extra quarter hearts and secret seashells. Link’s Awakening is a fantastic remake of a game that was fantastic in 1993. Fans must decide for themselves if those two things combine to make it a fantastic game in 2019 – particularly when the glorious Cadence of Hyrule is also on the Switch to scratch the itch you may have for 2D Zelda – and at a third of the price.