If you are wondering who is eating all the berries of your fuchsia bush, it’s me. I can’t tell you how much joy I get from wandering around my neighbourhood plucking from front garden bushes the juiciest of dripping fruit – it tastes somewhere between a kiwi, blueberry and strawberry, with a touch of pepper. If it’s too peppery, you are picking too soon – the berries really do need to be bursting. The best berries tend to be on the naffest bushes; those bedding sorts with pirouetting ballerinas for flowers, in clashing colour combinations. If it’s hard to imagine wanting such a thing in your garden, you may change your mind when you taste the berries. Plus, as bushes go, they are a tolerant sort: good for bees, unfussy about soil, shade and, for that matter, being pruned hard. On top of it all, they flower from June right through to October. The most common species grown here is Fuchsia magellanica, the hardy fuchsia with pink and purple flowers, which is found growing in the relatively temperate areas of southern Argentina and Chile. Although it can take heat and full sun, it flowers its socks off in the cooler months of September and October. It’s the one that often appears as an escapee in hedgerows in the warmer parts of the country. If the clashing colour combination has your toes curling, then the pale lavender pink flowers of F. magellanica var molinae or, my favourite, the delicate pure white flowers of F. magellanica ‘Hawkshead’ make for elegant plants that are particularly useful in shade. There’s also F. magellanica ‘Sharpitor’, which has beautiful pale pink flowers and delicate white margins to the leaves. These plants do best in a sheltered spot. A hard frost will take the plants right the way down, but established plants in the ground will recover. Not so for pot subjects, which will need to be brought to somewhere protected, if hard frosts are prominent in your area. Even when cut back or hit by frost they are capable of making 3ft of growth in one summer, so need to be sited with this in mind. It’s not one for the front of a border. Combine them with pale pink or white Japanese anemones, hydrangea and the long spires of Actaea simplex Atropurpurea Group. Fuchsia flower only on current season’s growth, so older plants can become very woody and leggy. In spring, treat them like buddleia and cut back old wood to a framework. Do this even if there are new shoots, as it will resprout from the base. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.