The aftermath of the Vegas wedding (and Ross not arranging the promised annulment) produced some of my favourite Chandler lines: “I couldn’t face the idea of another failed marriage” “Well. Can I ask at what stage you considered this to be a successful marriage?” and: “Ross, just for my own peace of mind, are you secretly married to any more of us?” mattyjj I love the one where Danny DeVito played the male stripper. Any time I hear the Soft Cell version of Tainted Love, I always picture DeVito in the policeman uniform. “Did someone call for the looong arm of the law?” DeVito seems like a good sport for taking the part. FrancoBegbieJnr The one where the neighbour Mr Heckles dies and Chandler sees a foreshadowing of his own lonely future. The realisation comes when Chandler hears the noisy girls upstairs and whacks the ceiling with Heckles’ broom, then looks at it and throws it aghast to the floor like it’s on fire. I love that bit; it’s classic Matthew Perry physical comedy. He was brilliant. And it had the melancholy that American comedy does so well. The last scene of Chandler alone in the empty room, turning the light off, was very human, which is why we loved it. And you did … even if you pretended you didn’t. colin_robinson The one where Brad Pitt comes to Thanksgiving and tells everyone he started the I hate Rachel Green club in high school. Chandler breaks Monica’s special dinner plates and the day’s been so disastrous she says: “Oh my God, I’ve lost the will to scold.” Northernsoulgirl For me, the single funniest moment of the entire thing is Chandler’s crazy roommate’s goldfish cracker. Also, Ross – he’s undoubtedly a weirdo and a bit of a creep, which is what makes him the best character in the show. Chandler has the best quips, but in terms of plot-based humour, Ross has the best episodes hands down. I mean, holiday armadillo! diibii I remember laughing so much the first time I watched The Baby on the Bus episode. And I like the episode where Phoebe and Mike (Paul Rudd) are donating and un-donating money to charity – and when they change their names to Princess Consuela Banana Hammock and Crap Bag. ID027179 Best single shot? The bit where it looks like Joey is mournfully looking through a rain splattered window and missing Chandler, then the camera pulls back and he is actually looking through a piece of ‘art’ he bought in some post Chandler-moving-out shopping spree. It was pretty much always great. This and Frasier on a Friday night were a great start to the weekend. Good days. arcaneenchanter “Pivot! Pivot! PIVAAAAAATTTTT”“Shut up, shut up, shut up!” Melissa McDonald The One Where No One’s Ready is my favourite. All six characters come in and out of Monica’s apartment, driving three storylines of varying frivolity. It’s a lesson in how to write a simple and perfect sitcom episode that doesn’t go anywhere and doesn’t have to. Phoebe: “How many of those [espressos] have you had?”Chandler: “I dunno – a MILLION?!” One of my favourite lines. AndSoOn 