Italy’s forwards bludgeoned Canada into submission with seven tries in a 48-7 victory amid energy-sapping humidity at Fukuoka Hakatanomori Stadium, catapulting them to the top of Pool B. Italy’s captain, Dean Budd, who scored his side’s second try, said: “We’ve earned a few drinks tonight. We were blowing out there but we put a massive focus on the first 20 minutes and the effort we put into that first 20 minutes took a bit of the pressure off.” It was the second successive bonus-point victory for Conor O’Shea’s side after last Sunday’s 47-22 win over Namibia and all but assured them of at least third place in a pool that includes the heavyweights New Zealand and South Africa. They have 10 points but still need to face both the All Blacks and Springboks, who are expected to qualify for the quarter-finals, short of an upset of the magnitude of Wednesday’s win for Uruguay over Fiji in Kamaishi. The Italians, who rested several players, were in no mood to allow a second shock within the space of 24 hours and were led by the rampaging loose forwards Jake Polledri, Braam Steyn and Sebastian Negri. For the first 15 minutes they demonstrated that the gulf between tier-one and tier-two nations was still in existence, with Steyn and Budd exploiting some poor defence to give their side a 17-0 lead by the 13th minute. Facing a rout, the North Americans started to make their tackles and they enjoyed spells of possession that presented three gilt-edged opportunities to get back into the game, most notably when the captain, Tyler Ardron, burst through and passed to the replacement flanker Matt Heaton, who dropped the ball with the line open. The wing DTH van der Merwe also started to make his presence felt, creating space down the left, but when the Canadians wasted a three-on-one chance, the momentum swung back to the Italians and they went into half-time with their 17-0 advantage. Negri extended the lead when he also smashed over from close range before Canada again failed to capitalise on an opportunity when Van der Merwe created space through the midfield and managed to put Jeff Hassler clear only for Matteo Minozzi to produce a try-saving tackle on the wing within five metres of the line. The referee, Nigel Owens, then awarded a penalty try that secured the bonus point for the Italians, following an illegal challenge from Heaton, before the replacement wing Mattia Bellini crossed with 19 minutes left. Owens awarded Ardron a try only for the television match official, Rowan Kitt, to overturn for a knock-on before the ball landed in the Canadian No 8’s hands. The decision was met by a chorus of boos but the crowd, now firmly behind the Canadians, rose to their feet minutes later when the underdogs did score the best try of the match with a superb finish by the wing Andrew Coe. Italy, however, finished strongly, with the replacement hooker Federico Zani shunted over from a driving maul before Bellini put Minozzi in to close out the scoring. O’Shea said: “You have to be pretty happy. We started the game really well and that’s where we imposed ourselves … and in the last 20 minutes drove it home the physical dominance we had.” His opposite number Kingsley Jones rued Canada’s failure to capitalise on their spells in possession: “We just didn’t finish our opportunities. If we had taken a gift under the posts, then that changes the shape of the game, not just the scoreboard, but unfortunately we didn’t take those chances.” Flanker Jake Polledri, who was awarded man of the match, told the official World Cup website: “Our main focus was the four-day turnaround which makes it difficult but we couldn’t have asked for anything more really. “Our philosophy is to play without fear and that’s exactly what we’re doing and it’s good to see it on the pitch.”