Lost in the din over the inclusion of the newly qualified second row Jean Kleyn in Ireland’s World Cup squad rather than the second row stalwart Devin Toner was the nationality of the team’s head coach, Joe Schmidt. The New Zealander takes charge of his final home match on Saturday against Wales before his last hurrah in the World Cup, having turned Ireland into serious contenders. Schmidt has the best record of an Ireland head coach in the professional era, comfortably so having overseen three Six Nations championships and last year’s grand slam. When asked for a comment this week about the sympathy expressed for Toner by the World Rugby vice-chairman, Agustín Pichot, who led a campaign to extend the residential qualification period in international rugby from three to five years, he could not hide his exasperation. “I am not sure I am the most qualified to comment,” he said. “I’m a blow-in myself and I will be blowing out soon enough. Pichot has been going on about the world rankings and he has a number of big opinions, but they are not relevant to us.” One reason for Schmidt’s success with Ireland, and at Leinster earlier in the decade, is his ability to strip sentiment from selection. Toner had been one of his mainstays, at provincial and international level, a player he valued and a man he liked, but he reached the decision based on form and an assessment of what was required to optimise the chances of success in the World Cup. Nothing else. Ireland, like Wales, used to be fuelled by emotion but both have been dragged into cold reality by New Zealanders. This weekend is Warren Gatland’s final European match with Wales, in the country where he started his international coaching career in 1998. Like Schmidt, he regards selection not as a means of rewarding reputation, and with it the temptation to allow players to bow out at their own time of choosing, but winning the next match or campaign. Players who served him well found themselves suddenly cut off, like Adam Jones, Martyn Williams, Jamie Roberts and Dwayne Peel, Lions all. Gatland and Schmidt were born and brought up on New Zealand’s north island and played provincial rugby: Gatland sat on New Zealand’s bench for 18 matches without coming off it, an experience that sees him empathise rather than sympathise with players who unexpectedly find themselves on the outside. Schmidt and Gatland are the third head coaches from New Zealand employed by their countries and the latter will be succeeded by another, Wayne Pivac, in November. When the two sides met during the group stage of the 1995 World Cup, they were the sick nations of the home championship, usually battling each other to avoid the wooden spoon. Ireland won by a point to send home Wales early, but their own exit was merely delayed and they were soundly beaten by France in the quarter-final. The two sides are unrecognisable now. Both sides have the chance of going to Japan top of the world rankings. A victory will do for Ireland but Wales must win by 15 points or more, something they have done only once in the last 109 years, in 1976. Not that either coach is obsessed with a system that reflects neither the status of a match nor whether teams are anywhere near full strength: both have the World Cup at the centre of their thoughts and leaving on the highest of highs. Ireland recovered from the shattering blow delivered by England at Twickenham last month to beat Wales in Cardiff last Saturday. It was less redemption than recovery with their opponents making 15 changes for the return. Johnny Sexton, Robbie Henshaw and Keith Earls return to the home side’s back division, while in the back-row Schmidt has moved CJ Stander to blindside flanker with Jack Conan at No 8, a hint they will mix directness with width. Ireland have been tactically rigid under Schmidt, as Wales were under Gatland earlier this decade, but as ball-in-play time increases and fatigue in the final quarter of matches becomes a greater factor, so the value of improvisation grows. Wales may not have turned into the Barbarians but handling and passing have become qualities they look for in tight-five forwards now. The success of Schmidt and Gatland was down to their immediate recognition that they were not dealing with players from New Zealand where instinct comes naturally. They have coached with a tight rein, but their achievements in the coming weeks may hinge on how much they are prepared to loosen them in attack.