I was interested to read Charlotte Church’s article (So Nana is dead. I’m glad we got time for a proper goodbye, G2, 26 August) on the excellent palliative care her grandmother received before her death. Not all hospitals have access to a palliative care team – and even if they have, they are not on the wards all the time to advise and supervise the ward staff. Church suggests that we have the best end-of-life care provision in the world, and certainly the hospice movement, started by Cicely Saunders, has contributed to this. In 2016, only 5.7% of terminally ill patients died in a hospice, while nearly half of all deaths occurred in hospital, where, I would suggest, care is inconsistent. A family member was admitted to a hospital in the Midlands in July this year for palliative care, suffering from terminal cancer. His visitors found him on the ward lying in blood- and urine-soaked sheets, and in acute distress with the pain he was suffering. He was lucid and courteous in spite of this. There appeared to be no shortage of staff – they were generally congregating around the desk chatting and laughing, and on one occasion ignoring the bleeping coming from this patient’s blocked syringe driver, as well as calls for help from other patients. There are other examples of gross lack of care and compassion. This calls into question what sort of training, supervision and support hospital staff receive when they are in contact with dying patients in extreme pain. Due to family persistence and a bed becoming available, he was transferred to a hospice for his last two days, where he was cared for with great skill and kindness, and died without the pain and distress he had endured in the hospital where he had worked for 25 years as a consultant.Anne DenhamRetired nurse and health visitor, Bridport, Dorset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition