Felipe Vázquez, the Pittsburgh Pirates’ two-time All-Star closer, has been arrested and charged with one count of computer pornography, solicitation of a child and one count of providing obscene material to minors, according to the Florida department of law enforcement (FDLE). Vázquez, 28, was served a felony search warrant out of Florida’s Lee County on Tuesday morning at his Pittsburgh apartment by the FDLE and Pennsylvania state police, authorities said. A spokesperson said arresting officers seized several electronic devices, which will undergo forensic examinations as part of the ongoing investigation. Florida police said the investigation into the left-handed pitcher began in August when agents “obtained information that Vázquez had a reported sexual relationship with a 13-year-old female” in Florida. The alleged victim, now aged 15, continued to communicate with Vázquez over text messaging and received a video in July from him in which he is shown performing a sex act, authorities said. Additionally, Vázquez is alleged to have sent messages suggesting they would meet for sex after baseball season was over, police said. “Today we were made aware of an active law enforcement investigation involving Felipe Vázquez and his subsequent arrest,” Pirates president Frank Coonelly said in a statement Tuesday. “We take this matter, and these charges in particular, extremely seriously. We have informed the commissioner’s office of the investigation and arrest. “The commissioner’s office will immediately place Felipe Vázquez on Administrative Leave (and, as a result, Restricted List) pursuant to the Joint MLB/MLBPA Policy. We need to be respectful to all involved and the ongoing legal proceeding. As a result, the organization, our staff and players cannot comment any further at this time.” A Venezuela native and Florida resident, Vázquez played his first two major league seasons for the Washington Nationals before a July 2016 trade sent him to Pittsburgh where he’s thrived in the closer role, making the National League All-Star team in 2018 and 2019. His most recent appearance for the Pirates came on Thursday in San Francisco, when he allowed one hit and struck out two in recording his 28th save of the season.