“Wherever law ends, tyranny begins,” propounded John Locke in 1690. The idea was captured and adjusted to the needs of our modern constitutional democracy by Tom Bingham, a pioneer of conceiving justice as the “rule of law” (and the “greatest judge of his era”, as his obituary in the Guardian noted). I wonder what this great proponent of judicial independence and the rule of law would make of this government’s utter disregard for both concepts, and for law itself, as a system that government must adhere to if we are not to slip into a tyranny of the executive. Bingham wrote, quoting Dicey: “every man, whatever his rank or condition, is subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals”. But this government would beg to differ. The PM would “rather be dead in a ditch” than apply the law and seek a further extension to article 50. He prorogued parliament to allow for executive fiat, and misled the Queen in the process (Johnson resists recalling MPs after Scottish ruling, 12 September). We now know this for certain. Scotland’s supreme civil court leaves no doubt: the “true reason” for prorogation “was to stymie parliamentary scrutiny of the executive”; an “egregious case” of failing to comply with “principles of democracy and the rule of law”. Any normal-functioning government would take note. The response of a No 10 source was instead to call into question the Scottish judiciary’s impartiality. The end of reason is in sight, and it is preceded by the end of law.Prof Dimitrios GiannoulopoulosFounder and director, Britain in Europe thinktank • While Boris Johnson repeatedly insists that the prorogation of parliament had nothing to do with Brexit, I, and the 1.7 million others who signed the “Do not prorogue Parliament” petition, have recently received an email with the government response: “Prorogation is a prerogative Act of the Crown, exercised on the advice of Ministers. We must respect the referendum result and the UK will be leaving the EU on 31 October whatever the circumstances.” Nothing to do with Brexit though.Neil JonesSwansea • “Boris Johnson says it is ‘absolutely’ not true he misled Queen over prorogation” (theguardian.com, 12 September). He would, wouldn’t he?Adrian WillsonBath • Following the recent judicial ruling on the unprecedented prorogation of parliament, the prime minister’s spokesman claimed it was “to put before MPs a proper domestic legislative programme”. However, since Mr Johnson’s decision was made in camera, we only have his word for this. Would I be better advised to trust the words of my own MP, Ben Wallace, when he stated on camera in a conversation with French defence minister Florence Parly that the real reason for the suspension of parliament was that Boris Johnson doesn’t have the majority to stop parliament blocking his Brexit plans?Austen LynchGarstang, Lancashire • John Crace deftly and rightly rebukes the “known liars” in No 10 (Sketch, 10 September), but I for one am hugely grateful for Dom’s prorogation. Without it we would not have witnessed a galvanised parliament inflicting six defeats on this most undemocratic of governments, nor would we have witnessed the unforgettable, patient dignity of Dominic Grieve, as he called them to account for their hapless perfidy. As long as a democratic heart resides in our country, these last few extraordinary days will have a resonant significance.Tony RowlandsBristol • Given that Boris’s avowed position on his justification for the prorogation of parliament is that the time is needed to prepare a programme of legislation before the Queen’s speech, has anyone thought to challenge him as to why this is still necessary? He no longer commands a majority in the House and will therefore be unable to enact any legislation, so having a Queen’s speech at all will be pointless.Rosemary BrownOswestry, Shropshire • Should this government lose in the forthcoming supreme court hearing it could appeal to the European court of justice. Bit of a dilemma though. Classic Dom, to coin a phrase.Stephen Rafferty Buckland Brewer, Devon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition