According to the UK government’s waste and resources programme, Wrap, as much as 70% of post-farm-gate waste takes place in our homes (the rest comes from manufacturing, hospitality and retail). That’s not all our fault, of course: clever marketing, BOGOF offers and bulk buys all help waste proliferate. Beyond reducing our own waste, we can also help food producers reduce theirs by changing our shopping habits. The most effective thing we can do is demand producers and retailers take responsibility for their waste by writing emails to them and our MPs; we can also shorten our food chain by wherever possible buying locally and seasonally. And then there’s root-to-fruit eating – consuming whole foods from the whole farm, including veg such as root greens and lesser-known cuts of meat such as lamb breast, which many butchers literally just throw away. This helps to create a demand for what would normally go to waste, while making our food shop more affordable. Lamb breast is a dream cut of meat savoured secretly by many chefs, not least because it’s flavoursome, affordable and thrifty – from the right butcher, you should be able to get it for a really good price. Do ask them to bone it for you, and take the bones home to help create a sauce for the meat. If you have the bones, make a trivet under the rolled lamb and add a splash of wine to cover them. Pop some potatoes and other vegetables in the oven to roast alongside the belly, to make sure the oven is used to its full capacity. 400g lamb belly, boned3 sprigs fresh herbs (oregano, thyme, rosemary, etc), tough stalks removed, or a sprinkle of dried herbs4 garlic cloves, peeled2 outer cabbage leaves (optional)Sea salt and freshly ground black pepperRoast potatoes and other vegetables, to serve (optional)Green sauce, to serve Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Lay the lamb breast flat on a worktop, season with salt and scatter with a mixture of fresh or dried herb leaves. Lay the peeled garlic cloves along the centre of the breast, then roll up the lamb into a tight sausage and wrap it in one or two large outer cabbage leaves (or a piece of greaseproof paper). Roast for 30 minutes, then turn down the heat to 140C (120C fan)/285F/gas 1 and slow roast, with a pan of potatoes and some other vegetables alongside (to fill the oven), for three to four hours, until tender. Serve with the roast veg and green sauce.