Saturday Night Live kicks off its 45th season in the Oval Office. Facing impeachment and “the greatest presidential harassment of all time,” Donald Trump (Alec Baldwin, putting to bed rumors he was done playing the role) sits up late and commiserates over the phone with his inner circle – blabbermouth Rudy Giuliani (Kate McKinnon), recalcitrant attorney general William Barr (Aidy Bryant), perfect fall guy Mike Pence (Beck Bennett), and his doofus sons (Mikey Day and Alex Moffat). Growing more desperate, he reaches out to various outlier allies, including Kim Jong-un (new featured player Bowen Yang), Fox News mouthpiece Jeanine Pirro (Cecily Strong) and his “urbans”, Kanye West (Chris Redd) and Don King (Keenan Thompson), who, on behalf of the “black wackadoo” contingent, have decided to drop their support. The sketch peters out after Trump calls Liev Schreiber, confusing him for the underworld fixer he plays on Showtime’s Ray Donovan. SNL couldn’t have picked a better week to come back, given the magnitude of the impeachment scandal and the bungles in the administration’s response. Alas, they manage only a rote, rushed and utterly pointless cold open, as free of big laughs as it is of insight. When it comes to Trump, it appears we’re in for a long season. Got a problem that needs fixing? Call Ray Donovan. ☎️#SNLPremiere pic.twitter.com/YIB9ReNd3p Zombieland star and self-described “fashionista” Woody Harrelson hosts for the fourth time. After stripping off his tuxedo to reveal silk pajamas, he delivers a rambling monologue overflowing with groaners such as “I’m Asian … Caucasian!” I think the joke is supposed to be that he’s high, but the whole thing is too muddled to tell. A CNN Impeachment Town Hall brings together the Democratic candidates to discuss this week’s bombshell story “the only way they know how – with a muddled, 10-person debate.” The hopeless candidates – Beto O’Rourke, Andrew Yang, Corey Booker, Pete Buttigieg, an astral projecting Marianne Williamson – are summarily excused. The moderator then pivots to “the actual candidates”: energetic reformer Elizabeth Warren, cranky revolutionary Bernie Sanders (Larry David), familiar but out-of-touch Joe Biden (Harrelson, really looking the part), and America’s “fun aunt” (or “funt”) Kamala Harris (Maya Rudolph). As is the case any time David shows up to play Sanders, he steals the show with his loveable curmudgeonry. But Harrelson and Rudolph match him, especially when sparring over Biden’s ridiculous Corn Pop anecdote. While the satire isn’t particularly cutting the laughs all land, thanks in large part to the cameoing guests. This should have been the cold open. Sun’s Out Nevada sees a local correspondent cover the grand opening of the World’s Biggest Cheeto museum, only for the centerpiece to fall into a fan and blow up in a puff of orange dust. It’s a long set-up for a merely decent payoff. Teen musical sensation Billie Eilish sings Bad Guy while dancing along the walls of a rotating set. It’s an ambitious performance, reminiscent of the sci-fi mindbender Inception. Lot of updates this weekend. #SNLPremiere pic.twitter.com/OyeKVZ0zjT Weekend Update returns, opening with the slow march to impeachment. Colin Jost is exasperated by Trump’s reaction: “It’s like if the cops asked you if you killed someone and instead of saying, ‘No, I didn’t,’ you’d said, ‘Who told you that – Ron?” Michael Che is annoyed by the length of the process: “Being president is only a four-year job but it feels like it’s taking them five years to just fire his ass.” They welcome their first and oddly only guest, Big Papi, former Red Sox star David Ortiz (Thompson), who is recovering from a shooting in the Dominican Republic. He’s staying positive, saying: “Whatever doesn’t kill you … makes you want to kill the person who tried to kill you”. He then pitches his latest array of ridiculous sponsors, including HairBnB (“You need a wig for the weekend, use HairBnB”) and Possible Burger (“Did you buy a bunch of ground meat from the back of a pickup truck? It might not be real meat … but it’s possible.”). There’s a short second round of news stories, touching on a sexually tinged animal attack, white supremacist hand signals and Juul’s recent troubles. If you were hoping the hosts (and co-head writers) might address or acknowledge the Shane Gillis controversy, you’re out of luck though likely not surprised. A callback to a memorable sketch from Harrelson’s last hosting gig, in 2014, Football Halftime Speech sees him playing a coach attempting to pep up his team, only to be interrupted by his new and much younger wife (Heidi Gardner), who asks if his “thing” is OK. After assuring her it’s fine, he attempts to get back to his speech, but of course all the players want to know more about his gruesome penile issues which include a Daffy Duck sound and a vein that keeps popping out. The writers tends to over-rely on this format – a normal setting derailed by some absurd or disgusting line – but they remain a reliable vehicle for good gross-out humor. Inside the Beltway attempts to poke fun at the way media elites fool themselves into thinking the latest Trump scandal will be the one that brings him down, but the whole thing falls apart after a couple of snags during costume changes. That said, if you’re a fan of cast members breaking, you’ll get a kick out of it: Bryant utterly fails to keep cool. Eilish returns and performs the acoustic ballad I Love You. The show winds down with Dad, a precise parody of 90s rap videos, before closing out with an informercial for Chickhan’s Apple Farm, a funny two-hander that makes good use of McKinnon and Bryant’s chemistry. Harrelson throws out a shout out to climate activist Greta Thurnberg (whose face is plastered on his t-shirt) during an awkwardly long curtain call, closing a scattered premiere episode on a scattered note.