Boris Johnson has reportedly compared himself to the founder of the Roman empire in meetings, suggesting similarities between his purge of no-deal blocking Tory MPs and Augustus’s bloody sweeping aside of his enemies before ushering in an era of peace. No stranger to Roman history – Johnson studied classics and in 2006 wrote The Dream of Rome – here are five other lessons he could learn from his idol. Born as Gaius Octavius Thurinus in 63BC, the Roman leader is better known to us today as Emperor Augustus. Between 44BC and 27BC he went by a third name: that of Gaius Julius Caesar in honour of the man who adopted him as son and heir. Historians generally refer to him as Octavian during this period to avoid confusion, although he would not have used this name himself. Mark Anthony is said to have taunted him that he only amounted to anything because of the name borrowed from his illustrious benefactor. Perhaps a Johnson rebrand could inspire success, and help distance himself from the family members quitting his government. It should be noted that Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson has already done this trick once. On his deathbed, Augustus is popularly reported to have said “I found Rome a city of bricks and left it a city of marble”, referring to the huge building programmes he had initiated, transforming the run-down civil war-ravaged city into what would be the capital of the western world for the next two centuries. Johnson’s building history as mayor of London is a little more chequered, with about £940m spent on  “vanity projects”. Successfully completed projects include the overheated and overpriced modern Routemaster buses, and the seldom-used Emirates Air Line cable car. The garden bridge and the “Boris Island” airport never even got off the drawing board. Augustus was criticised by friends and enemies alike for not carrying out his military victories personally, instead handing direct control at key moments to allies such as Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, who oversaw victories at the battles of Philippi and Actium. If the reports of Dominic Cummings’ frequent sweary tirades at colleagues are true, maybe Johnson has already found his Agrippa to put the boot in when needed. In 27BC Roman senators conferred on Octavian the title Augustus as a sign of respect, and after his death they clearly wanted to spread that respect further. They had already renamed the Roman month Quintilis to Julius in honour of Julius Caesar after his death, and when Augustus died in 14AD, they changed Sextilis to Augustus – hence the months July and August. Perhaps September could be renamed Boristember in honour of Johnson’s spectacular start in No 10? Augustus enjoyed a 40-year reign, living to the age of 75. He was much luckier than Galba, Otho and Vitellius, who all ruled Rome for short periods during AD69 before being replaced by Vespasian, in what became known as the year of the four emperors. Johnson would do well to avoid this. Still, we’ve already had two prime ministers this year, and given Johnson’s record of losing four out of four votes so far in parliament, who would bet against seeing a third before Christmas?