When Tammy Abraham sized up the situation on the edge of the Wolves penalty area last Saturday, it was a long way from being a clear opportunity. His marker, Conor Coady, appeared to have him where he wanted him. But in the blink of an eye, everything changed – in more than one way. Everybody has seen the move because that is what happens when a player does something outrageous in a Chelsea shirt to complete a hat‑trick. It is on Match of the Day and all over social media but it still bears retelling. There was the little touch inside with the right instep, followed in the same smooth movement with one from the outside of the same boot. Then there was the burst of acceleration, which Coady did not see coming. Who did? Quite simply, it destroyed him. Coady, it should be noted, is an excellent defender. But Abraham was away and he dispatched a low finish into the far corner. It was a jaw-dropper and, in terms of sheer explosiveness, it recalled Fernando Torres in his Liverpool pomp. Abraham has offered glimpses of his qualities this season but this was his best goal so far – the one that took him to seven in the Premier League – and it showed plenty of onlookers something they had not seen previously in his game. Frank Lampard was not among them. “I wasn’t surprised because I’ve seen Tammy do that in training,” the Chelsea manager says. “On different occasions, he can pull the ball out of the sky, do a bit of skill – not things that lead direct to a goal like that but, if you watch his game, you’ll see that in him. He has all these attributes and he has to maximise all of them. That bit of magic is something pretty special.” For Abraham, it is about continuing to add fresh layers as he plays on English football’s biggest stage; about building on his eye-catching start to the season. At Stamford Bridge on Sunday, the 21‑year‑old faces a potentially defining moment. Can he do it against Liverpool and Virgil van Dijk? Abraham made his Chelsea debut against Liverpool as a substitute in a 1-1 draw at Anfield under Guus Hiddink in May 2016. He carries a greater responsibility now. “It’s normal that the top strikers are judged on goals and the next level of that is do you score goals against the big teams?” Lampard says. “I understand that because against someone like Van Dijk, a defence like Liverpool’s and a team like Liverpool, maybe it’s harder to create chances. So it’s what can you do individually to try and create them, and how clinical can you be after that? “Tammy has shown great signs this season but it will be another test on the way. It’s not the be all and end all day and we make our judgments after this but for the top strikers like Didier Drogba … we all remember the amount of times he scored in finals and semi-finals and really important games, and I think, quite rightly, players are judged on that.” Chelsea against Liverpool became a heated rivalry during Lampard’s time as a player at Stamford Bridge. It was sparked in 2004-05, when José Mourinho was newly appointed as Chelsea’s manager and Rafael Benítez had gone to Liverpool the same summer. Towards the end of the season, the latter oversaw a 1-0 Champions League semi-final victory courtesy of Luis García’s disputed goal. Liverpool would beat Chelsea again in the Champions League semi-final the following season before Chelsea knocked them out in a 2007-08 semi-final and a quarter‑final a year later. There were numerous league and cup clashes and Lampard, whose team lost the European Super Cup to Liverpool on penalties in August, when Abraham missed the decisive kick, believes that the fixture has lost none of its spice. “Times have changed slightly but it doesn’t change that feeling, the fans feel it and the players have to feel it,” Lampard says. “It’s a game that does involve a lot of passion. If your levels aren’t there as they should be it’s a game that will go away from you quickly. So my first thing to say to the players is: ’Feel this game and recognise what it is.’ Because it always does have an edge.” Lampard felt that Chelsea should have won rather than lost to Valencia at home in the Champions League on Tuesday but, with Ross Barkley’s penalty going over off the bar, they were undone by a momentary lapse for the only goal. “It’s hugely about how focused and concentrated we are,” Lampard says. “Valencia taught us a lesson and one second was all it took. That’s the level we’re at. Liverpool can really hurt you in one second.” Coady and Wolves would say the same about Abraham.