There is all sorts of trouble to be had in Susukino if you know what you’re looking for and more if you’re not sure. Sapporo’s notorious entertainment district is a block of 20-storey tower blocks, neon from the pavement up: restaurants, bars, gaming parlours, cinemas, salons and love hotels, heaving with off-duty office workers and, for this weekend at least, several thousand English and Australian rugby fans. The England team are staying 10 blocks away, just the other side of the river. They haven’t been any further than the local cafe. “We just tend to find the best coffee shops if we can,” said Owen Farrell. But the atmosphere was crackling in their hotel. England are, as Eddie Jones says, about to go over the top of a rollercoaster they have been riding ever since they arrived at their training camp 10 weeks or so ago. You could see it in Jones, who seemed so wired he was almost vibrating with nervous energy, and hear it in George Ford:“It’s through the roof, we can’t wait to get out there,” and Courtney Lawes: “I am very, very excited.” They were grinning like kids who have burst into their parents’ bedroom on Christmas morning. If they were worried about anything, it was that the team are too wound up. Both mentioned it, which tells you it is something they have all been talking about in their meetings. “We have to contain ourselves,” said Lawes, echoing Ford, who said: “We need that balance of keeping our control and our discipline.” Which is where Farrell comes in. The captain, arms folded across his chest, was just as calm and level‑headed as he always is and has been. You guess on his Christmas mornings he left the presents to his siblings and skipped out to practise his kicking. “I probably try and take more of the emotion out of it because I need to be able to think clearly and make good decisions,” he said. “You want to be in control of what you’re doing. You don’t want your emotions to control you.” For the next 10 minutes, Farrell beat back everyone’s enthusiastic questions like he was brushing off tacklers. This tournament, he said, only defines your career “until your next”, and yes, it’s good to be playing outside his old mate Ford, but “there are a lot of people who have good relationships in this team”, and yes, he did learn a lot playing for the Lions but “this is a completely new tournament and a new environment”, and yes, he can vaguely recall David Beckham scoring a match-winning penalty against Argentina here in 2002, “but we’ve not watched it and it was a while ago now.” There are not many sportspeople who have less time for the games journalists play. It is not that Farrell is hiding anything, just that he is too blunt to pretend he wants to engage with any of it. Scratch him and you will likely find he is the same underneath the surface and all the way through. That makes him a reassuringly steady presence in the middle of this whirlwind that has swept up his coach, teammates and everyone else around him. Farrell has not even considered what he will say before the game: “I’d be worried if I had thought about it already, because there’s still a while to go.” Farrell will want – and need – to be this calm on the pitch, too. If there has been one big worry with his captaincy it is that he tends to bicker and snap at referees when they need careful, canny management. He also needs to be careful with those rash high tackles, when he leads with his shoulder rather than his arms. He says he has adjusted his technique. Listening to him talk, it feels like he was easing himself into just the right mindset for that first match. “Emotion is a big part of the game, it’s a big part of getting yourself in the right place to perform, for some more than others. But everyone’s a bit different in terms of the way they use that.” There was one topic Farrell warmed to and that was the message he had for everyone watching at home. “I already know how good the nation is at getting behind the team at tournaments like this. We’ve all been one of those fans, whether it was for the football World Cup, cricket World Cup, you seen the momentum that gathers back home and I’m sure those teams were able to feed off that. Hopefully we can give them something to cheer about while we’re here.” This is the sort of everyday stuff Farrell loves to talk about. The team, he says, had all watched the cricket World Cup final together: “Brilliant, wasn’t it?” “Whenever a team has got to the knockout stages and built some momentum the country goes mental for it and the football World Cup last year was a massive example of that. The cricket World Cup again showed loads of momentum towards the end, the Women’s World Cup was brilliant, too. England’s a fantastic place when it builds that momentum when there’s a tournament on.” Farrell came into the team right after England had blown one chance at all this, in 2011, and was part of the team that squandered another, in 2015. He is 27 now and he looks sounds and feels as if he’s ready for a taste of it himself.