A father-daughter duo who performed a song titled: “Mommy, don’t go to work” in China has prompted outcry online from parents and feminists. The song, penned by a little-known musician and comedian Yan Lifei, includes lyrics: “Mommy, don’t go to work, or I will have no one to play with. Mommy, even if you do go to work, you won’t make much money ... when I grow up I definitely won’t let mommy go to work anymore.” The song, previously sung by Yan and his daughter on state broadcaster CCTV, went viral on Chinese social media earlier this month when its lyrics were posted online where they came under fire. Online users questioned the misogyny behind the lyrics, as well as why CCTV allowed the performance. “He looks like he lacked love from his own mother – maybe she abandoned him a long time ago, before his malicious hatred of women became evident in his lyrics,” one user wrote. Another said, directing a comment at the child singing the song: “Are you dumb? Your father doesn’t earn as much as your mother does.” “Disgusting,” others wrote. “In my home, my mother worked two jobs. She went to work and when she came home, she took care of the household duties too. It’s only now that I realise that she was a real feminist,” one user wrote. In defence of the criticism, Yan said that he had written the song as a joke when his daughter was two years’ old and would cry every time her mother left for work. But he did not back away from his point about his wife’s lower salary. “In fact, my wife has to work every day, very hard, but the salary is not much. I wanted to express this point. I did not mean to hurt ... female compatriots. I am a very respectful of women and I also deeply understand how great great a mother’s love is”, he posted on Weibo. Users who found the artist’s back catalogue found other questionable songs, including, “I have a good wife,” in which he sings: “My wife, you listen to what I say. I will love you forever.” In another song, a duet about getting married, he sings: “Your future is my business now” to which the woman responds: “I will follow you wherever you go.” Another song is titled: “the woman who brings luck to her husband,” referencing the traditional term, wangfu, used to depict female subordination.