The Supper Club, the “secret society for hungry women” in Lara Williams’ debut novel, initially meets in restaurants, before graduating to breaking into buildings around London. They cook each other food, some from ingredients scavenged from bins outside supermarkets. They eat copiously, drink furiously, dance wildly. They take drugs. They go topless. They make out. They puke. They see each other retching and are pleased. They encourage each other to break through boundaries and inhibitions. They deliberately put on weight. They become “living art projects”. As I describe it there, Supper Club sounds like a gimmick: an easy way into discussions about female bodies and the invisible boundaries they are expected never to transgress, particularly the very visible demarcation of a wider waistband. But this novel is anything but pat or obvious, for Williams has more than enough wit, sincerity and daring to style out any accusations of tricksiness. She’s the real thing. Williams’ prose has a few rough edges, and she recycles a few phrases and ideas; her narrator, Roberta, often feels variations of emotion unravelling in her chest, for instance. But any unsatisfactory moments are easily outnumbered by fine passages of vivid, earthy description, sharp comedy and acute observation. She has the ability to turn something as humdrum as waiting for a selfish man to tease out his overlong order in a coffee shop into a maelstrom of anxiety and tension – not to mention comedy. “One lady bumped into me and I apologised to her,” she writes. “She apologised to me. But I apologised again, out-apologising her, as a kind of reverence.” The prose can be delightful. “He was the sort of boy teenage girls vandalise their desks for,” we are told at one point. In one office scene, Roberta notes: “Everyone had an Apple Mac with two monitors, their eyes darting from one screen to the other. I sometimes wondered about the space between the screens. Did they ever look into that, and if so, what did they see?” Roberta’s unusual mind is left bored by her job as a stylist’s assistant (“I once spent three hours looking at photographs of wrists: determining which wrist was the most appropriate for displaying our new lines of bangles.”) Seeking more excitement, she teams up with co-worker and best friend Stevie to form the supper club. “Do you want to work at that website forever?” Stevie asks. “Yes, I want to label footwear and reorganise cupboards of bras,” says Roberta. “It’s my heart’s song.” Well, I was roaring. The humour becomes even more effective when a shadow spreads over the book. We learn, in a dual narrative going back 10 years into Roberta’s past, that our narrator was raped at university. (As one reviewer has already observed, that would be a spoiler “in a better world”.) Here, Williams’ ability to plunge us into the moment takes on a disturbing and sorrowful power. “I wondered whether I should be making a sound, some husky moan or breath gasp, some indication of desire,” writes the narrator as she woozily begins to work out that she has been violated as she slept, “but I didn’t have any. I don’t want this, I thought; or rather, the thought emerged. I don’t want this.” It’s perhaps true that these experiences feel familiar, with #MeToo and a misogynist in the White House. But Williams makes the politics feel every bit as urgent as they should. Knowledge of the outrage Roberta has suffered helps us understand her friendship with Stevie, how exhilarating and liberating it can be. It also makes us fear for her when their relationship becomes claustrophobic, and the transgressions Stevie encourages begin to feel like intrusions into Roberta’s personal space. Similarly, the bond she begins to form with an old university friend called Adnan feels all the more tender and special, but also precarious. In among all this humane and effortlessly convincing material, the actual supper clubs can start to feel over-strained. The ideas about weight gain never quite work, because the clubs don’t happen often enough to make a physical difference. The sense that these evenings might be fun disappears into a hollow playacting of liberation and debauchery. But this all eventually feels right: the clubs begin to fail Roberta just as much as the reader. They no longer fill the void in her life; by the end, you’re left wondering if anything can. This uncertainty just adds to the impact of this strange and impressive novel. It’s the best on this year’s shortlist. Or at least, that’s my opinion. Next week we’ll move on, to voting and judgment … • Supper Club by Lara Williams is published by Penguin. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15.