Sartorial asymmetry is a tricky needle to thread. For every deliberately uneven Comme des Garçons showstopper, there is the one-shoulder Topshop number you forked out an ill-advised tenner for in a moment of sale-induced delusion. Thanks to Céline Dion’s fashion mega-reach, there could be more iffy purchases in the offing. The singer stepped out of a shiny black suburban at the last Paris Fashion Week in a pair of Ksenia Schaider’s asymmetrical blue jeans, and they have now hit the shelves. For about £400, you too can wow the world with one leg skinny and the other wide. Would you, though? We took to the streets at lunchtime to gauge the opinion of the general public (including some fashion students). I quite like classic things, and this is not it. I’m very particular about jeans: they have to fit really well; straight, not skinny, high waisted, good length, not rolled up. I think these are terrible. Also, it depends how old you are, but wouldn’t I trip on that length, on the wide side? Styling wouldn’t make much of a difference. They’re just wrong to begin with. What’s the point? The whole split-trouser thing has just been overdone. Usually it’s with different colours – and that’s all over fashion week at the moment. If you look at just the wide side, that’s a cool pair of jeans. But the other side is really not. Not a fan. I think they look awful. I mean, why? WHY? I don’t understand why it can’t be one or the other. But then, you appreciate that different people have different tastes, and some might wear it and you might think: “Oh that actually looks better than expected …” But no, not for me. I like the wide leg side way more than the skinny side, because I’m not the biggest fan of tight trousers, but honestly, I feel like they’re not much more than a funny idea. I don’t like them. Something’s off about them. They’re confusing, but not in a “what’s that?” kind of way, more in a “why?” kind of way. I’m not one for fashion, as you can tell – I’m in my gym kit most days. I think they’re lovely, if you’ve got very long legs and a small waist. I’m not sure I could pull them off. I think it works, but it’s just not my style. I couldn’t imagine wearing something like that. They look very interesting. I mean, they don’t strike me as something I would do, or something I would give a second thought to, to be frank. But if they make the wearer happy, then I’m all for it.