Up in the steep-sided hills overlooking Kobe is Japan’s biggest herb garden, a place of tranquillity and peace far from the madding crowds below. There are hammocks in which to lie and contemplate the stunning view across the bay towards distant Osaka and even a “happiness garden” designed to lift the spirits of visitors. Give or take Owen Farrell’s sore nose and Piers Francis’s pending disciplinary hearing, the relaxed vibe currently matches England’s improving mood at this World Cup. No regime presided over by Eddie Jones could ever be described as entirely mellow but even the ever-demanding head coach has granted his players the weekend off to enjoy a break from the stresses of the tournament. Jones’s mischievous post-match soundbite about the squad being free to jump into the harbour or throw things around, an ironic nod to the off-field headlines that overshadowed the 2011 World Cup campaign, was a joke but summed up the improving mood. England are two from two, albeit against modest opposition, the latest fitness bulletins are positive and they now have a secure platform from which to raise their sights in terms of tournament qualification. Both Jones and the attack coach, Scott Wisemantel, in the wake of Thursday’s 45-7 victory over the USA, have been using the analogy of the Tour de France to underline the point. “We’ve had the sprints and now we’re at the foothills of the mountains so we’re ready to go,” said Wisemantel, eyes fixed on the remaining pool C fixtures against Argentina and France. Both games, he reckons, will be “a huge step up” on anything England have experienced in Japan so far, particularly given the Pumas’ desperation to atone for their narrow early loss to les Bleus in Tokyo. The coming days also represent a key moment selectorially, with 31 players about to start vying on a weekly basis for 23 spots. The days of mixing and matching are done, replaced by him-or-me reality. Not for nothing has Jones had T-shirts made bearing the words “Team of 31” to try to ease the entirely natural disappointment of those omitted from the matchday squad to face Argentina. Take loosehead, for instance. In the absence, until now, of Mako Vunipola, both Joe Marler and Ellis Genge have made impacts, with the latter’s surging upfield solo run against the USA merely the most eye-catching example. Vunipola, however, is among the squad’s most reliably influential performers: do the management rush him back or reward current form? According to Wisemantel, Marler and Genge are definitely putting the pressure on. “The way the boys are going, Mako’s going to find it hard to get back in the team. He’s got to compete. If we’re going to be consistent with the team of 31 and the mantra of it, you have to fight to get back in. You just don’t walk straight back in. It’s good and it’s healthy competition.” It is a similar story behind the scrum. With both Jack Nowell and Henry Slade back in training and Jonathan Joseph looking lively, some good players are going to be left on the periphery towards the end of next week. Elliot Daly, Anthony Watson, Jonny May and Joe Cokanasiga cannot all start, even before Nowell roars back into contention. A delicate conundrum is looming for Jones. As with British & Irish Lions tours, the moment the Test team becomes distinct from the midweek side is critical. If the bitter and twisted brigade’s frustration seeps into the team room, everyone loses. Whichever way Jones goes, however, the players are suitably braced. “It puts a test on togetherness but togetherness is one of our themes and the players openly talk about it,” added Wisemantel, speaking after the squad had enjoyed a morning game of cricket on their hotel tennis court. “Socially they hang out and then when they’re on the field they compete hard. Whether they’re in the 23 or not they’re competing for places, they’re not just passengers. That’s what we want … it creates electricity.” Sparks certainly flew for a second or two in the Tonga game when Daly and Slade exchanged words following the miscommunication that cost England a potential late try. “I thought it was brilliant,” said Wisemantel. “They ripped into each other and sorted it very quickly. Brilliant.” And if Francis, Genge, Lewis Ludlam, Ruaridh McConnochie and Jack Singleton do end up in supporting roles next weekend they can at least take comfort from having already contributed to the cause. The Tour de France is not all about the winner; every team needs its domestiques who ride for the common good rather than individual glory. The road ahead is about to get steeper, whether people are playing or not.