If there was a gong for Greatest Potential to Go Wrong, highlighters would be shortlisted. As per this look at the Naeem Khan AW19 show, the “easy does it” approach is imperative to a successful finish. Excessive shimmer makes your skin look robotic and older than Methuselah’s. So pay attention to the Q and A: quality and application. Avoid powder highlighters with sparkly bits – they get lodged in the skin and make it look drier. Use a liquid version and apply sparingly on high points of cheeks, brow bone and cupid’s bow. Finish with a coloured lipgloss. It’ll make you look more human. 1. Bare Minerals BAREPRO Glow Highlighter £23, bareminerals.co.uk 2. Too Faced Juicy Fruits Candy Finish Watermelon Lip Glaze in Mega Melons £16, boots.com 3. Marc Jacobs O!Mega Glaze All-Over Foil Luminizer £38, harveynichols.com 4. Burberry Matte Glow Foundation in 120 Dark Neutral £35, burberry.com 5. Christian Louboutin Loubiglittergloss in Zuleika £65, net-a-porter.com From the overwhelming response I received the last time I featured a hair product that works on curly and afro hair types, it confirmed what I already knew: it is still an area beauty brands are not marketing effectively to. So here is another product to put on your radar. This is actually beneficial for all hair types. I know most products say they’re ‘for all hair types’, but it’s lies people, lies! I rarely find a mainstream styling product that works on my hair, which is why Davines Oi range (for it is all good) delights me so. The hair butter - and yes it is the texture of a light butter without the greasiness - is a considerable softener, anti-frizz agent and hydrator that also works as a breakage-prevention treatment. The key ingredient is roucou oil, which helps to restructure, strengthen and protect the hair. I use a tiny bit every other day to keep my hair ends soft, frizz free and less prone to snapping off. If you have really fine hair, you are better off using it as a pre-shampoo nourishing treatment as it might prove too heavy otherwise. Regardless of your hair type, expect softer, more manageable, shinier hair. Oh, and lest I forget, the pièce de résistance: the scent - an amber, floral, musk and citrus concoction. If you have ever been tempted to waste your money on a hair perfume, resist and tap into this instead. It is utterly divine. Davines Oi Hair Butter £24 libertylondon.com More than skin deep This new line of botanical skincare works in tandem with your skin, the environment – it’s vegan, cruelty free and sustainably sourced – and your bank balance. Tandem Cleansing Hero, £18, tandemskincare.co.uk Read my lips Can’t find that perfect lip colour? Play alchemist at Estée Lauder’s Lip Lounge and you’ll leave with three personalised lipsticks in a refillable case and customised pouch. Estée Lauder Custom Blend Lip Service, £81, selfridges.com Dollars and scents In fragrance, as in jewellery, there are ‘fine pieces’ and then there are ‘investment pieces’. This Cote d’Azur-inspired line by a beauty industry veteran is definitely the latter. Veronique Gabai Fragrances, £255, net-a-porter.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.