The global climate strike kicks off on Friday and will ripple across the world in more than 4,000 locations, the start of a weeklong movement to train international attention on the climate emergency. It’s the latest of a succession of strikes on Fridays led by schoolchildren – but this time adults are invited to join in. Millions are expected to take to the streets in more than 130 countries, with support on this occasion from unions, churches, and local community groups. Some are calling it the biggest mass protest in the history of the climate crisis. Possibly the best place to start is by consulting the Fridays for Future map, which details what is going on and where in more than 130 countries – and thousands of locations – worldwide. Hovering over the pin brings up basic details of where the action is happening. It’s worth noting that timings will vary from city to city and that some countries (notably New Zealand and Italy) have put back their protests until Friday 27th. More detailed information can be found by searching Twitter for a city or location near you and adding the hashtag #climatestrike. Another useful global resource is the global climate strike website which offers ideas on how to organise workplace or lunchbreak action, as well as how to add banners to websites and social media pages, if digital solidarity is as much as you can manage. Friday’s action is expected to be widespread in many countries with plenty of regional happenings to draw people who don’t want to waste all that carbon by travelling. There will be an estimated 800 actions in the US, 400 in Germany, and scores more in the UK, Australia, France and Belgium. In all, 13 Indian cities and 12 Indonesian ones are taking part. Of course, the major capitals are the places to head for the biggest crowds. London’s event starts at 11am, but marchers are being warned that police will restrict them to Westminster, so careful as you go. The action in Brussels will culminate outside EU headquarters, after starting at the city’s North station. In Paris, a march will begin at Place de la Nation and finish with a gathering at Parc de Bercy with workshops, conferences and “citizens meetings”. The action group Libérons le Louvre (Liberate the Louvre) is planning an “action” at the museum in protest at its long-standing partnership with the petrol group Total. In Berlin, typically, the day will climax with a 3pm outbreak of techno at the Potsdamer Platz under the motto “No Future, No Dancefloor”. Extinction Rebellion have announced plans to block traffic at strategic points “where it will hurt drivers” around the capital. New York City is anticipated to host the biggest climate strike the country has seen in decades. Thousands are expected at the strike, which is being co-hosted by more than two dozen local and national groups. Protestors plan to gather at a park outside New York’s City Hall at 12pm and march a mile down to Battery Park, where Greta Thunberg is scheduled to speak in the afternoon along with other performers and speakers. If you are out and about, do keep us posted on what is happening. But of course, the strike is just the start. The next question is: what will you DO?