Firefighters were battling a major blaze in south-west London in the early hours of Monday, with a four-storey block of flats engulfed in flames. A total of 20 fire engines and some 125 firefighters were sent to the scene, in Sherbrooke Way, Worcester Park, after the fire broke out and quickly spread. Firefighters are continuing to work hard at the challenging fire in #WorcesterPark. Our 999 control officers have taken 29 calls to the fire https://t.co/vwKhI20eC7 pic.twitter.com/iwmJjCj1Uu The fire brigade’s 999 control officers had taken 29 calls about the fire and engines were sent out around 1.30am. “This is a challenging fire and firefighters are working hard to bring the blaze under control,” said Graham Adams, a fire station manager who was at the scene. “Firefighters will remain on scene for a number of hours and we would urge people to avoid the area if possible.” Fire crews from New Malden, Sutton, Mitcham, Surbiton, Wimbledon, Kingston, Wallington and other surrounding fire stations were at the scene. The flats are believed to be part of a development called The Hamptons, which feature a number of blocks of apartments built in an American style with timber cladding. It also features detached houses which are worth more than £1m. “The whole of the four storey building is alight,” the LFB tweeted, at 2.26 am. The London ambulance services said crews were on the scene of the fire but no injuries had been reported. A Met police spokesman also said it was “not aware of any injuries”. “We were called at 1:34am today to reports of a fire at a residential address on Sherbrooke Way, Worcester Park,” the ambulance service said in a statement. “We sent an incident response officer, an ambulance crew, two medics in cars and our hazardous area response team (HART). “We have not treated any patients however we remain on the scene as a precaution.” We now have 20 fire engines and around 125 firefighters at the scene of a flat fire in #WorcesterPark. The whole of the four storey building is alight https://t.co/vwKhI20eC7 pic.twitter.com/pk59FflIKp This is a breaking news story. Please check back for updates