Jamie Joseph has told his players not to get carried away after Japan’s stunning victory over Ireland put them on course for a place in the quarter-finals for the first time. Victories in their final two matches against Samoa and Scotland would take them through as the group leaders to a probable meeting with South Africa, who they beat in the 2015 tournament. “I told the players to enjoy tonight because they deserved it,” said Joseph, whose side moved to eighth in the world rankings, their highest position. “I am hugely proud of them. We have been preparing for this match for more than a year. It has been a big focus for us and to hold out a very tough Irish attack in the second half took courage and ability. “I said before the tournament that making the last eight was our goal and I am not thinking beyond that. We could be in a situation where we lose to Scotland and miss out [as happened four years ago]. We are not getting ahead of ourselves. We have Samoa next and that is all that counts.” Ireland’s head coach, Joe Schmidt said: “Japan did not exceed my expectations. They met them. They showed intensity, skill and energy throughout. “We controlled the first quarter when we scored two good tries but after that we struggled to contain them. “The defeat is tough for us to take but we have to roll up our sleeves and prepare for Russia. Securing a bonus point could be really important because it puts us second in the group, a position that would put us in the quarter-finals. “We were on the wrong end of the penalty count, but any concerns we have will be addressed to World Rugby, not aired in public. I have to congratulate Japan on the way they played.” Full-back Rob Kearney, whose try put Ireland 12-3 ahead in the first-half, will not play against Russia on Thursday after failing a head injury assessment, while the No 8 Jack Conan will fly home having suffered a groin injury. Jordi Murphy is set to be called up in his place. It was the fifth time Ireland had lost to World Cup hosts or co-hosts. “We were chasing shadows,” said their captain, Rory Best. “Japan posed a lot of questions and we could not come up with the answers. We have to dust ourselves down and get better.”