Days after her powerful speech to the UN climate action summit reverberated around the world, Greta Thunberg has been named among four winners of an international award dubbed the “alternative Nobels”. The Swedish activist, whose emotional address accusing world leaders of betraying her generation went viral this week, was recognised by the judges of Sweden’s annual Rights Livelihood awards for “inspiring and amplifying political demands for urgent climate action reflecting scientific facts”. Honoured alongside Thunberg were Guo Jianmei, the leading Chinese lawyer and women’s rights advocate, “for her pioneering and persistent work in securing women’s rights in China”, and Aminatou Haidar from western Sahara, whose “dignity and resolve” in campaigning for the independence of her homeland drew praise from the judges. Indigenous leader Davi Kopenawa, a spokesperson for the Yanomami people, who live in an area of the Amazon rainforest on the Brazil-Venezuela border, completed the four-strong list of laureates. Kopenawa was jointly recognised with the Hutukara Yanomami Association, which conserves the rainforest and campaigns for indigenous rights, in Brazil. The Right Livelihood awards began in 1980 after the Nobel foundation rejected a proposal for two new prizes for work on the environment and within developing countries. Previous winners include Edward Snowden, Wangari Maathai and Alan Rusbridger. “I’m deeply grateful for being one of the recipients of this great honour,” said Thunberg, in New York for the UN general assembly. “But of course, it is not me who is the winner. I am part of a global movement of school children, youth and adults of all ages who have decided to act in defence of our living planet. I share this award with them.” Thunberg and her fellow laureates will each receive 1m Swedish krona (£83,000) to further their work in addition to long-term support that includes help and protection for those “whose lives and liberty are in danger”. Announcing the laureates in Stockholm, Ole von Uexkull, executive director of the Right Livelihood Foundation, said: “With the 2019 Right Livelihood award, we honour four practical visionaries whose leadership has empowered millions of people to defend their inalienable rights and to strive for a liveable future for all on planet Earth.” Jianmei, who has been hailed as China’s “patron of the weak” and has helped thousands of disadvantaged women to access justice , has faced sustained pressure in her efforts to support those affected by domestic violence. Jianmei said: “This award recognises and acknowledges the efforts of my team and me to uphold women’s rights and promote democracy and the rule of law in China, under difficult circumstances, for the past 25 years. Currently, pro bono legal work in China is facing enormous challenges. To stand firm, we will need more passion, courage, perseverance and commitment. This award serves as an encouragement and motivation.” Human rights defender Haidar, affectionately known as the “Sahrawi Gandhi”, was recognised for “her steadfast nonviolent action, despite imprisonment and torture, in pursuit of justice and self-determination for the people of western Sahara”. Haidar said: “This is a recognition of my nonviolent struggle and the just cause of the Sahrawi people. Despite military occupation and violations of fundamental human rights, they continue their peaceful struggle. The Sahrawis deserve to be supported by all so that, one day, they will achieve independence and freedom.” Kopenawa and the Hutukara Yanomami Association – of which he is president and co-founder – were hailed “for their courageous determination to protect the forests and biodiversity of the Amazon, and the lands and culture of its indigenous peoples”. Dubbed the Dalai Lama of the Rainforest, Kopenawa has dedicated his life to advocating for Yanomami rights, culture and lands in the Amazon. Kopenawa, who wrote The Falling Sky, the first book by a Yanomami, said the award came “just at the right time” and marked “a show of trust in me and Hutukara and all those who defend the forest and planet Earth”. He said: “The award gives me the strength to continue the fight to defend the soul of the Amazon forest. We, the peoples of the planet, need to preserve our cultural heritage as Omame [the Creator] taught – to live well caring for our land so that future generations continue to use it.” The winners will receive their prizes in a ceremony in Stockholm on 4 December.