For years, various men have told me I should read Michel Houellebecq’s novels – that they would give me a unique insight into masculinity, France, Islam, YouPorn, sex tourism, late capitalism, the human condition, and other things I should probably know more about. He braves subjects that British novelists would never dare to write about, they said. He has this unique gift of prophesying real-life events too: Islamic terrorism with Submission (2015); and with his latest novel, Serotonin, the gilets jaunes protests, apparently. So I thought, you know what, I’ll put myself in the hands of one of his catatonically depressed, racist, misogynistic, homophobic narrators and see what I learn about the plight of the modern male. But now that I have, I can’t help wondering why these men would suggest this – unless, of course, it was all a plea for mercy, like a terminally ill patient casting meaningful glances at a pillow. Serotonin is told from the perspective of Florent-Claude Labrouste, 46, a squat agricultural engineer who is, according to his doctor, “dying of sorrow”. His parents killed themselves in a joint suicide pact – but not before giving him his prissy name. To Florent, it reflects a life led as an “inconsistent wimp”, especially with the various women he has slept with, all of whom are weighed up on the basis of how wet their “pussies” are and whether they happen to be “exceptionally good at anal”. Houellebecq doesn’t just borrow his imagery from porn but his standards of verisimilitude too – there is simply no way any of these women would have slept with Florent in real life. Only one, Camille, emerges as something more than the sum of her “three holes”. A trainee vet, she is elevated by her homemaking skills, her concern for battery chickens and also the fact that she still looks like a teenager in her mid-30s. Her constancy is contrasted with that of Florent’s current girlfriend, Yuzu, a Japanese makeup junkie 20 years his junior. When he stumbles upon a video of Yuzu having sex with 15 men – as well as a “canine mini gangbang” – Florent sets about dismantling his life in a calculated but unheroic fashion, seeing in his own declining libido a poignant metaphor for the state of western democracy. He ends up returning to his roots in Normandy. Here, he visits an old friend, Aymeric, a divorced aristocratic landowner whose livelihood as a dairy farmer is at risk from free-trade treaties and imported produce. At around page 200, the story finally seems to be coming together as a bleak episode of Country House Rescue. There is a genuinely interesting line of inquiry about why French farmers are killing themselves “one by one, on their plots of land, without being noticed”, though the writing turns mawkish whenever Florent describes the slightest flicker of empathy between the two men. Once that story ends in tragedy, Houellebecq shifts his attention back to his narrator’s sexual torpor as he stalks Camille and her four-year-old son. We are presented with a picture of ageing men who have few other ways to get their kicks other than shooting things, whether that’s themselves or small children; men who are too spineless to take responsibility for relationships; men who would sooner turn to Grand Marnier, Deep Purple and Sherlock Holmes for comfort. Perhaps for Houellebecq’s male admirers, there is something redemptive about someone performing their worst selves on the page, revelling in that dark part of their souls that they delete from their internet caches. I won’t deny that there is something impressive about his commitment to the role, nor that the persona can be extremely funny – like a sort of existential Alan Partridge. It is telling that he reserves his real tantrums for environmentalists, the EU, the state of SNCF trains or the trend for casting mixed-race women. But I struggled to detect any bravery. As a writer, Houellebecq is as sloppy and cowardly as his narrator, vaguely gesturing towards ideas without ever seeing them through. You can almost hear him wondering how he could spice things up. A gangbang? That’s not going to cut it these days. A Japanese girl having sex with a dog? Is that enough? Perhaps two dogs? But somehow Houellebecq’s most insidious reductions of women occur when he tries to show tenderness. After a conversation with a hotel receptionist, Florent says: “I could tell she was a nice girl and I’m sure she made her boyfriend very happy.” We have no idea whether she has a boyfriend or not, but we’re still forced to see her through the lens of male ownership. Partridge in Gilead. Serotonin soon becomes banal and predictable, a novel whose universality you immediately begin to question. Is it really the case that “no one in the west will ever be happy again”? Is it true that friendships from youth “never survive into adulthood”? Is all that counts in the end “a pussy that is starting to get wet”? It is a world without pity, without love, without affection – and, ultimately, without truth, since the world does contain all of those things. This refusal to deal with the complexity of human experience makes Serotonin neither useful to the brain nor the soul. • Serotonin by Michel Houellebecq (translated by Shaun Whiteside) is published by William Heinemann (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99