Jean-Claude Juncker has called on the British government to table “operable proposals in writing” to resolve the Brexit deadlock, as he warned that no-deal was a “palpable” risk. Speaking in the European parliament in Strasbourg, Juncker, the outgoing European commission president, said his recent lunch with Boris Johnson in Luxembourg was “friendly, constructive and positive” but he could not say “real progress had been achieved”. During an often rowdy debate, Juncker said no deal would never be the EU’s choice but that the British prime minister had told him that he continued to want an agreement. “Now you will hardly be surprised to learn that the prime minister assured us that he continues to want an agreement, but whatever happens he, the United Kingdom, will leave the European Union on 31 October with or without an agreement and that is why the risk of a no deal is palpable,” Juncker said. The statement was greeted with loud cheers from Nigel Farage’s Brexit party MEPs. Juncker said “the risk of no deal is palpable”, but added that an agreement was desirable and still possible. Gesturing towards the Brexit party MEPs, Juncker joked: “These are my best friends and groupies; don’t be surprised that they are shouting.” In another one-liner about the suspension of the UK parliament for an unprecedented five weeks, Juncker said: “This house is open and in action and not prorogued.” The outgoing European commission president also announced that Michel Barnier, the chief Brexit negotiator, would be involved in new talks with the British, a sign that discussions would intensify and move up to the political level. Speaking after Juncker, Barnier said he and his team were “open to any UK proposal” and were “willing to work day and night towards progress”. But his intervention underscored the enormous gap between the two sides in finding an alternative to the Irish backstop, the fallback plan intended to protect the Irish peace process and the EU single market. The UK government has indicated it is ready to accept an all-Ireland food and agricultural zone to avoid the need for many checks. But Barnier said specific guarantees were needed in other areas, including customs, so the EU could control products arriving in the single market. Barnier and Juncker were speaking shortly before MEPs adopted a resolution insisting that any Brexit deal must include the Irish backstop, or equivalent legally-binding guarantees. The text, which also calls on the UK to produce written proposals on a backstop alternative, was passed by 544 to 126 MEPs. It also shows the parliament’s support for a Brexit extension in a wide range of circumstances, including avoiding no-deal, an election, second referendum, ratifying the agreement or revoking article 50. Guy Verhofstadt, the parliament’s Brexit coordinator, and lead author of the text, gave an impassioned speech that lacerated the British government’s record on citizens’ rights. In a withering joke, Verhofstadt said that “instead of playing the angry Hulk”, Johnson should play “the caring nanny of the film of Mrs Doubtfire” – to better protect 4.5 million citizens facing the huge uncertainty of a no-deal Brexit. Johnson compared himself to the Marvel superhero in an interview at the weekend. Picking up on one key concern for the EU, Verhofstadt said the European parliament would never accept an agreement that would give the UK “all the advantages of free trade”, without aligning with European standards on social rights, environment and health. “We are not stupid and we will not kill our own companies,” he said to cheers and boos. “We will defend our own economy and we’ll never accept Singapore by the North Sea.” Barnier had raised the same concern, which is widely shared by EU member states. “The UK government today wishes to revisit the commitments made by Theresa May in this area,” he said. “When we are talking about such an important, such a large and such a close country, who does half their trade with us, such a future agreement would require a clear common basis” of standards. Verhofstadt’s crowd-pleasing lines were cheered by many MEPs, including British remainers. While the chamber was at best one-quarter full, the UK’s 73 MEPs were well-represented, with the Brexit divide on full display. Speaking from the back of the room, Farage claimed Barnier’s objective had always been “keeping us trapped inside”, fearing that the UK “breaks out of the single market and we become much wealthier outside the European Union”. Barnier has said consistently he respects the UK decision to leave. Farage said the UK could not count on the EU’s good faith, citing the behaviour of “pipsqueak prime minister of Luxembourg” Xavier Bettel, who he claimed had set out to humiliate Johnson on Monday. The debate became increasingly rowdy and bad-tempered, as Brexit party MEPs heckled their colleagues, laughed or shouted “rubbish” when they heard statements they disliked. In an attempt to quieten one Brexit party MEP, the European parliament vice-president, Mairead McGuinness, who was chairing the meeting, told them: “Be quiet, I am in control.” Opening the debate, Tytti Tuppurainen, Finland’s EU affairs minister, had described the situation as bleak. “As the deadline of 31 October is fast approaching. We are faced with more, rather than less, uncertainty.” Finland holds the EU’s rotating presidency and Tuppurainen said her government was determined to make sure EU legislation to protect Europe from a no-deal Brexit was passed as soon as possible.