Approach with care the book that offers up a tale of Ireland in the old days. Since Patrick Kavanagh published The Great Hunger in 1942, any book about the poetry of rural life and youth’s endless summer must of necessity be acknowledged as sentimental. The best rural writers demolished these cliches long ago, and built in their place a literature that chronicled with unflinching, sorrowful honesty the world we all came from before we moved into the cities. One thinks of John McGahern, or RS Thomas’s dismissal of those who idealised Wales: “Too far for you to see / The fluke and the foot-rot and the fat maggot”. Without great skill, the country chronicler’s work will fall into the category of tourist fodder – Scottish shortbread, English ale, Welsh rarebit and tales of green Ireland. Such books only kill the places they claim to love. It takes time for Niall Williams to convince you that tourist fodder isn’t what he’s producing in This Is Happiness, the successor to his Booker-longlisted 2014 novel History of the Rain. The question Williams’s narrator, Noe (short for Noel), asks himself, “What does it matter what one old man was hoping one time?”, lingers with you as you read. Noe goes to stay with his grandparents in the village of Faha in Kerry at the same time as it is being connected up to the national grid, some time in the early 1970s. Throughout the spring that passes into summer in the course of his story, it also stops raining in this normally sodden parish. In the wake of personal grief, Noe has experienced a crisis of faith, and is taking time away from the seminary where he is studying for the priesthood. He ends up sharing a room with a man named Christy, who is laying cables into the village; Noe’s grandparents had agreed to take him in as a lodger before they knew Noe was coming to stay. Bringing electricity turns out only to be Christy’s means of coming to Faha, though; his real reason for doing so is a woman named Annie Mooney, whom the locals know as Mrs Gaffney the chemist’s widow. Half a century after he last saw her, Christy woke up one day in a boarding house in Boston and decided that he needed to see her again. All a little baroque, but Noe acknowledges that people in Faha prefer complexity over plain speaking, which has been corrupted by the politicians. So let’s forgive him that. But the plot is really a vehicle for Noe, half a century after the events he recalls, to write down his memories of Faha. The real heart of the book is a man remembering a summer when grief gave way to romantic love: the beginning of his adult life. This is how the novel finally earns its setting and sentimentality – it is among these familiar tropes of Irish writing that Noe’s youth happened, so it is here he must inevitably return in old age, “because, at the end, we all go back to the beginning”. As his story develops into one of boyish, sexless infatuation, what becomes clear is that the book is sentimental because the love it recalls – the romantic, abstracted love of a young man – is deeply sentimental, and Williams is being faithful to his subject. The first time Noe is struck by the thunderbolt, what he records is that “she is gentle, all simplicity and kindness … she is small and light and all business … her eyebrows … have an attraction which can’t be measured”, which is the most chaste rendering of love at first sight I think I’ve ever read, but by no means an unfamiliar kind of bloodless, youthful longing. The pleasure of this novel lies in its eye for detail. The plot, having been established, then takes a long time to do not very much more. What happens instead is a kind of tectonic movement from spring into summer, marked by the rhythms of village life. Williams is excellent on churchgoing, amateur dramatics, parking, the cinema. He lavishes close attention on his parishioners, and finds rich material there. He has a humorist’s eye, and his own fond amusement at the people he writes about shines out through the writing. The fields of Ireland are very crowded, but by the conclusion of This Is Happiness, you feel Williams has justified adding another book to the herd. • Barney Norris’s latest novel is The Vanishing Hours (Doubleday). This Is Happiness is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.