Fevered chants of “Jay1!” swarm over each other until the young rapper strides out under the spotlights. The glow from a thousand iPhones illuminates his frame, and his debut tour gets under way. The Coventry rapper is from the poppier side of UK rap, where singsong hooks segue into short, sweet verses that paint pictures of champagne lifestyles, and the good vibes are spread over enchanting flute and steel drum-tinged productions. Though a relative newcomer, with just the One Wave EP, released in July, to his name, Jay1 is becoming a force. The elated young crowd wail every hook and scream every slick punchline, dipping and rising in the moshpits – he showers them with praise, thanking the revellers “for changing my life”. This is UK rap at its most accessible and palatable. Detractors could snipe at a lack of substance: many of his verses centre on the pursuit of girls, and their pursuit of him. But he executes it all with the stammering kind of flow reminiscent of UK drill, a pattern that adds an edge to his light-hearted tales of love and lust. Productions are often minimalist and lean on US-influenced grumbling 808s, centring his deep-set vocals and giving his lyrics clarity. After fan favourites Becky and Good Vibes, the evening tilts into a celebration of UK rap’s burgeoning pop contingent. Young T & Bugsey, Tion Wayne, Swarmz and One Acen all emerge to perform tracks of their own, each guest’s arrival whipping the room further into frenzy for a rapturous finale. Jay1 ends proceedings with Your Mrs, the track that kickstarted his career – he dives into the crowd, revelling with the young and the wild. At O2 Institute2, Birmingham, on 26 September. Then touring until 1 November. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.