Let’s not overlook the other big figure in Thomas Cook’s boardroom. The three underwhelming chief executives of the past decade deserve their bashing, but chairman Frank Meysman had been in post for eight years when the ship sank on Monday. He was appointed to restore order after Thomas Cook’s narrow escape from its last financial crisis in 2011, so one could say he led the company from near-calamity to disaster. Back in 2011, Thomas Cook had provided a textbook illustration of why non-executive directors of a tour operator should prefer balance-sheet prudence over management bluster. The company had travelled from net cash of £394m in September 2007 to net debt of £900m in September 2011. The strategic imperative for a new chairman was to get the debt down and stay away from the rocks. The other lesson, circa 2011, was that “one-offs” happen all the time. In 2010, it was ash clouds from an Icelandic volcano. In 2011, it was the Arab spring, upsetting demand for holidays in Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia. So, again: seize any chance to reduce borrowings. Meysman started promisingly. Confidence returned and shareholders supported a £425m placing and rights issue in 2013 under Harriet Green. Meysman was able to boast in the annual report about “the tenfold increase to our share price in the past year”. Brexit“There is now little doubt that the Brexit process has led many UK customers to delay their holiday plans for this summer,” said the chief executive, Peter Fankhauser, in May. But it cannot be the whole story - arch-rival Tui has coped because its finances are healthier. WeatherThe summer heatwave of 2018 encouraged would-be holidaymakers to stay at home, undermining prices in the “lates” market where operators try to clear unsold holidays. There seems to have been a hangover into 2019, with customers calculating that waiting to book is a productive strategy. CompetitionA pincer movement of Airbnb and budget holidays has changed consumer behaviour, though Thomas Cook still managed to sell 11m package holidays last year. Banks and debtThe tour operator has been attempting to shoulder a  huge pile of debt for the past decade – £1.7bn worth at the last count. Successive managements failed to remove meaningful chunks. The banks argue they have supported an overstretched company for years and the details of why it could not be saved may have to await the report from the Insolvency Service. Bad managementThomas Cook’s borrowings were too high. The moral of the tale is that tour operators should fund themselves conservatively. If your balance sheet is fragile, you are at the mercy of events in an industry where most of the cash arrives in the summer and then flows out in the winter. Nils Pratley, financial editor The next step, in theory, was to take further chunks out of debt via internal cash generation. That never happened, at least not in a meaningful way. Merely refinancing existing borrowings did not move the dial. In that position, the board could have chosen safety and tapped shareholders again. There were opportunities, notably in 2015, when Thomas Cook seemed to be recovering, or so the market believed. Even as late as May 2018, before another “one-off” from the summer heatwave in the UK, Thomas Cook was worth £2bn. A £500m fundraising at that point to pay down borrowings would have upset a few shareholders, but so what? It would have improved the company’s financial profile massively. These are the judgments boards have to make: how much long-term funding risk will you accept? Thomas Cook left it too late to act confidently. After the soft summer of 2018, its refinancing options closed horribly as peak borrowings surged above £1bn once again. The final attempt to corral banks, bondholders and Chinese group Fosun was high-risk and ultimately failed. Chief executive Peter Fankhauser was pushed out to squirm in front of the cameras at the end, and rightly so. But Meysman should have joined him. An entire board failed and he did a full stint as chairman. Acquaint yourself with another banking initialism – it could be important, at least for troubled Metro Bank. MREL is “the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities” and is one way in which the Bank of England and EU regulators hope taxpayers will never again have to pick up the tab to rescue a broken lender. In short, banks have to maintain sufficient financial resources to ensure they can be “resolved”, in the jargon, in a crisis. In practice, the MREL demand means going into the market and raising some capital. Metro flopped in this routine exercise on Monday evening. It offered bonds with a seemingly juicy interest rate of 7.5% but couldn’t find enough takers to raise up to £250m. Cue another slide in the share price, which has now descended from £40 to 175p in the space of 18 months. The rot started in January when Metro confessed it had allocated £900m of loans to the wrong risk bracket, a basic error that has prompted a regulatory investigation. There was a temporary relief when the bank was able to raise £350m from shareholders in May but City analysts are now openly questioning the entire model. The branches look lovely, but how are you going to make healthy returns on capital? The latest mess will give more weight to the sceptics’ argument. The MREL requirement must be met by the end of the year, and it’s not obvious how Metro will do it. It could plead for an extension (unlikely) or have another go at raising the fund after its October trading update (risky). Or, suggest analysts, it could flog a few loans to raise capital, which is probably the surest way. But it could also do itself a favour by persuading idiosyncratic chairman Vernon Hill to leave quietly and soon. Metro needs an independent chair but Hill, outrageously, wants to hang around in the boardroom as non-executive “founder and president”. That plan will deter most self-respecting candidates. A clean exit for Hill wouldn’t solve the MREL crisis – but it would help matters.