On Tuesday’s Late Show, Stephen Colbert looked into the latest casualty of the revolving door that is Donald Trump’s White House: national security adviser and noted war hawk John Bolton, whose dismissal was announced via the president’s tweets this week. “I have never been more grateful for the president’s pettiness and stupidity,” Colbert said, “because today he was stupidly petty enough to save us from a very smart warmonger.” According to Trump, via Twitter, Bolton’s services were “no longer needed at the White House”. In other words, “another Trumpling bites the dumpling of dirt”, Colbert joked. Bolton was Trump’s third national security adviser, having succeeded Michael Flynn and HR McMaster. After three years of numerous staff departures, Colbert observed: “Trump goes through staffers like a high 17-year-olds go through Little Debbie Swiss Rolls.” Colbert maintained that this day was predictable, as Bolton and Trump have never seen eye-to-eye on foreign policy. While Trump has historically been down on America’s wars in the Middle East, Bolton “has never seen a patch of sand he didn’t want to make glow”, Colbert said. The conflict grew heated enough that according to a report from the Week, Trump began calling McMaster at the end of last year to express how much he missed him. “It’s been so different since you left,” Colbert mimicked in Trump’s voice. “Now when they say ‘HR wants to talk to you’, it’s for much worse reasons.” “Of all the interesting things I’ve been #blessed to cover when it comes to our president, I never thought the weather would be one of them,” Jimmy Kimmel said at the top of his show in Los Angeles. His focus was farther east, in Fayetteville, North Carolina, where Trump held a rally for which he claimed people were lining up outside in the rain. (It did not rain, according to local weather reports cited by Kimmel.) “I knew it was only a matter of time before he told us the sky isn’t blue,” Kimmel said. Meanwhile, “as Trump’s ratings keep dropping, so does the number of people who work for him”, Kimmel said in reference to Bolton’s firing. But the Trump branding machine continues unabated, Kimmel continued. Earlier this week, the Trump Store, as repped by Donald Trump Jr, announced new merchandise, including “rustic” dog collars, camouflage key fobs and sweaters. Kimmel noted, however, that “the Trump family still isn’t making their crap in America – after all this talk about American-made this and that, they still can’t spend the extra $2 to have their garbage made here”. Some items included the description “decorated in America”, but Kimmel was skeptical. “What does that even mean? Does that mean someone in Florida ironed the patch on?” On Late Night, Seth Meyers recapped the day’s headlines from Trump, starting with the departure of Bolton. “You have to appreciate the irony of John Bolton being taken out by a pre-emptive strike,” he joked. In other news, Trump and Pence held a pump-up rally in Fayetteville, North Carolina, “though do you really need Pence to pump up a crowd when you already have Trump?” Meyers asked. “Having Trump and Pence at a rally is like having the Rock and Malcolm Gladwell help you move – I think the Rock can handle it.” The rally covered the usual Trump talking points, with an addition from the president that Democrats aren’t “big believers in religion”. Meyers, imitating Trump’s voice, summarized the president’s own view of religion as: “Unlike me, who loves what’s his name – you know, the boy who was born Christmas, in a trash can, or whatever … you know what I’m talking about.”