It was a bad evening for England in Big Cup. Liverpool’s defence of their title lasted all of 82 minutes, while the youthful manifesto set out by trendy acid-jazz collective The Frank Lampard King’s Road Youth Revolution! has been immediately exposed as a tissue of lies, bum notes and pipe dreams. That’s if The Fiver has parsed all of Wednesday’s hot takes correctly. Now then, which other hopes can be blithely written off in mid-September? How about Tottenham Hotspur? Spurs came within touching distance last season; if only they’d remembered to turn up for the final, eh. If recent history is any guide, Spurs have a great chance of at least taking another pop in Istanbul: during the last decade, both Bayern Munich and Liverpool have bounced straight back from misery to ecstasy, while Manchester United, Atlético Madrid and Juventus have all followed up losses with another final visit in short order. But even Mauricio Pochettino admits that “no one will make us one of the contenders to be in the final” this time. So should they fail at Olympiakos, expect the analysis to make grim reading. Next! Ah, Manchester City. Like Spurs, things look promising for City on the face of it. They travel to Shakhtar Donetsk, having beaten the Ukrainians 3-0 and 6-0 last season. Pep Guardiola will fancy it: while boss of Barça, he won four out of five games against Shakhtar; at Bayern he beat them 7-0. He’s got their number. And if all that wasn’t promising enough, John Stones is out for a month, so everything appears to be falling back into place after that blip against Norwich. But group success in this competition is always a double-edged sword for City, and you don’t need us to explain why. Lump on whoever they draw in the quarters. Unless it’s PSG. But even if there are more English defeats, or City only manage to win 5-0, we should keep a level head. Spurs and Liverpool didn’t do so badly last season after slow starts, while City are bound to win this thing at some point, they just have to. In other words, what’s happening right now really, really, really doesn’t matter. At all. It’s almost as though we don’t need to bother with Big Cup until the knockouts start in February. Yes, there’s an idea, perhaps we should seriously start thinking about doing that. Join Paul Doyle from 5.55pm for hot MBM coverage of Olympiakos 1-2 Tottenham, while Scott Murray will be on hand for PSG 1-1 Real Madrid and Simon Burnton will be all over Shakhtar Donestk 1-3 Manchester City, both at 8pm. “The tenacity he had as a player was mirrored in how he took on his disease. He fought it right to his dying day and that was the mark of the man. It made me think that if I was struggling, then how was Fernando feeling? I spent some time with him, which was great because even though his body was deteriorating, his mind was really sharp. His wit was still as brilliant as it always had been and I had a real laugh with him. We didn’t speak about his illness, we just had a carry-on and it was like being back in the dressing room all those years ago” – Alex Rae pays tribute to former teammate Fernando Ricksen after the former Rangers and Netherlands player died aged 43, six years after revealing that he had motor neurone disease. “Saddened to read about Jim Jefferies having a heart attack. Despite him being loved all round at Hearts, my most enduring memory of him was finding his number in a phone book and calling him from a payphone with my friend when we were 12 years old. His wife made him speak to us and we spent hours every week talking about football. He was a true gent and even got us lots of free tickets for Kilmarnock games. Get well soon, Jim” – James Grieve. “Tumbleweed (yesterday’s Fiver letters). Really?! I know you received at least one letter, and you’ve published worse. I know, because I wrote some of them” – Steve Allen. “Ross Barkley can’t catch a break right now. He’s messing up, annoying those who used to be fans, and generally causing a right stink. Any vacancies at Fiver Towers you could proactively send to him?” – Craig Fawcett. “I’m surely not the only one to have thought that a certain pie manufacturer is missing a trick by not sponsoring Teemu Pukki with a view to introducing a special edition ‘Pukki Pie’?” – Robert Smith. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … James Grieve. The FA is examining claims that a promising deaf player was abused and goaded about his disability during an FA Youth Cup game. Will Palmer, who is 17 and one of the few deaf footballers to have played at a semi-professional level, was allegedly told by an opponent to “watch it you deaf [cee]” during Stamford’s 6-0 victory over Lincoln United on Tuesday. “I was in shock,” said Palmer. “Five minutes later I was talking to a teammate and he continued on this deaf theme by saying ‘speak up mate I can’t hear you’, while he was cupping his hand to his ear.” A Liverpool fan has been released from hospital after being assaulted in a bar hours before kick-off. Frank Lampard’s Chelsea fancy a bit more of Tammy Abraham and Fikayo Tomori, hoping the pair will agree new five-year deals. Meanwhile, Ross Barkley still fancies penalty duty after arguing with Willian before his costly miss from the spot in Frank Lampard’s Chelsea’s Big Cup defeat to Valencia. “If there was another penalty in the game I would have been confident of taking it,” he cheered. “You can miss penalties. It’s not the end of the world. We’ve got five more group games to go that we’re aiming to win. Today just didn’t go our way.” Inter boss Antonio Conte is lamenting the style of Big Cup football after their 1-1 draw at home to Slavia Prague. “This is not the kind of football we train for,” he parped. “I’m the one to blame because I didn’t make the right choices before the game and I didn’t correctly understand the type of match I was going to play.” Without a broadcaster for the next four seasons, the French Coupe de la Ligue has been binned off until further notice. And Chesterfield defender Anthony Gerrard has apologised after becoming embroiled in a spat on Social Media Disgrace Twitter. “I accept that I was wrong to respond to messages sent to me,” said Gerrard. “It was not my intention to bring the club into disrepute.” Marina Hyde on a grotesque tragedy unlikely to shame Fifa into action over Iran’s ban on female fans. It’s Diego Simeone in his own words. Barney Ronay on Liverpool. The mighty Erling Braut Haaland. By Marcus Christenson. Ed Aarons looks ahead to PSG v Real Madrid. Shakhtar have 12 Brazilian imports but which should City fear most, wonders Nick Ames. Which World Cup ‘98 players are still playing competitively? The Knowledge has the answer. The state of Stoke City. By Ben Fisher. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!