Good morning and welcome to this Tuesday briefing with Alison Rourke. This morning the UK’s highest court will give its historic ruling on the legality of the five-week suspension of parliament. Boris Johnson, who is in New York for a UN summit, has refused to rule out proroguing parliament again if the supreme court rules he abused his powers as PM. He has also indicated he would not feel obliged to resign in that scenario: “I think the reasons for wanting a Queen’s speech are extremely good,” he said – the reason he gave for proroguing parliament. The court of 11 judges has heard his move was designed to prevent scrutiny over Brexit. In what will be a busy day for the PM, Johnson will deliver a set-piece Brexit speech in New York today, during which he will promise that a post-Brexit UK would “roll out the red carpet” for US businesses with “the most competitive tax rates and the best skilled workforce in the hemisphere”. He will also have to deal with escalating tensions over Iran. Yesterday Johnson sided with Donald Trump in calling the 2015 nuclear agreement with Tehran a “bad deal”, while praising the US president as a “very brilliant negotiator” capable of achieving a better deal. His remarks marked a sharp change in UK rhetoric, but British officials insisted that Johnson continued to support full compliance with the 2015 nuclear deal. What was clear was the PM’s intention to emphasise his personal relationship with Trump: “I think there’s one guy who can do a better deal and one guy who understands how to get a difficult partner like Iran over the line and that is the president of the United States,” he said. Iran, meanwhile, ruled out the possibility of negotiating a new deal with major powers. The country’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, said in a tweet that European partners had failed to fulfil their commitments under the 2015 nuclear pact. Thomas Cook – Thousands more stranded passengers will be repatriated today amid accusations the government sealed the company’s fate by turning down its request for financial support to help tide it over the winter. Claims have emerged that the Spanish and Turkish governments had offered to help save the stricken tour operator, only for the deal to disintegrate due to a lack of support in Westminster. Meanwhile, the company’s executives faced criticism for multimillion-pound pay deals in recent years. The firm’s last three chief executives took home combined pay packages – including bonuses – worth more than £35m in the past 12 years, triggering calls from the Labour party for the bosses to return their windfalls. And what of the scale of the repatriation operation? The Civil Aviation Authority has spent millions creating a pop-up airline to bring people home, in Operation Matterhorn. Labour conference – Delegates will be asked to vote today on the target to cut the UK’s carbon emissions to net zero. Two motions will be put to members, one with a target of net zero carbon emissions by 2030 – which would be much more stringent than the government’s current target of net zero by 2050 – and one backed by the GMB union, which does not set a date. The 2030 motion came from the pressure group Labour for a Green New Deal and has the support of several smaller unions. Confusingly, both motions could pass. The party leadership is focusing its efforts on the “green industrial revolution”, its strategy for reviving the economy, creating high-quality jobs and tackling the climate emergency. It will promise to build dozens of new state-owned offshore windfarms, at a cost of £83bn in public and private money. The debate on emissions comes after delegates on Monday rejected a call for Labour to take a clear anti-Brexit stance before a general election. Corbyn has made clear that he would prefer to defer the decision about which side Labour would take in a referendum, until after any vote. But as John Crace writes, the battle over the party’s position on Brexit was such a shambles, it may just have ensured Labour will lose the war. ‘How dare you’– Greta Thunberg delivered an emotional and stirring speech to the UN yesterday, in which she condemned world leaders for their inertia over global heating, and criticised what she called a “betrayal” of young people (“You are failing us … how dare you”). President Trump later appeared to mock her when he tweeted she “seemed like a very happy young girl”. Thunberg’s impassioned plea for action came amid new analysis that has shown that more than 80% of the world’s largest companies are unlikely to meet the Paris agreement targets by 2050. A study of almost 3,000 publicly listed companies found that just 18% have disclosed plans that are aligned with goals to limit rising temperatures to 1.5C of pre-industrialised levels by the middle of the century. The report, by investment data provider Arabesque S-Ray, found more than a third of the world’s top 200 companies still do not disclose their greenhouse gas emissions. The firm’s chief executive, Andreas Feiner, said companies “may appear to be taking steps to reduce their impact on climate change” but many are choosing to keep the full scale of their emissions under wraps to avoid losing investment. Philby’s secrets – Extracts from Kim Philby’s official 1963 confession to the UK’s security services have been made public for the first time. Philby, one of the Soviet Union’s most notorious British cold war spies, fled to Moscow shortly after his 1963 admission of guilt. Philby, who while a double agent at one time headed up counter-espionage operations for MI6, explained that joining the Soviet secret police (OGPU) did not mean he agreed unquestioningly with everything they did. “None of the OGPU officials with whom I had dealings ever attempted to win my total acceptance on the technical level,” he said. The extracts – the latest to be released from MI5 files – begin with the rendezvous in the London park, with the man who would become Philby’s handler, Arnold Deutsch, known to the Briton only as “Otto”. Other newly declassified papers suggest that the Portland spy ring, an infamous Soviet group, exposed in 1961, that passed on admiralty documents, including information on Britain’s first nuclear submarine, could have been stopped four years earlier. Line of Duty – The Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, has expressed her “outrage” over plots in the hit TV series. “I was absolutely outraged by the level of casual and extreme corruption that was being portrayed as the way the police is in 2018–19. It’s so far from that,” said Dick in an interview with the Radio Times. However, she added that she was more outraged by The Bodyguard, also written by the Line of Duty creator, Jed Mercurio. “It drove everybody round here absolutely up the wall!” she said. But Dick did concede that both shows could ultimately do the police good, by making the police force “ look a bit cool and interesting – a net positive, probably,” she said. Journalist Evgenia Peretz discusses how US college tutor Rick Singer persuaded so many parents to take part in one of the biggest university scandals the Department of Justice has ever prosecuted. And: Rob Davies on the collapse of Thomas Cook. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/09/23-70230-20190923_TIF_Ivy.mp3 A Caravaggio masterpiece stolen from a Palermo church 50 years ago, and listed among FBI’s “most wanted” stolen artworks, was kept in the home of a powerful mafia boss, who sliced off a piece of the canvas in order to convince the Catholic church to make a deal for its return, according to previously unseen testimony from the priest who tried to recover it. In an video interview filmed in 2001 but locked in a drawer and now revealed exclusively to the Guardian, the parish priest of the Oratory of San Lorenzo revealed astonishing details of the October 1969 theft of Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio’s Nativity With St Lawrence and St Francis. “A few months after [the theft], a letter arrived at my home,” Monsignor Rocco Benedetto explained to film director Massimo D’Anolfi, who had filmed the interview for a documentary he was working on at the time about stolen artworks. “In the letter, the thieves declared: ‘We have the painting. If you want to make a deal, you have to submit this advert in the Giornale di Sicilia [Sicily’s daily newspaper].’” Barcelona’s Lionel Messi and the USA World Cup winner, Megan Rapinoe, have been crowned players of the year at Fifa’s The Best awards. Rapinoe used her platform to speak out against racism and homophobia, as well as the pay gap in football, while Leeds United and their manager, Marceloa Bielsa, won the 2019 Fifa Fair Play award. Jonny Bairstow has been challenged to fight his way back into England’s Test side as a specialist batsman after he was dropped for the upcoming series in New Zealand. Ben Youngs and Dan Cole are set to join Jonny Wilkinson as England’s third-most capped men’s international players on Thursday, with Eddie Jones poised to shuffle his side for their second match of the World Cup when they face the USA. And Russia faces the prospect of being banned from next year’s Olympics in Tokyo after the World Anti-Doping Agency gave it three weeks to explain apparent inconsistencies in data from its Moscow laboratory or to suffer the consequences. More than a third of the UK’s bank branches have shut for good in less than five years, while hundreds of those that remain have reduced their opening hours, according to Which? The consumer group found there were 3,303 closures in the bank branch network between January 2015 and last month, an “alarming rate”. Which? said the closures were primarily driven by the “big four” banks – Royal Bank of Scotland Group, Barclays, HSBC and Lloyds Banking Group. RBS closed almost three quarters, or 412, of its branches across the UK, it said. The pound is buying €1.131 and $1.243. Most of the front pages today lead on the Thomas Cook collapse. The Mirror says bosses shared £50m in pay and bonuses over the last decade: “Thomas Cook fatcats’ £50m bonanza”, the Mail has a similar lead story: “Thomas Cook fat cats had creamed off £47m”, the Express makes a demand: “Thomas Cook fat cats must pay back bonuses”, the Times reports: “PM attacks travel firm bosses’ pay” and the Sun is furious at other airlines for hiking their prices: “Dayflight robbery”. In other news, the Guardian has: “Corbyn sees off grassroots remain demand amid conference chaos”, the Telegraph says: “Corbyn accused of stitch-up’ in Brexit vote” and the i leads on Greta Thunberg’s speech to the climate summit in New York: “‘If you fail us, we will never forgive you. We are watching.’” The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com