At a time when Britain is slipping further down the toilet day by day, it is curious to visit Blenheim Palace, a colossal monument to our finest hours. The Battle of Blenheim in 1704 may not be remembered as one of those now, but John Churchill’s victory over Louis XIV’s France was so significant in its day that a grateful nation paid for this jaw-droppingly spectacular baroque palace. What kind of child might be born among its triumphant martial memories? Winston Churchill, that’s who. A set of memorabilia-crowded rooms commemorate the cigar-chomping hero’s childhood here. Except that now sniggering contemporary art fans are relieving themselves among the sacred Churchillian relics. Italian conceptual art clown Maurizio Cattelan has installed a fully plumbed-in solid-gold toilet here. You get three minutes alone in the wood-panelled chamber. How does it feel to urinate on gold? Much like peeing on porcelain. But here, among all the photos of young Winston, it also feels like pissing on British history. If you squint, the yellow bowl might even remind you of our current, would-be Churchillian prime minister’s golden hair. This gilded loo is an instant classic of contemporary art that has drawn queues at the Guggenheim in New York and was even sardonically offered to Donald Trump as a luxury that might suit his tastes. But Cattelan is far from a one-shit wonder. He has turned the theatre of past British glories that is Blenheim into a satirical sepulchre of absurdity. The lovely Cotswold stone colours of the huge main courtyard are totally ruined by his installation of a carpet of outsized union jacks. Is our flag really that hideous? I suppose it is. And in the palace’s magnificent salons surreal interventions replace nostalgia with unease. A giant’s fallen, severed arm holds a banner in the entrance hall and horse skulls are clothed in gold armour in a corridor: Cattelan really does enjoy revealing the vanity of gold. Most effective is a stuffed horse suspended from the ceiling of a room plastered with oil paintings. It works because, although equine taxidermy is another of Cattelan greatest hits, it takes on a new resonance here in the British landscape. It looks like a racehorse painted by Stubbs, except it’s slumped pathetically in empty space. This beautiful chestnut brown steed has been turned into a sack of straw, or whatever its hide is filled with. It has no pride, no life, no energy. A couple of massive interiors along, you come to a crocodile similarly suspended in nothingness. How did it get here, how might it understand its condition? The images of the Battle of Blenheim and the proud military Churchills that surround it speak of a British empire as dangerous as this big toothy beast. But now it hangs there, lifeless and lost. In a long classical hall an animatronic drummer boy perches on a lofty ledge. Every so often he beats his drum as if calling us to battle. At the far end of this echoing chamber another boy kneels before a soaring pipe organ. Who is this neatly dressed, praying child? Perhaps it is a portrait of the artist as an adolescent – there are several small mannequins of him in the show including one that hangs from a wall in saggy clothes. But go closer and you get a shock: the model kneeling as if in church is not a boy but a shrunken adult, and his face is that of Adolf Hitler. To put Hitler in the house where Churchill was born is even more disconcerting than plumbing in a gold loo. Both reduce history to chaos and abjection. Churchill led Britain in defence of European democracy but now we’re the European country with a parodic Winston who’s suspended parliament. Hitler stares intensely as he prays. Outside the palace windows I can see a giant Pinocchio, face down in an ornamental lake. This is a perfect exhibition for a Britain unravelling into madness, but its most cinematic nightmare is still waiting. In Blenheim’s private chapel – which is bigger than some churches – pigeons stand on every available surface, watching, watching. It’s a brilliant Hitchcockian moment. At first you see a few birds and might think they’re just passing visitors – not unknown in old buildings. Then you notice more and more. They perch all over the tomb of John Churchill, squatting on the marble angels of this monument inscribed to her late husband and children by Sarah Churchill, Queen Anne’s favourite. On a pew there’s a homeless man sleeping. Cattelan calls this figure with his face hidden in his hoodie Oliver. The birds stare, Oliver sleeps, and you edge out of the chapel uncomfortably. Wait a minute, isn’t Cattelan meant to be funny? In this powerful exhibition the laughs are mordant. The Pope lies in a state room with a meteorite crushing his legs, grimacing as he clutches his cross. And Cattelan’s mind-boggling coup de grace is a miniature Sistine Chapel the size of a shed. It’s meticulously copied from the original, not with digital photography but paint. On the altar wall is Michelangelo’s self-portrait as a flayed skin, its empty eyes staring. I suddenly realise that the figure of Cattelan himself, suspended in sagging fabrics back in the house, echoes this tragic skin. Cattelan is just the melancholy wit we need right now – an artist capable of evoking Britain’s least fine hour. At Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, until 27 October