Joe Wieczorek, long-time rave promoter and serial thorn in the side of the establishment, is marking the 25th anniversary of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (CJA) by cheerfully miming the insertion of a solemn legal document into a sensitive part of a policeman’s anatomy. The founder of the east London rave Labrynth, Wieczorek remains one of dance music’s most unique characters, all spiky irreverence, Cockney enthusiasm and relentless disdain for authority. Many of his peers have settled comfortably into rave’s middle age, but Wieczorek gives the impression that the culture’s real value lies in putting powerful noises out of joint. “We employed someone called Brian: Mr 10%,” he remembers. “Drove a turquoise and grey Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow, and he’d managed to get ‘the Right Honourable’ and ‘Sir’ put on his driving licence, so his sole purpose at Labrynth parties was to front the police when they showed up.” Wieczorek once held a rave “virtually opposite the Houses of Parliament … but a wagon of police caught us, and the queue hadn’t gone in. We could have been in trouble. Their policy was: ‘if they’re in the venue, leave them; if they’re not in, stop ’em.’ Anyway, Brian told this cozzer to stick his injunction up his fucking arse, and he done the actions as well, right in front of a line full of ravers,” Wieczorek says, demonstrating gesturally. “They got in the van and drove off, we never heard another thing. Brian’s off on a boat now, searching for the lost treasure of Atlantis.” Despite his anti-authoritarian impulses, Wieczorek maintains that his interest in rave was strictly apolitical. But the growing scene’s disruptive mix of hedonism and utopianism meant politics were bound to intrude eventually. It happened in 1994 with the Criminal Justice Act, and its infamous criminalisation of unlicensed events involving “the emission of a succession of repetitive beats”. Less well remembered are the CJA’s restrictions on squatting, the vastly increased powers it gave bailiffs and police, and the creation of a new crime of “aggravated trespass”. These were all explicitly targeted at the remaining pockets of Britain’s post-hippie counterculture, from environmental protestors and hunt saboteurs to new age travellers and Stonehenge solstice-seekers. Angus Murdoch, who has explored the CJA’s impact on Britain’s Gypsy communities, describes the legislation as an assault on “the rights to protest, to assemble and to celebrate” and a “further entrenchment of the powers of the state at the expense of civil liberties”. In this, the CJA marks a critical turning point in British social history, from a time in which fringe activities were permissible as long as they break no other laws to one in which they are forbidden unless approved in advance. Wieczorek, and thousands like him, continue to bristle against such restrictions. The late author Mark Fisher described the CJA as a form of “cultural exorcism, commercial purification and mandatory individualism”, a “psychic privatisation” akin to the earlier crushing of the miners’ strike, or the sell-off of public infrastructure. He would perhaps be grimly amused to see that idea reach its logical conclusion 25 years later, with this summer’s rave-themed exhibition at the Saatchi Gallery in London: whatever rave’s utopian ideals, when Thatcher’s favourite ad exec is the one charging you £10 to get in, you know the party’s over. Wieczorek’s route to rave was unusual. Before all this, he had only dabbled briefly in the music industry, as a body double for Les McKeown of 70s teen sensations the Bay City Rollers. After each gig, Wieczorek would dress in the Rollers’ trademark tartan and head out the front door to be mauled by a horde of ecstatic fans while the band escaped out the back. Unlike other acid house instigators, Wieczorek didn’t spend the mid-80s exploring the electronic sounds of Detroit and Chicago, but rather running a pub on Hackney Road, and indulging in the odd punch-up as a member of Tottenham Hotspurs’ hooligan firm. All that changed with his first rave and his first pill: within months the pub was gone, football receded into the background and Labrynth was born. By late 1988, Wieczorek was bringing thousands of ravers to dingy corners of the East End. “There was a much bigger togetherness then,” he says, even if his examples of that unity differ somewhat from the smiley-faced stereotype. “I remember one party down in Surrey, where the police told us, ‘You’re not having it.’ We turned the police coach over, we started attacking them. We was outraged. ‘They’re fucking stopping our party?’” Wieczorek was one of the first to spot a more sustained crackdown coming. He got out of illegal parties in late 1989 following the Bright Bill – a sort of CJA-lite that increased fines for illegal promoters – as well as pressure from the Metropolitan police’s acid squad and threats from organised crime. “Slowly but surely the police went to work on everyone. At the time I thought: ‘Why have they got it in for us?’ My home got raided seven times in a year and a half, and I thought eventually they’re gonna ‘find’ something, whether they find it or not.” Decamping from illegal warehouses to the Four Aces in Dalston in east London, Labrynth ran uninterrupted from 1989 to 1998, hosting the Prodigy’s first ever gig in 1991. Two years later, a pair of nervous teenagers from Bow went to their very first rave there: as Geeneus and Slimzee they would later found Rinse FM, playing a leading role in the birth of grime. But by 1998, a prosecution for VAT evasion drawn out over four years (ending in his acquittal) and separation from his partner had drained Wieczorek’s enthusiasm, and Labyrnth closed. Less than a decade later, the club was back – sporadically, at least – revived by Wieczorek after learning that an old Labrynth regular was terminally ill. But it’s clear that, for all his continued enjoyment, without the potential for antisocial mischief he feels something of rave’s original meaning has been lost. He describes today’s scene as stymied by restrictive licensing and intrusive security – what he calls “rave-inspired Mecca bingo” rather than the real thing. “The security in some venues now, they’ll grab your cock, put their hands up the crack in your arse, they’re fucking murder. We were being squeezed out by all this” – he searches for a word – “officialdom. Carpet and chrome nightclubs weren’t our cup of tea, we’d started our parties to get away from it. So to go away from that, but then find you’re being pushed back in – we’ve just ended up going full circle.” In his writing on the Criminal Justice Act, Fisher used a quote from Marxist theorist Fredric Jameson to describe the revolutionary potential of rave as “disturbing flashes of light … baroque sunbursts in which rays of light from another world suddenly break into this one, [and] we are reminded that Utopia exists and that other systems, other spaces are still possible.” Wieczorek puts it more bluntly: “Something’s going to come along and smash the fucking granny out of it soon, and you’re all going to be out of work – all your security firms, all these cottage industries. It’s ripe for someone to come along and – bam!” he thumps his fist emphatically into his open palm. “Something new.”