Quickly recall the epitaphs. Those wondering aloud whether the All Blacks were vulnerable, whether they still hold the mantle, have their answer. With one absorbing performance that embodied resilience and rampant running rugby, New Zealand confirmed their status as favourites for a third consecutive World Cup title. Nothing is guaranteed and no trophy is claimed in any side’s first match, but the spectacular manner of this victory and the six-minute attacking raid that blew South Africa away should send tremors through the other hopefuls. Much drama is yet to unfold at this ninth World Cup and the knockout arena is a completely different beast, but, undoubtedly, New Zealand are leaders of the pack. The target remains imprinted on their backs. At their peak, when the relentless pace, tactical kicking and offloads combine in such slick fashion, no one can stick with them. The All Blacks first needed to absorb the Springboks’ onslaught in the opening quarter but when they clicked, the support play and line breaks were impossible to stop. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales In the lead-in to this heavyweight duel several questions were raised about New Zealand. Their coach, Steve Hansen, appeared to roll the dice with a gamble of sorts by leaving the veteran full-back Ben Smith on the bench and placing faith in George Bridge and Sevu Reece, the wings who combined for five previous Test starts. So, too, did nerves persist about the fledgling dual playmaker combination of Richie Mo’unga and Beauden Barrett. New Zealand have a horror history of putting players out of position at World Cups – the great full-back Christian Cullen at centre being one such example. Yet the late tactical switch to hand Mo’unga the reins at fly-half and move Beauden Barrett to full-back following Damian McKenzie’s injury may prove a masterstroke. Both proved influential in guiding the All Blacks. Mo’unga’s cross-field kicks that picked Reece out helped spark the 17-point turnaround when the All Blacks scored their two brilliant tries. Mo’unga, the Crusaders playmaker, also nailed a penalty and pulled off a tackle on the dynamic Springboks wing Cheslin Kolbe that Hansen described as the match‑winner. Many consider Barrett the world’s best fly-half and, yet, from full-back he has been more potent than from his more accustomed role. The extra time and space allows Barrett to regularly exploit mismatches and pick moments to hit the line and leave opposition defences stunned. This All Blacks backline has enjoyed little time together of late, largely because of injury, but that did not deter Ryan Crotty and Anton Lienert-Brown combining superbly in the midfield. Ardie Savea must be the world’s best loose forward with his presence at the breakdown and sustained leg drive in contact making him one of the most difficult ball carriers to put on the deck. Remember, too, that the lock Brodie Retallick, arguably the world’s most influential player, is not scheduled to return from a shoulder injury until the latter stages of the group games. The All Blacks are experts at staying grounded – they regularly use the phrase ‘you are where your feet are’ – but on the basis of this performance, it will take a supreme side to stop them again clinching the crown. If all goes to form, which it never does at World Cups, the All Blacks should now meet Scotland in their quarter-final while the Boks are on a collision course with Ireland. Many suspected the holders were vulnerable, not the team they were four years ago when they embraced their most experienced team in history, led by Richie McCaw and Dan Carter, and stormed to their second successive World Cup title at Twickenham. These suspicions had validity given their form over the past two years was anything but vintage. Repeat losses to Ireland, South Africa, Australia and the drawn Lions series seemingly revealed chinks in a once impenetrable armour. But as the All Blacks made their way around Yokohama Stadium, it was not difficult to envision them in the same victorious position, at the same venue, six weeks from now.