Following a maiden season in England in which his expensively assembled Manchester City team won nothing, Pep Guardiola was labelled a charlatan by fans of opposition teams who saw this failure as proof his fancy-dan foreign ways would never catch on in the Premier League. The same fans have since been forced to eat their words on numerous occasions, never more so than on Saturday when a Norwich City side sticking fairly rigidly to the Guardiola blueprint, showed that intensive pressing high up the pitch coupled with a confident tiki-taka style of possession football can be extremely effective indeed, hoisting Pep and his men by their own petard and causing a seismic shock across the Premier League landscape. Not bad for a plucky team of church mice assembled for a total cost of £6.45m, a mere £399.65m less than the side they vanquished by the odd goal in five. With their team already dropping one point per game against their only realistic title rivals Liverpool, Manchester City are firmly on course to finish as runners-up, a mere 38 points off the pace. And considering some Manchester City fans have never seemed more upset and unhappy than when they were invading press boxes or mouth-foaming on Social Media Disgrace Twitter in the immediate aftermath of the most successful season in their history, it can only be a matter of time until the more impatient among them are calling for their manager’s shiny head. Oh. “They gave me all the prestige I have in England, [in] the first season when it was Fraud Guardiola, Fraudiola,” parped Pep, stepping into the hail of bullets fired his team’s way upon being asked if he’d be throwing Sheikh Mansour’s best china around the dressing room after his players were beaten by a tremendously disciplined effort by Daniel Farke’s fearless outfit. “This kind of game here in England, [they said] it’s not possible to play because you need to have tackles and you have to play like that. These players gave me the prestige that I have. And now all around the world people say how good a manager I am – it’s for them, not for me.” Kind words, softly spoken. The Fiver can’t help but wonder if he was as magnanimous on the other side of the closed dressing-room door. Join Niall McVeigh from 7.30pm for hot MBM coverage of Manchester United 1-2 Arsenal in the WSL, along with Aston Villa 2-1 West Ham with Nick Ames at 8pm. “He has supported Sheffield United through thick and thin going back to the 1950s and wishes nothing more than success for the club, its supporters and the many staff employed by it. Mr McCabe sincerely hopes that he is proved wrong in relation to his deep misgivings about the suitability of Prince Abdullah as an appropriate custodian of Sheffield United” – a spokesman for Kevin McCabe after a high court ordered him to sell his 50% share in the Blades to fellow co-owner Prince Abdullah Bin Mosaad Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud for just £5m. Football Weekly will be round this way. “Perhaps I got a little wistful watching Handsome’s Quique Sánchez Flores and his now superbly grey beard this weekend. What if AVB came back to the Premier League – would he have a bit more paunch and forehead these days? Tactics Tim moving on from hipster gilet to grandad’s sweater vest? And Mr Roy reinventing his look with … er, wait, I’ll stop there” – Mike Wilner. “Re: terrible pitches (Fiver passim). As a former inner-city five-a-side keeper, I have never played a competitive match on grass. For 18 bruising seasons our league games were played on solid concrete, covered by a ridiculously thin membrane that can only be described as Action Man hair. The mild inconvenience of a manhole, an oak tree, standing water or various dangerous but ultimately avoidable detritus cannot compare to continuously slamming your hips, knees and elbows on concrete every 30 seconds for 40 minutes each Thursday night. It is hell. On the plus side, qualifying for the regional cup competition meant playing on luscious 3G pitches. Proper footballers complain about the weird bounces and the bits of black rubber in your underpants but for me it was heaven” – Jimmy O’Brien. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Jimmy O’Brien. Twelve leaders of hardcore Juventus ‘ultra’ fan groups have been arrested on suspicion of criminal association, money-laundering, violence and aggravated extortion in connection with ticket sales. Italian TV pundit Luciano Passirani has been sacked for saying that the only way to stop Romelu Lukaku is to give “him 10 bananas to eat”. Qui Studio a Voi Stadio director, Fabio Ravezzani, said Passirani had apologised but that that was not enough: “Mr Passirani is 80 years old and to compliment Lukaku he used a metaphor that turned out to be racist.” Possibly the most protracted goalkeeper contract saga yet has come to an end with David de Gea trousering himself a new Manchester United contract until 2023. “I could never have imagined I would play over 350 games for this club,” he sighed, possibly a bit too on the nose. Arsenal being Arsenal against Watford has left Granit Xhaka admitting that the team were “scared” in the second half of Sunday’s 2-2 draw. “We knew they would come at us and push us hard,” he yelped. “We cannot give a performance like this.” And James Maddison has got Brendan Rodgers drooling, despite Leicester’s 1-0 defeat at Manchester United: “He has a lovely swagger, a lovely arrogance, and he is a good kid who will get better. He loves his football.” Suzanne Wrack gets her chat on with Arsenal’s Lia Wälti. Rachel Finnis-Brown reviews the weekend’s action in the Women’s Super League. Sid Lowe on La Liga’s newest star, Ansu Fati. While Julian Nagelsmann led his Leipzig team to a point against Bayern, Andy Brassell explains that the young coach is still learning. For the first time in a long time, Juventus are not top of Serie A. Nicky Bandini talks us through its significance. Our crack team of writers cobbled together 10 Premier League points meriting discussion. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!