Barcelona ended a string of bad results away from home with a 2-0 win at Getafe on Saturday in La Liga. Goals from Luis Suárez and Junior Firpo either side of half-time gave the Spanish champions their first away win of the season, although they finished with 10 men after Clément Lenglet’s dismissal. It was Barcelona’s first win in their last nine competitive games away from the Camp Nou and it eased the pressure on coach Ernesto Valverde. Real Madrid stay top on 15 points after their 0-0 capital derby draw with Atlético, who are third on 14 points. Granada beat Leganés 1-0 and are second, also on 14 points. Barcelona are fourth on 13 points. Cristiano Ronaldo helped Juventus to continue their unbeaten start to the Serie A season with a comfortable 2-0 home victory over struggling Spal. Miralem Pjanic’s strike put the hosts in front on the stroke of half-time before Ronaldo, who missed Tuesday’s win over Brescia with a minor injury, headed his third goal of the campaign with 12 minutes remaining. The Spal goalkeeper Etrit Berisha made a string of impressive saves to keep the score down as the visitors fell to their fifth defeat in six matches to stay level on three points with Sampdoria at the foot of the table. Internazionale stay top with a 100% record after winning 3-1 at Sampdoria. The match was Alexis Sánchez’s first start for Inter and the Chilean scored his club’s second before being sent off early in the second half. Stefano Sensi’s deflected strike put Inter in front after 20 minutes before the on-loan Manchester United forward finished from close range to double the lead two minutes later. A minute into the second half Sánchez was shown a second yellow card for simulation and Jakub Jankto pulled back a goal for Sampdoria with 35 minutes still to play. But Roberto Gagliardini pounced to seal the three points for Inter, who have won their first six league games of a season for the first time since 1966-67, and for only the second time in their history. “Fortunately, the way it finished, I can look at the glass half full,” the Inter coach Antonio Conte said. “I’d prefer a more relaxed match on an emotional level, as we absolutely dominated the first half and were in complete control.” Juventus and Inter meet at San Siro next Sunday in a match that is expected to have a big impact on the title race. The Juve coach Maurizio Sarri said he was taking things one step at a time with a Champions League match against Bayer Leverkusen to come on Tuesday first. “I haven’t actually watched any Inter games this season as we’ve focused mainly on the teams we are facing next,” he said. “Tonight we’ll watch a couple of Bayer Leverkusen matches and then go to dinner. “I hear that Inter are playing very well; I had no doubt they would considering the quality of the coach and their players. I always said this would be a far more balanced season.” Bayern Munich were made to sweat for a 3-2 win at Paderborn that sent them top of the Bundesliga after RB Leipzig went down 3-1 at home to Schalke for their first loss of the season. Bayern squandered several chances, hit the woodwork and conceded two goals in the second half in an uneven performance. The Bavarians went in front through Serge Gnabry in the 15th minute after a sensational start that saw them hit the post and create chance after chance. Their top scorer Robert Lewandowski managed to somehow miss a completely open goal from 10 metres, firing wide. Gnabry then set up Philippe Coutinho 10 minutes after the restart for their second goal but the hosts then came alive with Kai Proeger scoring a powerful volley in the 68th minute. Lewandowski got on the scoresheet with his 10th league goal of the season when he chipped the goalkeeper Jannik Huth in the 80th minute to restore their two-goal cushion but a sensational long-range strike from Jamilu Collins four minutes later renewed the hosts’ hopes and set up a nervous finale. Bayern are top on 14 points, one ahead of Leipzig who were caught on 13 by Schalke after goals from Salif Sané, Amine Harit and Rabbi Matondo gave Schalke the spoils from the sides’ meeting in Leipzig. Borussia Dortmund lost more ground by drawing 2-2 at home with Werder Bremen, Mario Götze and Marco Reus scoring goals book-ended by strikes from Werder’s Milot Rashica and Marco Friedl. Dortmund are now in seventh place and have won just one of their last four Bundesliga games. Borussia Mönchengladbach beat Hoffenheim 3-0 and Bayer Leverkusen beat Augsburg by the same score. This story will be updated