The “cruel” sport of horse racing has taken the life of the much-loved and successful jockey, Melanie Tyndall. The Australian Jockeys Association CEO, Martin Talty, said on Sunday the small Northern Territory racing community is reeling over the death of Tyndall, who was killed during a race at Fannie Bay after clipping the heels of another horse. “It is a sport that we all love, but sometimes it can be so cruel, and we’ve seen that in the last 24 to 48 hours,” Talty said. He said there are systems in place to help the community deal with the tragic incident. “We will offer every single entity of that support to everyone that needs it here in the Northern Territory.” Tyndall, 32, fell off her horse after clipping heels with another runner at the 300-metre mark during the third race at Darwin’s Fannie Bay racecourse on Saturday. She received immediate treatment by the on-track paramedics but later died at the Royal Darwin hospital. Her death came less than 48 hours after Mikaela Claridge died after a track work fall in Cranbourne, Victoria. Tyndall, originally from Murray Bridge in South Australia, moved to Darwin in late 2012 to further her racing career with the trainer Michael Hickmott. Hickmott paid tribute to Tyndall on social media, saying “if people only knew the hurdles you conquered in your life to make what you did of yourself.” “We were all so proud of what you achieved. You defied the odds,” he said on Saturday. The Darwin Turf Club chairman, Brett Dixon, said Tyndall quickly became part of the “small racing family” in Darwin. “She rode many winners right throughout the Territory,” he said on Sunday afternoon. In 2017, Tyndall took a break from racing to train as a police cadet, based predominantly in Katherine. She returned to racing on a part-time basis last year and won her 150th race just a fortnight ago at the Katherine Cup. She won her 150th race just a fortnight ago in Race Two of the Katherine Cup. Tributes poured in from the wider racing and police communities. The acting NT police commissioner, Michael Murphy, assured Tyndall’s partner and her father that the police family stood ready to help in whatever way they could. “Melanie had forged deep and strong ties in our small community and police are providing every possible support to her family,” he said in a statement. Libby Hopwood, who retired after suffering brain injuries in a fall in which a rider was killed, tweeted: “Simply lost for words. Sometimes the price of this industry seems too high.” In 2013, the jockey Simone Montgomerie died in a fall on Darwin Cup day. The Australian Jockeys Association chairman, Des O’Keeffe, said Claridge’s fall was also one that at first seemed simple. “Mikaela and another rider, Jamie, were trotting on the sand trails,” he said. “Something spooked the horses and both riders came off. Jamie got up and she expected Mikaela to get up.” O’Keeffe said the AJA and other authorities were there to offer support and counselling to any racing participant, not just riders.