In Julian Is a Mermaid, a little boy riding the New York City subway with “his nana” dreams of looking like the spectacularly dressed women they see – and ends up, with his grandmother’s help, joining the iconic Mermaid Parade. Author and illustrator Jessica Love, who was partly inspired by a trans friend to create the picture book, never expected it to be published after five years of work. On Wednesday night, Love was named winner of the prestigious Klaus Flugge prize, which goes to the most exciting and promising newcomer to picture book illustration. Judge and former children’s laureate Anthony Browne called the book “astonishingly beautiful”, saying it was amazing that it was her first attempt to write and illustrate a picture book. Chair of the judges Julia Eccleshare said the panel were unanimous in their decision: “Julian Is a Mermaid reminds us that picture books can make us understand the world differently and better; that they are for everyone. It is a groundbreaking book,” she said. Love’s win falls in a week when an academic has claimed that children are being put at risk by transgender books in UK primary schools. Meanwhile in the US, attempts have been made to pull children’s books featuring gay and transgender characters from library shelves. Love told the Guardian that while there had been “the occasional ‘dangerous book spreading the gay agenda’ article” in response to her book, “for the most part the reception has been overwhelmingly positive”. The book has a personal story behind it: when Love first met her partner’s older brother, he had recently transitioned, “so a lot of the stuff that comes up in a family when one member transitions was still sort of fresh. I became curious about how family and community systems respond [to these stories].” Paris Is Burning, Jennie Livingston’s documentary about New York’s subculture of drag ball “houses” in the 1980s, was also an influence. “So many of the young people in that film had been rejected by their birth families, only to form new families in the form of houses,” said Love. “I kept thinking about what their lives would have been like if they’d received the kind of support from their birth families that they received from their gay mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters.” Love herself grew up seeing her aunt with her wife – “two very visible queer role models”. “They’re the effective heads of the Love family. I never knew a world without strong, gay role models and I’ve seen the impact that has had on the second generation of my family. I wanted to make a book that provided that kind of support and pride of place, but quietly; subtly.” “For me, the coolest part has been the way different people respond to different elements in the story,” said Love. “There are some folks … who are there for the mermaid stuff, and some people who are there for the identity-affirmation stuff. People reach out to me on social media to tell me what it has meant to their families, to tell me that they were Julian when they were little.” Winning the £5,000 prize means her “heart is in danger of popping”: “I put my whole soul into this book, but I didn’t allow myself to hope that it would lead to anything. In fact I firmly hedged my bets against it having any success at all, because it would have been too painful to hope and then be disappointed,” she said. “But then this happens, and I’m proven miraculously, incredibly, joyously wrong.” She is now working on another story about Julian and his nana. “At first I was reluctant to do a second book – I really didn’t want to cheapen the characters by forcing them into some improbable sequel. But people kept asking and gradually I got comfortable with the idea that maybe it’s OK to give these characters further life,” she said. But Love admitted that she had found the success of the book “extremely gratifying and totally paralysing” at the same time. “Success is not particularly good for creativity because it feels like your permission to fail has been revoked, and that is basically a prescription for failure. I wish the book and characters could have terrific success while I myself continue to toil in obscurity. I think that would be healthier for everybody,” she said.