The serious postmortems are on hold since there is barely time to breathe between Test matches. The outsiders have not been playing any red‑ball cricket recently; even so it was a mild surprise that the selectors plucked out the same 13 names for the Test at the Oval, though it is unlikely that the same 11 will take to the field, especially if Ben Stokes is still suffering from a sore shoulder. There will be talk of a headlong pursuit of World Test Championship points. But even without this fresh incentive there will be much to engage us. An Ashes Test somehow has a life of its own. Thursday’s match at the Oval may lack the gripping intensity of those in the 2005 or 2009 series but it will consume us all even though the players of both sides may be nearing exhaustion. Then the postmortems and the planning begin in earnest. Before long England must announce the identity of their new coach and they must consider the captaincy. Presumably the new coach, whoever they may be, would like an input. Joe Root has said that he wants to continue. Why wouldn’t he? He is a proud man, who loves the game and it is the highest honour in English cricket. Meanwhile, there will be the simplistic, trigger reaction, which demands that he should be sacked. Root will be dubbed a “craptain” despite the fact that in his 32 games in charge he has won three more games than Mike Atherton did in 54 matches and just one fewer than Nasser Hussain in 45. He has overseen 16 victories. Only six captains – Peter May, Mike Brearley, Hussain, Michael Vaughan, Andrew Strauss and Alastair Cook – have more wins to their names. Root may not be a brilliant captain but he is not crap. This summer he has led an imbalanced side and they have deservedly lost, but they have strained every sinew throughout. There is no suggestion that he has “lost” the dressing room. But there is a case for replacing him. Sadly this would be seen as a monumental event. It is a modern phenomenon that England Test captains retain the job for a cycle, unless they are obviously unsuitable like Andrew Flintoff and Kevin Pietersen. Look at the names above and most of them are recent leaders. They were all given one long shot at the job and then they eventually resigned. That is the pattern of the last quarter of a century, which offers both stability – and rigidity. One of the beauties of cricket is that the captain on the field is highly significant, which is not the case in football or even rugby. He makes many of the critical decisions and he sets the tone. And, albeit of secondary importance, he must answer to a hungry media pack when it all goes wrong. It is a highly demanding post. But it does not have to be a lifelong calling and there may be virtue in switching and experimenting more often; it is possible to have a break from leadership duties and to come back wiser and more experienced later in a career – though this has never been possible for recent England captains. The goal of the decision-makers is to maximise England’s resources and this leads to the strongest argument for replacing Root. We can quibble with some of his decisions in this series but it would be intemperate and unfair to refer to a catalogue of howlers. That is not the problem. The issue is whether the captaincy is diminishing England’s best batsman. Root may even be a victim of his own conscientiousness. He is consumed by the game and he respects the gravity of his post. It may be that he takes on too much in the running of the team off the field. Perhaps he should be more bloody‑minded and say to his wide range of support staff: “You sort all that out while I concentrate on my batting.” Perhaps he has not been selfish enough. His runs are his greatest asset to the team. There have been 247 of them in the four Tests against Australia at an average of 30.87, with three half‑centuries and three ducks. Only four players have better returns in a series where there has been much high-class pace bowling but by Root’s standards this is considerably below par. His 70s at Headingley and Old Trafford were worthy efforts but he has never had to scrap so hard. Previously he rarely scored ugly runs. But in this series he has looked a class player (which he is) out of form, constantly battling with himself and the demands placed upon him by the presence of a flawed batting unit, a situation highlighted by his reluctant decision to bat at No 3. So the case for change hinges upon trying to restore Root the batsman, to allow him to own the crease again and to let his obvious talent flourish. Steve Smith provides an odd yet immediate example of a batsman refreshed and rejuvenated after leaving the captaincy. Any change should also be accompanied by the notion that there is no disgrace in having the captaincy removed. Moreover, it is almost an insult to some of the other capable men in the team to regard Root as the unassailable leader. There is no harm in giving someone else a go – and keeping open the option of him returning to leadership duties at a later date.