Andrew Bogut will likely be investigated for a foul-mouthed post-game spray while Boomers assistant coach Luc Longley was also fuming after the Europeans beat Australia 95-88 in a double overtime World Cup semi-final heartbreaker. Spain trailed by 11 against the Boomers in Beijing but, just like in the Rio Olympic bronze medal game three years ago, rallied and went ahead courtesy of a dubious foul – on Bogut – in the final seconds. Spain won that match by one but this time Patty Mills (34 points) had the chance to get one back for Australia when he went to line with four seconds on the clock down by one. But his second free-throw bobbled out and Ricky Rubio’s long heave just missed to force overtime. Matthew Dellavedova’s desperate floater on the buzzer clanged out to send teams into a second extra period, where Marc Gasol (33 points) and Rubio (19 points, seven rebounds, 12 assists) steered their side clear. A “furious” Boomers team surged through the media mixed zone post-game, Bogut yelling “Google where headquarters of fucking Fiba is ... it’s a fucking disgrace”. On court Bogut had earlier flashed a money signal with his hands after the foul that helped put Spain ahead, and he is likely to face investigation and a fine ahead of Sunday’s bronze medal game against either France. His comments were curious, given Fiba headquarters are in Switzerland. Sunday will be Longley’s fourth bronze medal game, having played in two and coached in one already, the most recent in eerily similar circumstances against the same opponent in Rio. “We’ve got to find an altar somewhere and burn a sacrifice to the basketball gods, because they’re not kissing us on the dick yet, like they do Spain,” he said. “I feel like Spain are kissed on the dick by the basketball gods every time we play them. “It’s gut-wrenching for the guys; they’ve been so fucking good, so consistent and played so hard and I felt like they deserved to win that and it doesn’t feel like that’s the right result.” Australia did have their moments though, with Mills’ free-throw somehow rimming out and 22 turnovers a constant olive branch to a Spain side that shot at just 31% in the second half. Dellavedova’s attempted match-winner looked good too, before it bounced out and he was forced out of the second overtime period with cramps. Nick Kay was enormous for Australia off the bench, scoring 16 points and grabbing 11 boards as the Boomers grabbed a staggering 20 offensive rebounds. “They’re furious, crushed. .. it’s very quiet in there and it stings in lots of ways, not least of which is that’s the team we lost to in Rio,” Longley said. “It’s not the time to start pointing fingers and spitting dummies; we’ve got to reload.” Luis Scola was asked what Sunday will mean to him, and he didn’t hesitate with the answer. “Everything,” he said. The veteran Argentinian forward didn’t need to give more of an explanation. The World Cup is one win away, and Scola made sure his team would have a chance to hoist the trophy. Scola scored 28 points and grabbed 13 rebounds, sealing the deal with 3-pointers on consecutive possessions down the stretch, and Argentina beat France 80-66 in Friday’s second World Cup semi-final. Argentina will play Spain in the gold-medal game on Sunday. Gabriel Deck scored 13 points and Facundo Campazzo added 12 for Argentina, a team with no active NBA players on its roster and still made its first gold-medal game in Olympic or World Cup play since the 2004 Athens Games. And when he made his way to the locker room, Scola was greeted by chants of “M-V-P” from teammates. He corrected them with a smile: “MBP,” he said. “Most Beautiful Player.” Indeed, on the court the 39-year-old’s game is still very much a thing of beauty. Showing no signs of fatigue, he played 34 of the 40 minutes and saved his best for the very end. “Luis told us before every game, including today, that we can win – that we are a tough, tough team to beat,” Argentina center Tayavek Gallizzi said. “Just focus on our game. It’s incredible. At his age he is playing better than all the younger guys.” Frank Ntilikina and Evan Fournier each scored 16 for France, which will play Australia for the bronze on Sunday. Nando De Colo scored 11 for France, a team that looked nothing like the one that topped the US in the quarter-finals on Wednesday. Rudy Gobert, who led France in that win over the Americans, scored only three points against Argentina. “From the first to the last minute, it was complete domination,” Gobert said, tipping his cap to Argentina. Both semi-final winners got two days off after their quarter-final victories. Australia and France both played their quarter-finals on Wednesday, and France coach Vincent Collet said he thought that was a factor. “I didn’t want to find any excuse, but I think so,” said Collet, who cancelled practice Thursday because of his team’s travel demands. “For me, it’s not fair that one team has two days to recover and prepare even if they don’t know the first day who will be the opponent. They know it’ll be one or the other, so they can prepare for both.” Argentina put together an early 10-0 run to take the lead, and kept it the rest of the way. A 15-point lead got cut to single digits for much of the fourth, when Scola’s back-to-back 3s clinched the outcome. “It was a great game for us,” Campazzo said.