Mattel is a 74-year-old company slowly taking on Gen-Z values. The maker of Barbie and Hot Wheels has announced the release of Creatable World, its first series of gender-neutral dolls. The dolls differ from Mattel’s gendered Barbie and GI Joe dolls in subtle but significant ways. The dolls are a blank slate. No broad shoulders, no full hips, no long lashes. Children of any gender identification are encouraged to play with them. “Toys are a reflection of culture and as the world continues to celebrate the positive impact of inclusivity, we felt it was time to create a doll line free of labels,” Mattel said in a statement on Wednesday. “Through research, we heard that kids don’t want their toys dictated by gender norms. This line allows all kids to express themselves freely.” It added: “We’re hopeful Creatable World will encourage people to think more broadly about how all kids can benefit from doll play.” Toy companies are vigorously retooling their products to align with advancements in representation, inclusion and diversity that Gen-Z children – not their millennial parents – are largely responsible for. Studies examining gender identification among young children are hard to come by, but a recent report by the Williams Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles found that 27% of California teens surveyed identified as gender-nonconforming to varying extents. Just this month, numerous conversation-starting toys and board games have come out. Hasbro released a gender-swapped version of Monopoly entitled Ms Monopoly, where women players earn more than men. Meanwhile, Mattel released a slew of culturally diverse Barbies (including a “Día de los Muertos Barbie” that garnered accusations of cultural appropriation). The response hasn’t been unanimously positive. Hasbro and Mattel have been accused of attempting to profit off culture wars. “There’s already this vibe in the [board] gaming community that anything Monopoly does is a cash-grab,” John “Hex” Carter, a board game designer and consultant, said in an interview with the Guardian last week. “Because the market is already flooded with so many different versions of it. So the motivation behind a game like Ms Monopoly is transparent: to make money.” Mattel’s gender-neutral doll has won over some in the LGBTQ community. “So many children and parents never saw themselves represented in toys and dolls, but this new line raises the bar for inclusion thanks to input from parents, physicians and children themselves,” the LGBT advocacy group Glaad wrote on Twitter. Despite the progressiveness of its Creatable World dolls, Mattel is quick to assert itself as apolitical. “We’re not in the business of politics,” Mattel’s president told Time Magazine, “and we respect the decision any parent makes around how they raise their kids. Our job is to stimulate imaginations. Our toys are ultimately canvases for cultural conversation, but it’s your conversation, not ours; your opinion, not ours.”