The first thing you notice about Lucy Guerin’s award-winning duet, Split, is that one of the dancers seems to have forgotten to put any clothes on. The two performers start moving in unison, identical except for the fact one of them is wearing a grey top and skirt, while the other is totally starkers. It seems like a provocation, but that’s not what this piece is about at all. In fact, it was more of an afterthought. Originally, Guerin had assumed that since the dancers were doing the same thing, she’d dress them in the same outfits. But when it came to designing the costumes, she realised that wasn’t right. The piece evolved in her Melbourne studio and the choreographer began to see the two dancers as representing two sides of the same person. She tried various ways of characterising them – one in a unitard, one in office clothes – then alighted on the idea of no clothes at all. “When I asked the dancer, Lilian Steiner, she just burst out laughing – slightly hysterically, I think,” says Guerin. “But she said, if that’s the right thing for the work then I want to try it. When we closed all the curtains and tried it, it seemed to reinforce this idea of the public and private self I’d been thinking about. And because Lilian is completely unselfconscious, it just felt like she was doing her work as a dancer, it wasn’t about being a victim or being sexual, it felt like a strong statement for a female body, so I really liked that.” Guerin admits that nudity on stage is “fraught”, especially female nudity, and “as the person who has the power,” she felt uncomfortable asking Steiner to do it. But after getting used to it, Steiner enjoys the feeling. For the audience, the effect is striking. After a few minutes you don’t really see the nakedness any more, but you do see the clean geometry of unclad limbs and the divide between the two dancers. Even when their moves are matching, there are all sorts of potential stories and power-plays evolving. Nudity aside, the real concept of Split – which came to Guerin in the shower – is based on a pleasingly simple idea. After the first 20 minutes, the dancers bisect the stage, laying down gaffer tape and restricting their performing area to one half. Ten minutes later, they halve the stage again, then again after five minutes, and so on, until the two have taped themselves into a corner, with barely room for four feet. The space becomes ever more claustrophobic and their once harmonious movements ever more fractious. Guerin was expecting the result to be “dry and clinical and abstract and geometric” but in fact, “it was a much more poetic and evocative structure than I thought,” she says. “I’ve had some really diverse and very intense responses from audience members about that idea of the shrinking of time and space. Like about someone’s partner dying and what that was like, very personal things.” The simplicity of the structure, and its readability, seems to liberate audiences. “For a lot of people, that clarity makes them feel comfortable – they feel safe and it lets other thoughts, produced by the dancing, come up,” says Guerin. “I find sometimes people are very confused by contemporary dance and they’re often wondering: what is it? But something about the framing in Split seemed to let them into the dance.” Guerin has been making dance for 20 years, but very little of the Australian choreographer’s work has actually been seen in the UK. Most recently she collaborated with theatre director Carrie Cracknell on productions of Medea at the National Theatre and Macbeth at the Young Vic, and made a danced deconstruction of the latter play, called Tomorrow, for Rambert. But those works aren’t typical of what she does with her own company. Much of Guerin’s own dance career took place in New York, where there was still a great influence of the postmodern choreographers of the Judson Church. In the decades since, she has watched trends come and go, moving from postmodern to conceptual dance, from a focus on physical technique to dancers giving up going to daily class altogether. In Australia, she says, “People are coming back to class and they seem keen to move. Although I walk past the rehearsal rooms in my studio and the dancer is often sitting there working on their laptop,” she laughs. Even dance cannot escape the shift to the digital world, it seems, but Guerin values the importance of “thinking through the body”, of getting up and doing. Not all her experiments will end up on stage. The early weeks of Split involved “a lot of time with a big roll of cellophane and dancers inside plastic bags, and learning lots of cartoon movement off YouTube, like Bugs Bunny”. But in the end she came back to the fundamentals of choreography: time, space, movement and the body, in its starkest form. Split is part of Dance Umbrella and is at the Place, London, 12-13 October.