WeWork’s ambition to float in New York was ridiculed as an exercise in hot air, bad governance and ludicrous financial projections. The arrival on the public markets of the shared-office company was ultimately pulled. Now comes a plan to get the show back on the road, courtesy of 30% shareholder, Softbank: ditch Adam Neumann as chief executive. As far as it goes, it’s a good idea. Neumann was responsible for most of WeWork’s self-regarding mission statements and was the source of most of the complaints about governance, as captured by the jaw-dropping revelation in the prospectus that he had been paid $5.9m (£4.8m) (since returned) by the company for the rights to the trademarked word “We”. So, yes, Neumann has to go. Almost nobody wants to buy shares in We Company, the parent, while he is at the helm, at least not at a valuation that would be attractive to Softbank. The original hope was to price We at more than $47bn, the last value at which the Japanese investor had contributed cash in a private fund-raising round. By the end of farcical roadshow, even $10bn looked a struggle. But let’s not imagine that ousting Neumann offers easy salvation. For starters, the co-founder has to be persuaded to walk the plank, which may be a challenge. Chief executives who think they are “elevating the world’s consciousness” tend not to shift easily and Neumann, in theory, is sitting on super-charged voting rights (another governance shocker) that give him the power to frustrate a rebellion. But, assuming Neumann can be pushed out, what then? In the shoes of would-be outsiders, you would surely want to be convinced that the company would not fall apart without its buccaneering pioneer. It is, after all, hard to see what, apart from Neumann’s undoubted ability to charm the likes of SoftBank boss Masayoshi Son, has fuelled We to this point. The company remains heavily loss-making and operates in the dull world of bricks and mortar. Indeed, the new rift between Son and Neumann will merely serve to concentrate more attention on the ugly financials. Aside from current losses from operations, We needs to raise $3bn from investors to unlock $6bn in loans from banks. The last straw for Softbank and Son, apparently, was the Wall Street Journal’s report that Neumann smoked marijuana on a private jet. It is hard to understand why that revelation should be more shocking than the arrangements around the “We” trademark, but Son has got himself into a tight spot. If Softbank now agrees that Neumann wasn’t fit to lead a public company, why didn’t it spot his short-comings before investing $11bn? And how can the Japanese firm possibly now expect to raise $100bn for its next Vision fund? Ditch Neumann by all means, but the outside world is also laughing at the hubris of Softbank. The revolving door turns quickly at Marks & Spencer these days but, even by the ex-FTSE 100 retailer’s standards, this counts as a speedy exit. After only 15 months in post, finance director Humphrey Singer has decided “now is the right time to move on”. He’ll hang around for a successor to be appointed, but then he’ll be off. As is traditional, both individual and company cooed in mechanical fashion. Singer said he felt “privileged” to have been part of “the challenging but hugely rewarding turnaround at M&S” while chief executive Steve Rowe said he had been “a huge asset to the business”. Spare us the platitudes, please. The job of counting the numbers at a troubled M&S is a big job, which is why it commands a £600,000 salary before bonus baubles. The company, when it hired Singer from Dixons Carphone, thought it was getting a bean-counter for the long-haul, which means the full stretch of a five-year plan to knock the business into shape. If Singer could not commit for the full duration, which seems to have been the case, it’s clearly best that he leaves. These things happen, but we call them recruitment mistakes.