Wally Downes has been suspended indefinitely from his role as AFC Wimbledon manager after he was accused of breaking the Football Association’s betting rules. Downes has been charged with contravening rule E8 and is alleged to have placed eight bets on football matches between November 2013 and July of this year. During this period Downes had worked briefly as a coach at Queens Park Rangers before later taking on his role at AFC Wimbledon, where he helped the club avoid relegation from League One last season. The FA would not comment on the contents of the charges, citing the ongoing nature of the investigation. But in a statement the club said they had suspended Downes due to the “seriousness” of the allegations and would be conducting their own investigation into his conduct. In a statement, the club said: “Manager Wally Downes has been suspended from first-team duties pending further notice. Given the seriousness of this breach in FA regulations, the club has decided to suspend Wally with immediate effect, giving time for the club and Dons Trust boards to look at the allegations more closely and make a further announcement in due course.” AFC Wimbledon are struggling again, second bottom in League One having taken just three points from their first 10 games. The club confirmed that Downes’s assistant, Glyn Hodges, will take charge of this weekend’s fixture at Peterborough. Any action taken against Downes will be closely scrutinised after recent high-profile cases under the FA’s betting rules, tightened in 2014 to prevent any player, coach or official in England’s top eight divisions betting on any football-related activity anywhere in the world, led to lenient punishments. This summer, an independent regulatory commission found Daniel Sturridge guilty of passing insider information on a possible transfer to Sevilla to his brother for the purposes of betting. The punishment, however, was a £75,000 fine and a six‑week ban from playing, four of them suspended, which was served during the close-season break. The sports minister Tracey Crouch subsequently described the ruling as having made “a mockery of the FA’s rules”. In June Paul Scholes was fined £8,000 after placing 140 bets worth £26,159 during his time as a director of Salford City. In deciding the punishment, the FA accepted Scholes’s mitigating argument that he had not realised the full scope of the betting rules.