As the shadows stretched out at the Oval on a lovely soft, drowsy Friday afternoon, something strange happened. Sam Curran took the ball from the Vauxhall End, paced out his comically furious run-up, and began to whistle up an unfamiliar kind of energy. Curran, with his 81mph full-pitch swingers, is an unlikely enforcer. But his outstanding quality is his intensity of purpose. Steve Smith fenced and was dropped by Joe Root. Tim Paine drove at an away-nibbler. Pat Cummins went lbw to another full, drifty hand grenade. Each time Curran came leaping down the pitch punching the air. Either side of this Jofra Archer produce another wonderful spell of hostile quick bowling, picking up his second six-for of the summer. Australia had been cruising midway through the afternoon. They were all out for 225 just after six o’clock. Too late perhaps, deep into a semi-dead rubber in early September. But this was without doubt England’s most forceful, aggressive session of the summer. Where has it been? Most of all, where has it been in the most vital phases, the Steve zone, those passages where Australia’s outstanding player has decided the destination of the urn? There is a theory that England have simply been too passive with Smith, distracted by his style, his mannerisms, his sheer annihilating brilliance. They took a first innings lead here. As ever, it might have been much more but for Smith. He came out to bat in mid-morning with the score on 14 for two. Archer was already bowling with fire and skill. At which point Smith began once again to drive and nudge and clip off his legs, shots played out of a state of pure sunlit calm. Later he stepped down to Jack Leach and heaved him over mid-on with all the carefree elan of a man hurling a broken vacuum cleaner into a builder’s skip. The shot brought up Smith’s 10th consecutive Ashes fifty. He waved his bat vaguely, bathed in the same unhurried, respectful sense of stillness. This has been the pattern. From Birmingham to London, England have not at any stage got stuck into Smith, have not been unduly hostile, have not greeted his arrival at the crease with a barrage of orchestrated hostility. It is a complaint many will reject out of hand. Matthew Wade was criticised, rightly perhaps, for his taunting of Archer in Manchester. Nobody likes a foghorn or a boor. English players have never been good at this sort of thing, which is a step outside of the national comfort zone. But still, faced with a man returning from a ban, a batsman who keeps 30 pairs of gloves in a carefully arranged row, England have not really tried to disturb him by nefarious means, never noticeably called him a cheat from short leg or stepped into his unusually ordered space. There have been passages of aggression, most notably Archer’s barrage at Lord’s. One of the more remarkable moments of the first Test was a report of one England player shouting the words, “You’re a bunch of [expletives deleted]” at the Australians as they performed their tearfully earnest pre-match huddle. And yet England have seemed to deflate from that point in the face of the summer of Steve. The absence of Jimmy Anderson has deprived this series of a fascinating duel, the master of English bowling v the master of England’s bowlers. But Anderson would have added bite too. A few tours back the simple act of repeatedly calling Mike Hussey “Dave” in the field – “shot Dave … played Dave … nice one Dave” – was enough to draw an angry reaction from one of Australia’s most relentlessly focused batsmen. Watching Smith here, stance ever more open, admiring the flow of the blade from its angle outside off stump into the most dreamily severe cover drive, the idea of disturbing those rhythms never really seemed to occur to the fielding team. Here is a batsman who has arranged the objects around him with a fussicky exactitude all summer, his game based on angles and planes and lines of impact. Trying something abrasive, disturbing, sandpapery, growling from short leg … well, why not? The odd thing is they did lay into Smith at Adelaide on the last Ashes tour, partly perhaps out of irritation at the Jonny Bairstow headbutt affair. The ball also moved in that match. Whatever the reason, Smith didn’t make it to fifty. Perhaps this time around the idea of leaving it to the crowd had crept in, along with the notion that a coterie of drunk middle-aged men in ballerina outfits represents genre-defining stadium hostility. Instead, England have simply looked on and ticked up the runs. Smith did make his lowest score of the series here, pinned in front by Chris Woakes for a mere 80 shortly after Curran’s burst; and dismissed, for all of the above, by a leading contender for the title of nicest man in cricket. England will look back at this series and imagine how it might have played without Smith. It might be useful also to imagine what some more of this, a little more needle, a little more concerted aggression might have done to that obsessive, emasculating brilliance.