Sports fans who bought tickets for major football matches and England’s winter cricket tour to South Africa are among those who could be affected by the collapse of Thomas Cook. Thomas Cook Sport, a specialist division of the fallen tour operator, provided tickets and accommodation for some of the UK’s biggest football clubs, including Manchester United, Liverpool, Chelsea and Tottenham. It also sold packages for rugby, the NFL, Formula One and darts, including the world championship in December. Liverpool FC said Thomas Cook had sold 360 hospitality packages for each home game at Anfield. The club said in a statement: “We are currently assessing the impact of Thomas Cook ceasing trading and the impact for those supporters who have purchased packages from Thomas Cook. Once we have those details from Thomas Cook we will update supporters.” Manchester United said Thomas Cook had presold a small number of tickets and hospitality for some home matches and travel packages to two upcoming UEFA Europa League away games in the Netherlands and Serbia. The club said in a statement: “As soon as we were aware of their potential insolvency, we started to work through contingency plans and we will endeavour to contact affected Manchester United fans who had booked direct via Thomas Cook.” Tottenham said only those who had booked coach travel for an away fixture against Brighton or purchased premium seats at the club’s own stadium were likely to be affected. “We are currently working on alternative plans and would ask anyone with concerns to contact our supporter services team,” a spokesman said. Chelsea said it would pick up the cost for alternative arrangements for fans who had booked Thomas Cook packages to away games against Lille on 2 October and Southampton on 6 October. All hospitality packages at Stamford Bridge booked through Thomas Cook have been cancelled and the club said supporters should contact their credit card provider. The England and Wales Cricket Board said people who had bought holiday packages for the South Africa tour, which starts in December, should receive compensation through the Atol insurance scheme for package holiday bookings and could make a claim through that. Scottish rugby fans who bought early for the Six Nations tournament next year are also likely to be affected as the national team had a partnership with Thomas Cook.