It won’t have escaped your attention that Christmas is nearly here. And by nearly I mean not remotely nearly – in fact, almost 12 entire weeks away, although my inbox is full of office party special offers and I’ve seen my first trimmed sparkly shrug on the high street. This is the shrug I always buy to make my arms look better in a party frock, but which actually makes me look like Hagrid from Harry Potter. But Christmas is nearly here in the sense that the tensions should be setting in around now about arrangements. If not already, maybe tonight. Usually it comes during the first rounds of Strictly Come Dancing, as the leaves turn. Someone says something like: “Oh, and Aunty Sheila’s sent an email about Boxing Day. She’s doing open-house buffet in Dudley, with karaoke, but that’ll mean staying in the rooms over the Harvester, or on a futon in her garage. I mean, we can’t really say no, can we?” And lo, the Holy Spirit enters the room and it is triumphant. Although I can never be entirely sure that the “Am I Being Unreasonable” threads on Mumsnet’s messageboards are not lavish performance art sponsored by the manufacturers of the Levonelle One Step Morning After Pill, I do enjoy watching the annual melee over “What are we doing for Christmas?”. It is alive everywhere, regardless of class, creed or denomination. Recently one young woman, her heart full of the hopes and dreams we all harbour in the early stages of a relationship, complained that Christmas wouldn’t be Christmas if she didn’t wake up in her childhood bedroom. She didn’t want to go to her partner’s parents’ place; she wanted her own stocking, her own mummy and her own family traditions. Both pathetic and understandable, her Mumsnet post was steeped in the sentimentality that surrounds everything to do with Jesus’s big bank holiday. “You silly fool. You will learn,” I laughed, remembering my own worst Christmas, spent sleeping on a camp bed at the family home of a boyfriend, who brought poems to the dinner table to perform tearfully. I did not want this. Now that I’m older, I put my foot down. My partner, who is from a chic French family where they eat marrons glacés and truffles on the 25th, did not bargain on spending last year’s Joyeux Noel in rural Cumbria, eating dry turkey crown with Aunt Bessie’s yorkshire puddings, before settling down to watch Paul O’Grady rescuing toothless chihuahuas. But Christmas is not about what we want, or at least it wasn’t for him that year. Christmas is mainly about who can play the best game of emotional chess over the preceding months. Some of us will get our own way, and some will wonder at the fact that we were once women who spent late December in high heels pissed on Warninks, but are now debating how to split one day of the year down the middle – eight hours in Hastings, eight in Auchtermuchty – so as not to upset either set of grandparents. Others, the single or the child-free, will be expected to pitch up anywhere and bend to everyone else’s plans, as we’re not doing anything important, and after all, “It’s for the kiddies, really.” Hearing everyone’s secret gripes is my favourite part of the season. It’s so very British: quiet, seething resentment, dressed up in a cheap paper hat. I enjoy Driving Home For Christmas by Chris Rea much more if I imagine that he’s going to strangle everyone when he arrives; the line “I can’t wait to see their faces” takes on a fresh, ghoulish meaning. I once sat next to a man at dinner who told me the best part of his Christmas was the turkey stuffing sandwich he ate in Scratchwood services on his way home to his wife and her family. He parked up, listened to Steve Wright, then had a Costa Coffee hot chocolate, a big mince pie and a lovely nap. “The rest is just crowd control and screaming,” he said. But, I hear you shout, this is all too early: shut up about Christmas, as you thrash about in denial. I’m afraid it is not too early. Some monsters who walk among us are really very organised. These people have booked up every 12-person holiday cottage with a pool table and nearby pub by late July. They have already reserved the best bedroom. They are currently jamming one hot finger repeatedly on the best online grocery pre-booked delivery slots. They know where they’re spending Christmas, and it will be on their terms. I always wonder who these people are. Who has that level of swagger? Secretly, I also wonder how much lovelier Christmas would be if Extinction Rebellion took umbrage over it, and blocked several motorways, making travel not just difficult but disgustingly unethical. Imagine the petrol saved, the plastic tat unbought. There is an argument that many of us would secretly be happier if we could wave at each other on FaceTime and then crack on with our own personal idea of heaven. I heard Gyles Brandreth say on a recent podcast that he is strictly anti-festive fuss. He marks the big day by going nowhere and eating a microwaved vegetarian dinner. Look at him, for God’s sake: the happiest man in Britain. While we all bicker and double-book and seethe, one man alone is experiencing the most wonderful time of the year.