The challenge for England is to win conventionally, without the necessity of a superhuman performance from one of their players to get them over the line. That tends to happen just once or twice in a generation. They desperately need runs from fresh sources. The challenge for Australia is to forget. They must forget how they bowled England out for 67 in the first innings at Headingley, how they needed just one more wicket with a lead of 72 runs to retain the Ashes and how despite much sweat and toil on that fairytale, final afternoon they somehow lost the match. How that hurts. Justin Langer, endearingly candid, admitted he felt physically sick when the match was “stolen”. Since then he has been working hard to ensure that his team can regroup and achieve their goal. In isolation that is not so difficult. One win at Old Trafford or the Oval will suffice. Yet there must remain the nagging feeling among the tourists that by now they should be luxuriating in the knowledge the task is complete. Langer may be propagating the “history is bunk” theory. After Headingley in 1981 the tourists were robbed once again by Ian Botham at Edgbaston. Their spine had been broken. They might easily have been 3-0 up in that series upon arrival in Manchester yet it was there that England retained the Ashes after Botham produced a better innings than the spectacular at Headingley. In 2005 Australia came to Old Trafford after the epic two-run defeat at Edgbaston. Then they were overjoyed to leave Manchester with a draw after a heroic rearguard action by Ricky Ponting but in the end, as Langer well remembers – he topped the Australian batting averages in that series – the Ashes would be lost. Langer and Tim Paine have been tinkering with their team. Usman Khawaja has been dropped, which is a surprise and a luxury not available to England. Khawaja averages just over 20 in the series, which is a poor return, but there are two batsmen in the England side who look on enviously at such an output. He has appeared more comfortable than most at the crease, yet his top score is 40. In 44 Tests for Australia he averages just over 40; England have just one player, Joe Root, with a better average. From a distance Khawaja seems a regular fall guy; England may prefer to bowl at Matthew Wade, despite his century at Edgbaston. The constitution of Australia’s pace attack is probably of more interest to the England team. The Australians must decide between Peter Siddle and Mitchell Starc. Within their camp this has become more of a tactical dilemma than a question of form. Until now they have been keen on maintaining a tight, disciplined pace attack that bowls dry. This has meant Siddle has been included in two of the three Tests (he was rotated out of the side at Headingley). Meanwhile Starc has looked on from afar, not quite like Achilles, but he is a formidable Ashes warrior, capable of causing devastation at considerable speed. He may not be quite so miserly as the others but now the expectation is that Starc will be recalled on a surface which is likely to be the quickest encountered in the series so far. So the triumvirate that tormented England in the last Ashes series may well be reunited. It is unlikely that the England batsmen will regard this as good news, however high their respect for Siddle. More surprisingly England have shuffled their pack by replacing Chris Woakes with Somerset’s Craig Overton, who will be embarking on his fourth Test match. Craig is the older of the Overton twins, slower than Jamie, but more reliable and the same height (6ft 5in). Woakes has had a busy summer, excelling in the latter stages of the World Cup, and he has bowled respectably enough in the series, taking nine wickets, as well as contributing some valuable runs, though he was not at his best with the bat at Headingley where the Aussie pacemen tormented him. Overton has leapfrogged both Woakes and Sam Curran. His batting is not so effective as Curran’s but his ability to gain surprising bounce may be seen as more effective at Old Trafford. Moreover Root may feel the need for a workhorse in his attack, a role unsuitable for the others. It is imperative that Jofra Archer is used as a shock rather stock bowler; Stuart Broad cannot be expected to bowl too many of the dirty overs; while Ben Stokes, despite delivering 24 overs at Headingley from the Rugby Stand End, interrupted only by the close of play and four deliveries from Archer, has other duties to perform. The thinking must be Overton is the best option to maintain control while the others are resting. However, he has only played one red-ball match since 17 July. Overton has yet to experience anything other than defeat in his three Tests so far; his Somerset colleague, Jack Leach, who is about to play his eighth Test, has never lost in an England shirt. So something has to give in a match that has everyone tingling with anticipation. After the melodrama of Headingley on top of a packed summer there may be some weary cricketers in Manchester with fuses shortening. There are, at least, some relatively fresh umpires. The World Cup final pairing of Kumar Dharmasena and Marais Erasmus is reunited at Old Trafford. This is no guarantee of umpiring utopia but those in charge of the first three Tests had a torrid time. So far the series has been evenly contested except that England have outstripped Australia in their use of DRS and that has been significant; it would be more satisfactory if the Ashes is now decided by one team playing superior cricket.