I’m not sure if I will ever see a more extraordinary day in Westminster. It began with John Bercow making a 15-minute statement in which he announced he would be standing down by 31 October. After that, dozens of MPs – almost all of them from the opposition parties, apart from Michael Gove who is the Tories’ go-to man for insincerity – spent the best part of 90 minutes calling for points of order to praise Bercow for his role in defending parliament against the executive, standing up for backbenchers and promoting gender and race equality. All of which was true, though it was curious no one thought to mention the allegations of bullying and losing his temper with staff that have persisted throughout his time in office. Bercow merely basked in the attention and congratulated each MP for their perspicacity. Then the government lost two more votes: the first demanding that it publish the details of no-deal Brexit planning and the prorogation; the second an attempt by Boris Johnson to force a general election – taking the prime minister’s record to played six, lost six. Strictly speaking, he’s also lost a couple more votes, but in parliamentary terms these are counted as pre-season friendlies. The session ended at about 2am with the Labour MP Lloyd Russell-Moyle sitting on the Speaker and other opposition MPs staging their own protests to try to delay prorogation. Much more of this and the EU wouldn’t have us back even if we got on our knees and begged. Geoffrey Boycott’s knighthood understandably created most of the headlines for Theresa May’s resignation honours list. But other gongs offered an equally intriguing insight into the former prime minister’s psyche. When David Cameron handed out baubles to all his staff, May said that his honours list made her physically retch. So she had presumably spent most of last weekend throwing her guts up as just about everyone who had ever stepped through the door of No 10 was rewarded with an honour. But it was her decision to offer CBEs to her former advisers Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy that most intrigued me. Without Hill and Timothy insisting not only that she call a general election in 2017, but fight it on a duff manifesto with a presidential campaign entirely unsuited to someone with no personality, May might still be prime minister. On top of this, Timothy has spent much of this year writing opinion pieces for the Daily Telegraph in which he has repeatedly rubbished almost everything his ex-boss has done in regard to Brexit. In giving both Hill and Timothy honours, May has not only chosen to reward failure but has displayed a disturbing masochistic tendency. I’m fairly certain that if I had honours within my gift, I wouldn’t be doling them out to someone who had insulted and abused me. It makes me wonder what you would have had to do to May to be left off her list. Asking on behalf of the Four Pot Plants, the only things in No 10 that never let her down. Parliament being shut down hasn’t made politics any less mad. I began the day at a speech in London given by Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, who was outlining an entirely different Brexit plan to the one Keir Starmer was delivering to the TUC conference in Brighton at the same time. Watson quoted at length from four great writers in his speech: Joseph Conrad, Dylan Thomas, Emily Brontë and ... Tom Watson. He has a new book out soon called Downsizing, about how he lost eight stone. If you have pounds, prepare to shed them now. The discrepancies in Labour’s Brexit position were quickly overshadowed by a Scottish court’s decision that Boris Johnson had misled parliament about the reasons for proroguing parliament, which forced the prime minister into a hasty denial that he had lied to the Queen. If true, this would make Her Maj the first woman Johnson hadn’t lied to in years. As if suffering from a guilty conscience at avoiding prime minister’s questions and a two-hour interrogation from the liaison committee, Johnson then hastily arranged his own Facebook PMQs for later in the day in which he answered questions carefully selected by Dominic Cummings for under 15 minutes. All of which meant I ended up working late and missing the launch of Marie Le Conte’s book Haven’t You Heard?, the inside story of gossip in Westminster. In the spirit of which, having already got a copy, I am happy to pass on that it is a cracking read. Treat yourself. It’s that time of the year when unwanted mail in the form of my pension statements arrive. They do not make for comforting reading, especially this year’s, which came with a covering letter explaining that my pension provider was closing down one of the funds my money was invested in because it was underperforming and the administration charges were too high, and switching it to another fund. I’d have been rather more grateful if they had managed my money properly from the start. Not that it would have made a great deal of difference as it seems the sum total of my pension pot to which I have been contributing for about 30 years is still pretty small. This, I should point out, is not my Guardian pension. But as I only became a full-time employee about 15 years ago, that is hardly a goldmine either. Nor does it help that it’s mostly my fault as I never increased my contributions. Partly because I always felt too poor to do so, but mostly because it never occurred to me I would be around to cash it in. That I’m still alive is a source of some amazement. So now I find myself in my 60s and facing the prospect of working indefinitely or a retirement spent in poverty. It has made one decision marginally more simple, though. Given that the pension pot is negligible, I might as well take out a cash sum from my pension and spend it how I please. That way I might even fulfil a dream of owning a small Lucie Rie pot. I might be broke, but I’d have a work of art touched by genius. Spare a thought for the publicity person at Collins who has been assigned to David Cameron’s autobiography and is about to have the fortnight from hell. Almost everything that could go wrong with this book has. It was already delayed to this autumn in the hope that Brexit would have been at least partly sorted by the end of March, only to find that publication has been moved to a time when the country is in the middle of a full-on existential crisis, with the government threatening to ignore the rule of law. Just about the only thing on which leavers and remainers agree is that Cameron is the man principally to blame for this mess. So now some poor publicist has to go on tour with Dave – luckily all bookshop events have been cancelled to minimise any chance of contact with the public – and tell the media and interviewers how Cameron doesn’t really want to talk about the Brexit thing. He feels it’s not particularly relevant to his journey. He’d much rather talk about his 2015 general election campaign. The publicist will also then have to spend hours keeping Dave away from the reviews and explaining why a book should never be judged on sales alone. But hey, double figures isn’t so bad for the first week! However much the person in the Collins publicity department who drew the short straw is being paid, it isn’t nearly enough. Digested week, digested: Silenced.