1) The Rugby World Cup starts on Friday, and the group stage will give minnows the chance to shine. Wales have been susceptible to shocks down the years – in 1999, they lost 31-38 to Samoa in Cardiff. That was a painful repeat of a 1991 stunner at the Arms Park, when they lost to Western Samoa. There was also Wales 34-38 Fiji in 2007, in which the Pacific Islanders produced a devastating 80 minutes of attacking rugby. From the same year, Argentina’s 17-12 defeat of the hosts France looked to have been a seismic shock, except that they met again in the third-place match and the Pumas won by an even greater margin. And where else to end but with this year’s hosts. Eddie Jones masterminded one of sport’s greatest shocks in 2015: South Africa 32-34 Japan. Of course, the minnows can also be on the end of a damned good thrashing. In 2003, hosts Australia beat Namibia 142-0 and in 1995, Japan were beaten 145-17 by the merciless All Blacks, with Mark Ellis scoring six tries while Simon Culhane notched 20 conversions and 45 points. 2) To further whet the whistle for the Japanese jamboree, here’s the best tries from the 2015 World Cup, in two parts – here and here. And some golden moments from the tournaments that came before that, between 1987 and 2011. 3) In the WNBA play-offs, Chicago Sky were 92-90 up on the Vegas Aces with seconds to play – before Dearica Marie Hamby produced this clutch steal and dramatic three-pointer. Further watching: here’s a nice short, behind-the-scenes film on the Aces. 4) In golf, last weekend’s Solheim Cup went to the wire, with both the US and the European team having putts to take the trophy. Up stepped Suzann Pettersen to sink a glorious six-footer before announcing her retirement. Not a bad way to bow out – here’s how it played out behind the ropes. 5) Forget Lionel Messi, the new star of Camp Nou is Ansu Fati, the 16-year-old from Guinea-Bissau who became Barcelona’s youngest ever Champions League player this week. He’s already scored twice this season in La Liga but here’s a primer on his goals for the Barça youth teams. Fati is Barça’s youngest-ever scorer; his predecessors are something of a mixed bag. 6) The Cleveland Browns may have just raised the bar for sporting social media #content with their Friends tribute, B•R•O•W•N•S. Other memorable Stateside team parodies: MLB’s Milwaukee Brewers recreate classic baseball movie The Sandlot, and there’s a Full House in San Francisco. In the NBA, Cleveland catch the Soul Train, Miami Heat go full 90s throwback, and there’s a Christmas medley from the New Orleans Pelicans. 1) What football has needed for years is a proper psychedelic-folk wibble anthem. So here comes Richard Dawson, the Newcastle troubadour, and his Two Halves: 2) Lasith Malinga took a four-ball, four-wicket hat-trick for Sri Lanka in an T20 international with New Zealand. It’s the second time he has completed that feat – the first was in the 2007 World Cup against South Africa. 3) Salvador Sánchez was the best boxer you never saw, and might even be the greatest featherweight of all time. 4) Forget sarcastically applauding the ref – here’s a throwback to Tim Duncan being ejected from an NBA game for … laughing on the sideline. 5) Welcome to The Big Ugly – a dramatic rescue of a big-wave surfer in Nazare, Portugal. Spotters’ badges: BlackCaeser, trevorn, whobroughtoranges, losshakers. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.