Maria Raga, CEO of Depop, the fashion resale app, enjoys wearing other people’s old clothes, but what to call them? Secondhand? She’s not enamoured with the term. There are connotations. So, though it is not, strictly speaking, official Depop brand language, she has landed on a different phrase. “We say pre-loved!” Depop is an entire platform for the pre-loved. More than 140,000 secondhand items are listed on the app daily. There are old Nike jumpers and old Off-White hoodies and vintage blue jeans and astonishing amounts of 90s dead stock. There are bras and satchels, chokers and bomber ja ckets – hot commodities on the resale market. There are items that are not clothing, but users predominantly trade in fashion and accessories. In functionality, the app is a practical marriage between eBay (used stuff for sale) and Instagram (curated lives). Items appear in scrollable grids. Buyers follow their favourite sellers, who market their products with age-appropriate copy. In a recent post, a user from south London tagged a neon green T-shirt (£29.99) with the terms “Gothic”, “eboy”, “techwear”, “egirl”, “heel”, “future”, “cyberdog”, “y2k” and “fire”. “It’s a fashion marketplace for the next generation,” Raga says and then, to clarify, “Generation Z!” She is sitting straight-backed in a conference room at Depop HQ – a converted industrial space in east London – wearing a white blouse handed down by her mother and a pair of floral silk trousers pre-loved by the pop star Lily Allen. Allen is big on Depop. She has 50,000 followers (a fraction of her Instagram count, but every little helps) and an inventory of upmarket cast-offs that includes a pair of Iceberg jogging bottoms (£120), a Phillip Lim vest top (£75) and a bright yellow jumper with bell sleeves (£70). But she is not big big, because she is not in ownership of the app’s cardinal user attribute, which is being tremendously young. Exactly why a successful singer-songwriter sells her unwanted clothing on a mobile app is anyone’s guess, though a cynic might suggest it’s a savvy way to reach teenage fans. Depop has more than 15m registered users, Raga says, of whom “90% are 26 or under”. A Depop user as old as Allen, who is 34, is rare. In a recent New York magazine article, the writer Matthew Schneier described Depop as “a siren pitched at a frequency easiest for teens and the recently teenage to hear”. It has been manufactured that way. “The mission,” Raga says, earnestly, “is to power young, entrepreneurial, creative people… because we think they’re the ones that will change the world.” Of the app’s users, she explains: “They are in that period of their lives where they are figuring out for themselves what they want to do in the future and we want to give them an opportunity. To support them in their journey.” The journey usually begins in a user’s bedroom. “What happens is they start selling clothes from their wardrobes,” Raga says. “They’re pretty much mobile natives, so they know how to get the ball rolling.” For casual users, that is enough. Depop pays out pocket money. It is the new paper round. But others seem born to the process, understand the power and value in sharing their particular tastes with the world, and the journey continues. They pillage charity shops. They create inventory. Slowly, they generate a following. And then they begin to sell so many items that, in a few cases at least, the gig becomes full-time. Earlier this year, it was reported that one of the app’s top sellers, Bella McFadden, or @internetgirl, used the app to haul a six-figure income. She is 23. She is not the only Depop mogul. “We make it super easy for people to start a business,” Raga says. In this way she believes the app provides a great social service. “We’re teaching. We’re helping people learn what it takes to be successful.” But a warning: “You have to be talented, you know? This is not something everybody can be successful at. You also have to have taste. You have to be super creative. And you need to be passionate about it.” Raga joined Depop in 2014, when she was 35. “Operations and finance,” she says. “I wasn’t C-suite at the time.” She had been working as a Groupon executive (“When it was, like, super exciting”), but she’d watched the company struggle to create a decent mobile platform, and “it was very obvious that mobile was the next platform”. She liked that Depop was mobile-first. And she liked that it was fashion. In 2016, when the company’s founding CEO left, she was asked by the board to take over. Depop was already building a huge community of young users. “They were using social in a smart way,” she says. “And the business was very organic.” So she took the job. Under Raga’s direction, Depop has surged remarkably, though most of its growth remains organic – a friend tells a friend, a friend buys from a friend. “In 2018, there was an 85% year-on-year growth in sales,” Raga says. Depop takes a 10% cut of every item sold through the app, but does not share total sales figures, though the website Techcrunch recently reported that Depop “has handled more than $500m of gross merchandise value since its launch” in 2011. The company is now active in 147 countries and, though it is headquartered in the UK, where most of its 196 full-time employees work, its popularity is rising faster in the US, where Raga has overseen the opening of two bricks-and-mortar shops and the rollout of traditional marketing campaigns. “It’s our key strategy to grow in the US,” she says. “It’s a bigger market.” She seems right to make a push now. Raga does not see Depop as a threat to the fashion industry, but she does understand that it is changing. Traditional retail is struggling, she thinks, and fast fashion is all but dead. “Consumers are realising it’s not sustainable,” she says, “and the brands know as well. There are reports that show that in five years resale will be as big as fast fashion.” The reports are taken from a recent paper, published by ThredUp, the online secondhand store, in which it was suggested the secondhand clothing market will be worth $51bn by 2023. Last month the department stores Macy’s and JC Penney announced they planned to partner with ThredUp to stock locations across the US with used women’s clothing. “It’s the way things are moving,” Raga says. Resale’s stock is rising. “The fashion industry is extremely polluting!” Depop appeals to young people because young people like to buy cool clothes. But really it appeals because it plays so acutely to a spectrum of teenage ethics and sensibilities: to save the planet from falling apart, sustainability is good and fast fashion is bad; that trends now emerge sideways from the community not top-down from creative directors; that the speciality of today’s 18-year-old is the ability to create a life online, so why not a business, too? “We’re extending the life of the garment,” Raga puts it, simply, “which resonates.” A while after I met Raga, I messaged a Depop user named Freddie (@shoeshifter; 23,000 followers) about his habit. Is Depop your job? “More of a hobby.” Do your parents understand what you do? “Pretty much not at all.” How do you feel about the future? “I feel like, as a young person, the chance of getting a job that is consistent and actually well-paid is rare… Most folk I know have multiple sources of income.” Freddie is 21. He works in a leisure centre part-time. If he were to have it his own way, he might sell clothes on Depop for a living, but he’s not sure. Could that really be his full-time gig? Sourcing clothes, selling clothes, making money? Sometimes Freddie makes £500 in a day, but those are the good days. Every now and then he’ll make no money for two weeks straight, and he’ll be at the leisure centre thinking about all the other ways he might make a decent income, what else he might do with his life. This isn’t an uncommon Depop experience – the ups and downs, the unsureness. Not everyone makes it big! Neither is anxiety about the future of the jobs market specific to Freddie. “This is a generation that is not hopeful about the future,” Raga says. They have grown up through a global financial crisis. They have seen money slip away. They have been introduced to political life as though Trump and Brexit were normal politics. When they think of the coming decades, they wonder whether traditional jobs will still exist. “They are surrounded by bad news,” she says. When Freddie talks about “multiple streams of income,” he is talking about what Raga calls “the side-hustle”. “They do not think careers are going to be step-by-step,” she says. (She puts “step-by-step” in air commas.) “They might want to be a musician, they might also have a Depop shop, and they also do something else. They are comfortable doing that,” she thinks, “because they are able to financially sustain themselves by doing those things.” Raga is describing an entire cohort subscribing to the gig economy, as though it were not just cool and hip, but necessary and exciting. This is a good thing, she argues. “Technology is allowing people to earn money in a way they weren’t able to before. Right now, all those old models are shifting. And it’s giving people opportunities in completely different ways.” I started using Depop almost three years ago. It’s not my main source of income, but I sell daily and I’d like it to be, which is why I’m trying to rebrand: better photos, better lighting, a particular style of clothing. I sell vintage clothing from the 70s, 80s, 90s and early 2000s. Rare or top-quality stuff; some designer pieces – things that reflect my own interests. I mainly source items from Poland, which is where I’m from, but I travel a lot and I’ve stocked items from Tokyo and Scotland. My customers are from all over the world, and they’re not just girls. I spend about two and a half hours on the app daily – sales mainly – and I make around £200 a week. There have been some weeks when I’ve earned £1,000 and others when I’ve sold nothing at all. There’s no seasonal pattern to it. It’s random. What’s the ambition? I’d like to own a physical store, selling clothes, accessories, things I find interesting. To be able to dedicate my time to sourcing clothes… that would be awesome. I started during my first week of university. I was 19 then and I just had so many clothes: Nike jumpers, old stuff. I thought, I have to get rid of this! So I started selling my own stuff. I didn’t think of it as a business, but everything I posted sold in a day, and I thought: ‘Where can I buy more?’ I’m a shopaholic, but now I’m buying for other people. I’ve sold 13,299 items. I read chemistry at uni, but this is my full-time job, and I can’t imagine a better-suited one. There are slow weeks, when people are on holiday, away from their phones. But there are surges during people’s downtime, like between 9pm and 11pm, when girls are going to bed, or watching TV, and just scrolling. I’ve been an entrepreneur since I was 14, and I see an opportunity in Depop to bring together my interests: dance, the LGBTQ community, social image. My main message is about gender nonconformity – I sell clothes for everyone. I’m a dancer, but my aim is to make Depop my full-time job. Social media has given our generation great freedom to not do the 9 to 5.