The Wallabies have been upset before by Samoa in a World Cup year – a stunning 32-23 loss in Sydney in 2011 before the tournament in New Zealand – and Michael Cheika’s side will rightly be wary of their opponents at Bankwest Stadium on Saturday night. The game eight years ago provided one of the biggest surprises in the history of Australian rugby and sent shock-waves around the world. But more importantly, the defeat had serious repercussions for the 2011 World Cup squad with six of the side failing to make the final cut, including inside back Matt Giteau and openside flanker Matt Hodgson, who later made it as a replacement. There are some crucial lessons the Wallabies can take from that defeat to Samoa as they prepare to face the Pacific Islanders on Saturday – in particular the need to stand up to physicality. The main difference between the 2011 Test and this weekend’s game in Parramatta is the timing of the matches. The 2011 game was scheduled at the beginning of the Wallabies’ World Cup preparation, coming just after the Queensland Reds won the Super Rugby title, while Saturday’s game will be Australia’s last hit-out before the tournament in Japan starts. The Wallabies were not at full-strength against Samoa in 2011 with then-coach Robbie Deans deciding to rest most of the Reds, including starting Test five-eighth Quade Cooper, with only five of the Queensland team participating. It was still a reasonably strong side, including four members of the 2019 World Cup squad – Adam Ashley-Cooper, Sekope Kepu, Will Genia and Kurtley Beale. A fifth member of the current squad, James O’Connor, was selected, but did not play because of a hamstring injury. Nick Phipps, who is a member of the current World Cup shadow squad, made his Test debut against Samoa in 2011 and will likely end his international career against the Pacific Islanders on Saturday night. The survivors of 2011 – Kepu, Genia, Ashley-Cooper, Phipps and O’Connor – will face the Samoans again, while Beale has been rested. Michael Cheika has followed Deans’ example and decided to rest key players this weekend, including captain Michael Hooper, rather than pick a full-strength side to avert another potential upset. It is similar to what Cheika did in 2015 when he selected a B-team to play the USA in Chicago in the Wallabies’ final hit-out before the World Cup in England. There is an argument that it is important for the Wallabies to beat Samoa and carry form and momentum into the World Cup. They will need to be at their best in their first two pool games against Fiji and Wales to ensure they secure a favourable passage through the knock-out stages of the tournament. Playing a full-strength team would also have given the players valuable experience against a Pacific Islander style of play, which would help their preparation for their opening game of the World Cup against Fiji in Sapporo on 21 September. But this Wallabies team includes six players – Tom Banks, Tatafu Polota-Nau, Luke Jones, Liam Wright, Rob Valetini and Phipps – who are not even in the Wallabies’ 31-man World Cup squad, although they are in a shadow squad covering injuries. The logic of Cheika and co-selectors Scott Johnson and Michael O’Connor is understandable – Samoa are renowned hard-hitters in defence and there is a grave risk of injury. Some Wallabies did not figure much, if at all, in the Rugby Championship and Bledisloe Cup series and are in desperate need of a run to gain match-fitness. The most obvious of these is star backrower David Pocock, who has barely played at all this year because of a calf injury he sustained at a Wallabies training camp in January. Pocock has been named captain and will play in his preferred openside flanker position, a hint maybe that the so-called “Pooper” backrow combination of Pocock and Wallabies skipper and No 7 Michael Hooper is over. But it is not just Pocock who needs to gain match-fitness. Other players selected for Saturday night such as Dane Haylett-Petty, Bernard Foley, Jack Dempsey and Jordan Uelese have not played much since the end of Super Rugby. The weekend’s result is not the main priority. It’s all about the World Cup. The loss to Samoa in 2011 rocked the Wallabies at the time, but they recovered from the setback to win the Tri Nations and reach the semi-finals of the World Cup where they lost to the All Blacks at Eden Park. The big difference is that the Rugby Championship and Bledisloe Cup series are behind the Wallabies this time. Australia’s next match after Samoa is a crucial World Cup pool game against Fiji, and is a real danger game. Cheika will not want to enter the World Cup having lost to the 16th-ranked team in the world, even if his team is not at full-strength. The Wallabies must be careful against Samoa, if only to protect Australia’s international rugby reputation. History has a nasty habit of repeating itself.