‘Best thing I have seen’: Chris135 I put off seeing Hamilton until a couple of months ago on the basis it would be over-hyped, preachy, woke and way too much money. Also the fear that if it was as good as rumoured, I would end up some annoying evangelical banging on about it constantly. It’s the best thing I have seen in my life. If you haven’t seen it: beg, steal or borrow the money and get a ticket. ‘Heartbreaking’: SueBriquet The most beautiful, heartbreaking piece of theatre I’ve ever seen. ‘Emotional and spectacular’: Nomadteacher205 My favourite dance experience of the last decade. The first half was a slightly languid affair, but the second half was outstanding, emotional and spectacular in equal measure. ‘Incredible’: Ilovelamp The Danny Boyle production of Frankenstein at the National theatre was incredible. ‘It should be there’: Iron Mike The Mother with Osipova should be there as should anything with the great Zakharova. ‘Guillem looked like she was bathed in flames’: Brightdayler Push is indeed fantastic, but I also love the solo Two, choreographed by Russell Maliphant in Two: Four: Ten. I was lucky enough to see both performed more than once. When I saw Two at the London Coliseum, during the more animated segments Sylvie Guillem looked like she was bathed in flames. It was one of the most stunning things I’ve ever seen (along with the opening of the balcony scene in the Budapest Opera House’s Romeo and Juliet). ‘Pretty damn fabulous’: Deschain The Book of Mormon was pretty damn fabulous, and deserves a place on this list. The Book of Mormon – obviously. Nemo81 What, no Book of Mormon?! YorkshireExPat ‘Very poignant’: Jen P Kinky Boots is easy to dismiss as flippant, but it’s a very poignant story dealing with a lot of deep issues, with heart and laughter, tears and great fun combined. Matt Henry as Lola was just incredible – Olivier and MBE very well deserved. I’m not in London nowadays but made the trip to see this several times. I’m very excited to catch it on tour next month, can’t wait! ‘Exhilarating’: david100 It proved to be one of the most exhilarating nights I have ever spent in the theatre. ‘Hypnotic’: cinephiliac Michael Clark’s work was absolutely stunning. Its combination of precision and energy was a joy; I found it a wonderfully dynamic and hypnotic work. ‘Our teachers whooped’: Cardellina We saw Avenue Q on a school trip and our English teachers whooped and clapped embarrassingly loudly after What Do You Do With a BA in English? ‘Not sure I’d seen anything like it before’: RobRoy1975 The Lehman Trilogy was an impressive bit of theatre – not sure I’d seen anything like it before. After The Encounter it was the best piece of pure storytelling I have seen this millennium. KentishTownie ‘Has a piece of contemporary dance ever had a bigger audience?’: NDL1234 Slightly surprised that there is no mention of Akram Khan’s Abide With Me at the London 2012 opening ceremony. Has a piece of contemporary dance ever had a bigger audience? Many of whom commented on just how moved they were by something they had not been exposed to before. ‘Very special’: MGMacall A small but perfect piece of theatre by The Wooster Group, featuring Eric Berryman. This piece had a quiet stillness, spare set and the magnificent voices of Eric Berryman, Jasper McGruder and Philip Moore all coming together perfectly to bring to life the pain and pathos of work songs, spirituals, and toasts recorded in 1964 in Texas’s then-segregated prison farms. It’s a piece of theatre that exemplifies the very special and unique value of live performance. ‘Hilarious and poignant’: freewheelingfrankie I loved Graeae Theatre Company’s by turns hilarious and poignant Reasons to Be Cheerful, which did superb justice to most of Ian Dury’s best songs and wove them into a rite-of-passage story that was much more than a contrived excuse for playing them. ‘Blew me away’: dude1981 The Flick deserves its spot. Blew me away. Felt like I was seeing someone of my generation writing a play for someone like me. ‘Hilarious and scary’: Bacteria The Pillowman by Martin McDonagh was the most enjoyable new play I saw this century. Hilarious, scary, constantly surprising and finally intensely moving. It screams out for a major revival. ‘Thrilling, gorgeous and joyous’: richardthomson Shobana Jeyasingh’s Counterpoint, performed in 2010 as a Cultural Olympics test event, filled the whole of the fountains area of Somerset House. Big-scale, fast, expansive, lovely patterns, lots of performances so easy to go and see; and above all, thrilling, gorgeous and joyous. There was a lot of good outdoor and site-specific dance all over London in 2010 and 2012. It feels like a different world now, never mind a different country. It will never happen again. ‘So good I saw it twice’: Thespionic Girl from the North Country is definitely one of the best I’ve seen and certainly the best vocals/songs. So good I saw it twice! Girl from the North Country: obviously phenomenal songs but the staging, the singing and the whole shebang were incredible. AngryBairsteward2 ‘One of the best performances I’ve seen’: RubyGeegee It was one of the best performances I’ve seen anywhere, especially as the special audience Q&A afterwards, which we thought we may as well stay for, turned out to be between the playwright, the director, Jo Berry (whose father was killed by the Brighton bomb), and Patrick Magee, the Brighton bomber. The atmosphere in the tiny theatre was electrifying – you could have heard a feather drop. ‘Electrifying’: Ronan McDermott No place for Ed Balls and Katya Jones’ electrifying Strictly salsa to the music of Gangnam Style? For shame. 