That dimwit Shakespeare got it wrong, of course. Love totally alters when it alteration finds. Unless he was writing about robots, which would have been quite a feat in the 1600s and raised more questions than it answered. In the new BBC series State of the Union (BBC Two, Sundays), Tom (Chris O’Dowd) and Louise (Rosamund Pike), not robots, are aiming to find out just how much has altered between them by going to marital therapy together after 15 years of marriage and in the wake of the latter’s desultory affair. In fleeting episodes, each just 10 minutes long, we watch them meet up before every session in the same pub, with the same drinks – dry white wine for her, pint of London Pride for him – and … talk. About everything, nothing and all points in between. It is written by Nick Hornby and directed by Stephen Frears, and together with their actors – O’Dowd even better than we usually see him, Pike revelatory – they have created something close to a masterpiece (or 10). It seems like a double-marriage of true minds. The quartet make it look effortless, even artless, but every aspect, every frame, every word, every beat is a perfectly considered, crafted and curated thing that creates something even greater than the sum of its parts. There is not a false note or unearned moment in the series’ 100-minute span as we come to know the charming but emotionally resistant Tom, struggling to deal with the forcible maturing his wife’s affair has thrust upon him, and Louise, no less upset or inwardly panicked by their current situation, despite being more open to facing it and finding solutions. The couple are tender and rebarbative by turns. Voices occasionally reach a higher pitch but are never raised. They find conversational common ground then spin away from each other again, pick at scabs but fall gratefully on distraction – often provided by covert watching through the pub window of the couple before them as they leave the therapist’s house across the street. “They’ve just been given a right good counselling,” says Tom mordantly as the grim-faced pair walk away. For the viewer, there are moments of brutal truth embedded in the filigree script. Everyone’s fantasy after a few years of marriage when “things have gone off a bit”, says Louise, “is that you come home, your partner says he’s met someone else and is moving out.” Moments of laughter, too. She mentions Tom poking fun at her bedtime reading. “I’m just encouraging you to branch out,” he replies. “I mean, how many Scandinavian women are there left to kill?” And the unspoken granting and withdrawal of Tom’s right to wear a fake plaster cast in episode four, after he accidentally told the therapist he had broken his wrist, is the perfect emblem of the constant undercurrents of trade-offs, rewards and punishments that make up an ever-larger proportion of any shared life. It is as honest and multi-faceted an examination and appreciation of marriage as you could hope to find (as well as an astonishingly cliche-free one); a wonderful dramatisation of the pros and cons of familiarity, the difference between reconcilable and irreconcilable differences, the comfort and weariness stability brings. It is a strangely endearing portrait, too. The balance of our sympathies may shift back and forth between the two characters, within each episode and over the course of the series, but they never leave them. The short episodes ensure not only that we pay full attention to a script approximately three times as dense as any other recent comedy-drama I can think of, but that the couple can go over and over the same ground, albeit in new ways, looping back to crisis points such as the affair, or attacking earlier interpretations of a moment, without ever boring us. Instead, as their conversations dip in and out of mundanity and profundity, like conversations between intimates do, and as they pursue extended metaphors in the hope of distilling and protecting themselves from the truth of what they are saying, anyone who is or has ever been in a long-term relationship will see themselves and wonder at the strength and fragility of these edifices we manage to build round ourselves. One word of advice, a spot of televisual counselling, if you will: even though it’s available in full on iPlayer, don’t binge the whole thing. The temptation will be terrible – just 10 more minutes! Ten more minutes! It’s so good! Ten more! – but resist. These are unusually rich dishes and you will enjoy them more if you savour them, let yourself digest them a little before moving on to the next.