The WeWork co-founder Adam Neumann stepped down as chief executive of the troubled office rental company on Tuesday after shelving plans for a stock market listing. The Wall Street Journal first reported that Neumann was preparing to step down. In a statement Neumann said he was “proud of this team and the incredible company that we have built over the last decade”. “While our business has never been stronger, in recent weeks, the scrutiny directed toward me has become a significant distraction, and I have decided that it is in the best interest of the company to step down as chief executive,” he said. Neumann says he will continue on as non-executive chairman. The company, now known as We, is one of the world’s most valuable startups and Neumann’s demotion marks a dramatic fall from grace for one of the most high-profile executives of the new generation of tech companies. We scrapped plans for an initial public offering last month after investors balked at the company’s sky-high valuation. We had been valued at $47bn, despite losing $3bn in the last three years. That price was cut by more than half ahead of the proposed share sale but even that price seemed too high to many investors. Investors were also concerned that Neumann had taken $700m out of the company ahead of the share sale and would keep tight control even after it. Meetings between the board and We’s largest investor, Japan’s SoftBank, began on Monday to discuss the possibility of Neumann being demoted. Those meetings came after the Journal reported a private jet chartered by Neumann had to be grounded after a large amount of marijuana was found onboard. The report also detailed tequila-fuelled company parties and bizarre statements by Neumann about his plans to become immortal and to use We to “solve the problem of children without parents”. According to the tech news source the Information, WeWork executives and the company’s bankers have been discussing laying off a third of We’s workforce, about 5,000 people, among various plans to cut costs at the heavily loss-making company. WeWork has shaken up the sleepy world of office rentals by leasing space, giving them a millennial make-over with potted plants, communal areas and beer taps and then leasing them to startups and other would-be entrepreneurs. WeWork reported that it had 527,000 members and 528 locations at the end of June and said it plans to open 169 new locations. In London, it owns or leases more spaces than any enterprise except the government. Larger companies (including the Guardian) also rent WeWork space. But while the company has grown fast, so have its losses and even We has conceded that it may never make a profit. We’s revenues in 2018 were $1.82bn, more than four times larger than they were in 2016. At the same time the company lost $2.9bn in the last three years. The company’s share sale prospectus warned: “We have a history of losses and, especially if we continue to grow at an accelerated rate, we may be unable to achieve profitability at a company level … for the foreseeable future.” We has burned through more than $2bn in 2018 and on current projections could run out of cash sometime next year if its fortunes do not turn or it fails to raise more money. Softbank has invested more than $9bn in the company and has reportedly soured on Neumann’s leadership in recent months. His departure would be the most high-profile ousting of a tech entrepreneur since Uber sidelined its co-founder Travis Kalanick in 2017 after a series of scandals at the ride-sharing company. Uber, which is also heavily loss-making, managed to press ahead with its IPO but its share sale has stumbled, and shares are down over 20% since their debut.