People are super nice here, like 'small village nice' Edmonton boasts an arts scene that won’t quit and a banging array of places to eat and drink, plus opportunities to commune with nature, shop indie boutiques or visit the largest mall on the continent. It’s a welcoming city on the prairies of roughly a million people – a home for artists, tradespeople, academics, government workers, and people from around the world. Edmonton is the place you didn’t know you belonged! City views from the riverside Ask any Edmontonian and they will happily brag about the river valley. Bordering the North Saskatchewan River, it’s the largest expanse of urban parkland in Canada, with 20 parks and [almost] 100 miles of maintained trails. Take a walk along the paths, then hop into a voyageur canoe for a guided tour from Haskin Canoe. The multi-paddler canoes are very stable and great for beginners. The tours run in the evening, but our long summer days mean you’ll have loads of time before the sun goes down to take in gorgeous panoramic city views and maybe spot some wildlife along the riverbank. Edmonton is the perfect mix of outdoors and urban Another way to enjoy the mix of the urban and provincial in Edmonton is at one of the farmers’ markets. Many of them are outdoor, and therefore seasonal, but a select few operate year-round indoors. The Downtown Farmers’ Market is an indoor-outdoor hybrid. During the winter months, the market takes over one of downtown’s historic buildings, and in the warmer months it takes to the streets. Doughnuts at the Downtown Farmers’ Market During the summer months, the outdoor markets shift around the city, and you’ll find local gems around Edmonton’s inner neighbourhoods on both Saturdays and Sundays from June through to Canadian Thanksgiving in mid-October, when vendors up stalls and shift indoors. (Insider tip: don’t miss Moonshine Doughnuts at Old Strathcona Farmers’ Market – vegan and delicious!) The best thing about Edmonton is that it’s a lively, vibrant festival city, year-round! Edmonton is nicknamed Festival City for a reason – you won’t get too far without happening upon a celebration. If a person likes something, Edmonton has a festival for it … from ice to cats! One of the most popular is the Edmonton international fringe theatre festival, held in venues centred in the Old Strathcona neighbourhood. Every year at the end of August, performers from around the world contribute their work. Attendees can see a show at almost any time of the day or night, then hang out in the beer garden, trading critiques on the performances that range from the ridiculous to the sublime. Pip (top); ice-cream from Yelo’d; Transcend Coffee Trendy Whyte Avenue is the backbone of the Old Strathcona neighbourhood. Take time to poke through the shops, restaurants, and bars that line the avenue and surrounding blocks. Don’t miss brunch at Pip, or satisfy your sweet tooth at La Boule or Sugared & Spiced. A soft serve ice-cream from Yelo’d is the perfect accompaniment to a sunny day. Venture a bit to the southeast to check out the new Ritchie Market – notably for Transcend Coffee or something stronger from Blind Enthusiasm brewery. Their craft beers pair well with the bites from adjacent Biera. Blind Enthusiasm brewery (top); vegan pizza at Die Pie We don't only have award-winning chefs and restaurants; we also have the best mom-and-pop, hidden gem, hole in the walls Just like Fringe, Rust Magic is an annual festival that features the work of local and international artists. But Instead of treading the boards, these artists are spray-painting them. Each year since 2016, 15 new murals have been created and bequeathed to the city. Plans are in the works for guided tours of the street art during the festival, and maps are readily available at local businesses for self-guided exploration. Periodically throughout the year, Hoang herself runs Photo Walks featuring Instagrammable Walls of Edmonton, which are a great way to see some city colour and get some superb pics to take home too. Before Alberta developed its oil and gas industry, it was straight-up farming and ranch country. Calling back to the area’s agricultural heritage, high-calibre restaurants are cropping up all over town, with chefs focusing on innovative ways to use locally grown and sourced ingredients. A great way to sample a variety of these restaurants is with a culinary tour from Eat or Alberta Food Tours; you can also pedal between nibbles and drinks with Food Bike Tours or the big bikes from Urban Pedal. Bundok (top); Sea Change brewery You won’t go hungry in any area of the city, but a high concentration of foodie favourites are found downtown and in the Ice District. Try the vegan pizzas at Die Pie, Italian to die for at Uccellino, wood-fired creations at Woodwork, or share some plates at Bundok or Baijiu. West of downtown has experienced a hip revival in recent years. In addition to arty new shops, there are tons of places to eat. Start at Wilfred’s in the Brewery District, then swing by the Oliver Exchange Building, full of great places to grab a bite or a drink. Come hungry to enjoy Canadian cuisine at RGE RD on 123rd Street NW. A short walk to the north-east brings you to the fresh and French Café Linnea. If you still have room after that, locals swear by the treats at Duchess Bake Shop and the vegan cookies at Bloom Cookie Co. Strathcona Spirits (top); Bar Clementine Cheers! Before heading off, make sure to toast your time in the city. There are ample opportunities to enjoy a pint or two. To curate the experience, try a brewery tour from Alberta Craft Tours or Urban Pedal. If you are going it on your own, make sure Sea Change, Strathcona Spirits, Town Square, and the newly opened Polar Park are on your list. Make time for an inventive cocktail at the cosy Bar Clementine or chic Partake. For something a little different, try to score tickets on Eventbrite for one of the seasonal Street Car Cask events hosted by the Common. There’s beer and snacks and lots of fun, as the reconditioned streetcar travels across the top of the High Level Bridge connecting downtown and Old Strathcona. Fly London to Edmonton with WestJet to enjoy this growing city. Direct summer seasonal flights, or a short hop from neighbouring Calgary with year round flights. (Schedule subject to change).