Derby County have confirmed their captain, Richard Keogh, is out until the end of the season because of a serious knee injury sustained in what the club described as an “alcohol-related incident”. The injury is believed to have been suffered in a car accident that led to two other Derby players, Tom Lawrence and Mason Bennett, being charged with drink-driving. The club said “a small group” including Keogh had “continued drinking into the night” after a team dinner. Derby’s manager, Phillip Cocu, described Keogh as “extremely down” and said the 33-year-old “feels responsible” for the incident. “Most of the players left around 8pm and a small group stayed and continued at the bar,” Cocu said. “Due to an alcohol-related incident we’ve lost our captain for the rest of the season, so in the end it was bad news for the whole team.” Cocu, asked whether Keogh’s injury could be career-threatening, reiterated it was “a very serious injury”. The former Netherlands international, who was not at the meal, said he had briefly spoken to Keogh at the training ground on Thursday. “I think he feels responsible, yeah. The more senior players always have to step up and take responsibility and it’s now had a huge effect on him.” Cocu explained the team dinner took place “for some bonding” after a plan to play foot golf was abandoned in favour of bowling because of the weather. Bennett and Lawrence were arrested and charged with drink-driving, police said, after a collision on the A6 at Allestree, Derby, shortly before midnight on Tuesday involving a Range Rover and Mercedes. They are due to appear at Southern Derbyshire magistrates court on 15 October. Derby issued a strong statement condemning what happened. “A small group, including the team captain Richard Keogh, continued drinking into the night,” it said. “They should have known when to stop and also ignored the opportunity to be driven home using cars laid on by the club, and chose to stay out. “The players involved will be subject to a rigorous internal investigation under the club’s code of conduct and disciplinary procedures … Those involved know they will pay a heavy price for their actions, but also that we will support them with their rehabilitation back into the squad and team.” Derby, who reached last season’s play-off final, sit 18th in the Championship with one win from eight fixtures. Keogh has made more than 350 appearances for the club since joining from Coventry in 2012 and has 26 Republic of Ireland caps. He will almost certainly miss Euro 2020 should Mick McCarthy’s side qualify.