Canyon Roadlite:ONPrice £2,499, canyon.comFrame aluminiumMotor Fazua Evation 1.0Top speed 25kmRange 50-60kmWeight 15.5 kgGuarantee 6 years Adding a stealthy electric motor to a bicycle is one thing, but then calling it a “fitness” bike sounds like pushing your credibility to the limit. But that’s exactly what Canyon has done with its latest ride. The online brand behind some of the sleekest, fleetest bikes on the market (it was the ride of choice for the Movistar team at this year’s Tour de France) has added a powerful engine to its bestselling Roadlite hybrid and renamed it the Roadlite:ON. Electric assistance comes from a smart Fazua Evation drive system, the battery is neatly concealed in the frame’s downtube and the zippy motor is hidden in the bottom bracket. The battery is very easy to remove so, in theory, you can ride the ebike without any power assistance if you want to. But why would do that? It would be like buying Magimix then chopping your veg by hand, with a blunt knife. Before serious riders choke on their energy bars, consider this: the lazy ebiker purring passed you could actually be taking more exercise than you. A recent study published in Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives followed 10,000 adults in seven European countries. Researchers determined their average energy expenditure on different forms of transportation, including electric bicycles, pedal bicycles, walking, running, etc. And guess what? Ebikers edged out pedal bikers in terms of total exercise taken – thanks mostly to the overall greater distances covered on their commute. They also found ebikers tended to be older, with an average age of 48 compared to 41 for standard cyclists, and on the whole were people who were “traditionally less physically active”. So this new motorised Canyon could be just the bike for them – and you. The frame is aluminium with carbon forks. It weighs in at 15.5kg. The gearing is a 1x Shimano mountain bike drivetrain (this means it only has one chainring at the front, rather than two, which makes it less prone to niggles and snags). It has neat internal cabling and disc brakes. It is a bike designed to make riding simple and maintenance easy. In keeping with this low-hassle approach, Canyon has gone for flat handlebars rather than the curved bars you usually get on road bikes. There’s a lot of snobbery attached to flat bars. They mark you out as “non-serious”. That’s ridiculous as they are so much easier to use. The more upright seating position also improves comfort and visibility. If you don’t believe me, take a look at the cycling commuters passing you every day and see if you can spot any of them using their dropped handlebars. The Roadlite:ON is responsive and lively. It takes the grind out of commuting and – even if you are getting a bit of help from its electric motor – it raises your pulse. There’s a touchpad on which you can flick between the bike’s three power assistance modes: Breeze, River and Rocket. The problem for anyone starting on a fitness campaign is that Rocket, the top setting, makes life a little too easy. Say goodbye to the misery of a puncture with a set of super-tough bike tyre liners. Armour tyre, £29.99 each, tannus.co.uk Email Martin at martin.love@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@MartinLove166