The Wallabies should know precisely what to expect from Wales after watching the Six Nations champions’ 43-14 win against Georgia on Monday night, but whether they possess the armoury to negate the Welsh aerial assault remains to be seen. Wales used their opening game in Toyota as a dress rehearsal for the Wallabies, and their kicking tactics were tailored specifically for Australia in what is effectively the Pool D decider in Tokyo on Sunday night. Wales employed the incessant box kicking of halfback Gareth Davies and the high balls of five-eighth Dan Biggar to put the Georgians under pressure and they will try to do the same to the Wallabies, who are more susceptible to the ball in the air in the absence of the high-flying Israel Folau. The likely targets of the Welsh bombardment are fullback Kurtley Beale and winger Marika Koroibete. Beale is susceptible to the high ball, while Wales winger George North has a 14cm height advantage over Koroibete. The Australian pair must be safe under the high ball if they are to turn defence into attack on the counter and cause Wales’ approach to backfire. Wales’ tactical kicking worked well in the first half against Georgia and they led 29-0 at the break, but they veered away from that game plan in the second and did not perform as effectively. Significantly, they had just 45% of possession in the first period. They made 418 kick metres to Georgia’s 257, deliberately giving the ball back to them, but by the end of the game Wales dominated possession 53% to 47% and had less kick metres (397 to 321) than Georgia in the second half. The scoreline in the second half was 14-all, indicating Wales played better without the ball, which is how they are expected to play against the Wallabies. Theoretically, this could suit the Wallabies, who like to keep the ball in hand, but they will need to direct their attack through the right channels to breach the Wales defence. If the Wallabies go wide too early as they did against Fiji, they risk outside-backs such as midfielder Jonathan Davies capitalising on any handling errors. Cheika needs to go back to using powerful inside-centre Samu Kerevi and his big ball-running forwards to get across the advantage-line and then unleash a flat-line attack before his side think about shifting the ball wide unless they are attacking off turnover ball. The Wallabies forwards must muscle up, but resist being lured into a tight, narrow contest. Wales snapped a 13-Test losing streak against Australia, dating back to 2009, when they eked out a try-less 9-6 victory in Cardiff last November. It is not the sort of slugfest the Wallabies want to get bogged down in again. The Australians have the capacity to use the width of the field and should do so; they just need to pick the right moments to play direct and expansively. Wales showed their hand as to how they will play the Wallabies, but at the same time they also exposed weaknesses in their game that can be exploited. Normally, a Wallaby forward pack would not be encouraged to take on a northern hemisphere team at scrum-time, but the Australian eight may fancy their chances in the set-piece. The Wallabies will have noted that Georgia won four scrum penalties to two against Wales. The eastern Europeans are renowned scrummagers, but Australia might also get some results, particularly at the back end of the game when the reserve front-rows are on the field. Wales scored two spectacular tries in the first half against Georgia from possession that originated at the lineout. On both occasions Biggar turned the ball inside to slice open the Georgian defence. Once Georgia shut down inside balls from the lineout, Wales seemed to run out of attacking ideas. Warren Gatland’s side may have a reputation for being conservative, but the Wallabies do not want to kick to their back three of North, Josh Adams and Liam Williams for risk of inviting some All Black-like counters. But perhaps the player the Wallabies have to watch the most on Sunday will be Gareth Davies, whose running and passing are the sparks that fire up Wales’ engine. If they can dominate the set-piece, they can take Davies out of the game to a certain degree. As Wales ponder where to direct their attack, Gatland may remember his Wales-heavy British and Irish Lions overpowering the Wallabies 41-16 in the third Test in Sydney in 2013. The Australian backline that night included Will Genia, James O’Connor, Christian Lealiifano, Adam Ashley-Cooper and Beale. The question is, does Cheika play the “Pooper” backrow combination of David Pocock and Michael Hooper again or go for a bigger pack to defuse the Welsh power game? If the Wallabies are sufficiently fit, there is an opportunity for them to dominate the game in the last 20 to 30 minutes. The Welsh bench players had little impact when they came on against Georgia – a stark contrast to the contribution to the Wallabies’ “finishers” in their comeback against Fiji. There has been speculation about reserves such as Genia starting against Wales, but the team may be better off if the 23-man squad is kept as it is to ensure a strong finish in what should be typically a close contest.