The family that owns the ailing Wrightbus firm has faced death threats since it collapsed, a former company director said. More than 1,000 people lost their jobs when the Ballymena-based engineering coachbuilder and pioneer of the low-floor bus went into administration earlier this week. The failure of Wrightbus, which made the latest iteration of London’s iconic red buses, represents the UK’s second significant insolvency of the week, following the demise of the holiday group Thomas Cook. The company had been scrambling to find a buyer and an expected sale evaporated at the end of last week when the Chinese engineering group Weichai and a firm led by the JCB heir, Jo Bamford, pulled out of talks. Jeff Wright, the former director, called for an end to the intimidation. He said: “There have been sinister developments involving threats to the life of Wright family members and I am asking all elected representatives and those with influence in the community to help end this intimidation and fear.” Wright, who is the son of Wrightbus founder Sir William Wright, added: “The closure of our family business has been devastating to our loyal and highly skilled workforce and the loss of the company my father and I have grown and nurtured for more than 70 years has been shattering for our family.”“Generations of families have worked alongside our own family over all these years and so this is deeply and personally felt by everyone. “We are here to provide our administrators, Deloitte, with all information, order books, financial records and whatever is needed to establish a future plan for the bus manufacturing operation … Our commitment to supporting all efforts is unwavering.” Boris Johnson ordered the distinctive red Routemaster London buses from Wrightbus during his time as mayor. Trade unionists have accused him of not doing enough to save the ailing firm, which suffered major cashflow problems and faced declining demand. The firm’s collapse came after Johnson told parliament his government would do everything it could to help Wrightbus. However, a government source strenuously denied any such assurances had been given. A source close to the company’s board also denied government support had been offered. Ballymena has lost several major employers in recent years including the closure of sites operated by tyremaker Michelin and tobacco firm Gallaher. A spokesperson for the Police Service of Northern Ireland said: “We do not discuss the security of individuals and no inference should be drawn from this. However, if we receive information that a person’s life may be at risk we will inform them accordingly. We never ignore anything which may put an individual at risk.”