Serena Williams eased through a potentially tricky US Open fourth-round meeting with Petra Martic with a 6-3, 6-4 win to remain on course for a record-tying 24th major championship on Sunday afternoon, two years to the day she gave birth to her daughter. The eighth-seeded American won nearly 80% of her first-serve points, hit twice as many winners (38) as unforced errors (19), faced only three break points and overcame an second-set injury scare over 92 minutes of baseline war with the big-serving Croat, advancing to the quarter-finals at Flushing Meadows for the 16th time in her career and 11th straight in as many appearances. A nervy start on both ends saw Williams then Martić broken in their opening service games before trading holds deep into the set. Then in the eighth game Williams hit a couple of screaming forehand crosscourt winners on Martić’s serve followed by a punishing backhand winner from the baseline to break the No 22 seed, consolidating it with a hold from love-30 and 15-40 down to take the opening set – the last break points she’d face on the day. With Martić serving at 2-3, 15-30 in the second, Williams rolled her ankle on a net approach and took a nasty spill to the cement, making an advance call for the trainer after gingerly making it to her feet. She managed to win the next two points, sealing the first break of the set with a clean volley winner that wrong-footed Martić, before receiving treatment during a three-minute medical timeout. But unlike her shock Australian Open loss to Karolína Plíšková when her game went to pieces after an ankle injury holding match point at 5-1, 40-30 lead in the deciding set, Williams landed the plane on Sunday in drama-free fashion. Serving at 3-4, Martić fought off four break points but Williams converted the fifth with a deft forehand volley winner at the net for a double-break advantage. Seven minutes later, the American painted the center service line with a 118mph ace on match point – her fastest of the afternoon – and raised both arms skyward in triumph amid roars from the Arthur Ashe Stadium crowd. “I just rolled it, I don’t know why,” Williams said afterward. “I was volleying and it just went over. It was a little frustrating but I wanted to get it compressed really fast and that’s what I did. It affected me a little mentally because I’ve had a rough year with injuries. I was like ‘oh my god, not again.’” The six-time US Open champion advances to a quarter-final clash on Tuesday with China’s Qiang Wang, who shocked second-seeded Ashleigh Barty in straight sets earlier on Sunday.