While Simon Henderson may argue correctly that abolishing independent schools would not directly improve the life chances of those left behind, it would take away the automatic life-privileging of those wealthy enough to attend them, thus creating a more level playing field (Eton College head says Labour plans for abolition make no financial sense, 24 September). Teachers’ jobs would not be lost as they would move from one paymaster to another when transferring to the state system, nor would this put an extra burden on the state if the taxation system was made more progressive so that school fees were, in effect, paid then into state school funding. Research has shown that simply attending a private school enhances prospects for entry to top universities and jobs, regardless of innate ability. It is known that state school university entrants with similar A-level grades to private school entrants tend to perform better, perhaps because the privately schooled have to some extent “peaked out” during their privileged school years. And while abolishing private schools would not directly improve social mobility, it would certainly help free it from some extraneous ossification; inequality is one of the main barriers to mobility. And if it is OK to transfer state school assets to academy trusts, then surely it is OK to transfer private school assets into state schools?Michael MillerSheffield • Whatever “excellence” is taught at Eton it clearly doesn’t run to a knowledge of education history. Like other ancient “public” schools, Eton’s original brief was to take in the poor and needy. It was only much later when the aristocracy started to see the advantage of a grounding in the classics and muscular Christianity, and a useful old-school network for the professions, that these institutions effectively became private – and still scandalously today receive a tax break for being “charitable institutions”. Eton’s headmaster trots out that old get-out about taking x amount of pupils out of the state system and saving the taxpayer x amount of money. I imagine that doctors and clinicians used the same kind of sophistry in 1948, and I imagine that Nye Bevan laughed. No one questions the usefulness of the NHS today, and if Labour manages to get its policy through I predict that in years to come no one will question the usefulness and fairness of our education system.David RedshawGravesend, Kent • Simon Henderson says that plans for abolition of private education do not make financial sense. The plans are intended to make social sense and promote equality of opportunity, the finance can be sorted later. Apparently, 90 pupils pay no fees at all at Eton. Effectively, this means that 90 young people are at risk of being infected by the sense of privilege and superiority enjoyed by the majority of their fellows. Mr Henderson talks about abolishing “some of the best schools in the world”. I object to his use of the word “best” – for most, the “best” schools will achieve high academic standards but also promote social justice and equality of opportunity. If we want a fairer society, then Labour’s proposals are sound. The opponents are fighting a rearguard action because they do not have convincing arguments to support their case.Joseph CockerLeominster, Herefordshire • How dare the headmaster of Eton talk about “abolishing excellence” when three former pupils have just brought this country to near civil war. Clearly they don’t teach morals or principles at Eton.Janet WhitakerStroud, Gloucestershire • If anything good comes from all the current political chaos, it is that the Eton brand has been comprehensively trashed.Michael GrangeSt Davids, Pembrokeshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition