England players and staff have been told not to use their mobile phones on World Cup matchdays amid the Wales betting scandal that has rocked the tournament in Japan. With the World Cup still reeling from the bombshell that Rob Howley has flown home it has emerged that England were briefed by World Rugby’s integrity unit days after Wales were made aware that their attack coach was suspected of breaching betting and anti-corruption regulations. The 31 players and all of England’s coaches and backroom staff were given a 20-minute presentation, which highlighted the plight of Phil Blake, the former Leicester defence coach who was given a six-month ban in 2014 for breaching the RFU’s betting rules. They were also advised to stay off their phones from an hour before kick-off at stadiums on matchdays due to fears they could be targeted for information. It is understood that there were six reported incidents of players or staff being suspiciously approached at the 2015 World Cup. Cricket adopts a similar policy – for any international match the players are required to hand their phones in before play starts and do not get them back until it ends due to the threat posed by spot-fixing. As well as this week’s presentation from World Rugby in Miyazaki this week, England were also briefed before departing for Japan and their assistant coach Neal Hatley expressed his surprise that Howley was under investigation, insisting the regulations could not be clearer. “All the stipulations were set out very, very clearly, I know it gets done at the clubs and the RPA [Rugby Players’ Association] are actively involved in it so there is real clarity around it,” he said. “I was a little bit surprised but it’s all very clear, it’s made clear before we arrived and it was made clear two days ago. It’s a real [warning] for everyone at the tournament. A real live reminder.” Meanwhile, Hatley revealed Mako Vunipola is ahead of schedule in his recovery from his hamstring injury after taking part in live scrummaging in England’s final training session in Miyazaki. Vunipola is set to miss England’s first two matches, against Tonga on Sunday and the USA four days later, but while Hatley insisted there is no need to rush him back he did not rule out the possibility of appearing earlier than expected. “We didn’t think he’d be doing live scrumagging today so it’s testament to the hard work that the medical staff have done, and how hard Mako has worked that he’s back in a position to do live scrums early,” added Hatley. “With a short turnaround we’ll see where we get to him with him. We’ve obviously got Joe [Marler] and Ellis [Genge], two fantastic looseheads so we’re not going to push Mak but it’s brilliant where he is.”