Patrick Mahomes and the Chiefs won a showdown between two of the NFL’s top offenses. The Ravens made them work for it until the very end. Mahomes threw for 374 yards and three touchdowns in another dazzling performance, Kansas City held quarterback Lamar Jackson in check most of the rain-soaked afternoon, and the Chiefs held on for a 33-28 victory over Baltimore on Sunday. LeSean McCoy and Darrel Williams combined for 116 yards rushing and a score in place of the injured Damien Williams, while the Chiefs (3-0) stopped the Ravens three times on two-point attempts. The last came after Jackson scrambled for a touchdown with 2:01 to go. The conversion would have gotten the Ravens (2-1) within a field goal, but Jackson was shoved out of bounds short of the pylon. Baltimore tried to get the ball back with a rare dropkick, but the Chiefs calmly called for a fair catch. Then they converted on third down moments later to run out the clock. Mark Ingram was the Ravens’ biggest bright spot, running for 103 yards and a trio of touchdowns while catching four passes for 32 yards. Jackson finished with 267 yards passing and 46 rushing, most of that when he was trying to rally the Ravens from a big halftime hole. In the day’s later kick-offs, Daniel Jones enjoyed a remarkable debut for the New York Giants, scoring a rushing touchdowns in the closing stages of his team’s 32-31 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who missed a field goal on the final play of the game. Elsewhere, the Carolina Panthers beat the Arizona Cardinals; the San Francisco 49ers won a back-and-forth game with the Pittsburgh Steelers, 24-20; Teddy Bridgewater, replacing the injured Drew Brees, led the New Orleans Saints to victory over the Seattle Seahawks; and the Houston Texans edged out the Los Angeles Chargers 27-20. Tom Brady threw a pair of touchdown passes and the Patriots didn’t allow an offensive touchdown for the third straight week as New England dominated in a 30-14 win over the New York Jets. Sony Michel and Rex Burkhead each added a rushing touchdown for the Patriots, who won their seventh straight over the Jets and earned their ninth consecutive regular-season win at home over their AFC East rival. The Jets were without starting quarterback Sam Darnold, still recovering from mononucleosis. They seemed lost at times on defense and struggled to move the ball offensively going 0 for 12 on third down against the Patriots’ top-ranked defense in quarterback Luke Falk’s first NFL start. Dak Prescott threw two touchdown passes to Amari Cooper before running for another score, and the Dallas Cowboys pulled out of a first-half funk as huge favorites in a 31-6 victory over the Miami Dolphins. One of Prescott’s TD tosses to Cooper came before half-time, but the Dolphins had a great chance to lead at the break as 22-point underdogs when Kenyan Drake fumbled on first down from the Dallas seven-yard line in the final minute of the second quarter. DeMarcus Lawrence recovered to preserve a 10-6 lead. Aaron Rodgers threw for 235 yards and a touchdown, Aaron Jones tied a career high by running for two scores, and the Green Bay Packers beat the Denver Broncos. Preston Smith matched a career high with three sacks as Green Bay got to Joe Flacco six times and forced three turnovers to lead the Packers (3-0) to the win despite being dominated in time of possession 35:34-24:26. Rodgers found Marquez Valdes-Scantling on a 40-yard strike on the opening drive and finished 17 of 29. Jones’ touchdown runs both came from one-yard out. Flacco was 20 of 29 for 213 yards with an interception and no touchdowns. For the third straight game, Von Miller, Bradley Chubb and Denver’s defense failed to record a sack or force a turnover. The Broncos (0-3) fell to 0-6-1 all-time on the road against the Packers. Take it to the house! #OnePride@jamalagnew with the 100-yard kickoff return for the TD. pic.twitter.com/mg8TP5m5z0 Matthew Stafford threw a touchdown pass to Marvin Jones, Jamal Agnew returned a kickoff 100 yards for a score and the Detroit Lions held on for a 27-24 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles. The Eagles had a chance after Malcolm Jenkins blocked Matt Prater’s 46-yard field goal try with 1:53 left. Rasul Douglas returned it to the Lions 22, but an illegal block on Jenkins pushed it back to midfield. On fourth-and-five, Darren Sproles caught a pass for a first down but got called for Philadelphia’s third offensive pass interference. Wentz’s deep pass to JJ Arcega-Whiteside fell incomplete with 41 seconds left. The Lions (2-0-1) remain undefeated and the Eagles (1-2) have lost two in a row. Jacoby Brissett threw two touchdown passes in the first half, and Marlon Mack scored on a four-yard run in the fourth quarter to lead the Indianapolis Colts past Atlanta. Indianapolis have won two straight overall and seven in a row at home. The Falcons rallied from a 20-3 halftime deficit to get within three on Matt Ryan’s 10-yard touchdown pass to Julio Jones with 4:11 to play. But the Falcons opted to kick deep and never got the ball back. NFL rushing leader Dalvin Cook cruised past the 100-yard mark for the third straight game, Kirk Cousins rebounded from his rattled performance the week before with a turnover-free afternoon. The defense had plenty to do with the victory, too. An interception by Harrison Smith of an overthrow by Oakland’s David Carr set up the second of two touchdowns by Adam Thielen to give the Vikings a 21-0 lead early in the second quarter. Frank Gore scored on a 1-yard run with 1:50 remaining in rallying the Buffalo Bills to a home-opening victory over the winless Cincinnati Bengals. Tight end Dawson Knox set up the score by bowling over two Bengals for a 49-yard gain. And cornerback Tre’Davious White sealed the win by intercepting Andy Dalton’s tipped pass on third-and-5 from Buffalo’s 28 with 12 seconds remaining. Buffalo improved to 3-0 for the first time since 2011 and only third time in 26 years. The Bengals fell to 0-3.