The Canadian man who spent five years held hostage in Afghanistan with his American wife has accused her of “incompetence” as a mother as his trial for sexual assault nears its conclusion. Under cross-examination by prosecutors, Joshua Boyle claimed his estranged wife, Caitlan Coleman, was unfit to look after their four children. “I believe she was an incompetent mother, that she was not doing everything necessary,” Boyle, 36, told an Ottawa court on Monday. Boyle and Coleman, who married in 2011, were kidnapped by Afghan militants during a backpacking trip in 2012 and were transferred to the custody of the Taliban-linked Haqqani network. Boyle has pleaded not guilty to assault, sexual assault and unlawful confinement betweenOctober and December 2017, after the couple returned to Ottawa. Since he took the stand last week, Boyle has worked to counter the prosecution’s depiction that he was a manipulative and abusive husband. On Monday, Boyle testified that in captivity, Coleman would “shut down”, neglecting to feed their newborn or change diapers, prompting him to ask guards for food for the child. Even after the family was rescued in 2017 and brought to Canada, Boyle claimed Coleman would strike and violently shake their oldest child in their family’s Ottawa apartment. In previous testimony from March and April, Coleman claimed Boyle was mercurial and violent, choking, punching and biting her. In addition to cataloguing numerous instances of sexual assault, she also alleged Boyle threatened to kill her – in front of their children. But during-cross examination, Boyle dismissed the accusation that he was manipulative in their relationship, suggesting Coleman’s behaviour and accusations could be attributed to mental illness. He also claimed that his demands that Coleman maintain a certain weight and dress in a specific manner were merely “suggestions” that she could have freely disregarded. On the stand, Boyle also claimed to have shouldered many of the child-rearing responsibilities, telling the court he become increasingly disillusioned with Coleman’s alleged parenting deficiencies, which prompted him to seek a divorce. The trial, which began in March, has been marred by numerous procedural delays over what material – including Coleman’s past sexual history – is admissible in court. The proceedings also came to a standstill in July after Coleman gave several interviews to media outlets about her time in captivity, despite an order from the judge not to discuss the case. The defence will question Boyle on Wednesday, with closing arguments from both sides scheduled for the end of September.