In person, Daniel Johnston was charming, infuriating, enthusiastic and needy by turns. I have sat at tables with him where he would say nothing, head lolling forward. He had issues with performing – the first time he headlined at London’s Barbican in 2006, with a supporting cast that included Spiritualized, Vic Chesnutt and Teenage Fanclub, he stayed for three brief songs and fled: “Thank you. Sorry.” In Sydney in 2010, he performed just two songs outside the venue and was already leaving, collecting his lyric notebooks, sloping around the corner to smoke a crafty fag, as the audience – many reduced to tears – started to clap. “He can do that, you know,” remarked his brother Dick afterwards. “Make the magic happen.” Dan was an awkward conversationalist when he could be bothered to hold a conversation: when he arrived in a new town, he liked nothing better than to go comic-book hunting and eat junk food. He had a great, albeit selective, memory. “This is fun, isn’t it Dick?” he would remark to his ever-patient brother as they searched out another store. “I’m having so much fun today.” On one trip, his travelling troupe (Dan, Dick and his touring guitarist Brett Hartenbach) were fined nearly $1,400 by Jetstar in Japan for the extra weight incurred by Daniel’s comics. Daniel loved the Beatles. He was so excited when he arrived in England to help promote Jeff Feuerzeig’s wonderful 2005 documentary The Devil and Daniel Johnston: “Thank you England!” he announced on stage. “Thank you so much for giving the world the Beatles.” After the screening, Dan, his brother and I got egged by a passing car. Daniel thought it was hilarious, the sight of his brother covered in egg. Dan also loved the ideal of true love, if not the actuality. His former manager Jeff Tartakov told me that he was so excited when Melody Maker ran a review of one of his albums in the early 1990s – not because of the exposure, but because it had the heading Tell Laurie I Love Her. (Jeff incidentally is the unsung hero of this tragic tale: easily the man most responsible for Daniel’s music not lying forgotten in some bargain basement – in Dan’s own words as a “rejected unknown”.) All of Dan’s music up to that point had been designed with one goal: to win the heart of his one true love Laurie, the gravedigger’s wife. It never happened, but then again it was never real. Dan could be dismissive and rude one moment, the next greet you with a massive bear hug as if nothing had happened. He was self-aware to the extent that his music took place despite his mental illness, not because of it: he referenced it for sure in his songs, but only inasmuch as he referenced everything going on around him in his myopic worldview. “People always talk about the myth of Daniel’s genius,” Jeff memorably remarked to me one time. “What about the genius of Daniel’s myth?” Jeff had been staying with me in Brighton: on the same visit in 1993 he gave me Dan’s Jeremiah the Innocent T-shirt, the only such item in Britain at the time. He told me to take great care of it. I did, but later I passed the shirt to another of his fans. We’d been arguing at the time about his choice of clothes, and I told him he could only have it if he promised to wear it in public. Kurt Cobain was true to his promise and wore it on the front of Spin magazine and at corporate award ceremonies, leading to a surreal bidding war between Atlantic and Elektra Records as Dan answered calls from a mental hospital. Dan was childish. He cared deeply about his art, his music – but would travel from town to town, playing with pick-up bands arranged almost randomly. He didn’t seem to care about sound quality or the like – he was famously heralded as “the father of lo-fi” with his cassette recorder-recorded albums – knowing that the magic lies deeper than that, deeper within. He had a strange sense of proportion that kept him in check. “When I was going to college my friends made me feel famous,” Dan told me. “I was so famous I was writin’ all the time. We were having parties. I would show up and I was Number One celebrity. I’ve never been as famous as when I first started out. “I hope I could feel that famous again,” he added wistfully, “because when you think you’re famous and you think you’re great, you might just have a chance of being great.” Sometimes all you need is a massive heart, wonderful songs and a naked vulnerability. • This article was updated on Thursday 12 September to correct an error – the frog image is called Jeremiah the Innocent, not Jebediah the Frog.