Hugo Palmer has spoken of his shock at learning two men broke into one of his horseboxes in France on Sunday evening in an apparent attempt to smuggle themselves into Britain. The incident happened as his staff returned from Baden Baden, where Palmer’s Heavenly Holly had run fifth in a Listed race, and came to light when footage was shared on social media. Palmer, who returned separately by air on Monday, described the incident as “terrifying” and planned to warn his fellow trainers about the experience. “There was a big queue to get on to the ferry at Calais and, when my lorry got to the scanner, it showed there were two fellas in the back of it,” he said. “The border staff there locked them in and then waited for the police. I don’t know what nationality these men were but it appears they spoke neither French nor English. I gather there were at least two other vehicles in the freight queue that migrants managed to get into. “They weren’t in the back with the horse, they got into the tack locker. They must have forced the lock. This was all happening at three in the morning after my staff had a long drive back from Germany and they hadn’t noticed a thing. It’s terrifying. I suppose one has to reinforce the locks on the doors.” It is not known what action is likely against the men, who were taken into custody. Palmer said the authorities accepted his staff’s explanation that they had returned from Baden Baden without stopping and had no knowledge of the men’s presence. “My driver was rushing back so as to be here in time for the funeral of a friend,” Palmer said, in reference to Chris Conway, the former travelling head lad at Michael Bell’s stable who died of a heart attack a fortnight ago. A member of Palmer’s staff filmed the moment when the men were released from the back of the lorry and then shared it with staffers from another Newmarket stable, who were also expected to return through Calais on Sunday night. Rupert Arnold, the chief executive of the National Trainers’ Federation, said he was not aware of a similar case involving a racehorse lorry. “This must be something that anyone who takes freight across the Channel has got to worry about these days,” he said. “I haven’t heard of another example involving a trainer but this is something we have alerted trainers about in the past.” With valuable races taking place in France or Germany every weekend through the summer, lorries containing British racehorses pass frequently across the Channel. It was reported this summer that two stowaways found themselves in a paddock at Silverstone, having clambered on board a truck belonging to the Ferrari team somewhere near Calais. Catterick 2.00 Lady Nectar 2.30 Sloane Garden 3.05 Gemini 3.35 Kindly 4.10 Final Frontier 4.40 Gylo 5.10 Tommy Hallinan 5.40 Boudica BayGoodwood 2.15 Seaborn (nb) 2.45 Call Me Katie 3.20 Celtic Art 3.50 Angel Grey 4.25 Themaxwecan (nap) 5.00 Sweet Pursuit 5.35 Cadre Du Noir Salisbury 4.50 Letmestopyouthere 5.25 Lost Empire 6.00 Star In The Making 6.30 Foxtrot Lady 7.00 Horatio Star 7.30 War EagleKempton 5.45 Activius 6.15 Mubakker 6.45 Rifft 7.15 Penrhos 7.45 Mawakib 8.15 El Misk 8.45 Iballisticvin