Bernardo Silva has expressed regret at any unintentional hurt he may have caused with the tweet sent to his Manchester City teammate Benjamin Mendy last weekend. The Portuguese midfielder posted a picture of a cartoon character used to promote a Spanish chocolate brand alongside one of Mendy as a child with the caption “Guess who?” and two smileys. He deleted the tweet but the Football Association is investigating the incident and it is understood Silva wrote a letter to make clear he regretted any offence caused. Mendy has also offered his support to the midfielder over the investigation. The letter was sent to the governing body before Thursday’s 5pm deadline, with a potential sanction being a six-game ban. Pep Guardiola said Silva may “take a lesson” to ensure he learns from the incident. “If someone is offended I can understand it,” the City manager said. “Bernardo is maybe going to take a lesson and it’s not going to happen again.” Guardiola again defended the player, as he had done following Tuesday’s EFL Cup win at Preston, saying it was only “one joke”. He said: “Put the focus on other things, not Bernardo. Regarding Bernardo I was incredibly clear. If they believe, if the people believe, that Bernardo is this type of player they are completely wrong. They judged one joke, I judge three years every single day with him and how he is and his friendship. Nothing more to add. “It was just a joke. It’s a cartoon and the face is quite similar. The same happened a thousand million times with white people. It’s the same. It was a cartoon. It was just a joke and that’s all. But if the people in the [FA] think it is the opposite then Bernardo and City are open to listen and to say [our] opinion. That is all.” Guardiola does not anticipate the club employing a social media officer to safeguard what players may post. “That is not going to happen,” he said. “It [social media] is part of our lives. When I was born there was no internet, social media. If I was 12, 13, 14, 16 I would use it like they use it.” Guardiola brushed off the fact that Gabriel Jesus is unhappy at his limited playing time, after the Brazilian stated this in a recent interview in his homeland. The striker also said there was “no reason to leave City”. The manager said: “He’s special. I saw the interview and it was perfect. No problem. He was respectful. Of course he wants to play. He’s the No 9 for Brazil. He’s the only striker in the world with this mentality. He plays one second, two minutes, 90 minutes and has to play his best. I understand completely.” Guardiola insisted Sergio Agüero was not his first-choice No 9. Jesus has started only one of City’s six Premier League games, though a hamstring problem did rule him out for around a month. “I judge in terms of their different qualities,” he said. “I try to let them play both as much as possible. Both are incredible players.”