Even Theresa May didn’t lose ministers at this rate. Give it a couple of weeks and he’ll need a major reshuffle. Classic Dom. For Amber Rudd it was the morning after the night before on the Andrew Marr Show. Under the glare of the studio lights – far too bright, far too early, should have worn her shades – Rudd appeared furious. Mostly with herself. Trying to explain your lack of judgment was something better done in a confessional podcast than on a mainstream politics TV news show. “This is about trust, isn’t it?” Marr observed. “I’m not going to use that word,” Rudd replied defensively. Only she couldn’t actually come up with any better word to describe the reason for her resignation. The bottom line was that she had been taken for a mug. She’d allowed her desperation, her neediness, to get the better of her. She’d chosen to believe a serial liar just to extend her career by a couple of months. Not that she was going to accuse Johnson of lying either. More that he was pathologically unable to tell the truth. The tipping point – the Damascene conversion – had come when Philip Hammond, Ken Clarke, Justine Greening and others had been slung out of the Tory party for doing what Jacob Rees-Mogg had done hundreds of times. Then she had demanded to see what progress the government was making, she had been told that preparations were the sort of thing that “girly swot” David Cameron did and had been palmed off with a single piece of paper on which was written, “tHe UK Is gRAte. We iS goNNa maKe veR EU eet shiT”. Thereafter, the interview had all been downhill with Rudd firmly on the defensive. No, she didn’t really know anything. She didn’t know if the prime minister was going to obey the law. She couldn’t say whether other ministers, such as Matt Hancock and Nicky Morgan, might also one day discover they were vertebrates after all. She couldn’t even be sure who exactly was running the Conservative party. She just wanted a long lie-down in a darkened room. Thankfully, there would be plenty of time for that in the coming weeks. Just what the government was planning on doing in the next two months was no clearer when Marr interviewed Sajid Javid. The chancellor has been under virtual house arrest since his appointment, with speeches cancelled and his dispatch box appearances limited to walk-on cameos that everyone ignored. With good reason. Because, like Johnson, Javid isn’t actually very good. Unable even to command a veneer of competence. He, too, knew nothing about anything. He couldn’t say how the prime minister was going to perform the mutually exclusive acts of complying with the law and asking the EU for an extension and breaking the law by refusing to ask for an extension. And all he could say about the government’s plans to get a deal was that Stella McCartney had been commissioned to design some stunning uniforms for the badger patrols on the Northern Ireland border. “But look,” he said. A no-deal Brexit wouldn’t be all bad. The Bank of England had downgraded its forecasts to predict the UK’s GDP would only take a 5% hit. So we would all be just a little less broke than we might have been. Back in No 10, Dominic Cummings sat with his feet up on the desk. He had the country and the government exactly where he wanted them. On their knees. Classic Dom.