Whether or not Toulouse Olympique stun Toronto Wolfpack and earn promotion to Super League in October, there is a strong argument that Sylvain Houles is the Championship’s coach of the year. Victory at Featherstone on Saturday will secure second place for Toulouse and a home play-off; defeat will likely send them on the first of several long-distance trips. Either way, Houles has improved Toulouse every year since turning from player to coach in 2012. That takes some doing at any level.Last Saturday, in 35-degree heat at Blagnac, a civilised little town by Toulouse airport, TOXIII secured two points with what Dewsbury coach Lee Greenwood called a “pretty much perfect” first half hour from “a red-hot team in red-hot weather”. The depleted visitors retained pride in a 42-14 defeat in searing heat, but Toulouse go into the play-offs in tremendous shape.“It’s exciting,” said James Bell, the Scotland lock who scored Toulouse’s opening try. “Everyone’s fresh and feeling good. I’m taking every game as a Grand Final. Four more wins and we are in Super League. We’re the underdogs going into the finals series. We’ve got nothing to lose. We’re playing stress-free footy, enjoying ourselves.” Inspired by what London Broncos have achieved this season, Houles believes the vast majority of his squad could make the step up if Toulouse find themselves in the Super League next season. While the club would be delighted with promotion, they are merely planning to improve on the field and grow off it. Isolated from the mainstream league culture, laidback Houles, 38, has created a culture that ensures a disparate group of players, many of whom have loosened their home ties to take their talent around the world, feel part of an adopted family. “Being away from home is hard but the language barrier has the been the biggest thing – I couldn’t even count to three in French before,” admits Bell, before he climbs into a wheelie bin of ice after a long, steaming-hot training session, conducted in both English and French. “But taking myself out of my comfort zone is helping me develop as a player and a person. My partner and I hadn’t done much travelling and I heard good things about the culture here. And Sylvain is the best. He’s really helped me develop. The style of footy he plays really suits me. I can’t speak highly enough of him.” As Mike Rylance explained in The Struggle and the Daring, his new opus on rugby league in France, small towns fell in love with the sport and have remained faithful partners, while flashier big cities have drifted off into the arms of football and union. In the decade after the second world war, teams from Lyon, Marseille and Bordeaux were all crowned rugby treize champions of France. Toulouse is exceptional: a city of half a million people that has retained a devoted, if low-key, relationship with rugby league since 1937. Only three clubs had appeared in more French Championship finals than Toulouse before they left for the English competition. Toulouse have pursued a place in the Super League for almost two decades and would certainly enhance it. With 10 full-time staff and 38 players, they are larger than most Championship clubs. Around 70% of their annual €3m comes from a group of 600 local sponsors, which is led by Toulouse Olympique legend Carlos Zalduendo, who captained France to a series win over Australia in Toulouse in 1978. They are already among Europe’s top dozen most commercially successful clubs. With a five-year agreement in place (albeit not yet signed) to share Stade Toulousain’s modern 19,000-seat Stade Ernest Wallon from February – and a plan in place to build an administrative and training centre at their old Stade Arnauné home a mile away – the future is bright, whether they upset Toronto next month or not. With star full-back Mark Kheirallah in England on compassionate leave and the suspended Joe Bretherton manning the promo stall, Toulouse fielded 10 of their dozen “étrangers” on Saturday. Many of their Antipodean players have stayed for years, making Toulouse their second home. Much-loved forward Tyler Hepi is leaving though, for Castleford, and he was given a fine farewell by the Blagnac faithful. He and his fellow Kiwis then performed a moving Haka to the retiring Andrew Bentley. Leaping over the stand fence to join in was Bentley’s brother Kane. Among five league-playing siblings brought up in the Dordogne after their father moved from New Zealand to play for La Réole, Andrew and Kane have played together at four French clubs, and for both France and Scotland. They even had short spells in England. Defeated by a recurring neck injury, Andrew hopes to remain at Toulouse in a player welfare capacity. Among the many delightful places in France that are home to rugby league is Albi, an absolute peach of a town straddling the River Tarn an hour east of Toulouse. Even if it didn’t have the world’s largest brick-built cathedral – truly astonishing inside and out – and the Museum Toulouse-Latrec, it would be lovely. Add a rugby league club stable in Elite 1 after a woeful few years, and Albi is a must. No offence, but Featherstone this ain’t. I visited the stylishly refurbished Stade Maurice Riguad, where the American All Stars played on Christmas Day 1953, and the Stadium D’Albi next door, occasional host to France internationals and regular home to SC Albi who have fallen into union’s regional leagues. Perhaps opportunity knocks for Albi RL, five-time champions of France, at their new home across the river at Stade Mazicou. Leading rugby administrator Mark Evans likes to say “never be the third club in town”. Despite the impression made by a club-branded bus passing me on Pont Neuf one day, Toulouse Olympique are fighting for that role with top flight handball, women’s basketball and ice hockey clubs, all lagging way behind Stade Toulousain, champions of the Top 14, the world’s richest rugby competition, and Ligue 1’s Toulouse FC. The crowd of 2,055 that watched Toulouse Olympique beat Dewsbury on Saturday was about par, with many fans coming from across the region, some as far as Carcassonne. A couple of hours later, Toulouse FC drew just 10,000 to the Stadium Municipal. Crowds in the Top 14 are not enormous either, with 10,000 being the norm for most clubs. Carcassonne union club only attracted 3,000 to each of their first two Pro D2 games at the Albert Domec: Toulouse Olympique should get that in the Championship at the Ernest Wallon and be confident of matching the Pro D2 average of 6,000 if they made Super League. Even then they may still be shunned by national sports daily L’Equipe, which contained not a single word about rugby league last weekend. Toulouse is an ideal base for a rugby league break in the south of France. Elite 1 does not start until mid November, but Elite 2 runs from late September until early June so you can see two games in a weekend, with Saint-Gaudens, like Albi, only an hour away, or without even leaving Toulouse if you also watch union or football. There are daily direct flights to Toulouse from Manchester, Heathrow, Stansted, Bristol and Luton, but we took the romantic route, going by Eurostar to Paris then changing for the TGV, speeding down to Bordeaux before easing through fields of parched sunflowers and vineyards, even past La Réole’s little ground by the river, en route to the Pink City. I can highly recommend it. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook