EU citizens are our friends, family and neighbours. We want them to stay, and the EU settlement scheme has been designed to make it straightforward for them to get the immigration status they need. I am writing to address a number of inaccuracies in letters published on 6 September. A letter signed by Diane Abbott and Alf Dubs, among others, stated: “The Home Office has brought forward the deadline for applications from 30 June 2021 to 31 December 2020. This is the perfect recipe for a repetition of the Windrush generation scandal.” This is untrue. We have been consistent that EU citizens have until at least 31 December 2020 to apply to the scheme if we leave the EU without a deal. If we leave the EU with a deal, the deadline will be 30 June 2021. The same letter says: “Legislation should be passed to guarantee the legal status of all EU migrants who live here.” The EU settlement scheme provides an immigration status in UK law, set out in the immigration rules. By being granted status through the scheme, EU citizens and their families will have the immigration status they need to stay in the UK. Another letter said there needs to be a helpline. There is one. People can call 0300 123 7379 and reach some of the 1,500 Home Office staff working on the scheme, including handling calls and emails in the Settlement Resolution Centre. Furthermore, there is a wide range of support available by phone, email and in person, including 300 assisted digital locations across the UK to help people with limited computer skills to apply. A letter from another reader stated that their child is travelling in Australia for the next 18 months, has not been able to apply for settled status and will not meet the deadline of December 2020. This suggests that you can only apply to the scheme from the UK. Individuals can download the app and apply from anywhere in the world. Another letter stated: “EU nationals pay £65 per person for settlement.” This is untrue. It is free to apply to the scheme. I want to reassure EU citizens that we are looking for reasons to grant status. Anyone who experiences issues applying to the scheme should contact the Settlement Resolution Centre and we’ll do everything we can to resolve these as soon as possible.Brandon Lewis MPHome Office minister • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition