Boris Johnson has been confronted by an angry father at a hospital who told him his seven-day-old daughter had nearly died because the ward on which she was treated was “not safe for children” after years of austerity. The prime minister was criticised as he visited Whipps Cross university hospital in north-east London, with the man telling him there were not enough doctors and nurses. In a conversation that lasted about two minutes, Johnson was told the situation was “not acceptable”. Omar Salem started the encounter in a hospital corridor, saying: “My daughter nearly died yesterday. And I came here, the A&E guys were great but we then came down to this ward here and it took two hours [inaudible] and that is just not acceptable. This ward is not safe for children. “There was one registrar covering the entirety of this ward and the neonatal unit. That is just not acceptable, is it? There are not enough people on this ward, not enough doctors, not enough nurses and it’s not well organised enough. The NHS has been destroyed ... and now you come here for a press opportunity.” Johnson claimed there were “no press here” but the man gestured to cameras filming the confrontation and said: “What do you mean there’s no press here? Who are these people?” The prime minister said he was “here to find out” about the situation but the man said: “It’s a bit late, isn’t it? Years and years and years of the NHS being destroyed.” Salem, who is a Labour activist campaigning against Brexit, later tweeted: “Boris Johnson had the temerity to come to Whipps Cross hospital for a press opportunity on the children’s ward that my seven-day-old daughter is on, having been admitted to A&E yesterday gravely ill. The A&E team were great but she then went for hours on the ward without seeing a doctor.” He added: “I gave him a piece of my mind about how he is running the NHS based on the experience with my daughter, so that patients get the care they deserve, there is adequate staffing with good working conditions and worried fathers like me can have some peace of mind.” A spokesman for the prime minister said Johnson was visiting public services to see for himself the reality of the situation. The spokesman said the man was understandably “very distressed” and the prime minister was “not going to hide away from those circumstances when he goes on these visits, and so obviously is keen to talk to people and empathise and see what he can do to help”. “It’s also a reminder of why exactly he is so keen to make the NHS a priority and make sure it’s getting the funding that it requires,” the spokesman added. Jonathan Ashworth, the Labour health spokesman, said the encounter showed Johnson “simply can’t be honest with people”. “He can make as many phoney announcements on the NHS as he likes but he can’t hide from the truth, or from patients,” he said. “The Tories have plunged the health service into crisis through years of cuts and privatisation and the prime minister can’t run from the consequences this has had for patient care. “You can’t trust the Tories because, as Johnson’s top adviser admits,they don’t care about our NHS.” Downing Street said the prime minister had spent the past six weeks visiting hospitals “to hear directly from NHS staff and patients – and this is exactly why he is so committed to making sure investment reaches frontline services, so that doctors and nurses have the resources they need and patients receive consistently world-leading care”. A spokesman added: “This is why we’ve recently invested an additional £1.8bn into frontline services and are upgrading 20 hospitals across the country.”