London Broncos can consider themselves extremely unfortunate to be relegated from the Super League. Their 19-10 defeat to Wakefield on Friday night meant they were relegated on points difference, having won more points than any relegated side in Super League history. They are probably the best ever team to go down. Their record of 10 wins in 29 games gives them a better points-per-game ratio than any wooden-spooners in the top flight’s history, better than Huddersfield in 1903-04, who are the only other team to finish bottom of the first division despite having won that many games, albeit in 34 attempts. The Broncos are statistically the best team to be relegated since second-bottom Featherstone went down on points difference in 1992 despite winning 11 of their 26 games. They bounced straight back up. If London are to do the same, it will take a third successive season of magic by Ward and his team. Just like their first and second spells in the top flight in the early 1980s, London’s fourth stint in the top flight lasted just a season. They could point at the extra fixtures forcing them to play St Helens three times, but they managed to beat them twice. “We thought 10 wins would be sweet,” said coach Danny Ward. “But there’s only one stat that matters: we’re bottom of the league.” Ward knows the pain of relegation well. He was part of the Castleford side harshly sent down despite finishing above the protected Catalans Dragons in 2006. “It’s the second time I’ve got relegated at this place and it’s not a nice feeling,” said Ward. “I hope none of them ever feel like this again in their careers. It’s adversity and you’ve got to deal with it. That’s life. We will come out the other side. Most haven’t played at this level before. The majority were Championship players or young lads stepping up from the academy - and it’s hard to do it for 28 weeks up against some world class players. They should be happy with what we’ve done, but we’ve still failed in what we set out to achieve so it’s bittersweet.” More than 6,000 of us went to Belle Vue to see a funeral but, like Deidre Barlow’s mum Blanche in Coronation Street, we had no idea whose it was. London had probably their biggest following for 20 years packing the north west paddock. They had made a big effort to get there on Friday afternoon and were hoping for a second successive glorious Friday night in Yorkshire, but they did not get one. Having stayed to honour their fallen heroes, they weren’t back home until the early hours of the morning. Representing London were men from as far afield as Hemel Hempstead, Hull, Sawbridgeworth, Widnes, Northampton, Bryn-y-Baal, Newcastle and Liverpool (New South Wales, not England). Eddie Battaye, once a buffalo farmer, was their cult hero prop; Jay Pitts, a former Wakefield junior who is returning there next season, was their captain. Like millions of others, the capital had become their adopted home, albeit one many are now leaving behind. As they trudged off the field, the reactions varied. Some marched off defiantly. Salford-bound Elliot Kear had a vacant stare. “It’s a terrible feeling,” he said. “We came up short after working so hard. It’s heartbreaking. I’ll remember this all my career.” Full-back Alex Walker, who is joining Trinity, burst into tears on the sight of Broncos player welfare manager John Keyes, who has been there since he first played the sport. Kieran Dixon, who mixed the sublime with the stumbling, buried his head in Keyes’ chest and sobbed inconsolably. This hurt. “It really hurts to go down but, to take the positive, look at what we have achieved,” said a distraught Dixon. “To play as well as we have, and to win the games we have, is credit to ourselves. You look at their team against our mix-and-match. We tried everything but they were just bum-rushing us.” Half of the Broncos squad have already agreed contracts elsewhere for 2020, with Brock Lamb, Ryan Morgan and James Cunningham also expected to leave. The club will do well to retain prop Rob Butler, who would be a good fit for most top flight clubs and even the NRL. “That happens every year here, not just now,” said Dixon, who is staying put. “Players move on; others come in. You just cherish the moment this group had together. We can be proud as a team and as a group of men of what we achieved this season, against all the odds, taking it to the last game. I will never forget this.” The good news is that the club have a production line of talent. They have the fifth best Under-19 side in the country. “We’ve got a fantastic youth system but the vultures will be swooping,” said Ward. “We produce good kids and that’s the future of London. The team that came up was based on London lads and we’ll do that again.” Super League has lost its biggest city, but also its smallest fanbase and ground. With a £1m drop in funding, the Broncos’ full-time status is almost entirely reliant on the generosity of long-term backer David Hughes. With so many southerners around the squad, they are better positioned now to transition into a part-time model than after any of their other 21 Super League seasons. When they had to, Wakefield produced the goods to conclude a season in which they were decimated by injuries. Among the injured players was their magnificently mulleted talisman David Fifita, who was at the match on crutches with an ankle cast. “I worked it out the other day: of our £1.7m cap, about £800,000 was on the sideline,” said coach Chris Chester. “We’ll have spent over £130,000 on operations. Key people missed a hell of a lot of the season and we missed those senior guys. But we only had ourselves to blame for the position we were in. There were probably times when our attitudes were not right, but those players aren’t going to be here next season.” After the hooter, both Chester and chairman Michael Carter sighed with relief and hugged the players who have kept Wakey in Super League for a 22nd consecutive season. Now Carter’s attention returns to renovating the ramshackle Belle Vue. The way the NRL finals are going, we could have a record number of English players in Australia’s Grand Final next month. This Friday marks 50 years since Wiganer David Bolton played an influential role for Balmain Tigers in one of the most controversial games in Sydney rugby league history. To mark it, Stoke Hill Press are giving away a copy of The Great Grand Final Heist – Ian Heads’ magnificent account of that scandal-bound game. Revelations – such as swimming legend Dawn Fraser painting tiger paw prints around Souths’ Redfearn home – and tit-bits (Tim Pickup took a bus to Woodstock Festival the summer before) abound. To win a copy be the first person below the line to say which other Englishman played with Bolton in the 1966 NSWRL Grand Final. At least Elliot Kear and his close mate Rhys Williams have something rather special to look forward to. Along with returning big guns Ben Flower, Gil Dudson and Regan Grace, they are in the Wales squad for next month’s World Nines at Parramatta. “I called them all and said ‘We’re getting the band back together’” said Gareth Kear, Elliot’s dad, the Wales RL General Manager. “A couple of the lads may be in the Grand Final so will join us late, but it’s going to be another great adventure. Hopefully we can then take that into the 2021 World Cup, which could be a final swansong for a lot of this group.” The play-offs are already under way in the Championship and League One. Led by inspired half-back performances from former France international Dane Chisholm and borrowed Leeds youngster Callum McLelland, Featherstone’s superb 34-18 win at Leigh on Sunday eliminated the hosts and ensures Super League will have a new name in it next season. With Stan Albert in devastating form, Toulouse dismantled surprise package York and now play at Toronto on Sunday, the winners heading straight to the final. The losers will be given a second chance against the winners of the York v Featherstone clash. In the third tier, unlikely champions Whitehaven could yet be joined in the Championship by Cumbrian rivals Workington after Town knocked out Hunslet. Following a surprisingly comfortable win at Newcastle, Doncaster now go to Oldham this weekend while Newcastle host Workington. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook