The political scientist Su Shaozhi, who has died aged 96, was a campaigner for reform of the Chinese Communist party in the post-Mao years, until he was forced into exile after the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989. Su was eventually allowed to return to China, but the news of his death has been ignored except on unofficial websites. In his earlier career, Su would admit, he had “put obedience to the [Communist] party in first place”, churning out what was required to “elaborate the thoughts of Chairman Mao”. He made up for this in the 1980s by denouncing the party’s “feudalism and Stalinism” and proposing democratic reforms that are still unachieved. Privately he was even more outspoken, telling me in 1985 that “we need to make a clean sweep of the leadership”, which still insisted on rigid control. In 1987 Su and four other leading pro-reform intellectuals were purged from their positions in what became known as the “incident of the five gentlemen”. They were the targets of conservative party leaders who were alarmed at the open-minded debate encouraged by the party’s secretary general, Hu Yaobang. Hu’s enforced resignation and subsequent death would trigger the student protests of spring 1989 and the Beijing massacre. Su was lecturing in the US at the time and would remain there for over two decades, reflecting on the failure of reform and what he saw as the rise of a type of fascism. When Mao’s successor Deng Xiaoping died in 1997, Su wrote in the Guardian that Deng had remained as dedicated as Mao to the dictatorship of the party. Su gained an orthodox academic education while China was falling apart during the 40s under Nationalist rule. Born in Beijing, into a family that was ethnically Manchu – the former imperial ruling class of Qing dynasty China (1644-1911) – he moved with them first to Shanghai, then in 1942 to inland Chongqing, fleeing from Japanese occupation. Su, already known as a brilliant student, was recruited by the economics research department of Nankai University, which had also moved to western China. After the war Su joined the staff of Fudan University in Shanghai, where, during a brief period of cooperation between nationalists and communists, he discovered the works of Marxism and Mao Zedong. Impressed by the moderate programme known as “new democracy” then being put forward by Mao, Su hoped to work towards a synthesis of liberal and Marxist economic theory. Returning to Nankai University, now relocated in Tianjin, Su earned his doctorate in 1949 at the end of the civil war. This was one of the first to be awarded under the new communist regime – and one of the last, too, because all advanced degrees would soon be abolished. Su, like thousands of other young graduates, gladly joined the enterprise of “new China”. He would remember being deeply moved by a performance of the tear-jerking revolutionary opera The White-Haired Girl. Before long Su was attending lectures in Marxist economics at the Beijing People’s University, given by professors from the Soviet “big brother”: he regretted later that his own work had been influenced by their dogmatic approach. In 1953 he joined the Communist party, and as well as teaching political economy at Fudan University he became a party cadre, ensuring that the curriculum faithfully followed the official “line”. All went well until 1959, when Su criticised the exaggerated claims for economic success in the Great Leap Forward and became too friendly with Hong Wenda, an economics teacher who was labelled a “rightist”. Even so, he was protected by senior officials who realised that if they sacked all the “rightist” economists there would be no one left. In 1963, as the Sino-Soviet dispute came into the open, Su was moved to Beijing to join a team gathering material for a series of polemics proving that the Soviet Union had “betrayed Marxism”. During the Cultural Revolution (1966-76), Su was sent to a “cadre farm” in the countryside – relatively mild punishment for intellectuals in need of ideological remoulding. It also meant that, being removed from the political scene, he did not have to write to order for the Gang of Four, led by Madame Mao (Jiang Qing). Emerging unscathed after Mao’s death and the rise to power of Deng, Su finally found his voice as Chinese intellectual life began to thaw under Deng’s protege Hu. At the path-breaking Wu Xu seminar on ideology organised by Hu in 1979, Su produced a joint statement with the veteran philosopher Feng Yulan criticising the official line that China was moving seamlessly through the “socialist stage” towards communism. At another seminar, in 1986, Su called for an end to the party’s “feudal autocracy”, denouncing corruption among the children of senior officials, and urging intellectuals to display “real courage and boldness of vision”. Appointed the director of a leading theoretical thinktank at the Academy of Social Sciences, Su condemned the gap between party theory and reality. The Chinese constitution guaranteed freedom of expression, he pointed out, “but if you criticise someone for violating the constitution, many people will laugh at your foolishness”. In the conservative backlash of 1987 Su was dismissed from his Academy post, but he continued to speak out. “There is too much concentration of power, no democracy and no real supervision of government officials,” he said early in 1989, as the political climate worsened in the run-up to Tiananmen Square. When the Beijing massacre occurred, Su was expelled from the Communist party and placed on a blacklist. He was given temporary refuge at Princeton University, in New Jersey, with other exiled scholars, and later joined the editorial board of the dissident journal Beijing Spring. In 1996, Su published Shinian Fengyu (Ten Years of Storm) which gives a valuable account of the ideological struggle during the 80s in which he had played such a prominent part. Later, he edited a memorial volume In Memory of Hu Yaobang (2006) lamenting the lost opportunity of that decade. Its last chance, he believed, disappeared during the Tiananmen protests when Hu’s successor, Zhao Ziyang, who was sympathetic to the students, was forced to resign. After more than two decades in vocal exile, Su finally accepted the need for silence if he was to return home. The importance of the efforts of Su and other scholars to reform Chinese socialism was forgotten as China embraced economic globalisation while retaining strict one-party rule. This has been taken further since 2012 under the leadership of Xi Jinping, whose repressive and neo-Maoist style of leadership is exactly what Su was arguing against in the 80s. • Su Shaozhi, political scientist, born 1923; died 27 May 2019