Early autumn is a time for netting ponds, raking leaves and cleaning out sheds – or so much of the narrative of horticultural media goes. Yet as a botanist with a special interest in how people communicate and learn about plants, I find the way we often talk about gardening as an art form fascinatingly weird. I mean, to the uninitiated it must sound an awful lot like outdoor tidying up. A sort of never-ending series of messy chores, often in less than ideal weather, and as much as it pains me to say it, I can see why so many people would rather do anything else with their time. Can you imagine if, for example, the people of food media talked about their passion in a similar way? “Right now is the perfect time to defrost your freezer, reorganise your spice rack and tidy your tin cupboard.” There’d be very little talk about food as a creative art form, an outlet for self-expression, a catalyst for social interaction or an essential part of wellbeing – just lots of advice on the exact angle at which to sift flour and how to load the dishwasher. The analogy sounds ridiculous until you consider that’s exactly how we gardeners talk all the time about our passion: as if it was about maintenance, not an artistic act of creation. We talk about “jobs for the week”, not “new projects” or “outdoor experiments”. I have even been asked to present lengthy TV segments on, for example, how to jet wash a patio. My response was that I would never see Nigella cleaning a hob or Jamie unblocking a sink. If they did, food media would probably still be in a niche and, frankly, incredibly dull category with a focus on the detail of the process not the pleasure it brings. Maybe this way of talking about gardening is because we horticulturists are just a really practical bunch who love to get straight to the nitty gritty. Maybe it’s because we are often (and I include myself in this box) a socially awkward lot, who can’t even picture how other people could possibly not find gardening intrinsically fascinating. Maybe it’s because, once upon a time, gardening was such a dominant force in UK culture that there was no need to introduce timid first timers to the sheer life-affirming joy growing and designing with plants can provide. They already knew, so we could afford to take them for granted. As someone who has benefitted enormously from a lifetime of growing things, from both a mental and physical point of view, I think we owe it to the uninitiated to show them the magic horticulture can bring. Gardening has not just saved my life, but given it meaning. So this weekend, don’t mow, weed or rake. Grab your partner, kids or best mates and take them to a garden. Allow them to feel the crisp air on their face, see the last flush of autumn bulbs peaking out from the warm earth, hear a songbird in the branch of a tree and tell them what it is that gardens have given you. Because to me that is what horticulture is about: the daily act of disconnecting from the stresses around you, and reconnecting with nature – even if that’s only from a tiny pot on your windowsill. Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @Botanygeek 