Lucinda Chambers had not, she said, read Vogue for years. The magazine was too full of ridiculously expensive clothes that felt irrelevant to ordinary women’s lives, she complained, and besides, the glossies always left her feeling faintly anxious that her life wasn’t up to their standards. It’s hardly an unusual take on women’s magazines, long accused of encouraging readers to go shopping by preying on their insecurities, save for one crucial detail. Chambers had been running Vogue’s fashion pages for the previous 25 years, and let rip only after being sacked. An army of influencers is giving away for free large chunks of what magazines once sold, with little regulation In a similar vein, there may be few tears shed in some quarters for the print demise of Marie Claire, which this week followed a slew of titles such as InStyle, More! and Glamour on the sad path to outright closure or to the graveyard known as “closing the print edition”. But to dismiss these magazines as just another means of making women feel bad about themselves is to miss the crucial gap they have for so long filled in women’s lives. For the titles dying out now – along with digital women’s lifestyle sites such as The Debrief or The Pool which have folded – are not the achingly aspirational Vogues of this world. They’re the mid-market titles, ones that mixed high-street brands and cheering fluff with pieces that treated women’s emotional lives as if they actually mattered. From miscarriages to maternal guilt to the disturbing porn-influenced trend for men choking women during sex, women’s magazines have long smuggled in difficult subjects under cover of writing about lipstick and shoes. In the 60s, Helen Gurley Brown’s Cosmopolitan carried pieces on the pill and championed the subversive idea that women could live perfectly thrilling lives without a husband. Then came a generation of agony aunts – the Claire Rayners and the Virginia Ironsides – who quietly broke taboos from their hiding places on the back pages of women’s titles, opening up a frank conversation with readers about everything from marital violence to the menopause. Marie Claire was routinely covering the struggles of women in developing countries before today’s woke generation of young women was born, while Cosmo gave Michael Howard one of his most awkward moments during the 2005 election by extracting his views on abortion in what he had clearly assumed would be a soft-soap interview. As women have risen towards the top of newspapers, issues like these have rightly entered the mainstream, but women’s magazines are still the place many female journalists cut their teeth. A surprising number of senior BBC or broadsheet names originally started out tidying the fashion cupboard, in one of the few parts of the industry where women could call the shots. As with newspapers, the industry always had a dark underbelly. It was an outgoing editor of Marie Claire, Liz Jones, who first lifted the lid on the commercially sleazy side of her business by detailing the 22 designer handbags she was sent for Christmas in hopes of preferential coverage, and the way major advertisers were rewarded by having their clothes promoted on fashion spreads. The 00s was an era of reckoning, with Kate Winslet protesting against being airbrushed and editors being summoned to Downing Street meetings on the use of skeletally thin models. (It’s telling, incidentally, that within a media industry that is built on tapping into human insecurities and aspirations, it’s specifically the ones written by and for women which end up under fire. Most male readers look nothing like the ripped young hunks on the cover of Men’s Health, yet who chides men’s magazines for portraying unrealistic body shapes they’re portraying or making men want new tech gadgets they don’t really need?) But at least in those days there were editors to summon, a recognisable industry to be pressured into signing codes of conduct. That may not be the case for much longer. The new generation of women’s magazine editors is acutely aware of millennial sensitivities, preaching body positivity and diverse ideas of beauty. But they’re no longer the only ones driving the culture. The longing that magazines once satisfied for a bit of trashy downtime on the train, or something relaxing to flick through in the bath, is increasingly met by social media. And the latter also excels at generating the nagging feeling that someone out there has a better life than you do. An army of Instagram influencers and fashion bloggers, Pinterest users and beauty YouTubers is creating and giving away for free large chunks of what magazines once sold, with precious little regulation of the often shady relationships cultivated with brands behind the scenes, and minimal accountability. Does that Instagrammer really love the skirt she’s raving over, or was she given it for free on condition that she shifts some stock? How little is that fitness influencer eating to get those abs? How do you foster corporate responsibility in what’s less an industry than a profusion of one-woman cottage businesses, each with none of the job security that magazine staffers once had, but even greater pressure to expose their souls for likes? This isn’t, of course, quite the end of an era. When Glamour first emerged as a competitor to Cosmopolitan, Gurley Brown famously complained that “I used to have all the sex to myself,” yet it is her title that endures. Those who survive the current remorseless winnowing out will be the ones who best understand their audiences; who get that women want to read about sex and shoes but also to be made to think and feel, and realise they’re not alone. So long as there are silences to break, experiences and feelings wrongly dismissed as niche or frivolous or just uncomfortable by other media, there should be room for them. But it would be a crying shame for women’s magazines to join the ranks of things we only miss once they’re gone, and we see what fills their place instead. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist