Nicolò Zaniolo made his debut for Virtus Entella in Serie B two and a half years ago. He had been released by Fiorentina the year before as a 16-year-old and knew he had to pursue other opportunities in the game. Some players would have fallen down the league pyramid or given up on football altogether, but Zaniolo rolled up his socks and started a journey that has taken him to the very top. After spending a season at Inter, where he was named their academy player of the year, Zaniolo signed for Roma in June 2018. He played his first game for the club exactly a year ago – away at Real Madrid in the Champions League – and has not looked back. Zaniolo is now a regular at the heart of the Roma midfield and his goals were instrumental in the club’s run to the Champions League quarter-finals last season. To crown it all, he is now an Italy international. Zaniolo is a man on the up. Your breakthrough at Roma last season was incredible. Did you predict such a rapid rise when you joined the club? “To be honest, I didn’t expect to have such an impact as I was coming from an academy team and had a lot to learn. I also made my Italy debut, which was a surprise, but I have lots of targets left. I have learned a lot from last season, but I need to go further now and keep pushing.” It must seem like a long time since you were playing for Virtus Entella. What has changed in two years to take you from Serie B to the Italy team? “So much has changed, both from a physical standpoint and a psychological one. Essentially, I’ve changed the way I work and the way I am day-to-day. I wanted to be a teenager before, doing all the things my friends do, but I’ve learned to focus on what is important: football. I train harder, I focus more, I have high targets, and all these have helped me improve technically on the pitch but also in terms of my life off it. I am more complete – that’s what’s led to me playing at the top.” Why did you think Roma would be a better place than Inter to break through and progress? “When a big club with so much history like Roma wants you and has plans for you in the first team, it’s hard to turn down the offer. I confess, I thought I’d be sent out on loan as I had lots to learn and a new move is always a risk, but Eusebio Di Francesco had confidence in me from the start and helped me a lot. If it wasn’t for him, I would not have made the breakthrough. He is great with younger players and I owe him a lot.” Young players in Italy often face a lot of pressure. You have been called ‘the new Totti’. What are you doing to manage those expectations? “It’s important to keep your feet on the ground at all times and I have a family behind me who do that, who understand football and who make sure I work my best at all times. Beyond that, the only way to manage expectations is within myself. I can’t listen to what others say, good or bad. I’m not Totti, but one day I hope to be as good.” Who was your favourite player growing up? “My hero undoubtedly was always Kaká, especially during his Milan years and for Brazil. I watched him a lot. For me, he was the perfect offensive midfielder: strong, technically perfect and capable of scoring and assisting. That is what I wanted to become as a kid and I still do now. I watch his videos, study the way he moved, and try to take elements into my game as I’m also tall, strong and try to play technical, direct football.” You left Fiorentina’s academy at 16. What advice do you have for other young players who have been released by clubs? “The main advice is to never give up. Partly because, If you’re 15 or 16 and have reached that point, you must have some quality that another team will always find useful, even if it isn’t always obvious. One team not wanting your skillset doesn’t mean another won’t. More than that, though, you need to continue to enjoy football. If you don’t enjoy it, you won’t have the motivation to keep fighting. Love football no matter what, in good times and in bad.” Some former players and managers in Italy say your best position is at No 8, where you can influence the game in both halves. Which role do you see yourself settling into for Roma and the national team? “As a kid, because I had technical skills, I always played as a No 10 but I like playing as an eight or even a defensive midfielder. For now, I’ll play in any position, but maybe one day I will settle a little deeper, unless a manager comes in and sees me totally as a forward playmaker. I will play anywhere as long as I’m on the pitch.” Being a professional footballer is a great job with many perks, but what is the toughest part of being a player? “The journey itself is the hardest as it’s not easy to get the top. It takes a lot of sacrifice and time, and you have to keep believing even when you think it won’t happen. And then, once you get there, it’s even harder to stay. You are always working harder and harder every day. But, as you say, it’s worth what awaits you. I always found it hard to leave my family. I had to leave them many times as a young teenager to live elsewhere so I could pursue a football career. I was travelling all the time. I didn’t get to do the things that my friends were doing – going out, the stuff everyone my age does. It becomes easier but when you’re younger, you just want to have a normal life and be around friends. It was worth it, though.” Who are the best players you’ve played against so far – in midfield and in defence? “Cristiano Ronaldo, of course. He is perfect physically and very hard to mark. Luka Modric as well. I was impressed with how he used the ball and the way he moved with it. He’s small but hard to get off it. He turns sharply, moves quickly and takes up great positions. I found him hard to control. Defensively, Raphaël Varane. He’s fast, very technical and strong. He is the hardest player to get past – almost impossible, especially one on one.” You played with Daniele De Rossi before he left Roma. What have you learned from experienced players such as him? “Daniele was always a leader and a fantastic person, so it’s easy to learn from him and other experienced players. In fact, if you can’t, there’s something wrong. Mostly what I learned was humility. He has time for everyone: the fans, the staff, the other players. Off the pitch, he prepares well and was always focused on Roma. I am trying to take that into my life, to make Roma the centre of it.” You’ve shared a dressing room two World Cup winners in De Rossi and Steven Nzonzi. What inspiration have they given you when it comes to playing for Italy? “Winning the World Cup is my childhood dream, as it is for any player, and being lucky enough to share a changing room with Daniele and Steve makes you believe that it’s possible. It focuses you to try to become that sort of player so others may one day look up to me. It’s a boost every day, but now it’s time for me to write my own story. I’m ready for the challenge.” • This article is from These Football Times• Follow These Football Times and Omar Saleem on Twitter