When Cersei Lannister was raped by her brother, Jaime, next to the corpse of their dead son in the fourth season of Game of Thrones, even longstanding viewers inured to the scenes of sexual violence in the series found cause for concern. In the book, by George RR Martin, the scene had been consensual, but in the dramatised version a weeping Cersei says no and tries to push her brother off. The episode’s director, Alex Graves, shrugged off criticism. When asked if the scene constituted rape, he said, “Yes and no … There are moments where she gives in, and moments where she pushes him away.” It’s typical of the attitude often taken by film-makers that, if it serves the plot (in this case, to remind us of Jaime’s ruthless streak), then sexual violence is justifiable. Rape has long been a staple of screen drama, often fulfilling requirements – edginess, excitement, titillation – that were once covered by plain consensual sex. It is often the sole reason for the existence of female characters, yet their stories are invariably told through the eyes of others, and their pain is rarely explored. Common is the scene in which women are presented as powerless victims and men both as attackers and saviours. See Luther, which places assailants under the beds of victims; Ripper Street, which drooled over the assault and murder of fallen women; or True Detective, with its kinkily adorned lady corpses. The Accused, True Blood, Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile, The Last House on the Left, The Nightingale – the list goes on. Rather than reducing its audience to mere gawpers, it digs deeply into themes of trauma, self-worth and the failures of the justice system All of which underlines why Unbelievable, the new Netflix eight-part drama about a spate of brutal rapes, feels so radical. The series, which features women in the lead roles, is based on a real-life case of a vulnerable young woman raped by an intruder who, faced with the scepticism of investigating police officers, later withdraws her statement. While there are glimpses of the attack seen through the eyes of the victim, Unbelievable dwells more on the assaults that come later: the internal examination, the pitiless questioning (in the hours following the rape, the victim is asked to go over her story six times), the doubt, the judgment, the implied blame. It’s rare and heartening to find a series looking with such nuance and compassion at the effects of sexual violence on victims. Rather than reducing its audience to mere gawpers, it digs deeply into themes of trauma, self-worth and the failures of the justice system. It shows us that there is no single reaction to rape among victims: some suffer lapses of memory, whereas others remember every detail; some weep while others appear dissociated and serene. “This is not something people get over, this is something they carry with them for ever like a bullet in the spine,” Merritt Wever’s police detective tells her male colleagues, who are annoyed at having to work overtime. This isn’t the first time rape has been carefully drawn on screen – Tyrannosaur, the 2011 film in which Olivia Colman is beaten and raped by her husband, was a powerful and considered study of anger, violence and shame; Veronica Mars and Jessica Jones are among the series to have navigated the subject with sensitivity and tact. But these are the exceptions rather than the rule. No one is suggesting that tales of male violence aren’t worth telling – to investigate them well is to create greater understanding for all – but the too-familiar tableaux of women bound and gagged, their eyes wide and their mascara streaked, with cameras trained lasciviously on their terrified faces, is lazy and cruel, and presents women as ultimately disposable. Two years ago the Black List, a US community of film-makers and writers, surveyed the thousands of film and TV scripts on its database, and found that out of 45,000 scripts, about 2,400 involved scenes of rape. The author of the study, Kate Hagen, described coming across a script by a male writer about an aspiring female standup that contained eight incidents of rape. It had been classified as a comedy. Should we be surprised? In America an alleged sexual predator, Brett Kavanaugh, was elected to the supreme court (he now faces a fresh allegation of sexual misconduct, which he denies), and a self-proclaimed pussy-grabber sits in the White House. The #MeToo movement has gone a long way in amplifying the stories of women who have experienced assault, and created greater understanding about the gender power balance, though bringing about meaningful change takes time and energy. Examining how stories of rape and assault are told in popular culture is an excellent start. • Fiona Sturges is an arts writer