Parliamentary sovereignty is the fundamental tenet of Britain’s uncodified constitution. Parliament makes the laws of the land; it cannot be overruled by the prime minister or the courts. Yet Boris Johnson, a prime minister selected by the unrepresentative membership of the Conservative party, which does not even have a majority in the Commons, is seeking to stop parliament from doing its job by any means at his disposal. Johnson’s authority to govern is derived from parliament and parliament alone. The more a man who has faced no more than a day of parliamentary scrutiny, let alone a general election, acts as though he has some kind of extra-parliamentary mandate, the more British democracy dangles on a precipice. Johnson’s decision to prorogue parliament for five weeks at the moment of the most dangerous political crisis this country has witnessed in decades is outrageous. He claims he is doing it in order to set out his domestic agenda in a Queen’s speech, but this could have been achieved through a shorter shutdown. By preventing them from scrapping the three-week party conference recess, and taking up four days of Commons sittings with Queen’s speech debates, he has drastically reduced the time MPs have to block a no-deal Brexit. Johnson is trying to stop parliament expressing its will on the most important question postwar Britain has faced. So much for the arguments of leading Brexit advocates before the referendum: that leaving the EU was imperative in order to “take back control” and restore parliamentary sovereignty. It now transpires that the real threat to parliamentary sovereignty is embodied in the fundamentalist Eurosceptics of the Conservative party, not the EU. There appears to be no principle some Eurosceptics are unwilling to sacrifice on the ideological altar of Brexit. Shame on the cabinet ministers who, having previously condemned the prorogation of parliament, are standing by in the name of their careers. “You don’t deliver on democracy by trashing democracy”; “absolutely outrageous”; “it would not be true to the best traditions of cabinet democracy”; “the end of the Conservative party as a serious party of government”. Not the words of harsh critics, but of the current chancellor, the work and pensions secretary, the chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and the health secretary. They are enabling the subversion of the usual accountability mechanisms that should act as a check on government. Loath to account to parliament, Johnson is also evading scrutiny by the media. Aided by his top adviser Dominic Cummings, who is reportedly firing ministerial advisers on a whim in an attempt to bully any opposition out of the cabinet, he is trashing the principles of cabinet government. No lack of democratic mandate stops this prime minister from trying to hoard presidential power in Downing Street. But while Johnson and Cummings may seek to evade the British constitution, they cannot rewrite it. Johnson’s actions have significantly weakened parliament, but not leached its power altogether. Time is short, but MPs must do all in their power this week to pass a bill mandating the prime minister to ask for an article 50 extension, should no deal have been passed by 31 October. The government will try all manner of dirty tactics to prevent this: there is the potential for Tory peers to filibuster any bill until parliament is prorogued; and the government has threatened that any MP voting for an extension bill next week won’t be allowed to stand as a Conservative in the next general election. What these bully-boy tactics betray is how much power still sits with MPs. If parliamentarians fail in this endeavour next week, then Jeremy Corbyn must bring a vote of no confidence in Johnson as soon as parliament returns in mid-October, which must be backed by every MP who believes that no deal would be catastrophic for the country. They must support a temporary government with Corbyn at its head, whose sole purpose is to request an article 50 extension and trigger a general election. The stakes could not be higher. A no-deal Brexit – which this government has barely prepared for – would depress growth and jobs and sharpen the inequalities between the most and least affluent areas of the country. New Bank of England research suggests the Brexit vote has already cut the productivity of UK companies by between 2 and 5% – representing tens of billions of foregone growth – even before Brexit has happened. Johnson contends no deal must remain on the table to strongarm the EU into removing the backstop from the withdrawal agreement. But there is no reason to assume the EU – in a stronger position than the UK – will blink first in this ludicrous game of chicken, sacrificing the integrity of the single market to make unreasonable concessions that it cannot even be sure would win the support of Conservative hardliners. Even if a new deal were somehow passed, it would require a significant extension simply to pass the necessary legislation. As long as the prime minister insists on a 31 October Brexit deadline, “do or die” Britain continues to career towards crashing out without a deal. But the stakes go beyond even Brexit. Taking Britain out of the EU without a deal – despite the fact a majority of MPs and the public do not support it – would set a dangerous constitutional precedent that prime ministers can ride roughshod over our democratic conventions and safeguards. The British constitution is being stress-tested like never before. No matter how much Johnson might wish it were not so, parliament remains sovereign – for now. MPs can bring our recalcitrant prime minister to heel. But it will take more courage, unity and ingenuity than they have displayed to date. Whether they have what it takes will shape Britain’s future prosperity and place in the world for decades to come.