Boris Johnson claims that anyone who opposes his increasingly likely no-deal Brexit is anti-democratic, against the “people”, a closet remainer or a Labour voter. Such abusive mendacity is no help. Johnson knows perfectly well that millions of people who voted to leave the EU did not vote for arbitrarily timed border chaos. They voted for what he and his friends promised: negotiated Brexit with frictionless trade. So did he. He also voted for Theresa May’s withdrawal agreement. He was among those he now condemns as traitors and unfit to be members of the Conservative party. The hypocrisy, allegedly willed on Johnson by his devious apparatchik Dominic Cummings, is towering. So let’s calm down. This is a political crisis, not a constitutional one. The constitution is not fit to handle sudden suspensions of parliament, ministers who will not promise to obey the law, or commerce screaming against an imminent breakdown in trade. In such a crisis, power devolves to those in power. The national interest requires the prime minister to retain control over events, including in parliament. Overnight statutes and supreme courts are unlikely to influence Brexit, because they can only default to a general election, which gets us nowhere. Brussels would face a Britain in the grip of indecision. The best hope might be an agreement with the EU to stop the clock on the customs union on 31 October. It would be Brexit plus backstop by default, but anti-British borders would start crashing down across Europe. Johnson must see that the path to any conceivable compromise from Brussels this month will require clear evidence of a united ruling party and a united parliament. To polarise and split his own party now is plain stupid. If parliament defies him, if the courts, implausibly, oppose him, he will need to wriggle and scheme – but he must not lose control. The nation must be governed. On the backstop it is increasingly clear that Johnson is bluffing. Leak after leak makes plain that he has no alternative to a hard Irish border. Before or after Brexit, he desperately needs a get-out, and it must in some sense be agreed by parliament. The glimmer of hope is still that Brussels might back down on the open-ended and unilateral (ie “undemocratic”, as Johnson likes to claim) nature of the backstop. In return Johnson would agree a temporary, fixed-term continuation of the customs union, while a new post-Brexit trade deal is negotiated. He owes this to Ireland, and the rest of Britain. Yes, it is kicking the can down the road, but yes, Johnson could plausibly claim both Brexit achieved and a modest negotiating success. The precondition for this is not further parliamentary or legal confrontation. It needs wise counsel, courtesy and a setting aside of tribal machismo. The difficulty is that Johnson’s Downing Street knows not these words. It knows only confrontation, barricades and vilification. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist