What has gone so wrong that British Airways pilots earning six-figure salaries are angry enough to strike? On Monday and Tuesday, the majority of BA’s 4,300 pilots based at Heathrow and Gatwick will down tools for the first pilot strike in the airline’s history. BA would usually operate almost 800 flights a day carrying 145,000 passengers, most of which would have now been cancelled or rebooked. In the midst of Britain’s political turmoil, it seems fitting that the flag carrier should also be lumbering into crisis. In cost and cancellations, the strike will likely eclipse even the bitter BA cabin crew dispute of 2010-11. An eight-month pay negotiation has broken down, despite an offer worth 11.9% over three years having been made. Pilots represented by the Balpa union have rejected this and have asked for the kind of profit share enjoyed by directors, plus an above-inflation pay guarantee. Few people would be dissatisfied with a BA pilot’s pay. Perhaps only Álex Cruz, the company’s chief executive, who is currently paid £1.3m, would be pained to earn a captain’s £167,000 plus allowances. But Cruz firmly believes the pay deal on offer is good enough. When strike dates were announced, he said blame laid “squarely at the door” of Balpa. Cruz added: “I personally believe BA pilots are the best in the world … but I think they have been very badly served by the union.” But 93% of pilots voted for industrial action, on a 90% turnout. Brian Strutton, the general secretary of Balpa, said: “BA does pay well and has good terms and conditions. “And yet almost all of its pilots wanted to go on strike. You’ve got to look at what the company is doing to generate that level of ill-feeling among their staff.” One striking pilot, a long-serving BA employee based at Heathrow, said: “It’s the pilots pushing the union rather than the other way round. “Pilots are logical thinkers, they are not going to be led by the nose, no union leader is going to whip them up. Only management has the ability to do that. Communications from Álex Cruz have made pilots more angry, not less.” Speaking on condition of anonymity, he said: “It’s not really about money, it’s about respect. We’ve effectively been lied to. We’ve given up a serious pension scheme, pay and pay rises when the company was weak – all on the promise that when the company was strong and giving up proper returns to its investors, we would benefit.” BA said this week that it has “acted with integrity through many months of negotiations” and accused Balpa of backtracking on an agreement. In terms of pure profit, BA’s lean years are in the past. Its generous but burdensome pension scheme has been closed, saving BA an estimated £800m, according to Balpa. The airline is the cash cow of IAG, making more than £2bn in pre-tax profit in 2018. “And now that we’ve asked for a little bit of payback, it’s not there,” the pilot added. Day-to-day gripes associated with cost cutting have furthered pilots’ disenchantment, he said, including slow responses to minor engineering issues – “not a safety risk,” said the pilot “but you wouldn’t expect it at an airline like BA” – to worsening food and accommodation for long-haul flight stopovers. “If crew have done an 18-hour day, the least they need is a room where they can sleep,” he said. Complaints have headed into a void, the pilot said: “The stress is such that the pilots are trying to say – you’ve not been listening to us.” BA has said the pay deal would take some captains to more than £200,000 a year after three years. The pilot admitted he was well paid, but said other colleagues struggled to reach that point: “Many pilots are working flat out, they are not likely to get a decent pension, it’s a much longer pay scale to progress to higher pay.” According to Balpa, a cadet pilot comes in at about £27,000 and a first officer £59,000, while captains start at £78,000, making about £100,000 a more typical figure. While the row is pinned to pay, Strutton said: “There are a lot of factors. BA pilots have lost confidence in the management and direction of the airline. A cost-cutting regime has reduced the quality of the service pilots want to give to the customers, as well as affecting themselves. The cumulative effect is a serious groundswell of bad feeling.” Meltdowns at BA, in particular IT outages, have fuelled that feeling. The power cut that left 75,000 passengers stranded in May 2017 also disrupted the lives of pilots and crew, and they were left to deal with the fallout. “Management decisions are being taken that impinge on the working lives and quality of service that pilots and BA staff can deliver. They feel that quality should be the ethos of BA, and they don’t think that it is,” Strutton said. More strikes could follow. A further walkout is due on 27 September, although BA has yet to cancel those flights, and Balpa has a mandate for action until January. On Thursday, BA furiously rebuffed an offer of new talks and accused Strutton of reneging on an agreement struck during talks in August, which he denied: “Categorically, no, we didn’t shake hands on the deal.” Strutton said he was “running out of ideas to try to avoid the strike”, which he said would be bruising for all parties. “We need to start rebuilding the relationship of trust and confidence, which is so sadly lacking,” he added.