Racing’s ruling body has issued an unapologetic defence of its policy of taking pre-race blood samples from horses, following a complaint by the trainer Jessica Harrington. After her Millisle was narrowly beaten in a Group Three race at Salisbury last week, Harrington used her column in the Irish Field to complain that a vet with the British Horseracing Authority had taken a blood sample just 35 minutes before the race.The County Kildare trainer, who has won the Cheltenham Gold Cup and the Irish Grand National as well as top-class races on the Flat, said the vet’s intervention was “very disappointing” and suggested it may have affected the outcome. Having consulted her own vet, Harrington said that taking a sample “could raise a horse’s blood pressure, contract the spleen and/or provide an adrenaline rush, all of which you don’t want happening just over half an hour before a Group Three. “I do not want this to come across as sour grapes but she was beaten a short-head and small margins make the difference.” Harrington noted that her horse had arrived at the track the day before the race and questioned why the test had to be done at such a late stage. Her supporters on social media wondered aloud whether this was a case of an Irish runner being singled out.But a BHA spokesperson said four British-based runners in the same race also had blood samples taken, two of them after Millisle and therefore even closer to race-time. “Pre-race testing is an important part of our equine anti-doping strategy,” he added.“Pre-race testing is used in Britain and other racing jurisdictions to detect and deter the use of methods or substances which might be administered prior to racing which might enhance a horse’s performance. For certain methods and substances, it is essential that the sample is taken directly before competition, as they would not be detectable immediately post-race.“Hundreds of thousands of pre-race blood samples have been taken from horses over decades across the world. This includes runners in virtually all major racing nations contesting the most important races in the international calendar. Over the past two years, runners – and often subsequent winners – of many Group races in Britain have been pre-race tested.”Asked whether it might not be fairer to test all the runners in a particular race, the spokesperson suggested there might be logistical and practical reasons why that would often prove impractical. He added that BHA samplers are prepared to walk away if a horse responds badly when a pre-race sample is sought. Pre-race blood samples are not taken in Ireland but officials there hope to introduce the practice, possibly in the first half of next year. Talks have been taking place with trainers’ representatives. Catterick 1.55 Wadi Al Salaam 2.30 Sambucca Spirit (nap) 3.00 Gylo 3.30 Absolute Dream 4.00 Kodicat 4.35 Rose Marmara 5.10 Rego Park Lady 5.45 Be Perfect Worcester 2.10 Malangen 2.40 Byron Flyer 3.10 Hallings Comet 3.40 Danboru 4.10 Queen’s Magic 4.45 Cardy Leicester  2.20 Turaath 2.50 Saeer 3.20 Sparkling Breeze 3.50 Fantastic Blue 4.20 Wise Words 4.55 Chatham House 5.25 Compass Point Kelso 4.25 Clearance 5.00 Pena Dorada 5.35 Ardera Cross 6.10 Honourable Gent (nb) 6.40 Winding Roe 7.10 Cesar Du Gouet