His title hopes long gone, after a disastrous race in Monza, Sebastian Vettel now faces a battle just to beat his teammate. Charles Leclerc’s win put him ahead of the German into fourth. Vettel’s problem is that his touch seems to have deserted him. Much was rightly made of his unsafe return to the track but Vettel’s long-term issue was illustrated by the spin that precipitated it. The unforced error in losing the rear at Ascari was yet another mistake to add to the others that have increasingly blighted his performances. He took a three-point penalty for his dangerous return and now faces a one-race ban if he accrues three more in the next three races. Ferrari’s chief executive, Louis Camilleri, backed his driver but others were less generous. Italy’s Autosprint wrote: “Sebastian is lost and can no longer return.” Vettel needs to regroup and reset before this becomes a career-ending case of the racing yips. While Vettel suffered, the tifosi celebrated and Leclerc’s win was greeted with rapture, perhaps best summed up in Gazzetta dello Sport, which wrote: “On the podium is a 21-year-old who has conquered everything in just six months: The Scuderia, the love of the fans and probably the whole future of Ferrari. His triumph is similar to a coronation.” Leclerc had driven a fine race but equally his team had executed it perfectly – far from a given. The Ferrari can chew up its tyres prohibitively, as Leclerc discovered in Austria, caught by Verstappen, and at Spa where Lewis Hamilton could have passed him with a few more laps. Their decision to switch Leclerc to the slower hard tyre proved inspired. It was a risk, ensuring he would make it to the end on decent rubber but that he would have to defend his lead from Hamilton on the quicker mediums. It paid off, Hamilton did not pass and Leclerc could push at the end to prevent Valtteri Bottas catching him. The team principal, Mattia Binotto, praised it as “a brave but right decision”. One that helped ensure Leclerc’s coronation. Engaged in an ongoing effort to reinvent and repackage itself to attract a new, younger audience, F1 could not have prevented a more confusing, arcane scenario to new or casual fans than its qualifying debacle at Monza. So important was gaining a tow on the track that in the final session the drivers vied with one another not to be at the front of the pack and crawled around so slowly that all but two failed to cross the line in time to start their last hot laps. It made perfect sense from a drivers’ perspective, no one wanted to be in front as it could cost as much as three-tenths on the lap. However farcical it appeared, everyone had known it might happen. Similar had occurred at Spa and it had been discussed in the drivers’ briefing on Friday. But as the race director, Michael Masi, revealed after Monza: “Everyone in the room acknowledged there was not a single regulatory fix for it.” Further discussion of how it might be addressed is expected in two races’ time at Singapore. Few events cause popular uproar across the F1 press room. On Sunday, however, when the F1 director chose to cut to a crowd reaction shot just after Vettel had spun off and was about to return to the track, it was greeted with a wave of vocal outrage, booing and some choice expletives, doubtless reflected similarly by fans watching at home. When coverage returned to the track, Vettel’s dangerous return, hitting and spinning Lance Stroll had already been and gone. This was not the first time. In France there were similar poor choices and a similar woeful cut to a crowd shot during an attempted overtake at Silverstone. This is an issue not just because it is an irritation. The pictures are delivered by F1 and their intent is to sell the sport as an over-the-top streaming service in future. If that is to be successful, fans paying for it will expect a high level of professionalism. Repeated instances of poor directorial decisions are no way to sell the sport, to traditional broadcasters or for F1’s vision of the future. After a season that has proved well below Renault’s target of being comfortably the best of the rest the team finally have reason to feel they are on track with their engine. Daniel Ricciardo’s and Nico Hülkenberg’s fourth and fifth in the race was their best result since returning as a manufacturer in 2016. That it was at Monza, where they have struggled for pace in the past, was a real result for the team. The 22 points they claimed moved them into fifth in the constructors’ championship, 18 behind McLaren. That they have made strides with the power unit seems clear, as acknowledged by Ricciardo. “I want to give an extra special shout out to Viry, to the engine boys, because this sort of result here as a Renault team and power unit is quite a statement,” he said. They still have a way to go with their car and their team principal, Cyril Abiteboul, was wary of raising expectations too high but was able to take pleasure in that the progress they have been expecting from the engine was finally on display.