Joe Dunthorne is a novelist who understands that joking can be the most powerful way of being serious. In his most recent novel, The Adulterants, his abject protagonist survives (only just) through last-ditch gags. How would his mutinous humour translate into poetry? The answer is: brilliantly. The delight of this debut collection is in watching a joker shuffle the darkest pack of cards. He travels so fast and far within the short spaces of his poems that readers must fasten their safety belts and be ready for anything. Including turbulence – obviously. The opening poem, A Sighting, about seeing a bear while camping, introduces a defining theme: transformation. There is nothing Dunthorne’s imagination cannot turn inside out (not the same as saying there is nothing it cannot heal). He does not believe in seeing straight and that is the pleasure of reading him. This sighting might prove lethal. But the calculated symmetry of the lost actor within the bear and the bear within the human being is offered as a rescuing conceit. In I wanted to see how unhappy I could get, he grumbles about a therapist who “never let my jokes be jokes”. (I’m on the therapist’s side.) The poem continues: And in time I did step clearof his unaffordable home to kneelin a garden square that was open to non-residentsjust this one day of the year. And thereI thought of other words for the little bitty sticksOf grass that were not leaves or blades. I hope, one day, to read a Dunthorne poem listing the words he found for this almost-grass. Occasionally, his jokes are just jokes. I love the surreal poise of In which I practise happiness, in which he imagines himself (like a hotel receptionist) addressing a guinea pig: “‘whom may I say is speaking?’” The poem has a wonderful, unforced ending: “I love the sun/ when it arrives/ like a tray of/ drinks.” The collection weaves surreal dreams with reality (poems that are not about dreams behave as though they were). In Afternoon meditation at the ecovillage, he bails out of meditating: “Lucky for me I never found the inner attic”. But his poetry tells against him: he is constantly raiding his inner attic, sending himself up and down (two poems involve lifts – with different dramas going on). In All my friends regardless, he describes a party at which people from different parts of his life are present and compresses his social insecurity into a dozen lines: Please let me introduce the scientists. Yes,he studies the behaviour of bees.Friends from my childhood,I do not think you stupid and boring.Assistant editors, step away from the pond. Why are assistant editors especially likely to fall into the pond? It gave me pleasure to ponder this. And in Sestina for my friends, he entertainingly describes offering WG Sebald’s The Rings of Saturn as a gift to impress friends. Their improbable reactions crank up the comedy: After reading it they will say:“Joe – it was beautiful, I mean, he’s like the great gramps I never had. He even made Suffolk compelling.” He has something of Mark Haddon’s comic vitality. And I love his final poem, After I have written my important poem, in which he imagines all the inessential poems he might find it essential to write in future, including “a long one about jambes lourdes (heavy legs), a condition from which only French people suffer”, before ending with the sense that he is on the edge of something else entirely. Might O Positive be a blood group for the about-to-be transformed? • O Positive by Joe Dunthorne is published by Faber (£10.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99 As we waited to be torn apartI remember thinking the bearlooked like an actor in a bear suitwho had quit his frontier theme parkto live in the hills, eat ear-frill fungus,scratch his pelt on oaks cracked wideby lightning and in time forgethis name and how to walk so thatwhen he found us pegging outthe groundsheet with absolutedevotion he sensed in each of usa black bear beneath the Gore-Tex,balancing well on our hind legs,playing at language and marriage,and his respect for our commitmentto character was why he did notopen us up.