Taylor Moore, wearing a navy sweatshirt with the word ‘Ami’, each letter block filled with the tricolour flag, is detailing how he spent the bulk of his childhood in Le Touquet, 45 miles south of Calais, when conversation sticks on an invitation from the French Football Federation while the now Bristol City defender was at Lens. “I had the option at the age of 15, 16 to take up dual nationality, having lived there from the age of seven,” Moore says. “They said they would take me on board for their Under-16 team and onwards. That was very flattering but after having a sit down with my mum and dad, it was more a case of I didn’t actually feel French. I always had that English side of me, at home we’d speak English and I didn’t necessarily want to take that on. But I said to my dad: ‘If France are willing to take me, what about England?’” Moore impressed Football Association scouts sent across the channel to look at the then teenager, who was born in Walthamstow and went on to lift the Under-17 European Championship five years ago as part of an England team that included Dominic Solanke, Lewis Cook and Joe Gomez, before captaining the Under-18s, -19s and -20s. Yet when the Under-20s won the World Cup two years ago, Moore, who finished the previous season on loan at Bury, was absent. “Being told by England, ‘We no longer think you’re good enough, we’re going to take another player’ was heartbreaking,” says Moore, who returned to England to join Bristol City in 2016 after 12 years in northern France. “Then I always looked at others. I’d think: ‘He’s playing back at his club, why am I not doing it?’ But I learned pretty quickly that each and every player goes on a different journey. Although I had to take a step back pretty early, I can still kick on massively with Bristol City and take my career to the next level.” Moore, a down-to-earth, erudite young man, makes captivating company over an hour at Ashton Gate as he discusses seeking the help of a mental coach, going from a “boy to a man”, learning how “to defend like a bloke” on loan at Cheltenham in League Two under Gary Johnson, father of the City head coach, Lee – and trying to keep track of Kylian Mbappé in the Coupe Gambardella, the French equivalent of the FA Youth Cup. “I’d already pulled my hamstring but I tried to play on a little bit and completely tore it when he went through on goal – that’s how quick he was; I couldn’t catch him,” says Moore, laughing. “No chance. I remember playing against PSG, I played as a central midfielder and Kingsley Coman played as a No 10. I think he played 60 minutes and he scored three goals. All three of them had nothing to do with me, thank God; I had a fairly good game actually. One of the [FA] delegates came out to watch that game so I didn’t quite know what he was going to make of it after that but, thankfully, from an individual point of view, I played quite well and it was enough to get into the England team.” Moore, 22, is mature enough to recognise he was not prepared for first-team football on arrival at Bristol City, and loans to Bury (“the club was in big financial trouble back then, I didn’t have my rent paid”), Cheltenham and, last season, Southend, followed. Some went better than others, with a season at Cheltenham under Johnson Sr a steep learning curve. “I could think of four or five situations where I probably cost us games at the time,” he says. “I learned how to defend like a bloke, like a man, because in certain situations I’d be trying to play the nice tiki-taka you never see in League Two. It’s more about hitting the striker as quick as possible, going long, getting it into the channel. Set pieces. “It was definitely a challenge,” he says, puffing his cheeks. “Going from that difficult season, coming back and having a meeting with the manager here at the end of the season, when he had the feedback from his dad and it was pretty negative in general. And rightfully so, because it wasn’t a pretty season for me although I played 40 games. We had a good conversation and the manager basically said: ‘I don’t think you’re ready for Bristol City just yet. We might look at moving you on, loaning you out again, we’re not too sure, but I’m not too sure you’re ready.’ It was a negative outcome but that kind of fuelled me and gave me that bit more hunger to come back ready.” Moore has not looked back, with a successful season at Southend under Chris Powell, who worked with him at England youth camps, priming him for a starting berth at Bristol City, where the defender has calmly stepped into the void left by Adam Webster. Before joining Southend, Moore says he effectively split the remaining year on his contract into two, halving his pay to get a contract extension. In August his progress was rewarded with a new two-year deal. “I feel like I’m back and I’m here to stay. This is where I want to be in the long run and this is where I want to develop. I did absolutely everything I could this summer to show the manager, staff and the players that I am good enough.” This season Moore has started seven of City’s eight Championship games going into Saturday’s match at third-placed Preston. Moore is adamant City, who finished eighth last season, are “going places”, touching on the attention to detail in training, where Johnson and his staff utilise virtual reality technology. “I look a bit better than Carragher with it [the headset] on!” Moore says, laughing. “We look back on certain situations. For example, Liverpool playing Napoli in the Champions League, we get into a Liverpool player’s shoes and learn what you could or might do differently.” Full-time flourishing centre-back, part-time translator? Moore, who also speaks Spanish and some Portuguese, has helped the France Under-19s midfielder Han-Noah Massengo, a revelation since signing from Monaco, settle, as have French-speaking Famara Diedhiou, Benik Afobe and Kalifa Cissé, who joined Johnson’s backroom staff this summer. Massengo has proved a big hit with supporters, with the 18-year-old given a standing ovation after pressuring and then pickpocketing Swansea’s Bersant Celina last weekend, and fans have been donning wigs in tribute to his afro. “I’ve got one already,” Moore says, with a wry smile. “Walking towards the tunnel, I had to do a double take to check I was actually seeing what I was seeing, all of these different Han-Noah Massengos. I just grabbed him: ‘Look, look.’ All of that stuff helps him settle in and he absolutely loves it. And, knowing Bristol City fans, they probably have a lot more up their sleeve …”