Miso is a tired cook’s best friend and the time-poor cook’s shortcut to an excellent meal. There’s more than one type, too. Sweet white miso is chirpy and savoury in equal parts; it makes a great salad dressing and adds sparkle to chocolate brownies. Then there are the dark, brooding types, such as the brown rice miso I’ve used in today’s recipe. It’s deeply flavoured enough to stand up to the earthiest mushrooms and creates a broth – and a real welcome to autumn – in a matter of minutes. Kombu is a dried, flat natural seaweed that can be found in Asian supermarkets, the world food aisle of big supermarkets and in healthfood stores. It’s great for making a stock. Prep 10 minCook 25 minServes 4 for lunch 300g jasmine rice6 spring onions – 4 roughly chopped for the broth, 2 finely sliced, to finish5cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and roughly sliced25g dried shiitake mushrooms1 sheet (or 12g) kombu1 red bird’s eye chilli, slit lengthways250g wild mushrooms (such as ceps, chanterelles, girolles), cleaned and finely sliced4 tbsp brown rice miso First, make the rice. Put the rice in a sieve and wash under cold running water until it runs clear. Tip the rice into a saucepan for which you have a lid, cover with 450ml cold water and bring to a boil. Turn down the heat, cover the pan and leave the rice to simmer for six minutes. Turn off the heat, but don’t be tempted to lift the lid; leave the rice to continue steaming until the soup is ready. Now make the broth. Fill a large saucepan with a litre and a half of water and set it over a medium heat. Add the roughly chopped spring onions, ginger, shiitake, kombu and chilli, bring up to a boil, then reduce the heat to low and leave to simmer for 10 minutes. Strain the stock into a bowl through a fine sieve, pouring it very carefully so you leave behind the last couple of tablespoons (these might be a little gritty from the dried mushrooms). Return the broth to the clean pan and discard the stock veg in the sieve. Bring the broth back to a boil and, once it’s bubbling gently, add the sliced mushrooms. Reduce the heat to a simmer and cook the mushrooms in the broth for four minutes. Turn off the heat and gently whisk the miso paste into the stock. Divide the broth and mushrooms between four bowls, and serve with the steamed rice.