Bookmaker Betfred, which is owned by billionaire Conservative party donors Fred and Peter Done, underpaid staff and apparently failed to tell them they might be owed money even after it discovered the widespread payment problem. The bookmaker, which employs more than 7,000 people, admitted it had failed to make automatic payments to staff owed extra holiday pay because they had worked overtime. Instead it calculated holiday pay based on their contracted hours, in many cases far fewer than those they actually worked, potentially leaving staff hundreds of pounds out of pocket. Law firm Leigh Day is seeking to speak to staff who work at the company’s 1,650 betting shops to determine whether they could have a legal claim against the company. The Guardian has seen correspondence between Betfred and Peter Dowd MP, the Labour MP for Bootle, in which Betfred acknowledged the problem and promised to notify staff, allowing them to claim their money. Betfred did not respond directly to questions on whether it has notified its staff. But a whistleblower, who alerted the Guardian to the problem, claimed Betfred had not sent out a company-wide memo since making the promise in mid-August and was instead waiting for employees, many of whom were unaware they were owed money, to make a claim. It is unclear how many of Betfred’s staff, many of whom earn little more than the minimum wage, have been affected. The whistleblower said: “I don’t know one person in there who doesn’t do overtime. Everyone does it because they don’t have enough staff.” Betfred is owned by the Done brothers, who ranked 117th on the latest Sunday Times rich list with a combined wealth of £1.25bn and gave £100,000 to the Tories in 2017. Betfred has paid £20m in dividends during the past two years, most of it to the Done brothers. The pair have previously faced criticism for sacking staff just before Christmas, linking pay to takings from “social blight” fixed-odds betting terminals and lending money to staff on minimum wage at 40% interest. The whistleblower said: “It’s disgusting that as workers on 10p or 20p more that the minimum wage we’ve put off taking holidays or are forced to work extra hours before a holiday to make up for the shortfall of wages that shouldn’t even be happening.” A spokesman for Betfred blamed problems with its payroll system, which has struggled to cope with changes in the way holiday pay is calculated. He said: “We are currently working with both our advisers and our external payroll providers to develop a robust and accurate system that will automate the calculation of holiday pay based on an employee’s ‘normal remuneration’ in line with government guidelines. “As you will be aware, from April 2020 the law changes from a 12-week to a 52-week reference period, which has made it extremely difficult for employers to implement an automated payment through the payroll system, only to have to change this again in April 2020. The fact that enhancements do not apply to all of an employee’s holiday entitlement, but only to their first four weeks, is an additional issue that is proving to be a real challenge. “We are looking for our external payroll providers to provide us with the tools to enable us to make automated payments by April 2020, and in the meantime we continue to deal with all claims made to us on a case-by-case basis, authorising payments to be made when it is appropriate to do so.” The company blamed its payroll systems provided by an external organisation, not Bright HR, the human resources company jointly owned by the Done brothers.