All six crew members were asleep when a fire broke out aboard the scuba diving boat Conception in southern California, killing 34 people trapped below deck, federal investigators announced on Thursday. Boats like the Conception, which caught fire around 3am on 2 September and sank, are required to have a crew member keep watch at night. Five crew members, including the captain, managed to escape by jumping overboard but dozens trapped in the boat’s bunkroom are believed to have died of smoke inhalation. The disaster was the worst in California’s recent maritime history and sent shockwaves through the diving community and across the state. The names of nine victims have been released so far, while the remains of the final victim who remained unaccounted for were recovered on Wednesday. The National Transportation Safety Board has been investigating the tragedy and released a two-page preliminary report that said five crew members were sleeping in their quarters behind the wheelhouse on the second deck and another below deck when the fire broke out. The report comes as investigators seek to determine the cause and try to recover the wreckage of the Conception from the bottom of the sea amid an ongoing criminal investigation conducted by the FBI, Coast Guard and the US attorney’s office. The Coast Guard has issued additional safety recommendations in the wake of the tragedy, such as limiting the unsupervised charging of lithium-ion batteries and the use of power strips and extension cords. The recommendations also suggest owners and operators of vessels review emergency duties with the crew, identify emergency escapes, check all firefighting and lifesaving equipment onboard, and look at the condition of passenger accommodation spaces for “unsafe practices or other hazardous arrangements”. Coast Guard records show the Conception passed its two most recent inspections with no safety violations. Previous customers said the company that owns the vessel, Truth Aquatics, and the captains of its three boats, were very safety conscious. James Hall, a former NTSB chairman, told the Associated Press a preliminary report is generally a summary of the early findings that relies on interviews, inspection documents and other records and a review of current maritime rules and regulations. The victims who have been identified range in age from 25 to 62. A family of five was among those presumed dead, while other victims included students from a northern California charter school, and a marine biologist who owned the diving company that was leading the tour.