I urinate into the cup and wait for the stick to change colour. I hand it to the care worker and fill out the rest of the forms. Induction complete, they leave. I stare out the barred windows of my new room and look at my watch. Forty-seven hours left. This weekend in south-east London, 25 strangers signed up for a two-night stay in a fictional care home. For our brief but intense experience of institutionalised care, we eat and sleep on site, our days filled with jigsaws, naps and insidious microaggressions. Part of the Albany’s Age Against the Machine festival, this extraordinary immersive experiment investigating the performance of – and line between – care and control is an unforgettable feat of emotional engineering. We are lab rats. Incredibly quickly, we become compliant, and when the public are let in for bingo and afternoon tea, we are territorial. While our carers are never cruel, there is an undercutting of independence and dignity, their tone switching from playful to patronising, leaving us at times feeling demeaned and diminished. Slice the show open and you’d see the layers of performance like rings in a tree, so tightly wound, you quickly lose count. Fiction blurs with reality as we hover between parody and sincerity. We search for patterns and second-guess everything. Our tasks are so menial that it starts to feel more like an extended team-building exercise – we file up for food, we sing at the piano, we keep hydrated. Though laughter fills much of the space, and camaraderie helps us muddle us through, some parts of the weekend are boring, uncomfortable or lack purpose. Yet somehow this strange fictional cacophony has swallowed us so intensely, the immersive naturalism so complete, that when certain aspects come to light as artificial, it feels like a genuine betrayal. The experiment is run by indecently entertaining performer and writer Christopher Green, who flits through the rooms as executive director, a metallic head-office tang lining his faux warmth, a thin smile distracting you while his eyes leap over your shoulder for someone more useful to talk to. The compassion, kindness and respect that the residents extend to each other ring far truer than the obnoxious sales pitch Green spews for a care package and the branded posters that line every wall. By freak timing, the show starts on the same day that my grandma moves into a real care home. When I hand over my urine and signature, it’s my second induction of the day, having sat on her bed earlier and listened to her new carers ask about her pills and morning routine. However surreal this weekend gets – when the local police officers dance to a singalong rendition of Laughing Policeman, when a resident rebellion swells or when activity coordinator Anita yells, “Who still thinks chair zumba is for pussies?” while pumping her neon leggings from side to side – reality is never far away. Logistically, The Home is remarkable: the level of control even when we thought we had agency; the intricacy of planning and stage management; the intense periods of improvisation from all cast and crew. It rings us out emotionally, too. The Home is neither a blanket celebration nor critique of the care sector, but a demonstration of how complicated and difficult it is. By making us genuinely vulnerable, The Home forces us to directly address the care industry and our own possible futures within it.