Anthony Joshua, touching down briefly in New York, desperately wanted to return to the scene of the crime to reclaim his world heavyweight titles but he has settled instead for meeting his conqueror in Saudi Arabia, where crime takes on an altogether different meaning. In the city where Andy Ruiz Jr stopped him in seven rounds in June, Joshua explained on Thursday why the rematch is not taking place at nearby Madison Square Garden, or Cardiff or London – and why he is comfortable going to Saudi Arabia. “I do like New York,” he said. “It was part of the plan [to fight in New York again]. That was my preferred option. The figures were amazing. I spoke to the team. The UK was a great opportunity, home crowd. I’m about energy – getting energy from fighting at home, would have been good. “Then the Saudis came on board, so there were all those opportunities as well. Even though we had more say in the contract negotiations, when we discussed it being in the UK, there was just stalling on their side. They didn’t want to come to the UK. “I was happy to fight in London. We weighed up the situation. Then [the Saudis] told me about Formula E, WWE, World Series Boxing, mentioned all these things [held there]. So OK, cool. But honestly, I wouldn’t know enough about what was exactly happening to make it so bad for me that I wouldn’t want to box there. The event they’re going to put on, the people they’re going to cater for, what they’re trying to achieve through boxing, the reforms that are happening in their country … “But, since I was going to fight there, I had this conversation in my gym with two women. It is a point of conversation. And, the good thing is, they are talking about [reforms]. The good thing is they are going to make a change. The other good thing is Matchroom are having conversations about maybe having a female boxer on the night. The event is going to be mixed. They are making progress. These conversations are taking place.” Joshua has been philosophical about losing against Ruiz and says he has a higher purpose than just regaining his titles. “There’s pressure, being an ambassador for boxing, to be bigger than boxing,” he said. “That’s my ambition and I have to deal with it.” Yet, for all his good intentions – and he does sound sincere – Joshua is seeking redemption on 7 December in a country where that concept is a nebulous concept. Human rights abuse, the slaughter of innocent people in Yemen and the murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi also seem to have been no impediment to doing a deal with a regime so transparently desperate for international approval that “sportswashing”, as it has become known, is a central plank of their public relations platform. This is not all about the dethroned Joshua. Ruiz told him when they faced off in Saudi Arabia the day before: “The hunger remains. I don’t want 15 minutes of fame. I want it to last. I want a generation. I want to be a champion for more years.” Ruiz will bring with him the IBF, WBA and WBO belts he ripped away from the then unbeaten champion at Madison Square Garden. It was Joshua’s American debut, the moment that was meant to propel him into a mega-fight with Deontay Wilder, but their paths diverged dramatically when Ruiz brought his big lumbering fists into the equation. Joshua went down four times and a couple of pegs – although his stature and Sky Sports connection kept his commercial clout in place. “You have time to grieve,” Joshua said on Thursday about the many months he has had in which to take in the full implications of losing. “You have to get over that situation and get back to the drawing board. We are soldiers. You just prepare for the next battle.” That it will be in the desert of a country that has an appalling human rights record is the itch nobody wants to scratch. This is professional boxing. This is about money, not morals – because the business does not do all that well with morals. In a way it is the perfect place to have a fight: a long way from normality.