A recent social-media post summed up the mood among rugby lovers in Japan days before the World Cup kicks off in Tokyo. “RWC flags are all over streets of Shibuya. It was kind of [a] ‘dream may come true’ feeling for me,” wrote Koji Tokumasu, a past president of Asia Rugby and director of the RWC 2019 Organising Committee. The committee and World Rugby say it will be a will be a “once in a lifetime” experience for all concerned and are certainly confident everything is on track, despite a few logistical issues at the recent Test matches in Kamaishi and Osaka, mainly involving the queues for food and beer. “As Japan prepares to welcome the world, Rugby World Cup fever is well and truly sweeping the nation,” World Rugby Chairman, Bill Beaumont, said following Japan’s recent wins over Fiji, Tonga and the United States in the Pacific Nations Cup. But while there has been plenty of visibility on social media of the teams arriving and taking part in welcome ceremonies this weekend there are still some concerns about how much of an impact the tournament will have. For some, with less than a week remaining until the showpiece begins in Japan, much still needs to be done for the first tournament to be held in Asia to have a long-lasting effect. The journey to the start of the tournament has been tumultuous and one that at times has been overshadowed by next year’s Olympics in Tokyo. Weeks before kick-off, even in Tokyo, it seemed that there were still many who did not fully comprehend what is about to hit Japan. “Really disappointed – I’m teaching in a junior high school in central Tokyo,” one school teacher said. “Literally two or three students out of 200 had the slightest interest or knowledge about rugby or the World Cup. “No posters, nothing. There should be publicity and visits to elementary and high schools. The Olympics has been mentioned every day for ages and will not be until next year. The momentum after 2015 has just vanished. It baffles and infuriates me.” To be fair, many of those students are probably already at school when Japan rugby legend Daisuke Ohata appears every day on morning TV in a segment promoting the tournament. And Ohata is only one of many former internationals who are doing their bit to promote the World Cup. The former Japan captain, Toshiaki Hirose, has been touring Japan teaching fans the national anthems of the 20 teams taking part, to ensure all visitors – be they players, fans or media – feel the Japanese sense of “Omotenashi” or welcome, while Hiroyuki Tanuma, who played for Japan in the 1999 and 2003 tournaments, led a group of players from Yamanashi Gakuin University to the summit of Mount Fuji in August wearing the shirts of the teams taking part in the tournament. Of course, the tournament organisers would point to the statistics to prove everything is fine with 1.6m of the 1.8m tickets sold and a record 38,000 applying for the initial 10,000 places on the volunteer programme for the tournament, forcing an extra 3,000 to be taken on to what has been dubbed “Team No-Side.” The economic benefit to Japan is also without question, with recent estimates saying the economy will benefit by around ¥216.6bn (£1.5bn). But still questions have been raised, particularly away from the 12 host cities. Cities and municipalities hosting the more than 50 training venues have criticised the rules that prohibit them publicising practice locations and schedules for security reasons. The massive crowds that have witnessed teams such as South Africa and Australia at their pre-tournament camps would seem to suggest that a compromise has been reached. Wales, meanwhile, have been running an engagement programme in Kitakyushu, the host for their pre-tournament camp, for a year with refereeing and coaching courses that have extended to other cities. Pictures of the team have been appearing on local buses while there are even Welsh flags on mail vans and fire engines. “The welcome the teams have received so far across the country has been phenomenal. They are telling us that they have never seen anything like it. From the host cities, volunteers and public, everyone is keen and showing their full support, which is fantastic,” said Beaumont. It was a marked change from five months ago, when Yoshiro Mori resigned as Honorary President of the Japan Rugby Football Union, forcing the board to follow suit to take responsibility for what the former prime minister of Japan said was the lack of progress made in promoting the tournament and developing legacy programmes. For most, the feeling here is the tournament itself will be a huge success. “The Webb Ellis Cup is here in Japan. Our host cities are ready. Our stadiums are in immaculate condition and our 20 teams are itching to take the field,” said Japan Rugby World Cup 2019 Organising Committee CEO Akira Shimazu. “I speak on behalf of all Japan, a 127 million-strong welcoming committee, when I say that we are ready to welcome the world to Japan, and ready to host a truly memorable and once in a lifetime Rugby World Cup.”