On a crisp, newly autumnal night on Oxford Street in London, the 100 Club has a line of mostly old-school mods and skinheads wearing denim jackets and Fred Perry polo shirts, carrying 1970s-styled holdalls. The queue stretches across the front of several chain stores with people from all over the country – and even Italy – waiting to be let in. The 100 Club might be better known for its punk rock history, but the 6Ts Rhythm and Soul Society nights are celebrating their 40th anniversary, thus making it the longest-running club night in London and the longest-running northern soul night in the world. Despite recent club closures and changing music tastes, 6Ts has held firm. The room is full by around 11.30pm with barely any space to dance; most people are over the age of 45, with an equal split of men and women. With the DJ gauging that the crowd are anticipating northern soul’s biggest anthems, that’s what we get: Sandi Sheldon’s You’re Gonna Make Me Love You, Soul Incorporated’s My Proposal and Luther Ingram’s If It’s All the Same to You Babe. The dancefloor is quickly coated in sweat from the dancers’ faces. There’s a lot of swift, nifty footwork, including some trademark northern soul spins and shuffles, which are greatly aided by the talcum powder laid down to add traction. By the bar is a small record stall with originals fetching anywhere between £20 and £900. The crate-digging culture on the northern soul scene is often likened to train-spotting, complete with sage discussion of matrix numbers etched into the record itself. The most expensive northern soul record to date is Frank Wilson’s Do I Love You (Indeed I Do), which was sold at auction for £25,000 in 2009 – there are only two known copies in existence. 6Ts began in August 1979 at the Bedford Head pub in Covent Garden, coinciding with the release of the film Quadrophenia, which helped kickstart the revival of the mod scene. Mods had themselves kickstarted northern soul in the late 1960s, thanks to their love of a particular kind of heavy, anthemic, danceable US soul music – the sound quickly took hold in clubs like Wigan Casino and Manchester’s Twisted Wheel. “The new mods would have been about 20% to start with, in terms of the crowd,” Ady Croasdell explains. The other 80% were avid northern soul heads from across the country, looking for newer sounds as the old classics began to grow stale. And when Wigan Casino began to decline as the DJs catered to tourists – mostly from London – favouring pop songs with the slightest hint of a uptempo beat, the old guard wanted an alternative. Northern soul in the 70s was counter-cultural, and many looked to 6Ts for new discoveries of long-lost records that had been found by record collectors on regular visits to American warehouses and record company vaults. Some were often demos from singers who made one song, and then went back to their regular jobs as bus drivers or cleaners. “Before 6Ts we had northern soul nights in London but only 30 or 40 people would turn up, as opposed to thousands up north,” Ady explains. “We were all on a big learning curve, but we already knew a lot of people, and being a record dealer I had a good reputation with other DJs and collectors.” As a result, soulies from all over the country would flock to London just to hear rare records on a Friday night. To this day, Croasdell puts its success down to “mainly luck” and playing “exclusive new-old discoveries that put us at the cutting-edge of northern soul”. After a hop from Covent Garden to West Hampstead, he moved to the 100 Club in 1981. To commemorate each passing anniversary, they release a 7in single, only available to those who buy a ticket – some fetch up to hundreds of pounds on eBay. This year’s release was Ready or Not, Here Comes Love by Carolyn Crawford with I Stand Blue by Mickey Stevenson as the B-side. At around 2am, when it’s Croasdell’s turn to man the decks onstage, he airs it: “You all have this single, and it’s fucking great!” At 3am, fellow 6Ts promoter, curator and DJ Matt Bolton, as well as resident DJ Butch, make a framed presentation to Croasdell for his Outstanding Contribution to Soul Music, with touching tributes from other DJs on the soul scene. There’s a poignant, touching tribute for “a few of those that can’t be with us tonight”, referring to co-founder Randy Cozens, who died of cancer in 2003, with an airing of Bettye Swann’s Kiss My Love Goodbye. When the all-nighter comes to a close at 6am on Sunday morning, the traditional final three songs of every 6Ts night play out: Carla Thomas’s I’ll Never Stop Loving You, Four Tops’ Baby I Need Your Loving, and Walter Jackson’s That’s What Mama Say. Walking outside after eight hours of dancing, there’s a feeling that – middle-aged or not – 6Ts punters still have a lot of energy left in those legs. Carla Thomas – I’ll Never Stop Loving You “An atypical Stax sound, found in an annotated tape box in the company’s library. It is probably a Detroit production from the late 60s, when Al Bell got Stax artists to cut with Don Davis for a slicker sound. Played at the club at 5.55am – as the penultimate record of the all-nighters – it’s a goose-pimples moment for a tired and emotional crowd.” Little Ann – Who Are You Trying To Fool “Discovered in a Harlesden, London, studio, while listening to a wrongly marked tape box from indie Detroit producer and guitarist Dave Hamilton’s vaults. Little Ann had a massive track, What Should I Do, in Wigan Casino’s final years; this tough, heartbroken, yet angry song, which Ann wrote with Dave, cemented her place as a lost soul heroine.” Ben E King – Gettin’ To Me “An unmarked 8in metal acetate record was discovered in a Hanway Street record shop about 200 yards away from the 100 Club in London’s West End. It sounded incredible and turned out to be the great Ben E King on the third track – that missed the 45 cut – from his session with Leiber & Stoller for Atlantic. As the only known copy in the world, this dramatic recording quickly became a 6Ts anthem that drew rare soul fans to the club like moths to a flame.” Darrow Fletcher – (Love Is) My Secret Weapon “Darrow Fletcher was a 14-year-old hit Chicago soul singer with The Pain Gets a Little Deeper in 1965. Ten years later he was in LA where he had matured into a talented, expressive vocalist and recorded this track for Ray Charles. The projected LP didn’t make the presses but Kent Records acquired the masters and the song is now considered a modern soul classic.” Melba Moore – The Magic Touch “The first of the unissued tape discoveries to really take off and become massive on the northern and scooter scenes across the world. Its dynamic production by NYC veteran Stan Kahan on Brill Building writer Ted Daryll’s opus, was perfect for the teenage Melba Moore on her first recording. It would have rammed Wigan Casino’s dancefloor in any era.”