Back in May last year I bought a £3,000 specialist mountain bike from the “worlds biggest online bike store”, Chain Reaction Cycles – part of cycling retailer, Wiggle. Less than a year later – in March this year – the frame developed a crack and I submitted a warranty claim. The problem is, the company just won’t deal with it. After endless delays, I finally received an acknowledgement that a replacement had been allocated in August. I was told it would be dispatched in 24 hours. Nothing happened and I eventually discovered that my allocated frame had been sold to someone else. The warranty team will not answer emails, the “live chat team” tells me it passes on messages but they seem to get nowhere, and you cannot ever speak to anyone on the phone. In short, I feel like I’m being ignored. Trading Standards has advised me to send a letter stating the company is in breach of contract, but I suspect that this will be ignored, too. ML, Thatcham Given the huge size of Chain Reaction and its parent firm Wiggle, we get very few complaints about these firms which are the Amazon of cycle retailing. I have used both and always had excellent service. That said, your case is not a good advert for Northern Ireland-based Chain Reaction, taken over by Wiggle in 2016. In fairness, once we raised it with Wiggle HQ it resolved the problem very quickly. Chris McKee, CR’s manager, told us that a technical error led to the first replacement delivery being cancelled. “We’re investigating why this happened to ensure the same issue doesn’t occur again. We’re deeply sorry for the experience he has had. “We’ve already contacted him to apologise and a new frame is on its way,” he says. You are just hugely relieved that you have the £2,000 replacement. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to terms and conditions