“Believe me, gentlemen,” cried Horatio Nelson, one-armed yet tight of trouser as he strutted before the stuffed shirts at the Admiralty, “he wants to be the master of the world.” Nelson was talking about Napoleon, and counselling that there could be no deal with the pint-sized menace. “You cannot make peace with dictators. You have to destroy them.” This scene from Lady Hamilton, with Laurence Olivier as Nelson and Vivien Leigh as his eponymous mistress, was allegorical, since the film was made in 1941 to serve as propaganda as another pint-sized menace stalked Europe. The intriguing suggestion in Churchill and the Movie Mogul (BBC Four) was that this scene was written by the former as Britain once more stood alone against a megalomaniac foe. Britain’s wartime leader opened a new front in the cinema to encourage Americans to join the fight to defeat Hitler. Lady Hamilton’s director, the Hungarian Jewish émigré Alexander Korda, had already been dispatched to Hollywood to make the British sympathetic to Americans. Tough gig. Britain in 1941 still had its imperial boot on the throats of millions of colonials – a fact that led Americans, such as the influential Chicago Tribune publisher Robert R McCormick, to argue it would be better if British imperialism not German fascism got its comeuppance in the second world war. The FBI boss, J Edgar Hoover, received a memo arguing that Korda was making not so much entertainment as propaganda. Gee, you think? Korda was even hauled before a senate committee for a proto-McCarthyite grilling on his allegedly un-American activities. We heard audio from the hearing at which an unnamed senator laid into Korda’s 1939 film The Four Feathers, damning the movie about a British coward turned hero in the imperial conflict against the Mahdi in Sudan for being “all pip-pip and tawny port and a thin red line of heroes”. It was a shame we didn’t hear Korda’s reply to this critique. But in a sense it didn’t matter: the film was a smash in the US, making Americans feel sympathy for their former colonial masters even as it depicted what that senator called “the ancient British sport of knocking off the natives”. Hitler had Leni Riefenstahl, the suggestion went; we had Korda. How striking that it took a refugee from Hungary to win Britain’s propaganda war. Not only did he produce wartime movies, but he later provided cover to MI6 agents working in Europe by pretending they were employed by his company, London Films. It is worth thinking about whenever someone suggests there are too many refugees in the UK. In 1942, he was knighted by Churchill. But why did the two become friends? This film suggests that both men were establishment outsiders. You could overstate this. After all, Korda was a refugee from the antisemitic persecution of Admiral Horthy’s regime, while Churchill was born in that well-known shtetl, Blenheim Palace. But the facts that his mother was American and that, by 1934, he was in the political wilderness, helped him feel simpatico with Korda. As for Korda, he reinvented himself in his friend’s image; he even smoked Churchill’s brand of cigars to complete the effect. Korda signed up Churchill in 1934 to write two screenplays for £10,000. He realised Churchill’s literary gift was essentially visual; his speeches are unmade movies, argued critic David Thomson. Consider the fast-edited montage of this speech: “We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender.” That said, the screenplays Churchill wrote were never made into films. Let us not go overboard on what these two did for the war effort. What swung the US into joining the war was not the movies, but the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor. The English exceptionalism these two men pioneered, though, is still with us. Today, that scene from Lady Hamilton has a new resonance as an allegory of Brexit. Johnson and that other gimcrack Churchill, Nigel Farage, suppose themselves leaders of a heroic England that stands alone again (no offence Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, but you don’t belong in this rhetorical nonsense), facing down pip-squeak continentals. The myth of splendid, indomitable isolation was always dubious, but never more ridiculous than in 2019.