David Gauke, a former cabinet minister, has rejected the idea that ex-Tory rebels colluded with foreign powers to block a no-deal Brexit and warned No 10 to stop using the tactics and language of Donald Trump. The former justice secretary, who had the whip withdrawn by Boris Johnson, responded with dismay to an anonymous briefing from someone in Downing Street that he and others had help from EU countries in drafting the Benn Act to block a no-deal exit on 31 October. In an interview with Sky’s Sophy Ridge, Gauke said: “It’s not true, and I think here is a very good example of a No 10 briefing, using the word ‘collusion’ – and that’s a very potent word in itself – providing no evidence that there was anything like help with the drafting from foreign countries. “It’s not true, but even if it were true the use of language of that sort is completely disproportionate, completely over the top, and feeds into this narrative that anyone who doesn’t agree with No 10’s position is somehow unpatriotic or betraying the country, or an enemy, or wanting the country to surrender. “This is the sort of language that I think a lot of people are concerned about, because it is questioning the motives of people who are just trying to do the best for this country, and avoid what most people, I think, would say would be a disastrous outcome of leaving without a deal on 31 October.”  The Observer breaks the story that Boris Johnson has sought legal advice on closing parliament for five weeks Other media organisations begin to receive leaks that Johnson will make a statement on prorogation Three privy counsellors, including Jacob Rees-Mogg, travel to Balmoral to tell the Queen of the prorogation plan. Cabinet ministers are informed by conference call Tens of thousands protest against prorogation. Cross-party group of MPs steps up preparation for blocking no deal when parliament makes a brief return Parliament returns and the prime minister loses six votes in six days. MPs vote to prevent a no-deal Brexit, and refuse Johnson's attempts to force them into a general election. Legal campaigner Gina Miller vows to continue her “fight for democracy” after the high court dismissed her claim that the prime minister acted unlawfully in giving advice to the Queen to suspend parliament at a time of momentous political upheaval. Parliament is dissolved amid chaotic scenes as some MPs hold up signs saying they have been silenced, try to prevent Speaker John Bercow leaving the chamber, and  sing the Red Flag. The court of session in Scotland rules that Boris Johnson’s decision to prorogue parliament for five weeks was unlawful. The case will go to the supreme court. The Supreme court begins three-day hearing to join together all the appeals and legal challenges to the prorogation. The judges unanimously decided that prorogation was justiciable, and it was in the power of the court to rule on it. They additionally found that the prorogation was unlawful, as it had the effect of preventing parliament from being able to carry out its constitutional functions. The court found that the prime minister’s advice to the Queen was unlawful, void and of no effect. Their unanimous judgement was that parliament had not been prorogued. Parliament goes back to work. He added: “I am worried about the use of language at the moment. It is incredibly divisive, it is designed to stoke resentment, provoke anger, to nurse grievances, and it is feeding into a toxic atmosphere, not just in parliament but I think more widely.” Gauke, who has said he would like to return as a Conservative MP, also accused Johnson of acting like Trump. “I think the Conservative party should aim higher than the standards of Donald Trump,” he said His comments add to a warning from Amber Rudd, the former home secretary, that Johnson’s words had been contributing to a “more aggressive approach” and using language that could “incite violence”. She also said No 10 appeared to be trying to “mobilise anger”. Johnson’s use of the phrase “surrender act” to refer to the Benn bill has been repeatedly criticised by Labour MPs, who warned they are receiving more death threats and referenced the murder of Jo Cox by a rightwing extremist. The prime minister provoked outrage by saying this was “humbug”. Since then, Johnson has claimed he was just talking about criticism of the term “surrender act” and doubled down on its usage, arguing it was a proportionate term.