“It is terrible that someone who has been destroyed spreads destruction, and how hard that is to avoid.” There are three generations of destructive parents and children in Vigdis Hjorth’s Will and Testament. The protagonist, Bergljot, was sexually abused as a child by her rich and powerful father, who once half excused himself by alluding to the terrible experiences of his own childhood. Now in her 50s, Bergljot fears that she too has been a destructive parent, and her daughter writes a moving letter to her grandmother and aunts telling them that her mother’s childhood has impacted on her own: “I’ve seen Mum as broken and distraught as a human being is capable of without dying.” The book was a bestseller when it was published in Norway in 2016, partly because readers recognised Hjorth’s own family in the tale of intergenerational destruction and seem to have been titillated by a story presented in the press as disguised autobiography. Hjorth’s sister was so offended by the depiction of their parents that she wrote her own more rose-tinted autobiographical novel, Free Will, and that became a bestseller as well. As Will and Testament opens, the narrator’s parents have given their holiday cabins to their favourite younger daughters, denying Bergljot and her brother Bard their share on the grounds that they have a more troubled relationship with the older siblings. An argument ensues in which the excluded children fight not only for their inheritance but for their right to their own tales about their childhoods. At its most profound, this is a novel about the way that dysfunctional family life sets one person’s story against another’s with no possibility of victory. Hjorth’s narrator is repetitive and insistent. She drinks a lot, as do all her relatives, and the prose has the convincing feel of a drunken rant, as the sentences circle back on themselves. It’s an ugly book about an ugly subject, lit up only by the black humour of its anecdotes and the freer world of Bergljot’s dreams. Irritating as the repetition can be, it works to enclose us in the claustrophobia of the story, where Bergljot feels doomed to echo herself unheard. Asked by her mother why she hates her, she explains “that I didn’t hate her, until I did start to hate her, I told her over and over, would I have to explain myself – yet again – only for the conversation to be as if I had never even tried and I felt rejected, would I be rejected yet again?” There are obvious comparisons to be made with the bleakly comic 1998 Danish film Festen, and the narrator makes them herself. Ultimately, she thinks that Festen is flawed by giving the man who confronts his father a relatively happy ending, when “in real life it doesn’t end well for anyone who confronts their father and family”. There are also parallels with Karl Ove Knausgaard, and the existence of his autobiographical series My Struggle makes it pleasing that a woman should give a female (and comparatively compact) version of the kind of bitter inter-generational conflict he described, again told through the mundane minutiae of everyday life. As with Knausgaard, a kind of wisdom does accrue, almost in spite of the narrator, who seems determined not to gain the perspective that might allow her to move on. I found the book wisest when the events described were least lurid, and for this reason Bergljot’s relationship with her mother seemed the most profound and most disturbing of the dramas portrayed. When, in her 20s and having escaped her family, Bergljot told her mother she was pregnant, her mother announced that she was pregnant too, even going so far as to fake a positive test result. It’s a common set of dynamics: the wife of a sexually abusive father competes with her daughter. But here it feels complicated by the mother’s particular personality – her combination of insecurity and self-righteousness. As a result of these characteristics, Bergljot’s sisters both pity their mother and believe her story over Bergljot’s, and we come to see the pointlessness of insisting on truth, as Bergljot does, when only one of you is committed to logic and when the truth of the past can have little impact on the present. Bergljot learns to her cost that there is no balance sheet for our childhoods. Because her parents are so rich, and because it’s an inheritance issue that’s at stake, she is tempted to think that a financial settlement might provide recompense for emotional harm. But as the financial dispute nears a resolution, it becomes clear that it only serves to reinforce the hopelessness of Bergljot’s quest for justice and recognition. We aren’t recompensed for childhood suffering. Our relationships with our parents are simply there, for us to take or leave. Bergljot thinks that she chooses to separate from her parents in adulthood, but the emotional consequences are too profound for this to be true. In this unappealing but compelling book, Hjorth proves brilliant at revealing the stubborn, unredemptive quality of childhood suffering. • Lara Feigel is the author of Free Woman: Life, Liberation and Doris Lessing. Will and Testament by Vigdis Hjorth, translated by Charlotte Barslund, is published by Verso (£10.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.