Alexander Zeldin’s new play is not like anything I have seen before. Directed by the author, it creates its own category of intensity: slowly paced but sharply felt. It is as if an audience is seeing the action through a microscope. What looks at first like all-over dismay turns out to be swarming with idiosyncrasy. Faith, Hope and Charity is the last in a trilogy of dramas about life in Britain under the cosh of austerity. A community centre diminished by welfare cuts is threatened with closure; Natasha Jenkins’s design makes this immediately recognisable as a place of shelter and of sadness. Yellow brickwork; children’s paintings pinned to a board; a stack of plastic chairs. A drip of water falls from the ceiling; from an unreachable place within the walls comes the sound of a trapped bird. This is an evening of individual moments. Susan Lynch – a mother on the brink of having a daughter taken into care – is gleaming with desperation, used to going to bed because she does not have enough to eat, and so hungry for comfort that she hugs everyone she meets. As her son, Bobby Stallwood is equally remarkable: loyal but jittering with anxiety and anger. Alan Williams puts in a finely dazed performance as the man who comes for the choir – “ they are all singing nicely around me and I can pretend it’s me” – and thinks Christmas is fascist. Presiding over them all, trying to steer them through court cases and ensuring that the sandwiches are cut “for adults” (in triangles), is the marvellous Cecilia Noble: apparently phlegmatic, holding in her own troubles. There is not a moment of obvious “acting” in the entire evening. Two playwrights briefly hove into my mind. Mike Leigh, because of the downbeat delivery of oddities of phrasing, and Annie Baker, because of the pace. I was about to call this “leisurely” but there is no such thing as time off here: after all, no one has time on. For the second time this month, someone in the stalls has watched her battle for justice being dramatised. On the press night of A Very Expensive Poison, Marina Litvinenko, who battled so long to make public the circumstances of her husband’s murder, was among the audience, her presence adding a further instance of the slipping between the real and the imagined seen in Lucy Prebble’s play. Now another campaigner, Dr Shuping Wang, has seen a version of her life – apparently against the wishes of the Chinese government. She was cajoled into taking an unwilling bow. The King of Hell’s Palace, by Frances Ya-Chu Cowhig, has the makings of a terrific investigative story. It reverberates well beyond China – and that setting alone, rare for a British theatre, is a promising aspect of the programming by Hampstead’s new artistic director, Roxana Silbert. In Henan province in the early 1990s, Chinese farmers, compelled to work in mines to support themselves, are desperate to find a way out of poverty. They consider growing peonies, symbols of good fortune; they are offered a quick route to wealth by selling blood plasma. The pressure to make a profit leads to blood getting mixed: infection follows; a doctor alerts the authorities but is ignored; later, violent attempts are made to silence her. By the end of the play, the skin of the farmers is marked by lesions – while the doctor notes that “officially there’s no Aids in the country”.’ Tom Piper’s design brings the story into immediate life: a shrine of family pictures; baskets spilling over with richly coloured peonies; rails cutting brutally through the landscape. There are memorable images: corpse flowers “bloom once a year and smell like rotting flesh”. The idea of contaminated blood is a powerful warning of what follows when healthcare is dictated by commercial interests – and a powerful metaphor of a poisoned political system. But the dialogue does not match the visual immediacy, and Michael Boyd’s production – with an unusual number of fluffs on press night – does not rescue it from galumphing. The first half is soggy with exposition; it is only halfway through that a thriller element – kidnap, hoods – enables the play to move from explanation to action. An important story has not yet been fully dramatised. At the Bush, Lynette Linton begins her reign as artistic director with another play evidently in the grip of a crusading purpose. There are lovely possibilities in Jackie Kay’s 1986 poetic drama Chiaroscuro, but too much spelling out. In a recording studio, members of a girl band discover and deny same-sex love. They begin by explaining the origin of their names: a Himalayan grandmother, a Nigerian mother, a “strong woman” (I think we should rest this term, which makes it sound like this is a rare beast) who was the daughter of slaves. Most strikingly, a girl in care, born of one black and one white parent, is called Opal because she changes with the light. As two of them fall in love, and one proves to be a homophobe, they go on explaining, sometimes over-lyrically, sometimes ruminatively in song. The aim is admirable, the execution accomplished; the subtext and tightness are missing. Star ratings (out of five)Faith, Hope & Charity ★★★★The King of Hell’s Palace ★★★Chiaroscuro ★★★ • Faith, Hope and Charity is at the Dorfman, National Theatre, London, until 12 October• The King of Hell’s Palace is at the Hampstead theatre, London, until 12 October• Chiaroscuro is at the Bush theatre, London, until 5 October