Brompton ExplorePrice £1,570, cyclesurgery.com Gears 6 Saddle Brooks Cambium C17 All-Weather Few bikes are more perfectly evolved for city living than the Brompton. Adaptable, foldable, portable and (virtually) unpinchable, it is the urban equivalent of a queue-busting fast pass at a theme park. But now this lifelong townie is eyeing up the countryside and planning trips that will take it further afield and into pastures new. To capture cycling’s inherent spirit of adventure, Brompton has created the Explore edition. If you imagine that means chunkier wheels, suspension and mud-splattered cranks, you will be disappointed. In fact, it means little more than a very comfortable saddle, a pouch that you can load with accessories to keep you on the go and special six-speed gearing to take the thigh-burn out of steep hills. It has also been given tan-walled tyres and an earthy paint job so that you’ll blend into the landscape rather than looking like a metropolitan escape artist. To be fair to Brompton, the Explore does push home the fact that these little bikes really can go anywhere. Intrepid riders have already pedalled them at the South Pole and from Land’s End to John O’Groats. So, forget the office and cycle somewhere new. Santini, the producers of the official UCI kit, have created this UCI Collection so you can wear your own rainbow stripes. Worn on or off the bike to add some extra style to your look, Santini’s Cycling Cap has a UCI Collection design with rainbow stripes on the peak. The central breathable mesh insert keeps things cool and when worn peak down you’ll get excellent protection from the elements. UCI Collection Rainbow Cycling Cap, £20, sigmasports.com Email Martin at martin.love@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@MartinLove166 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.