They are not the biggest beasts in the east but, win or lose, the unheralded rugby men of Russia are planning to enjoy their rare moment in the global spotlight when the World Cup kicks off on Friday night. While even their own head coach, the former Welsh flanker Lyn Jones, gives them barely a 20% chance of upsetting hosts Japan in the tournament’s opening fixture, the Bears are definitely not a squad lacking for spirit or character. Defeats to Italy, Connacht and Jersey in their warm-up games do not remotely reflect the eventful journey they have been on to get this far. Russia only crept into the tournament by the back door after Romania, Spain and Belgium were docked points for fielding ineligible players in European World Cup qualification and their eclectic squad includes a tighthead prop, Kiril Gotovtsev, who competed as a wrestler and bobsleigher before, aged 26, he reapplied his raw strength to the front row. Their captain Vasily Artemyev is a Dublin native while their fly-half Yuri Kushnarev has already won well over 100 caps for his country. If knitting together a vaguely competitive squad in 12 months has clearly been a challenge for Jones, the 55-year-old has this week been urging his players to make the most of their pool games against Japan, Samoa, Ireland and Scotland. “It is both scary and exciting and I’ve just explained to the players there’s nothing we can do to help them prepare for this first game. It’s just about the experience and playing with no fear whatsoever. Just get out there and express yourself. If you play really hard and chase really hard it’s amazing what you can achieve.” It unquestionably ranks as the highest-profile assignment of Jones’s coaching career, a long way from the more familiar environments of Neath and London Welsh. The past year has been spent trying to bridge the ever-widening gap between rugby’s major and minor players; even the investment of one billion roubles (£12.45m) only goes so far. “We keep trying to catch them up and they keep accelerating,” sighs Jones. “They have gone into supersonic mode and are in a different stratosphere to us. You think you’re getting there and they keep pushing on. But this is a long-term investment and you have to keep trying and working hard. There are no shortcuts.” Jones has also been having flashbacks to life in Wales in the late 1990s, shortly after professionalism had dawned. “Russian rugby reminds me a lot of where we were in Welsh rugby in 1998-99: no academies, everyone bickering with each other, limited resources. But Wales got their act together and look where they are today. That’s how long the process can take. Russia have plans, they have ambition and the president has done an excellent job in trying to push the game forward in the correct manner. “Once we had confirmation we were going to play in the World Cup the union put resources in straight away to get our players to a standard where we could compete and survive for longer than 50 minutes. The last 12 months has been about making the players understand what the contemporary game involves. We’re not playing at a different level, we’re playing a different sport. The ball is the same shape but [against tier one teams] the referee never blows his whistle and people rarely make mistakes. Whatever happens on Friday I’m so proud of how dedicated these guys have been.” Russia’s longer-term aim is to become more regular World Cup qualifiers, having only featured once before, in 2011. But as yet no good luck messages have been received from the office of Vladimir Putin. “People in Russia are very realistic as to where the team is but the players are very proud people and they want to perform for their country,” says Jones. “There is nothing they won’t do to create that pride. We know sides are going to keep the ball on the field against us and create a huge amount of ball-in-play time. We want to take it all the way and see what happens in the last five minutes.”