David de Gea Had little to do in the first half until double save kept contest level before United’s opener. 7 Ashley Young A muted presence as United missed Aaron Wan-Bissaka’s zest and pace at full-back. Booked. 5 Victor Lindelöf Found the effervescent Saka difficult to contain but this was, overall, a steady display from the Swede. 6 Harry Maguire Had been a constant aerial threat in Arsenal area but played Aubameyang onside for his goal. 5 Axel Tuanzebe First league start for two years came at left-back and disaster struck as error led to equaliser. 4 Paul Pogba Tackle then pass to Rashford showed quality, though he may have been troubled by recent ankle problem. 6 Scott McTominay Net-bursting strike gave Leno no chance and in an impressive outing kept going right until the end. 8 Andreas Pereira Lit up a dour first half with a sparkling run-then-shot Leno did well to save. Improving. 7 Jesse Lingard Desperately needs to find his top form but this was, yet again, a below-par offering. 5 Daniel James Always bright: attacked Chambers along the left when he could and break along opposite flank led to United’s goal. 7 Marcus Rashford A surprise inclusion at centre-forward, appeared to lack sharpness but he did set up McTominay’s goal. 7 Substitutes Fred (Lingard) 6; Greenwood (Pereira) 6 Bernd Leno Produced the save of the opening 45 minutes from Pereira, could not repel McTominay’s pile-driver but beat out Rashford’s late effort. 8 Calum Chambers Found James difficult, booked early and was part of a shaky visiting rearguard that never looked comfortable. 5 Sokratis Papastathopoulos Should have charged McTominay but knelt, bowed his head and ball flicked off an arm for United’s goal. 4 David Luiz Sprayed one diagonal pass to Chambers but could lose attackers and as senior man lacked leadership. 5 Sead Kolasinac A surge should have been rewarded with Aubameyang’s run but was lucky not to concede penalty after break. 6 Lucas Torreira Will be disappointed he could not connect with second-half chance in front of United’s goal. 5 Granit Xhaka New captain hit a slick early ball but also appeared to duck out of the way of McTominay’s shot. 6 Mattéo Guendouzi Upped tempo when he could, saw De Gea save well from him, but was not enough of a factor. 6 Nicolas Pépé Disappointing. Scored first Arsenal goal last time out but spurned free-kick, then later a chance offered by Saka. 5 Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang Had never before scored against big-six opposition away from home: chipped finish was sublime. 8 Bukayo Saka 18-year-old winger made only a second Premier League start and created his team’s crucial goal. 7 Substitutes Ceballos (Torreira) 6; Willock (Saka) 6; Nelson (Pépé) 6