The furious and dramatic scenes in Westminster dominate the front pages on Thursday as papers report on Boris Johnson’s return to the House of Commons after his decision to suspend parliament was found to be unlawful. The Mirror’s splash today is “Man with no shame”, claiming that Johnson has hit a “new low” after invoking the name of murdered MP Jo Cox to argue that Brexit must be delivered. “Boris Johnson was hauled back into the Commons yesterday after his supreme court slapdown but failed to show any remorse.” The paper also said the “PM refuses to say sorry for his lies” and that his “vile Jo Cox jibe leaves MPs in tears”. Tomorrow's front page: Man with no shame #TomorrowsPapersToday https://t.co/ykW5qPZ3yl pic.twitter.com/j3IALb15tx The Guardian says there were “gasps as PM uses memory of Jo Cox to bolster Brexit case”, in its story, which ran under the headline: “MPs’ fury as Johnson claims to speak for Britain on Brexit”. The paper also says that “to the fury of opposition MPs he dismissed fears that his use of language such as ‘surrender’ and ‘betrayal’ was dangerous in a heightened political climate as ‘humbug’”. The Guardian front page, Thursday 26 September 2019: MPs’ fury as Johnson claims to speak for Britain on Brexit pic.twitter.com/Pii28wJR3F The Daily Mail has a very different take, citing a survey it has conducted that found 64% of people who voted for Labour at the last election wanted an early vote and that the majority think “the Establishment is determined to stop Brexit”. “Poll: give us election now”, is the splash headline. “Jeremy Corbyn faces a mass revolt by millions of Labour supporters over his refusal to agree to a snap election,” says the paper, citing another response in the survey, which found that the majority of those who voted Labour at the last election wanted an early election. Thursday's @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/L3NlNUJI9M The Express writes: “Furious Boris: Brexit rebels face ‘day of reckoning’”, painting a picture of a defiant Johnson, who the papers says “dared remainer MPs to topple him” in a “tempestuous day at Westminster”. Thursday’s EXPRESS: Furious Boris: Brexit rebels face ‘day of reckoning’ #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/JNjQTwAaki The Times says: “Commons hits boiling point”. The paper describes the scenes in parliament yesterday as “bitter”, “extraordinary” and “vitriolic” and focuses on calls for Johnson to temper his language, noting that the prime minister “dismissed as ‘humbug’ claims that his words were being cited in death threats received by MPs”. The paper also reported Johnson’s comments “that the ‘best way’ to honour Jo Cox, who was murdered during the 2016 referendum, was to “get Brexit done”. Thursday’s TIMES: Commons hits boiling point #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/jYRzTM0HR3 For the second day in a row, the Telegraph’s headline is simply a direct quote from the prime minister: “‘Parliament must stand aside or face its days of reckoning’,” it says following Wednesday’s “‘Let’s be in doubt, there are a lot of people who want to frustrate Brexit’.” The paper reports that Johnson accused rivals of “cowardice in refusing an election”. “In a speech that was greeted with loud applause from the Tory benches, Mr Johnson accused his opponents of attempting to ‘sabotage’ Brexit,” it says. Thursday’s TELEGRAPH; ‘Parliament must stand aside or face its day of reckoning’ #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/w0XORNkaKm The i’s splash headline is the same as the Times’s effort – “Commons hits boiling point” – with the paper saying “Tempers inflamed after Attorney General dismisses Parliament as ‘dead’ and PM is accused of using ‘dangerous’ language”. Thursday’s i: Commons hits boiling point #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/4zEB1B5lVn The FT leads with: “Defiant Johnson lays the ground for people vs parliament election”. The paper says that “on a day of ferocious debate” and “cheered on by Conservative MPs, Mr Johnson used his legal defeat as a springboard for attack, claiming MPs had ‘run to the courts’ instead of having the courage to take him on in an election”. Thursday’s FT: Defiant Johnson lays the ground for people vs parliament election #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/6SE09sTQ6b Many papers also feature a small story or picture from the duke and duchess of Sussex’s trip to South Africa with their infant son Archie. The Sun splashes on the royals: “Little one meets Tutu”, and a small story on politics: “PM flays ‘scared’ Corb on election”. Tomorrow's front page: 'Royal baby Archie met Archbishop Desmond Tutu in South Africa' https://t.co/aVEt25tiHJ pic.twitter.com/ABME04CRE4 The New Statesman has a striking cover, which features a cartoon of Boris Johnson with his Pinocchio nose snapped off under the headline: “The great disgrace”. This week's New Statesman cover: A special issue on our political and constitutional crisis, with pieces from @stephenkb and @steverichards14. Plus, @harrytlambert profiles Dominic Cummings and @ameliargh on why we should say "I don't know" more often. pic.twitter.com/9zQHK1KjT3