Peaky Blinders (BBC One)Sanditon (ITV)The Great British Bake Off (Channel 4)A Black and White Killing: The Case That Shook America (BBC Two)The Affair (Sky Atlantic/Now TV) Five series in, Peaky Blinders, dubbed the “Brummie Scorsese”, has become a global cultural phenomenon, with young men everywhere sporting that hairstyle (resembling a melting Pontefract cake), and celebrity fans from Brad Pitt to Snoop Dogg to David Beckham (Beckham has produced a Peaky Blinders-themed clothing range). After a two-year hiatus, the challenge for creator Steven Knight was to resist lapsing into self-parody. Any concerns that the move from BBC Two to BBC One would result in a mellowing or a sanitising were put straight with director Anthony Byrne’s righteous two-episode eruption involving bloodshed, duplicity, the stirrings of fascism, a horse funeral and a bloody crucifixion. At the end of the last series, Cillian Murphy’s Thomas Shelby, he of the brutal, chiselled face and eyes like haunted marbles, was realising his dream of not just wealth but also legitimacy, by becoming a Labour MP. This series opened with 1929’s Wall Street Crash, and the Shelbys losing shedloads because of Michael (Finn Cole), who’d returned from America with a flint-eyed wife (Thoroughbreds’ Anya Taylor-Joy). Michael is such a hissing serpent that when substance-addicted Thomas started rambling with Shakespearean intensity about someone betraying him, I wondered if it would be too obvious (and boring) to be him. As the Shelbys, including hair-trigger Arthur (Paul Anderson), skidded back into the underworld, the Peaky Blinders’ women, led by Helen McCrory’s unfiltered Romany queen, Polly, were ostensibly a restraining influence, but really they’re just as wild. “We’re bold people, aren’t we, Polly?” breathed Ada (Sophie Rundle). Thomas is what would’ve happened had Tony Soprano hailed from the slums of Birmingham and survived the Somme. His death wish is as strong as his soul is compromised as his tongue is sharp, asking a journalist he later has killed: “What’s your Tory newspaper more afraid of – is it evolution or revolution?” Elsewhere, Sir Oswald Mosley (Sam Claflin) appeared out of the political murk to recruit Thomas, while another malevolent force, Jimmy McCavern (Brian Gleeson), led the Billy Boys in crucifying Bonnie Gold (Jack Rowan) in front of his distraught father (Aidan Gillen). Such biblical connotations play into the ongoing Small Heath-meets-Old Testament psychodrama at the heart of Peaky Blinders, even as the colour palette morphs into nihilist-John Constable. Along the way it transpired that Thomas had, after all, taken in Cyril the dog, after killing his owner, Alfie Solomons (Tom Hardy). In Peaky Blinders, this counts as heartwarming. ITV’s new eight-part Sanditon is a dramatisation of the unfinished novel by Jane Austen, here finished by Andrew Davies, though one wondered whether Austen might have slapped his face for his trouble. Bare male bottoms were viewed running into the sea (perhaps Davies trying to outdo Colin Firth’s wet-Darcy moment from his own 1995 Pride and Prejudice?). Moreover, in a somewhat unexpected “Austen-does-Pornhub” diversion, impoverished gentlewoman Clara (Lily Sacofsky) appeared to be (Austen purists, look away now!) “pleasuring” the dastardly Edward Denham (Jack Fox) in the foliage. Elsewhere, Charlotte Heywood (Rose Williams) joined the enthused Tom Parker (Kris Marshall) on his mission to make Sanditon a fashionable Sussex seaside resort, encountering, among others, Anne Reid’s formidable Lady Denham, a woman well aware that certain people were manoeuvring for an inheritance (“There is one thing that they forget – I have no intention at all of dying”); the seemingly incestuous Edward and Esther Denham (Charlotte Spencer); Austen’s first black character, a West Indies heiress (Crystal Clarke); and the requisite brooding Austen hunk in the form of Sidney Parker (Theo James) – who of course ended up haughtily scolding Charlotte. “Miss Heywood, you’re very free with your opinions.” Some might say that, thus far, Davies has been “very free” with Jane Austen, but this opener was intriguing nonetheless. Now more than ever, The Great British Bake Off could be viewed as a floury manifestation of a collective national nervous breakdown. As in: “The real world is scary – let’s obsess about cakes!” In this sense, the pastel-hued tent represents sanctuary, while this year’s 13 (“baker’s dozen”) contestants (noted as being on the young side for Bake Off’s 10th anniversary outing) bake, crumble and stir in a gentler world where rubbery icing really matters. It still amuses me that a right-goth like Noel Fielding presents Bake Off (Fielding met his match in a goth contestant fashioning a cake fairy garden), along with Sandi Toksvig and experts Prue Leith and Paul Hollywood. Last week, a bloke with mega-pierced ears was sent home because Hollywood couldn’t taste his tangy filling. Alas, life is cruel, even inside the Tent of Human Kindness. If Bafta-winning Mobeen Azhar set out to depress with his two-part documentary A Black and White Killing: The Case That Shook America, then he succeeded. When Russell Courtier ran over and killed black 19-year-old Larnell Bruce, after an altercation in Portland, Oregon, three years ago, the only remaining question was: was this a racially motivated crime? In prison, Courtier had become a member of white supremacist prison-gang European Kindred, but it also emerged that Bruce had been carrying a machete. Azhar followed the case through court, talking with, among others, relatives of the accused and the deceased. There were revelations – I didn’t realise that uber-liberal Portland had such strong past links with the Ku Klux Klan. In the end, Courtier was found guilty of racially motivated murder, but there was no sense of triumph, just an abiding grimness. Throughout, Azhar used being British-Pakistani to smoke out racist interviewees. One man seemed more taken aback by Azhar having an English accent. Others seemed to relish exuding a chilly faux-friendliness that just made their bigotry even more obvious. The Affair returned for its fifth and final season, and not only is Alison (Ruth Wilson) dead (I still can’t believe it), but key cast members are awol, not least the only truly likable one, Joshua Jackson as Alison’s ex, Cole. I still like The Affair, despite (or maybe because of) the characters being such intolerable, self-absorbed whinge-bats. Dominic West is superb as flawed author Noah, a weak man prone to overplaying his strengths, as is Maura Tierney as his fuming, raddled former wife, Helen, now coping with the death of new love Vik (Omar Metwally) – even as the nextdoor neighbour has Vik’s baby (you’ve got to stay very alert for Affair plots). “Why him and not you?” growled Helen at Noah, in one of those signature Affair scenes-from-different-perspectives. Elsewhere, there are little acid splashes of dialogue: “How nice to meet another one of Noah’s women,” says Helen’s mum (Kathleen Chalfant) to his new partner (Sanaa Lathan). Interestingly, Anna Paquin (The Piano) features as Alison and Cole’s daughter Joanie, but in scenes set years ahead in the future. Bad news: Joanie is as miserable as everybody else in The Affair. Good news: she’s going to look into her mother’s death. I’m already hooked.