The Football Association is examining claims that a promising deaf footballer was abused and goaded about his disability during an FA Youth Cup game. Will Palmer, who is 17 and one of the few deaf footballers to have played at a semi-professional level, was allegedly told by an opponent to “watch it you deaf” followed by an expletive during Stamford’s 6-0 victory over Lincoln United on Tuesday. Later in the game, the same opponent saw Palmer trying to talk to his teammate and is said to have mocked him by saying: “Speak up mate I can’t hear you” while cupping a hand to an ear. Palmer, who wears a cochlear ear implant allowing him to hear a little, said the abuse had affected him so much he had wanted to be substituted. “During the game he kept on prodding me in the lower back with his finger and running his studs down the back of my leg. When it happened again in the second half I pushed him away harder. Then he said: ‘Watch it you deaf …’ before using the C-word. “I was in shock. Five minutes later I was talking to a teammate and he continued on this deaf theme by saying: ‘Speak up mate I can’t hear you’ while he was cupping his hand to his ear. “I thought, I’m just a 17-year-old who wants to play football and I found that really difficult to deal with. I couldn’t shake it off. I wanted to be off that pitch right away and nearly asked the manager to sub me off.” In a tweet Lincoln United confirmed they were aware of the alleged abuse of a deaf player during the match. “Lincoln United FC abhor all forms of abuse and will look to take action against anyone tarnishing our wonderful community club,” it added. “We are currently conducting internal investigations into the incident and will respond in due course.” Jamie Clarke, the captain of the England and Great Britain Deaf teams, said he was appalled by the allegations. “I know this lad very well – he will one day soon play for England,” he said. Clarke added that the player accused should, if found guilty, “be kicked out of the club – or apologise and not to do it again”.