Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. Let’s open with a bang, as safereturndoubtful recommends Smonk by Tom Franklin: Smonk opens with a real bang, the first four chapters are amongst the most savage and grotesque as I have read in fiction. It’s 1911 in Alabama and EO Smonk and Evavangeline, both thoroughly despicable characters, are running amok on separate paths of destruction, sharing some bit characters in their storylines, but otherwise remaining oblivious of each other’s existence as they move toward the day of reckoning… Alone, as a blood-bath western this would have limited appeal, but with the imagery created by his terse character descriptions and his deft application of black humour make it stand-out as an outstanding work in the southern gothic genre. Death in Captivity by Michael Gilbert has inspired Kincaid to make a “major shout-out for the British Library’s crime series”: Just a few more pages to go with Someone (a snitch?) is found dead in an uncompleted escape tunnel in an Italian prison camp. Who did it? The Allies are in Sicily. When will they invade Italy, and where? Will the Germans show up in the POW camp? So many what will happens when. My Sister, the Serial Killer by Oyinkan Braithwaite has won over jimitron5000: There were a couple of things, namely the garish green on the cover and the positive review by a bookseller whose tastes seem diametrically opposed to mine, that told me I shouldn’t like it. But I did, I really enjoyed it. Although the title suggests plenty of murder in the book, it more an exploration of family loyalty and sisterly binds. Punchy and sprinkled with humour, it is a good quick read. JG Farrell’s Singapore Grip is “marvellous, as you would expect from this author,” writes SydneyH: The main thing I’ll take from it is the foolhardiness of engaging in war with Germany and Japan simultaneously, the two countries most likely to be extremely competent and efficient at it – though there obviously wasn’t much choice in the matter. After the strike on America’s fleet in Pearl Harbour, Japan were in control of the Asia Pacific, and there wasn’t much that Britain, Australia and India could do about it, especially after key battleships were sunk. The bombing of Singapore is something I was not familiar with, so it was all very interesting. If the novel isn’t quite as satisfying as Troubles, it’s probably because of the emphasis on the economic pressures that led to the tensions in the region. Also, I felt that the ending left too many tales unfinished. Pseudaletia is persevering with The Flounder by Gunter Grass: … A book I have started twice but never got past about page five. I dug it out, and I think this time it has ‘taken’. I really enjoy the mix of real and surreal. I’m not far enough into it to talk about it’s meaning, etc, but so far it’s entertaining and thoughtful. We Don’t Die of Love by Stephen May has won over pubbore: A lovely little book about masculinity in crisis. A man pushing 60 struggles to find a purpose after his wife leaves and he finds his business under threat. A bit like Nick Hornby, if he wrote about older working class men in the post-industrial north - sad, real, ultimately hopeful. Vasily Grossman’s Stalingrad is “very long” says paulburns, but that “doesn’t matter”: It’s a stunning achievement, one of the great literary masterpieces to come out of Russia in the twentieth century. Through the lives of several families, (not just the Shaposhnikovs, for those of you who have read Life and Fate ) and various individuals, Grossman tells the story of the opening stages of the Battle for Stalingrad and its effect on the whole of Soviet society. His scope is epic and for the most part, transcends the limits of Socialist Realism imposed on him by the cultural elite. A lot of my pleasure came from how I was surprised by how Grossman portrayed events (and I thought I knew the battle of Stalingrad pretty well) so I’m refusing to engage in a series of spoilers. Read and enjoy. Delight! In a strange way it might make some weeks of this terrible year easier to bear. Finally, Vesca has just finished Robinson by the great Muriel Spark: It’s not as dark than others of hers I’ve read, which may be because it’s only her second book. Our heroine wakes up on a privately owned island after a plane crash. She and two very different men are the only survivors. Other than that there’s only a young boy and the owner and resident, Robinson. But who is Robinson? Now I want to know too. Hey, hey, my, my, paper books will never die. Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd? Edmund Wilson’s classic (and brutal) essay on crime fiction. (Hat tip to Swelter.) Also from the archives, Lawrence Durrell on The Art Of Fiction in the Paris Review. “You know, I was trying everything…” Book Marks list 10 novels that changed history. The longlist for National Book Award for Translated Literature. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!