Odell Beckham Jr had an 89-yard touchdown catch and a spectacular one-handed grab in his return to MetLife Stadium, and Baker Mayfield and the Cleveland Browns did enough to beat the banged-up New York Jets 23-3 on Monday night. Beckham, traded from the Giants in March, helped the Browns (1-1) bounce back from a 30-point loss to Tennessee in their opener to top the Jets (0-2). New York lost quarterback Trevor Siemian to an ankle injury in the second quarter, and Luke Falk promoted from the practice squad earlier in the day played the rest of the game. Siemian was starting in place of Sam Darnold, who’s sidelined for at least a few weeks while recovering from mononucleosis. The Jets couldn’t get anything going on offense, and the Browns blew open the game late in the third quarter. Falk led the Jets on their longest drive of night to that point 60 yards but Le’Veon Bell could only get one-yard on a fourth-and-two pass, turning the ball over on downs at the Browns 11. 89.Yards.@bakermayfield to @obj for six! pic.twitter.com/OahySJgIG0 On the very next play, Mayfield hit Beckham with a slant pass, and the receiver outran the Jets’ defenders all the way to the end zone for an 89-yard TD that put Cleveland up 23-3 with 3:32 remaining in the third quarter. The touchdown came after Beckham called out Jets defensive coordinator Gregg Williams last Thursday, saying the coach then with the Browns instructed players to hurt him in a preseason game in 2017. Williams denied Beckham’s accusations, jokingly asking reporters: “Odell who?” Williams, who led the Browns to a 5-3 record as their interim coach last season, also chided reporters for giving Beckham attention. Williams clearly knows who Beckham is now. The coach was seen shouting angrily on the sideline after Beckham’s touchdown. And, that wasn’t all for Beckham, who finished with six catches for 161 yards and the TD. WHAT. 😱@bakermayfield ➡️ @obj pic.twitter.com/Yha7OMjoUd He helped the Browns take a 3-0 lead on their first possession on Austin Seibert’s 23-yard field goal a drive highlighted by a spectacular 33-yard, one-handed grab that got Cleveland down to the Jets four. It was reminiscent of Beckham’s highlight-reel, one-handed reception for the Giants on Sunday Night Football as a rookie in 2014. On this one, Mayfield found Beckham down the right sideline, and the receiver stuck out his right hand to snare the ball behind Nate Hairston in nearly the same spot as his big catch five years ago. Browns defensive end Chris Smith played after his girlfriend, Petara Cordero, was killed in car accident last week. The 26-year-old Cordero was killed after she exited Smith’s Lamborghini and was standing on the highway’s shoulder when she was hit by an oncoming car.