As the son of one of the most prolific strikers to have graced the non-league game, Jude Bellingham should have learned a thing or two about scoring goals. The 16-year-old, whose father, Mark, racked up more than 700 in his career while also serving as a sergeant for West Midlands Police, inflicted Charlton’s first defeat of the season with a superb strike on his full league debut as Pep Clotet’s side played party poopers on the 100th anniversary of the first match played at this ground. To make matters worse for the hosts, the Charlton manager, Lee Bowyer, was sent off in the dying moments after losing his temper when a member of the Birmingham staff threw a ball on the pitch in an attempt to slow down the game. “I’ve never seen that done before,” he said. Charlton’s brilliant start has taken a few people in this part of south-east London by surprise, especially after Bowyer had looked certain to leave in the summer when talks over a new contract broke down. Having guided them to promotion last season, the former England midfielder eventually stayed at the club where he began his playing career after resolving his differences with the controversial owner Roland Duchâtelet. That decision has paid dividends for both men, with Charlton going into this match as the first promoted side to go unbeaten in their first six league games of a Championship season since Brighton in 2011. The prospect of a potential return to the top-flight for the first time since 2007 remains unlikely despite their stellar start under Bowyer, however, with the manager operating on a budget that is one of the lowest in the division. An injury to their top-scorer, Lyle Taylor, sustained on international duty for Montserrat this week underlined the difficulties he faces as the Brighton loanee Tomer Hemed was brought into replace him up front, with Erhun Oztumer preferred at the top of the midfield diamond to Jonny Williams. Birmingham began with real intent and could have taken the lead early on had Jason Pearce not saved from Marc Roberts. The hosts seemed to be missing Taylor’s pace and summoned up only one real chance of note in the half as Josh Cullen’s effort from the edge of the box sailed way over the bar. Several Charlton legends, including the former manager Alan Curbishley, were introduced on to the pitch at the break, with the visiting supporters reserving a special reception for the former Aston Villa striker Darren Bent. Charlton found themselves behind six minutes after half-time when a clinical attack from the visitors that began with a mazy dribble from David Davis in midfield led to Bellingham slamming home his second winning goal in successive weeks thanks to Dan Crowley’s accurate cutback. Already the club’s youngest-ever player – a record he took from Southampton’s Nathan Redmond – he opted to stay in the Midlands this summer after interest from Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Manchester City but on this evidence, looks capable of playing at the very highest level. “It’s a lot of success for the club and the academy,” Clotet said of his prodigy. “For the fans to see a young player coming through – that is something you can never buy in football.” In response to going behind, Bowyer threw on Williams as Charlton pressed forward and it almost had the desired effect. Lee Camp did well to beat away efforts from Chris Solly and Cullen in the space of 60 frantic seconds before another goalmouth scramble must have left Clotet with his heart in his mouth. But, despite Bowyer’s indignation at the circumstances behind his dismissal, the afternoon belonged to Bellingham.