Donald Trump has attempted to shrug off renewed demands for his impeachment over the allegation he tried to pressure a foreign government to hurt his leading rival in next year’s presidential election. Trump travelled to the United Nations in New York under the shadow of reports that he asked Ukraine’s leader to investigate Joe Biden, the frontrunner for the Democratic nomination in 2020, and that a US intelligence community whistleblower filed a report about it. Some Democrats said the allegation was a tipping point in the dilemma over whether to begin impeachment proceedings. Asked on Monday if he took that threat seriously, the president replied: “Not at all seriously.” Analysts have cast the episode as the latest example of Trump’s willingness to behave with impunity, sow disinformation and confusion and stretch democratic norms to breaking point. It emerged last week that the whistleblower filed a report after becoming alarmed at Trump’s alleged attempt to pressure Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president – eight times, according to the Wall Street Journal – in a phone call in July. Some reports suggest Trump tried to strong-arm Zelenskiy into targeting Biden by temporarily withholding US military aid. The president has confirmed that he discussed corruption during the call and mentioned Biden but denies applying pressure on Zelenskiy. “We had a perfect phone call,” he told reporters at the UN. “Everybody knows it’s just a Democrat witch-hunt.” It is one thing for a sitting president to break the law. It’s another to let him The White House is refusing to release the substance of the whistleblower’s complaint, setting up a showdown with Congress. Chuck Schumer, the top Senate Democrat, called on the majority leader, Mitch McConnell, to investigate. Schumer wrote in a letter that the Republicans’ “see no evil, hear no evil” attitude toward the president “is unacceptable and must change”. Schumer also said Republicans should urge the White House to release transcripts of Trump’s conversation with Zelenskiy and identify who in the White House sought to delay $250m in aid to Ukraine. Trump’s claims, echoed by rightwing media, concern the activities of Biden’s son, Hunter, who was on the board of a Ukrainian gas company. As vice-president, Joe Biden pressured the Ukrainian government to fire the prosecutor general, seen by many as too soft on corruption. Trump has asserted without basis that the prosecutor, who had led an investigation into the company’s owner, “was after” Hunter Biden. The president said on Monday: “What Biden did was wrong. We’re supporting a country, so we want to make sure that country is honest. One of the reasons the new president got elected is he was going to stop corruption. So it’s very important that on occasion that you speak to somebody about corruption.” He also added what appeared to be an admission that US military aid was at issue: “If you don’t talk about corruption, why would you give money to a country that you think is corrupt?” There is no evidence of wrongdoing by Biden or his son. The former vice-president has dismissed the claim as a political smear. He tweeted on Sunday: “Let’s be clear, Donald Trump pressured a foreign government to interfere in our elections. It goes against everything the United States stands for. We must make him a one-term president.” Trump has spent much of his first term denouncing allegations he benefited from Russian interference in his 2016 win over Hillary Clinton. The special counsel Robert Mueller showed multiple contacts between the Trump campaign and Moscow but did not find direct collusion. The drumbeat for Trump’s impeachment has become distinctly louder. A majority of Democrats in the House were already in favour but Nancy Pelosi, the speaker, has resisted, perhaps fearing such a move would be unpopular and rally Trump’s support. On Sunday, Pelosi said administration officials “will be entering a grave new chapter of lawlessness which will take us into a whole new stage of investigation”, if the acting director of national intelligence, Joseph Maguire, refuses to provide information to Congress. It’s treason, pure and simple, and the penalty for treason under the US code is death. That’s the only penalty Pelosi’s statement, made in a letter to Democratic lawmakers, came after Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the first-term congresswoman from New York who has emerged as a progressive leader, criticised her party’s unwillingness to pursue impeachment. “At this point, the bigger national scandal isn’t the president’s lawbreaking behavior – it is the Democratic party’s refusal to impeach him for it,” Ocasio-Cortez said in a tweet on Saturday night. “It is one thing for a sitting president to break the law. It’s another to let him… The GOP’s silence [and] refusal to act shouldn’t be a surprise. Ours is.” Another sign of building momentum came from the chair of the House intelligence committee, Adam Schiff, who told CNN “we may very well have crossed the Rubicon here.” On Monday Jim Himes of Connecticut, a member of the House panel, told CNN: “I can’t tell you that the House will move into impeachment mode right away, but this really ups the ante.” Senator Chris Murphy of Connecticut tweeted: “There is an implicit threat in every demand that a president makes of another country, especially one so dependent on us as Ukraine. Who cares whether Trump explicitly made the interference-for-aid connection? The corruption is in the demand.” There were few signs of Republicans breaking ranks. If Democrats do go ahead with impeachment, there is virtually no prospect of the Republican-controlled Senate convicting and removing the president before the 2020 election. Bill Weld, the former governor of Massachusetts who is mounting a long-shot challenge to Trump, told MSNBC’s Morning Joe: “Talk about pressuring a foreign country to interfere with and control a US election. It couldn’t be clearer, and that’s not just undermining democratic institutions. That is treason. “It’s treason, pure and simple, and the penalty for treason under the US code is death. That’s the only penalty.” Trump and Zelenskiy plan to meet on the sidelines of the UN on Wednesday. Maguire is due to testify before the House intelligence committee on Thursday.