Boris Johnson has done wonders for Jeremy Corbyn. While Theresa May was prime minister it was possible for the Conservatives to portray the Labour leader as a dangerous radical. A man who couldn’t be trusted to maintain his allotment, let alone run the country. Now, though, Corbyn is increasingly looking like the sensible, safe choice. Against shutting down parliament just because MPs had started asking awkward questions. Against a no-deal Brexit that could wipe 5% off GDP. And for respecting the rule of law. The sort of things on which most Tory MPs used to pride themselves. It must be hard for Corbyn to adjust to his new circumstances. After years of sticking up for unpopular causes, speaking at fringe meetings and voting against his own party, he now finds himself suspiciously close to being a figure of the establishment. Someone who can – more or less – be trusted to do the right thing. At least when compared with Johnson. The problem is that just as Corbyn has become more of a symbol of the status quo, the battle lines have shifted and being an extremist is back in fashion. Throwing 21 moderate MPs out of your party for doing something you have done on several occasions is the new normal. Parliamentary democracy is now the enemy of the people and in the coming election you have to pick your side. For much of his speech to the Trades Union Congress conference in Brighton, Corbyn appeared to be on autopilot. Understandably, perhaps, since he had been up until well past 2am as the House of Commons session ended in chaos, there was little by way of passion. Just a sense of doing the bare minimum to keep a home crowd happy with a promise to end zero-hours contracts and renationalise utilities. He did, though, try to reset the dial by making it clear that although he was happy to be considered more mainstream these days, the real establishment elite were the Brexiters who were claiming to be anti-establishment. It wasn’t them who would be harmed by a no-deal Brexit, it was the people whose jobs and rights would be under threat. Labour would promise a second referendum with a negotiated deal and remain on the ballot paper. Corbyn just couldn’t say which side he would support. Partly because he was knackered, but mainly because he didn’t know. The race is now firmly on to make sure you aren’t the party perceived to be on the side of the establishment. In an interview later in the day, Johnson begged for everyone to “Donnez-moi un break” while insisting democracy was best served by doing away with democracy. The country replied with a loud “Fermez le fuck up”. With May we had Schrödinger’s Brexit. With Boris we have Schrödinger’s parliament. Most of us now also long to both exist and not exist. Preferably the latter. Where are the four pot plants when you need them? Back in London, Westminster resembled a ghost town. All the pro- and anti-Brexit protesters had melted away and traffic around Parliament Square was flowing freely for the first time in months. But in committee room 16, Yvette Cooper and a handful of opposition MPs were mounting their own guerrilla government by holding an unofficial session of the home affairs select committee. The resistance started here. And almost certainly ended here, as the proceedings weren’t televised. So the evidence of Pauline Bastidon, the head of European policy for the Freight Transport Authority, that the government’s Brexit preparations were still largely a mystery to her went almost entirely unnoticed. Just as the Tories had hoped. Government at an almost total standstill. So little was going on – remember Donald Tusk pleading with the UK not to waste this time? – that the only other highlight of the day was a brief cameo from Dominic Cummings, who was doorstepped outside his home. How was he planning to spend the next five weeks? Not talking to rich remainers in London. Said the rich Brexiter whose family has taken £250,000 off the EU in farming subsidies. Classic Dom.