Japan have done it again, this time against the team ranked No 1 in the world just two weeks ago. The hosts came from nine points down to win after playing with a pace and fervour that the humidity and countdown clock could not dim and such was the noise when the final whistle sounded it would have caused the nearby Mount Fuji to wobble. If Japan left it late against South Africa four years ago, here they took a grip on the game from the moment Michael Leitch, their captain who had been surprisingly named on the bench, came on to the field after 30 minutes. The hosts had troubled Ireland with their ability to offload in contact and spread the ball wide, but they were also excitable. Leitch brought authority and direction. His first three touches saw him making a few metres, committing the defence and threatening the gainline. It gave his side forward momentum and forced Ireland to concede penalties at the breakdown. Peter O’Mahoney and Josh van der Flier slowed the ball down and Yu Tamura kicked the points to make it 12-9 to Ireland at the interval. Japan had been camera-shy on the opening night against Russia but here they revelled in the spotlight. It was Japan at their effervescent, inventive best. Faced with a defence arguably the sharpest off the line, they took it on, creating room by releasing in contact or passing out of the back of the hand. Ireland found relief in conceding penalties, and while they led at half-time having scored two tries through the opportunism of Jack Carty, they enjoyed three moments of fortune. The first came in the third minute when, after Amanaki Mafi won a turnover in his 22, Japan scampered upfield. Kotaro Matsushima, who scored a try hat-trick on the opening night, chased a kick to the line and got in front of Jacob Stockdale only to veer sideways and allow his opposite number to ground the ball for a drop-out. The second came after another kick ahead and Jack van der Flier salvaged the ball a few metres from his line under pressure but knocked it slightly forward before retrieving it. Instead of a five-metre scrum, Japan had a lineout near the halfway line, and they went close again with the final move of the opening half when Lomano Lemeki had the legs on Keith Earls as they chased a kick only for the ball to roll into touch. If Japan play with the same intensity against Scotland in the final group match, they will take some stopping. It was their misfortune to be up against a team that, despite being shaken at times, kept their shape and composure, led by Carty, their third-choice fly-half who created the tries in the opening period. They were identical in their presentation. After Ireland were awarded a penalty in Japan’s 22, Carty took to the air, first kicking diagonally for Garry Ringrose on the right wing, where the centre exploited the full-back Ryohei Yamanaka’s disorientation to catch and score. Seven minutes later the referee was playing advantage when Carty, 18 metres from the line, chipped delicately and Rob Kearney seized the ball to just touch it down under pressure from Mafi. Japan’s points had come from a Tamura penalty. They were going frustrated at their line-breaks yielding nothing when Leitch came off the bench to replace the injured Mafi. He made an immediate impact, driving hard and low. Ireland were stretched and penalised after being pushed off their own scrum in a seminal moment in the game, and the question was whether Japan could sustain the pace after the break. The answer was a resounding yes and it was Ireland, used to slower-paced matches played on longer grass and in colder weather, who felt energy sap away. The momentum had shifted hugely to the home side by the time the took the lead, Ryoto Nakamura’s break finished by the full-back Kenki Fukuoka after Timothy Lafaele’s slick pass. Ireland’s hope remained in kicking, with Japan not liking it up in the air. Kearney seized on another miss, but Japan were quick to scramble back. Oozing with belief, they were playing like World Cup contenders. Tamura’s fourth penalty nine minutes from the end gave Japan a seven-point cushion and they came the closest to scoring again, with Fukuoka hauled down a few metres from the line by Keith Earls after an interception and Nakamura held up after a scrum. Ireland had a final chance with 12 seconds to go when Isileli Nakajima knocked on just short of the line. Joey Carbery opted to kick the ball dead and take the bonus point.