The Fiji head coach, John McKee, has hit back at his Wallabies counterpart after Michael Cheika said Fiji’s referral of winger Reece Hodge to the match citing official was not in the “spirit of the game”. Hodge faces a hearing in Tokyo on Wednesday after Fiji referred his first-half tackle on Peceli Yato, which saw the flanker leave the field with concussion. At the time of the incident in Saturday’s Pool D match, Fiji were leading and Yato was their standout player on the pitch. Hodge scored Australia’s next try as the Wallabies went on to win 39-21. Cheika subsequently criticised McKee for effectively going behind his back having not raised it with him in their post-match chat. But as Fiji, without Yato, prepare to face Uruguay on Wednesday – while Hodge will be in front of the disciplinary committee – McKee questioned Cheika’s interpretation of the spirit of the game. “Maybe Michael Cheika’s views of what’s within the spirit of the game are slightly different to some other people, but it’s not up to me to decide what exactly he meant by that comment,” McKee said. “From our side, we lost a player who was nearly the most influential player on the park at that the time of the game for the rest of the game, and because of the head injury he can’t play in this game either. So, we have already lost out. “I think the World Rugby guidelines are quite clear around head injury assessment. Everyone is very well aware of the head injury framework and how they will be dealt with by the match officials and citing official. “The process in the World Cup, it is the citing commissioner who cites people if they deem something could have been a red card offence and was missed on the field. In the citing official’s opinion, it’s a red card offence and it’s up to Australia Rugby to argue whatever they wish, and for the judiciary to decide.” Meanwhile, McKee has encouraged his players to unwind at the beach to recover from their controversial loss to Australia before they face Uruguay in Kamaishi on Wednesday. “We planned for this short turnaround and from the time of the Rugby World Cup we always knew that we would have to address certain things across this time,” he said . “One of the things we did do upon arriving at our hotel was to use the ocean here for ocean recovery. It was something a little bit different but it was very good for our players to swim in the sea water but also it was very relaxing for them and it got their minds relaxed as well. Because it isn’t just the physical tiredness, it is the mental tiredness from the big match in Sapporo.” Uruguay, ranked 19th in the world and playing in their first match of the tournament, could be just the tonic for Fiji, who beat Los Tecos 68-7 last year. However, McKee knows their opponents will be more prepared this time around. “We know Uruguay are a much improved team now in the World Cup and we expect them to be a bit more physical,” he said. “We expect them, typical of Uruguayan and South American teams, to use their forward pack as a strength and we will have to be very on top of our game in terms of scrums and particularly around our maul defence.”