Birmingham attracted a record number of tourists last year as fans of Peaky Blinders flocked to explore the world associated with the hit BBC gangster series. The UK’s second largest city and the wider West Midlands region are becoming significant beneficiaries of the growing phenomenon of so-called “screen tourism”, where fans base a holiday on visiting locations related to popular films and TV shows. A record 42.8 million tourists visited Birmingham last year as the city cashed in on its status as the home of the real-life Peaky Blinders criminal gang, which operated from the 1890s to the 1930s. “The Peaky effect is really gaining momentum here, with tours and events in the West Midlands selling out months in advance,” says Andy Street, the region’s mayor. “Record numbers of tourists are now visiting the region, with many people wanting to explore the places and stories associated with the show.” Birmingham’s visitor numbers increased by 26% between 2013 – when the first season aired on the BBC – and 2018, according to new figures from the West Midlands Growth Company (WMGC). The West Midlands region, which includes towns such Wolverhampton, Coventry and Dudley, is also enjoying the boom, with a record 131.4 million tourists last year. Peaky Blinders has developed a global following as a deal with Netflix means the show is available in 183 countries, and the numbers of international visitors to Birmingham has surged in the five years since the series launched. International visitor numbers rose by 19% to 1.1 million between 2013 and 2018, with the number coming from the US – where Peaky Blinders has been a big hit – rising by 50%. It is estimated that overseas visitors spent about £17m last year on screen tourism-related trips, according to the WMGC. “Peaky Blinders’s fantastic success has introduced Birmingham and the West Midlands to a new global audience,” says Street. The Black Country Living Museum in Dudley – a staple filming location in all five series of Peaky Blinders to date – sells out themed evenings in less than 24 hours. The show has acted as a free advertising campaign, at home and abroad, fuelling a record 355,000 visits last year, up almost a third since 2014. “We’ve just seen out the fifth successive year of growth, achieving record visitor attendance,” says Andrew Lovett, chief executive at the museum. “As one of the film locations for Peaky Blinders, the popularity of the series has undoubtedly attracted new audiences.” Down the road in Stourbridge, Sadler’s Ales launched its own Peaky Blinders beer off the back of the show a few years ago. “It is based on the history of Birmingham and the original gangs,” says Chris Dew, marketing manager at Sadler’s. “But when the TV show is on, we naturally see a spike in sales.” While the TV series isn’t shot in Birmingham – streets in Greater Manchester and Liverpool serve as doubles – the TV series’ real-life association with the city has created Peaky Blinders mania for local businesses. The Digbeth area of Birmingham, where the eponyous gang operated, will get its first official Peaky Blinders festival, created by Steven Knight, the writer and creator of the TV show, later this month. Digbeth is also home to Peaky Tours, a guided walk operator, and the Custard Factory, an arts venue that was once home to Bird’s Custard, which recently unveiled a 60ft mural of Cillian Murphy’s character, Tommy Shelby. Nearby, in a 1920s period building in Birmingham’s jewellery quarter, Escape Live has officially licensed the right to create the first two Peaky Blinders escape rooms – called The Raid and Double Cross – and are due to open to tourists imminently. The appetite for Peaky Blinders shows no sign of slowing. In July, more than 76,000 people applied for tickets to the first exclusive screening of the season five premiere in Birmingham town hall. The season four premiere at the same venue in 2017 attracted 40,000 applicants. Episode 1: Black TuesdayEpisode 2: Black Cats Episode 1: The NooseEpisode 2: HeathensEpisode 3: BlackbirdEpisode 4: DangerousEpisode 5: The DuelEpisode 6: The Company Episode 1Episode 2Episode 3Episode 4Episode 5Episode 6 Episode 1Episode 2Episode 3Episode 4Episode 5Episode 6 Episode 1Episode 2Episode 3Episode 4Episode 5Episode 6 While Peaky Blinders may have firmly put Birmingham on the global tourism map, the West Midlands is proving to be an increasingly popular location for film and TV companies. Steven Spielberg used the region for parts of Hollywood sci-fi film Ready Player One, including filming in the jewellery quarter. Matthew Vaughn’s Kingsman: The Golden Circle and the film American Assassin also shot in the West Midlands. Earlier this year, Steven Knight unveiled an ambitious £100m plan for a 40-acre film and TV studio in the West Midlands. “Peaky Blinders has had such a positive effect on the local economy, but the full cultural impact is immeasurable,” said Joe Godwin, director of BBC Midlands. “Peaky Blinders has been a game-changer for Birmingham.”