A “haunted” Lego set with a ghost-catching app and a 3D version of the “blaster” guns from the Fortnite video game are predicted to be among the Christmas bestsellers at Hamleys, as toymakers bridge the gap between toys and screens. About a quarter of all toys sold in the UK each year are purchased in December and buyers at the retailer, famous for its flagship store on Regent Street in London, think the £55 Lego Hidden Side paranormal bus and £30 Nerf Fortnite guns will be topping children’s Christmas lists. The LOL Surprise! dolls’ chalet – which has a working ski lift, ice-skating rink and snow machine – also makes the Hamleys top 10, despite a hefty £250 price tag. Victoria Kay, Hamleys’ head buyer, said there were a growing number of toys seeking to embrace the online world through physical play. “It’s no surprise that tech-based toys are popular with the kids this Christmas but it’s interesting that we are seeing an emerging trend of human connection,” she said. Christmas may still be 90 days away but Hamleys – which was bought by India’s richest man, Mukesh Ambani, earlier this year – also opened its festive shop on Thursday. Kay said the Regent Street store had experienced a successful year so far and that for many people it was a family tradition to visit during the Christmas period. “Nobody knows what will happen with Brexit,” she said. “We get lots of international visitors so are not solely reliant on the UK market. Hamleys is a very experiential store – we love to get products out of their boxes.” Scruff-a-Luv’s my real rescue – a matted fur ball that comes to life after a bath (£40). Coding Critters – cute interactive puppies that teach coding (£40). Pictionary Air – a smart pen streams drawings on TV, meaning no paper is required (£20). SmART Pixelator – create 2D and 3D pixelated designs using beads (£70). LOL Surprise! dolls’ chalet – comes with ski lift, ice rink and snow machine (£250). Nerf Fortnite – computer game-inspired blaster that fires foam rockets (£30). Poopsie Surprise Dolls – doll with clothes that can be customised with DIY slime (£50). Oblique Drifter – remote-controlled buggy (£60). Lego Hidden Side paranormal bus 3000 – school bus with augmented reality app (£55). Linkimals Smooth Moves Sloth – interactive baby toy (£35).