Cancer survival rates in the UK have long lagged behind those in other countries of comparable wealth and income levels. And an international study published this week shows that while the UK is making rapid progress, there’s still a big gap in the survival rates cancer patients can expect in Britain compared with countries such as Australia, Canada and Norway. The good news is that the outlook for patients suffering from major forms of cancer has got much better. On an age standardised basis, fewer than half of patients with rectal cancer in the UK lived more than five years in 1995. By 2014, more than 60% did. And we should take the bad news with a pinch of salt because comparing cancer survival across countries is so inherently difficult. There is a risk that some countries look as though their patients are more likely to live extra years just because they have started counting sooner. But this isn’t an isolated finding: the UK performs consistently poorly in international studies, suggesting there is something very real to worry about. The gaps are not small: if people in the UK survived at the same rate as those in Austria or Canada, 20 in every 100 people with lung cancer would live for five years, instead of 13 in every 100. For some cancers, the international gap doesn’t even appear to be closing. So why aren’t patients in the UK living as long, and what can we do about it? Attention often falls on the expensive and dramatic aspects of cancer treatment: proton beam machines and breakthrough medicines. Other explanations focus on the state-funded nature of the NHS – ignoring the fact that many of the better-performing countries use the same model. Experts who have studied possible reasons for worse performance in the UK have concluded that it may have more to do with subtle everyday behaviours of doctors and patients that influence how fast diagnoses can be made. Studies have found British patients are more likely to be reluctant to come forward with symptoms than in countries that largely have better cancer survival rates. Compared to people in Scandinavian countries, Australia and Canada, they were most likely to worry about wasting their doctor’s time. British GPs are also less likely to refer people to hospitals for further tests – and this is statistically linked to worse survival rates. You can always blame the alleged culture of the “stiff upper lip”. But it is also not difficult to see why the NHS might incentivise doctors and patients to be constantly mindful of scarce resources. The NHS has fewer of nearly all types of staff than its counterparts overseas, relative to the number of patients. It also seems to have far fewer scanners than comparable countries we looked at in western Europe, the Anglosphere and the G7 – around seven MRI machines per million people, compared to an average of almost 20. It has a low number of hospital beds as well. The recent NHS long-term plan includes a battery of measures to improve cancer survival. It emphasises earlier diagnosis, and specifically aims to “lower the threshold of referral” so that symptoms are investigated more readily. A review of screening is monitoring how well current programmes work and what the future should be. These are in line with where the problems appear to be. But we should also reflect on the deeper reasons we ended up here. The NHS has often suffered from short-termism, with low levels of investment compared to its peers. Last year Theresa May announced an extra £20.5bn for the day-to-day running of the service. But there was nothing extra for the budget that funds investment and equipment, which has been raided repeatedly in recent years. Although the government has since pledged to put more money in, we at the Nuffield Trust have warned that much of this is just allowing trusts to spend money they already have – which they need for repairs after years of austerity, leaving little to spend on new projects. The budget for staff training has also suffered, and seen only partial relief, despite spiralling shortages of both nurses and the radiographers who scan people for cancer. Politicians in the UK tend to talk a great deal about NHS waiting times – which actually seem to be fairly average compared to other countries. Our performance in keeping people alive, which has some serious shortcomings, often takes second place. This week’s study shows rapid improvements in cancer care are possible, and the NHS is capable of making them. But we need to take a long, hard look at our priorities if we want to improve quickly enough to close the gap with other countries, and give British cancer patients a chance as good as any. • Mark Dayan is a policy analyst at the Nuffield Trust