What a rapt, intricate and disturbing evening. Four short dramas – the longest only an hour – by the un-United Kingdom’s most fascinating playwright, staged with delicacy and dash by her long-time collaborator. Caryl Churchill is famous for capturing new subjects for the stage in plays that are utterly unpredictable in form; plays that not only never plough the same furrow but leap each time into a new field. City traders; feminism under Margaret Thatcher; cloning. Verse drama; a two-hander in which one man plays three characters; a play made out of a multitude of flickering scenes. Back-garden chat swerving into apocalypse. Glass. Kill. Bluebeard. Imp. brings together utter difference – of idioms, scales and universes – in one evening. The first play takes place on a mantelpiece, while the second is set on a cloud. Elusive on the page, they are wonderfully realised by director James Macdonald. Miriam Buether’s decisive design sets up these stories about the lies we tell ourselves and each other in a frame of make-believe: a bulb-studded proscenium arch and traditional velvet curtains. Christopher Shutt’s sound design murmurs through the action like a sceptical wind. A juggler and a gymnast appear between scenes, twirling, inverting, stretching the bounds of probability: they are not in the playscript, so is this a Macdonald intervention or a late thought by Churchill? They make us ask again what we should believe in – our eyes? All is disconcerting, much is very funny. Churchill’s elastic way with structure and the gauntlet of her ideas are so striking that there is a risk of overlooking just how comic a writer she is, and how powerful a creator of weird and credible dialogue. Glass takes its title from a character who can – we are told – be seen through and is chronically fragile. A girl. Shutt sends chimes through the action as if the stage were a chandelier. Also sitting on Buether’s precarious strip of a shelf, suspended in darkness, is one chap who declares himself a clock, and another who says he is a vase. They all look like people to us – but then who knows? In Kill, a languid Greek god encapsulates all the deities; he looks down, smoking, on a child who, scribbling furiously, represents all humans. As he recites a tangle of myths, he reminds us that he doesn’t exist. Bluebeard’s Friends (its full title) is excoriating satire, a look at the woman-murderer as if he were a contemporary monster – “horrified to learn my friend Bluebeard is a serial killer” – who will rapidly provide a commercial opportunity: at the back of the stage, the blood-spattered gowns of his victims dangle, waiting to be marketed by his chums. There is not a dud performance in any of these plays: on the contrary. But it is in the longest drama, Imp – naturalistic, with brown sofas and sad family histories – that the cast pull together most strongly. Deborah Findlay and Toby Jones are elderly cousins – “there’s kissing cousins but no kissing here” – who share a house together, with some memories of violence and a small, intimate secret that subtly recalls Pandora’s box. They are visited by a young niece and a homeless man who becomes her lover. The direction of the plot – delivered in short scenes under a drab domestic light – is never guessable: sometimes, as is pointed out in Kill, unleashed furies can be quietened, and sometimes not. Louisa Harland and Tom Mothersdale are riveting as the on-off lovers: one of them open, the other opaque; both equally subtle. Toby Jones is effortlessly convincing as he manoeuvres from grumpiness to resignation. And how wonderful to see Deborah Findlay unleashing her strengths both as a comic actress and as a rage-fuelled missile. She has the part with the greatest range and she uses it to the full: towering in anger, and beautifully baleful in her sagging shoes: “I remember sex. Dimly… You look at it now and you think… Whatever was that?” Each of these plays could have a future independent of the others. Yet they gain from being seen together. Echoes gradually become apparent: dark moments in Shakespeare plays thread their way throughout alongside Greek goriness. There is a beautiful arc to the evening as the final line quietly touches on opening moments. It is a testament to these oblique, remarkable plays that a single word can provoke a murmur of recognition. My Beautiful Laundrette has always been loved. The 1985 film – written by Hanif Kureishi and directed by Stephen Frears – was a sudsy revolution, an acerbic look at Thatcherite Britain which was also a romance. Kureishi’s new version comes up sharply, with a welcome emphasis on the predicament of women: Cathy Tyson struts with fine scorn. The factionalism and racism are all too recognisable: Paddy Daly’s strongly played punk Genghis – all brawn and fury and no vocabulary – could be a voice from today. The love affair between Omar – the son of a Pakistani intellectual in a family of businessmen, played by Omar Malik – and Johnny, a white punk, who once took part in attacks on his lover’s family, is the action’s unexpected, hopeful centre. But there is another romantic transformation, seen in Grace Smart’s busily moving design when a row of greasy washing machines becomes saffron yellow. The two young men – “I love cleaning!” – aim at a south London version of Scott Fitzgerald: to make a “laundrette as big as the Ritz”. It’s a brilliant wheeze. Their vision bursts gorgeously into life when they switch on their neon sign of a tilted detergent packet – and again when, as they splash each other with water, the stage is entirely covered in a mass of tiny bubbles. I would like still more: Nikolai Foster’s production was, at preview, flickering rather than flaming. Gordon Warnecke, who played Omar in the film (he and Daniel Day-Lewis did so much kissing they were called the Listerine Kids), appears more stiffly as his father. But how lovely to have a strong script and visuals playing against each other; “Where are those two buggers?” asks an unknowing uncle as the two boys make love in the next room. And Jonny Fines (another namesake casting) galvanises: witty, gentle and loping – with Malcolm McDowell Catherine wheel eyes. Star ratings (out of five)Glass. Kill. Bluebeard. Imp. ★★★★★My Beautiful Laundrette ★★★★ Glass. Kill. Bluebeard. Imp. is at the Jerwood Theatre Downstairs, Royal Court, London, until 12 October My Beautiful Laundrette is at the Curve, Leicester, until 5 October