Jamie George believes England may be forced to adopt a coded sign language during lineouts against Tonga because of the unique atmosphere expected in the Sapporo Dome. England begin their World Cup campaign on Sunday at the 42,000-seat indoor stadium, with Eddie Jones warning his squad it is likely to be the loudest venue they play in, based on information received from the England football team who faced Argentina there at the 2002 World Cup. Their opponents have also promised Billy Vunipola that he will receive a hot reception. The stadium was eerily quiet for Australia’s win against Fiji on Saturday but with thousands of supporters set to descend on Sapporo and the match kicking off at 7.15pm local time, England are anticipating a markedly different atmosphere. England trained at the stadium on Friday – before Jones and his coaching staff attended Australia’s victory – and after getting his first taste of the arena, George said England may have to adopt different triggers when he is looking to hit his jumpers. “Around lineout time there is a bit of change we might need to make,” he said. “In order for a lineout to work you need a trigger. Often a lineout caller will shout a letter or number or a colour and that triggers movements. You can go into a lineout with three or four different things that can happen and you are listening for that. If you can’t hear, it becomes pretty difficult and we have to adapt around that. Thankfully, our lineout callers are pretty good at that and we are aware of that. “I have always got potential options when the lineout happens. The trigger might be a hand movement, we might just back one thing. There are hundreds of options – you can get around not being able to hear too much. It is just being aware of that and making sure we are all clear what we want me to do.” While England are as short as 1-1,000 with some bookmakers to beat Tonga, Jones has left little to chance and named his strongest available side. The squad arrived in Japan last Monday and spent eight days at a pre-tournament camp in Miyazaki before heading north to Sapporo on Wednesday. The following day was England’s final full-intensity training session and George revealed there was no little tension among the squad. “The way we have trained, there was a bite to it, an edge to it, which is what you want in Test week,” he said. “That’s our time to have a physical session. There certainly was that edge to it. We had to be reined in rather than given a kick, which is always a good sign. The boys are itching to go. We have been looking forward to this for four years. “It’s just about making sure we control the emotions, not get too far ahead of ourselves and focus on what we need to do. We’re not putting a huge amount of pressure on ourselves. We know how important the game is, how important it is to start with a bang. Whenever I’ve played in England teams that are playing really well there’s a feeling.” Tonga, meanwhile, are relishing the chance to come up against Billy Vunipola, whose father and uncle played for the Pacific islanders against England at the 1999 World Cup. Vunipola has predicted he would be targeted and Toutai Kefu, the Tonga head coach and former No 8 who played for Australia under Jones, said: “Billy is a bloody good player. I would love to have him in my team. “Our players love playing against other Tongans. They definitely won’t give him any space or time. They will be trying their hardest to get into Billy’s face and smash him.”