Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. A timely read from interwar, who has been enjoying The Fortnight in September by RC Sherriff: The perfect, gentle book for an overheated day, inserting a little sweetness into sour times. It follows a lower-middle-class family on holiday at the seaside c. 1930. The pleasure these unremarkable but good people derive from small things - a beach hut with a balcony, a military band concert, a tea of bread and jam - is balanced against the limitations and disappointments of their lives. RC Sherriff’s novel provides a vivid picture of ordinary life in a world in some ways very different from ours, and in other ways totally recognisable. Also apt for the moment is Goldstein by Volker Kutscher, as gavernism explains: It is set in Weimar Republic Germany in the late 20s and early 30s. Reading while parliament is being prorogued is quite strange actually; made me feel closer to the characters and scenarios in the novels as there is an uncertainty that runs through the novels ... Veufveuve has been reading Greg Grandin’s The End of the Myth: From The Frontier To The Border Wall In The Mind Of America: I thought this was a (provocatively) brilliant take on US history. The myth of the frontier, an ever moving zone of possibility, not only shaped American notions of freedom (individual rights over human rights) but was always also about who was outside the frontier, implanting nativism and racism deep in the culture. Always racialised and policed through violence, the idea of the frontier, now that the limits of expansion have been met, has curdled into something even darker: an inward-looking nihilistic rage that (white) America cannot forever have it all. Maybe none of this is new but I learned a great deal from this book. “One of my favourite Japanese authors is Sawako Arioshi,” says ChronicExpat: During her lifetime she was one of Japan’s better-known writers but lately she seems somewhat less frequently read, which I think is rather a pity. She was ahead of her time in addressing social issues in her writing, such as the environment and the impact of cultural change on the lives of Japanese women. I am aware of only three of her novels being available in translation, but they are among her best: The River Ki (1959), The Doctor’s Wife (1966) and The Twilight Years (1972). All three are (in my opinion) wonderful reading experiences but I would especially recommend The Twilight Years, which was one of the earlier Japanese novels to address the issue of dementia and the incredible strain placed upon women when they are obliged to become carers for ageing relatives. Staying with Japan, Marc de Faoite has been reading The Memory Police by Yōko Ogawa, translated by Stephen Snyder: If Franz Kafka was a Japanese woman, she might have written a book like this. This is one of those novels that has a mini-novel inside it, always a risky move, but Ogawa pulls it off, with both stories intertwining and finally converging beautifully. A sad novel about memory and loss and fascism and the tenuous bonds that bring people together. And Alexia_R has been “wryly amused” by Convenience Store Woman by Sayaka Murata, translated by Ginny Tapley Takemori: The story of a thirtysomething Japanese woman who is neither married nor has a high-flying career, but instead works in a shop. Her friends and family dedicate some effort to showing her how wrong this is. (I was reminded of the title of Jeanette Winterson’s autobiography, “Why be happy when you can be normal?”) I’m sure I haven’t seen more comparisons to Eleanor Oliphant ... the main characters certainly struck me as having some overlaps. I liked this and was wryly amused by it in places, but I didn’t love it. Finally, davidgl51 recommends School for Love by the “unfairly neglected” Olivia Manning: This novel is set in Jerusalem during the second world war and is seen through the eyes of Felix, a 16 year old orphan who is taken into the “care” of Ethel Bohun, the landlady of a guesthouse. The monstrous Miss Bohun dominates the novel. An evangelical Christian who leads a sect called “The Ever Ready Group of Wise Virgins”, she sets aside a large empty front room for the imminent second coming of the Lord. She thinks that she is generous but is in fact a hypocritical skinflint, virtually starving the other residents of the poorly-heated guesthouse. A coming of age tale that is also a tragic-comic masterpiece. Sounds astonishing. Anagrams of “Ernest Hemingway” That Could Sort of Almost Be Titles of His Novels The New York Times hails Kochland, the story of the rise of the notorious climate-crisis denying Koch brothers, as “among the best books ever written about an American corporation.” The confessions of Karl Marx. Re-reading all of Margaret Atwood’s novels. “I wouldn’t have one of the motherfuckers in my house for anything.” Kurt Vonnegut on guns. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!