A 77-year-old British woman has become the oldest person to sail around the world alone, non-stop, and unassisted. Jeanne Socrates, from Lymington, Hampshire, completed her 320-day voyage in Victoria, Canada. She was accompanied by a flotilla of boats during the final moments of the journey, while hundreds of people cheered her on from the harbour. The Royal Victoria Yacht Club congratulated Socrates on Saturday for completing her solo circumnavigation unassisted and setting the record for being the oldest person to do so. During the journey, Socrates’s 38ft (11.5-metre) boat, Nereida, sustained damage to its mainsail and backup sail, while its solar panels were lost overboard. Socrates was already the oldest woman to make the trip, completing it in 2013. The Royal Victoria Yacht Club said the previous record was held by Minoru Saito, who was 71 when he completed the journey in 2005. Socrates told the local press, Chek News: “The wind gods have not been with me, two cyclones off Hawaii to avoid, and a cyclone off the Indian ocean to avoid, I wasted a week with that.” She also thanked the public for their support, “They’ve sent me such great messages, I think they like the fact that I’ve persevered and overcome so many problems on the way around, and that I show it can be done.” Socrates took up sailing with her husband shortly after retiring in 1997. The pair travelled across Europe, the Caribbean, and the US. After her husband died in 2003, Socrates continued to sail alone, describing it as “quite a daunting task, getting to know the various systems onboard Nereida and dealing with a variety of problems,” on her blog. She attempted to complete her first non-stop sail around the world in 2009, but rigging problems forced her to abandon the attempt. Another attempt in 2012 had also failed, but Socrates persevered and was awarded the Guinness World Record in 2013 for being the oldest pwoman to sail alone non-stop and unassisted. Socrates has been able to overcome a number of setbacks in her career. In 2017, she fell off her boat, breaking her neck and ribs as she prepared for a previous record attempt. During her journey, Socrates raised more than £2,000 for the lifeboat charity RNLI. In a recent blogpost, she wrote that she supported “the superb life-saving work done by the RNLI … each and every day of the year, regardless how bad the weather. “In fact, the worse it is, the more likely they are out there, helping someone in distress – whether a swimmer, surfer, small boat or big ship, night or day, summer or winter, and it is a charity – no government funding – so they rely on our help to fund their intensive training and maintain their equipment.”