Good morning briefers. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories on a very busy Monday morning. Thomas Cook has finally gone bust after last-ditch talks failed to provide £200m in new funding for the stricken travel company, placing 9,000 jobs at risk in Britain alone and triggering the biggest peacetime repatriation effort to help 150,000 stranded holidaymakers. The Civil Aviation Authority announced at 2am that the company, the world’s oldest travel firm, had ceased trading and that all related flights and bookings had been cancelled. You can follow all the latest developments on our live blog here. The company’s chief executive, Peter Fankhauser, said the collapse was a “matter of profound regret” and he apologised to the company’s “millions of customers, and thousands of employees”. Boris Johnson hinted at possible government action against directors of travel firms who presided over bankruptcies. With Thomas Cook planes grounded, a huge plan – codenamed Operation Matterhorn – will swing into effect today to bring travellers home. British Airways and easyJet will be among the airlines providing aircraft to repatriate people stranded abroad in destinations from mainland Europe to north Africa, the Middle East, the US and the Caribbean. Hundreds of thousands of Thomas Cook customers from other countries are also facing uncertainty. You can find the the answers to all your questions about what happens now in our Q&A here. And read an analysis from our business staff on how online competition and massive debts finally proved too much for the venerable company founded in 1841, which has more than 500 shops on Britain’s high streets and employs thousands more people overseas. Labour clash – Pro-European Labour MPs have succeeded in forcing a vote at the party conference today on whether the party should campaign for remain in the next general election. Jeremy Corbyn has tried to neutralise the contentious issue by saying the party won’t decide until after it forms a government. But rebel MPs and activists have managed to bring a motion at the conference in Brighton that sets them on a collision course with the leader. On Sunday, activists voted for a radical policy to abolish private schools. ‘This is just getting ridiculous’ – British stars have dominated the Emmy awards in Los Angeles overnight, with Phoebe Waller-Bridge winning three gongs for her series Fleabag as it swept the comedy accolades. The programme that started life as her one-woman show in Edinburgh was judged best comedy series, and she also won for best writing and best actress, the latter a surprise win ahead of much-tipped Julia Louis-Dreyfus for Veep. As she began her third winner’s speech she said: “This is just getting ridculous.” She could also claim a hand in another award when her writing for Killing Eve helped Jodie Comer win best actress in a drama series. Ben Whishaw was handed the best supporting actor prize for A Very English Scandal and John Oliver won for his talk series Last Week Tonight. Game of Thrones was nominated for 32 awards and came away with the prize for outstanding drama series and a best supporting actor for American star Peter Dinklage. Here’s a full list of winners and you can also read how the night unfolded. PM to NYC – Boris Johnson arrived in New York for the UN general assembly overnight but has been fielding questions on several fronts on his way. First, he played down speculation that he might make a breakthrough on Brexit this week when he holds a series of meetings with European leaders also attending the summit. He claimed that EU leaders might not “necessarily have an attachment to the backstop”, but conceded there were still “gaps and difficulties”. The PM also told reporters on his flight to the US that the government now believes Iran was responsible for the drone attack on Saudi oil facilities earlier this month, raising the possibility that the British military could become involved in helping secure the Saudis against future aggression. And he also had time to deny six times giving his friend Jennifer Arcuri access to taxpayers’ money for her business. ‘No time to lose’ – Still in New York, the climate science body United in Science has warned world leaders gathering for the UN summit that countries must at least triple their carbon emissions targets if the world is going to limit global heating to 2C. The report says current plans would lead to a rise in average global temperatures of between 2.9C and 3.4C by 2100. Severe heatwaves, record-breaking wildfires, declining sea ice and glaciers, cyclones, floods and drought, have all hit sooner and harder than predicted a decade ago, it says, and the period 2014-19 has been the warmest five-year-period on record. UN secretary general António Guterres, who presides over the climate action summit this week, says “we have no time to lose”. Housing crisis – An estimated 8.4 million people are living in unsuitable housing, making them more likely to experience homelessness, serious debt and poor health . A survey of 40,000 people for the National Housing Federation estimated that 3.6 million are living in an overcrowded home, 2.5 million are unable to afford their rent or mortgage and 2.5 million cannot afford to move out of house shares or their parents’ house. Another study today shows that the number of empty houses in Britain increased by almost 11,000 to 216,000 last year. In the weeks leading up to the war in Iraq, Katharine Gun exposed a US plot to spy on the UN in leaks published in the Observer. She joins former Observer journalist Martin Bright to tell their story ahead of a forthcoming Hollywood adaptation. Plus the BBC’s Carrie Gracie on how she fought for equal pay. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/09/20-63459-190923TIF_secrets.mp3 The mysterious end to the heroic life of Raoul Wallenberg has puzzled and troubled historians, governments and his family since he disappeared into the Soviet prison system in 1945. The Swedish diplomat had by that time saved an estimated 30,000 Hungarian Jews from the Nazi deaths camps but it has never been established exactly how, when or where he perished. This week his nieces are travelling to Stockholm to demand “specific answers to specific questions” after what they believe has been a decades-long coverup. “His story is unfinished – the mystery must be resolved. There are still so many closed doors, and we must have help in opening them,” says his niece Marie von Dardel-Dupuy. Billy Vunipola, the England No 8 with Tongan heritage, is unbowed after emerging unscathed from a bruising Rugby World Cup encounter and here are five talking points from the match. César Azpilicueta was denied an equaliser for Chelsea against Liverpool before the Reds took a 2-0 lead as an imperfect VAR system continues to prevail at important moments in the Premier League. Sebastian Vettel won the Singapore Grand Prix in a Ferrari one-two finish, but Charles Leclerc was unhappy with team orders. And Danny Willett says he is enjoying his golf again after winning the PGA Championship at Wentworth. A grim warning about the perils of a no-deal Brexit comes from the European car industry, whose leading lights say today that it will have a “seismic” impact on the automotive sector. The FTSE100 is expected to open flat this morning despite a positive move by Asian stocks overnight on reports that renewed US-China trade talks had gone reasonably well. Sterling is sitting at $1.249 and €1.132. The Labour party’s Brexit woes provide the lead for several papers. The Guardian splashes with “Revolt over Brexit policy throws Labour into chaos” while the Telegraph reports “Labour will be crushed over Brexit, Corbyn told”. The i cuts to the chase and announces “Labour civil war”. The Times has a different angle ahead of the Brighton conference with “Independent schools will be abolished by Labour” as does the Express, which prefers “Benefits bill to hit £520bn under Labour”. The Mail focuses on the Thomas Cook collapse with “165,000 face fortnight of Thomas Cook chaos”, as does the FT – “Thomas Cook repatriation plan on standby as administration looms” – and the Sun, “40 jumbos to the rescue”. The Mirror leads with “Justice for nuclear test victims”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com