Spain’s acting prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has announced hundreds of progressive policies intended to persuade the anti-austerity Unidas Podemos alliance to back his efforts to form a government and avoid the country’s fourth general election in as many years. Sánchez’s Socialist party (PSOE) won the most seats in April’s general election but fell short of a majority in congress and has refused to govern in coalition with the far-left grouping. Sánchez has instead suggested a “shared progressive programme” designed to end the standoff and win over Unidas Podemos, unveiling on Tuesday 370 policies including proposals to clamp down on excessive rent rises, introduce low-emission zones in towns and cities, and expand free public nursery education. Speaking at the launch in Madrid, the acting prime minister called for a government built around a “shared, progressive agreement” and an openness to society. “It’s not just because it’s the route people called for when they voted at the polls,” he said. “It’s because society is asking us to show we can overcome the political impasse that the country’s endured since 28 April and give Spain the opportunity to have a progressive government right now.” Voter anger over economic woes and corruptions scandals leaders to a hung parliament. The two main parties - the ruling People’s party (PP) and the Socialists (PSOE) - suffer big loses at the expense of newcomers (leftwing) Podemos and (rightwing) Ciudadanos. Neither the PP nor the PSOE manage to secure a majority in parliament to form a new government, so … … another election is held in June. Voter turnout is the lowest since the transition to democracy in 1975. The PP’s vote share increases, but parliamentary deadlock continues. PSOE leader Pedro Sánchez refuses to allow PP leader Mariano Rajoy to form a minority government, citing the corruption scandals swirling around the PP. Years of simmering discontent among PSOE members with Sánchez boil over and he is ousted as leader after powerful factions rebel against his refusal to allow Rajoy to form a government. With Sánchez gone, the political paralysis is broken and Rajoy returns as PM after the PSOE abstains on an investiture vote in parliament. Sánchez regains the leadership of the still-divided PSOE, his hardline anti-Rajoy stance bolstered by a slew of corruption scandals involving former senior PP figures in Madrid’s regional government. Rajoy becomes the first serving Spanish PM to testify in a criminal case. He emphatically denied any knowledge of an illegal funding racket in the PP. The president of Madrid’s regional government, PP's Cristina Cifuentes, resigns after video footage emerged of her apparently being caught stealing two tubs of face cream seven years previously. Rajoy had refused to heed calls to sack Cifuentes after an earlier scandal involving false claims about her academic qualifications. The PSOE calls a vote of no confidence in the scandal-plagued Rajoy administration, and it passes through parliament with the help of regional parties and Podemos. Sánchez is sworn in as PM the next day. Sánchez is unable to get his 2019 budget passed through parliament after the Basque and Catalan nationalist parties who had supported him against Rajoy vote against it. Yet another election is called. Another inconclusive election sees the PSOE increases its vote share, as the PP vote plummets and the far-right Vox party enters parliament for the first time.  Speculation immediately turns to how the PSOE will secure the majority needed to form a government. Sánchez also took aim at the conservatives and pro-independence Catalan parties who overcame their bitter enmity to trigger the snap election by rejecting his government’s 2019 budget. “We haven’t got to where we are today because of disagreements between progressive parties but because pro-independence and conservative parties pooled their votes to topple a progressive government,” he said. Iglesias gave the policies a cautious welcome, telling Spanish TV that while they “sounded good”, he and his colleagues would need to study them in detail before making any decisions. Even if Sánchez manages to win over Unidas Podemos – which is far from certain – he would still need the pro-independence Catalan Republican Left party to abstain during the investiture vote. Tensions between Catalan separatists and pro-unity parties remain high and are likely to rise still further when the supreme court delivers its verdict next month in the trial of the 12 regional independence leaders accused of rebellion, sedition and misuse of public funds over their alleged roles in the failed bid to secede from Spain two years ago. The Spanish Socialist Workers’ party  has governed Spain since turfing the conservative People’s party out of office last year in a vote of no-confidence. But it has struggled to achieve its ambitious agenda as it is a minority government, holding only 84 of the 350 seats in the Spanish congress. Opponents accuse it of being weak and beholden to the Catalan separatists parties on whose support it relied to win power. The rightwing party governed from 2011 until last year, when it was finally undone after a court case laid bare the corruption at its heart. In the case, Mariano Rajoy became the first serving PM to testify in a criminal case. He was succeeded as party leader by Pablo Casado, who has dragged the party much further to the right in the hope of seeing off the challenge from Vox. Along with Podemos, the young, the centre-right Citizens party achieved a breakthrough in the 2015 election, ending decades of PSOE and PP duopoly. The party has also shifted further to the right in recent months, and made the Catalan crisis a key focus. Its tough line on regional independence and rigorous defence of Spain’s national unity paid off in the 2017 Catalan regional elections, in which Citizens were the single biggest winner. The anti-austerity party, born of frustration and the indignados movement, looked set to leapfrog the PSOE and become the dominant leftwing political force in the 2016 general election. But mixed messages, internal squabbles and an alliance with the United Left – a coalition that includes the Communist party – saw it do far worse than expected. Podemos has helped to shore up the Sánchez government, but public internal spats have blunted its message and weakened its image. Vox, led by the pistol-carrying Santiago Abascal, ended four decades of Spanish exceptionalism in December when its performance in the Andalucían elections made it the first far-right party to win seats in Spain since the country’s return to democracy following the Franco dictatorship. Abascal has talked of a 'reconquest' of Spain – a reference to the long campaign against Moorish rule, which concluded in 1492 and also led to the expulsion of Spain’s Jews. Vox, which was formed by disgruntled PP members five years ago, has raged against 'supremacist feminism and gender totalitarianism', and the party has complained that existing domestic violence laws are unfairly weighted against men. - If the manoeuvring and horse-trading fail to yield a government by 23 September, another general election will be held on 10 November. Although Spaniards are weary after voting in three general elections since December 2015, two recent polls suggest a repeat poll would benefit the PSOE. A survey for El Mundo found that the Socialists would again finish first, taking 145 of the 350 seats in congress – 22 more than they managed in April. Unidas Podemos, meanwhile, would win 40 seats, meaning the two parties would easily secure a majority. Another poll, for El Español, predicted the PSOE and Unidas Podemos would take 176 seats between them. The current impasse, however, does not bode well for a deal, and voter fatigue could cause a decrease in turnout. Sánchez came to power in June 2018 after using a vote of no confidence to turf the scandal-mired conservative People’s party (PP) out of office. The PP suffered its worst ever results in April’s election as its support collapsed and it lost 71 seats. The party’s corruption woes show no sign of abating. On Monday, a judge investigating illegal political financing summoned two former PP presidents of the Madrid region – Esperanza Aguirre and Cristina Cifuentes – to answer questions over alleged corruption. Another election could also hurt the centre-right Citizens party. The party, led by Albert Rivera, was leading the polls last year until it refused to back Sánchez’s no-confidence motion. Its liberal credentials have also been undermined by its decision to enlist the help of the far-right Vox party to take power in Andalucía and Madrid. El País’s poll predicts Citizens would drop from 57 seats to 34 in the event of another election, while El Español’s suggests it would lose 19 seats.