Summer is over. You know it is because the weather is a bit rubbish, the roads are busy, public transport is creaking and journalists are back on College Green asking the same two questions we have been asking for more than three years now: what just happened? And what now? The answer to the first question varies; the second is always the same – don’t know, or fouler words to that effect. As school looms, children everywhere are slightly fed up, while their parents are slightly relieved. I just interviewed the Labour MP Jonathan Reynolds and finished by asking him how he had spent his summer. He said it had been wonderful to spend time with his four children. I put it to him, Andrew Neil-style, that surely his kids must have got on his wick a bit from time to time. He flatly denied this, which just goes to show that you really can’t believe a word politicians say. I have had a great time this summer filming around the British coast, which I love, rain or shine. But everywhere I have been has reminded me of something that always baffled me when my children were small: why is it, in a country where the coast is great but the weather often poor, that there is so little to do when the rain starts falling? I have pitied young families everywhere, strolling in the drizzle, teeth gritted, pushing through until bedtime. Playgrounds need covers of some kind; pubs need soft play areas bigger than the pubs themselves; and noise cancelling headphones should be issued to all parents to block out the whining. Let’s be honest, there should be another word for holidays when you’re away with small children. I used to spend every school holiday in a caravan in south Wales, which was brilliant until it rained, at which point it was hopeless. To a soundtrack of rain hammering on the metal roof, my brother and I would play Escape From Colditz, make Airfix models, fight each other and irritate the living daylights out of our parents. I left school 34 summers ago but certain times of year land me right back there. In spring, the smell of mowed grass frightens me about revision. On wet days in winter when bus windows sweat condensation, I am, for some reason, taken back to baffling German lessons (Mr Stocker can’t have ventilated the classroom very well). And this week I find myself wondering if my uniform is ready for the new school year. It always was ready; my mum saw to that. But I loathed the crispness of the shirt and the donning of the new jumper, at which moment I briefly entered darkness before popping my head out, blinded by the light of the knowledge that it was a long haul to Christmas. I had the same group of friends from the age of four to 18, so there was no reason for the new school year to be traumatic. But with friendships to be renewed and enmities reviewed or hostilities resumed, we still eyed each other warily on the first day back. Classes and teachers and timings might have been shuffled around a bit, and there would be some poor new kid to be sized up. But by home time, I would already be feeling better. The new uniform would have been broken in, football practice was on Monday and I was looking forward to my tea.