You report that James Purnell, the BBC’s radio and education director, said the following in justification of the limited reach of its new Sounds app (as opposed to iPlayer Radio): “It is standard practice for updated apps to no longer support older operating systems” (BBC listeners tell of being cut off by switch from iPlayer to Sounds app, 29 September). This may possibly be “standard practice” for most commercial organisations. But it should not be the practice of a licence-fee-funded, non-commercial public broadcasting organisation. The BBC charter states that the mission of the BBC is “to act in the public interest, serving all audiences through the provision of impartial, high-quality and distinctive output and services which inform, educate and entertain”. The new Sounds app manifestly fails to serve “all” with an app that only works on certain devices. Not every licence fee payer also pays only for the newest machines and operating systems. Is it really wise for the BBC in these straitened times to turn away and alienate so many currently supportive fee-paying listeners?Anthony Lawton Church Langton, Leicestershire • I am sure all the rage I am feeling is mirrored by thousands of others who are utterly happy with their current technology and methods used to access radio programmes. Why the BBC cannot continue to run the two services until we old folk are dead and gone or our trusty devices rust away I do not know. Talk about built-in obsolescence. It has been a joy to be able to listen to serial dramas and programmes missed. Shame on you from those of us who are proud to keep our old iPads and phones for as long as we can. Not to mention some of us don’t have the cash or desire to buy anything other than food, recycled household goods and secondhand clothes, and share the food from our gardens and allotments. Where is the sensitivity to the majority of us who live carefully?Jo ValentineBridgwater, Somerset • May I add my voice to those who cannot download the new BBC Sounds app and will soon lose my well-loved iPlayer because of the age of my iPad. And while on the subject of age, I note that this whole problem has arisen because the BBC wants to appeal to younger listeners at the expense of us older ones. They should realise a truism, which is that young listeners always get older, but old listeners never get younger.Colin Burke (aged 69 and ¾)Cartmel, Cumbria • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition