Congratulations to Phoebe Waller-Bridge on her well-deserved Emmy awards. It is just a pity she has decided to take her success to a minority channel, leaving the majority of her fans behind (Waller-Bridge has Amazon deal in the bag, 25 September). It’s that much more galling given that the public who supported her through the licence fee will have to shell out (if they can) to an organisation that doesn’t even pay its fair share of tax in the UK.Pete FosterDevizes, Wiltshire • Two cheers for featuring the Fairphone 3 in “Sam’s smart buys” (28 September). The third cheer would be for making it the introduction to the piece on mobile phones and not a postscript to it. The same would apply to all consumer features starting with the ethical or environmental option before turning to “bargains” which leave others to pick up the true costs.Dave HunterBristol • Just a letter of support for John Crace, whose column I love (Digested week, 28 September). He is a Spurs supporter. Most of my mates are season ticket holders for Huddersfield Town. When I meet them in the pub after a home match and inquire: “Have Town played today?”, the usual response is: “Allegedly.” Keep the faith, man! Kate Layden Dewsbury, West Yorkshire • Dinner is the main meal of the day whenever it’s eaten. In the Midlands we sometimes had dinner for tea (Letters, 30 September).Jennifer MacwhinnieLondon • I have a question for those who insist that the evening meal is dinner. When they went to school, was their midday meal served by lunch ladies?Alan WoodleyNorthampton • If supper is twee, should we refer to that well-known painting in Milan as The Last Tea or The Last Dinner?Richard ThomasWinchelsea, East Sussex • All this arguing over dinner, tea and supper is doing my head in. Here in Stoke if a meal is eaten after 6pm it’s called a curry.David McverryStoke-on-Trent • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition