Leave with the best deal possible, but stay close to EU “Labour’s divisions reflect those in the country, representing areas where a second referendum and Remain seem inevitable and places where it seems absurd. Acknowledging this shows a refreshing willingness to be honest with the public and a desire to heal the divisions that exist. But serious problems remain. A second referendum, before any serious attempt to implement the first, holds no legitimacy for millions who voted in good faith and believe democracy is at stake. The prime minister trashes democratic norms. We cannot afford to do the same. With the failure to agree a deal already causing job losses, medicine shortages and cancelled clinical trials, I believe the only compromise is to leave with a deal that maintains close ties with the EU. It does not provide a neat and easy ending to this crisis, but there are no options that come without costs. We have to be honest and help the country move forwards.” Put it back to the people but ‘no deal’ must be on the ballot paper “Labour will head into the coming election offering a second referendum between its own negotiated Leave option and Remain, and not state a preference for either. Notwithstanding the difficulty in selling that policy on the doorstep, this position is fraught with danger. In general, both those who support and oppose a second referendum see it as a vehicle to overturn the 2016 result. Many millions will therefore deem it illegitimate from the outset. Keeping ‘no deal’ off the ballot would lead to further claims that the vote was being rigged. This would be both extremely dangerous and fundamentally wrong. For a second referendum to be legitimate it has to be considered fair. If not, the process will be seen to have been corrupted. The referendum will immediately lose its legitimacy, especially if Remain wins, and the anger will be on a scale we have not yet witnessed.” Offer the people a choice - a decent Brexit or remain - but campaign to stay in the EU “Politics is matching what is possible with our priorities. What is possible is a compromise that finds a tolerable form of Brexit - where jobs and living standards are protected - and giving the final say to the British public as to whether they still want to go ahead, three and a half years down the line. What our priority should be is that we fight to remain in the EU, committed to changing the UK. We need an end to food banks and a better deal for people at work. Our schools and our health service are being ignored because of Brexit. People are tired of being locked in this Tory psychodrama. Politics needs urgently to deal with this issue once and for all, so we can get back to the things people care about.” Have a referendum before an election and campaign to remain “When a Tory prime minister tells the Labour party that he really, really wants us to do something, it’s probably best to say ‘no’. Earlier this month we said ‘no’ to an election, and Boris Johnson’s descent into panic was immediate. It was probably the first time anyone’s ever said ‘no’ to him which must have been a shock. Worst still, he had no ‘Plan B’ to turn to. There were no EU negotiations over the summer, just preparations for a general election. All the dark money, cyber-lying, and populist attacks on the pillars of our democracy were being prepped for an election campaign with one purpose: to seek a mandate before having to deliver on the prime minister’s wild promises and be held to account for his failure to do so. It was a trap that we were too smart to fall into and nor should we again. Labour should be clear that allowing an election will be based on a principal not a date. We should only return to the public for a general election once we’ve resolved the Brexit impasse. We should push for a confirmatory referendum before an election in which the options on the ballot paper would be the best deal on offer with the EU and remain, with Labour campaigning to remain. To ask voters to solve our problems as a political class rather than the other way around would rightly draw the scorn of the electorate. Voters deserve something better and Labour and should deliver it for them.” Have a referendum, but let voters decide whether to leave or remain “Let the people decide. What could be clearer, more honourable than that? Other parties are polarising the country like demagogues, but Jeremy Corbyn is saying that Labour is the only party speaking to Leave and Remain voters, putting the unity of the nation first. Because unless we heal this country our people will suffer. Labour acts for the whole country. I make this plea to our friends across the party: support Jeremy, support this Brexit position … Then we can get a hearing on the changes that will make the next Labour government as life-enhancing as that of 1945.”