A newly composed song has become the rallying point for Hong Kong’s anti-government movement this week as thousands gathered at shopping centres and a football match to sing what protesters have embraced as their unofficial anthem: Glory to Hong Kong. The singing sessions have spread across the city this week, coming as a respite after weeks of intensifying violent clashes between protesters and police in an ongoing political crisis that has entered its fourth month. Thousands of people gathered across multiple floors of suburban shopping centres in various locations across Hong Kong every night this week to sing the protest song. On Thursday lunchtime, a rival camp waving the Chinese national flags and singing the Chinese national anthem turned up at the upmarket IFC shopping centre in the Central business district, prompting many onlookers and office workers to sing “Glory to Hong Kong” in retaliation. The two sides tried to drown out one another with songs and slogans and many got into a shouting match. During a World Cup qualifying match on Tuesday night, fans booed the Chinese national anthem and sang Glory to Hong Kong. They repeatedly chanted “Liberate Hong Kong” as they waved a black version of the territory’s Bauhinia flag, a symbol of resistance in the protests. Many Hongkongers say the singing lifts their spirits and boosts morale in their fight for democracy and basic rights. Some, tired of violent clashes in recent protests, said the singing was a powerful tool of solidarity and determination. “The song spells out our heartfelt feelings. It is a song that stands for our fight,” said a 33-year-old man who gave his surname as Hung, who participated in singing at the football match and at a shopping centre on Wednesday. Hung said singing was a good way of uniting supporters of the movement, on top of other non-violent expressions such as human chains and Lennon Walls – where people post sticky notes with pro-democracy messages – in communities across Hong Kong. “Why are tears flowing on this land? Why are people angry? We lift our heads, we reject silence and we yearn for freedom with our resounding voices,” said the opening verse. Words like “freedom”, “glory”, “courage” pepper the song, which finishes with a verse calling for democracy, justice and freedom and “a return of glory to Hong Kong in this era of revolution” – a slogan frequently used in the current wave of protests. Last Wednesday, Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam belatedly announced the full withdrawal of a controversial extradition, which in June sparked the wave of demonstrations. The withdrawal was one of five key demands of the demonstrators. She did not respond to protesters’ other demands, which include an independent inquiry into police behaviour, amnesty for those arrested, and democratic reforms to give Hong Kong residents universal suffrage. “We don’t want to give up. One demand has been met, but we don’t want to give up on the rest, we have to persist,” Hung said.