Born in London, Powell, 59, made costumes for the choreographer Lindsay Kemp in the 80s; she graduated to film after being mentored by Derek Jarman. She has won three Oscars and received the 2019 Costume Designers Guild award for The Favourite. Her next film is Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman, showing at the London film festival next month. On 12 September she takes part in a Behind the Scenes Q&A about independent film with Mark Kermode at Autograph Collection’s Bankside hotel in London. What is your greatest fear?Losing my sight or losing my mind. Which living person do you most admire and why?My friend [art director] Simon Costin who, in 35 years, I’ve never once seen in a bad mood. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Impatience. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Chewing gum. What was your most embarrassing moment?I altered a costume worn by an actor to fit me, as I planned to keep it afterwards, forgetting she had to wear it for another scene. There was an embarrassing confrontation on set. Who would play you in the film of your life?Eddie Izzard. What is your most unappealing habit?Looking someone up and down when I first meet them to check out what they’re wearing. Which book changed your life?When I first read Carol by Patricia Highsmith I knew it had to be made into a film and thought the perfect director would be Todd Haynes. Then it happened. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?That they would see to it that I would never work again. Luckily it didn’t happen. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Sausage rolls. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Good raconteurs – Martin Scorsese, Gloria Steinem, Jean‑Paul Gaultier, Lindsay Kemp – and a great chef, because I won’t be cooking. What has been your biggest disappointment?Not meeting David Bowie, but then they say it’s best not to meet your heroes. If you could edit your past, what would you change?None of it. What is the closest you’ve come to death?When I rode on the back of a motorbike from London to Rome with my eyes closed the entire way. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?A daily massage. What do you consider your greatest achievement?To be getting paid for doing something I love. What keeps you awake at night?Coffee, which is why I’ve given it up. What song would you like played at your funeral?Life On Mars. How would you like to be remembered?With a smile. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?To maintain a sense of humour and be dignified.