Scotland have brushed up their act before Sunday’s wet and wild World Cup opener with Ireland – by practising with balls soaked in shampoo. Gregor Townsend’s team are forecast to kick-off their campaign in Yokohama amid a torrential thunderstorm this weekend. But their coach has been expecting things to get slippery regardless while his team are sweating it out in Japan. The Scots have been based in Nagasaki as they complete their final preparations for the tournament, where temperatures of up to 33 degrees and humidity levels of almost 75% have been recorded. Now assistant coach Mike Blair has revealed the lengths they have gone to ensure there are no spills when they square off against Joe Schmidt’s No 1-ranked side in the world. “We had the shampoo and conditioner out over the ball when we were back in Edinburgh,” said Blair. “Since coming here to Nagasaki it’s mainly just been water because the sweat is more of an issue. The wet is obviously not ideal, but the sweat is difficult to deal with. “The conditions here in Nagasaki have been tough with the heat. It is likely to be wet and a bit cooler in Tokyo, but I never trust the weather forecast. Yesterday it said there was a 100% chance of rain [on Sunday] and today it says a 50 to 60% chance, which means it wasn’t a 100% chance the day before. So there will be a drop in temperature but difficult conditions to play in. It is good they have been training in the heat here, so they will be able to adapt to that as well.” Ireland are refusing to give up hope that Robbie Henshaw can shake off his hamstring injury and play a significant part in the World Cup. Assistant coach Greg Feek admitted centre Henshaw is “very, very unlikely” to feature against Scotland, but insisted Henshaw’s early reaction to his hamstring issue allows team bosses to hold out hope he can recover to take part in the competition. Ireland have opted not to release the full extent of Henshaw’s injury, but a team spokesman confirmed the 26-year-old will definitely not be returning home and is still part of the 31-man squad. Asked if Henshaw had been ruled out for the Scotland match, Feek said: “Well not really but you can read between the lines. Robbie’s looking very, very unlikely for this weekend obviously. But we’ve just got back from training and still sorting things out, but I think it’s reasonably positive in terms of what we saw.” Meanwhile, Wales’s World Cup campaign had a spectacular lift-off in Kitakyushu on Monday when 15,000 people attended an open training session. Kitakyushu Stadium was packed to the rafters as tournament fever gripped a city that has been turned into a home from home for Wales’ squad. Former Wales captain and triple grand slam winner Ryan Jones has been a driving force in establishing strong rugby links between the Welsh Rugby Union and Kitakyushu. “I’ve never experienced anything like this in my career,” he said. “It’s astonishing and it has been really emotional. It’s been like hosting a party. We got up this morning and we were saying ‘oh, I hope it goes well today and people will turn up’. “Then to see the queues and then to see the players’ faces when they came out, it was just magic. It has exceeded all our expectations. But what has really warmed my heart is that it has shown how really strong the brand of Welsh rugby is. People know it’s us, they love the colour red, but also how powerful rugby is. It’s great as the guys are one week out from our first game, and to have an experience like this brings it home how amazing an event it is. It will give the players a huge lift.”