Oak and Ash and Thorn, Peter Fiennes’s previous book, stood out from the thicket of dendrophilic titles that have emerged in the past few years. Full of the most exquisite descriptions and judiciously peppered with personal reflections and little biographical flourishes, it was a triumph, securing Fiennes critical and commercial success. Now comes Footnotes, a book that seeks to take a “journey round Britain in the company of great writers”. Fiennes is brilliantly self-deprecating, a genial and good-hearted presence The thesis draws your attention to the extent to which all authors are travel guides, leading the reader into the landscape of their stories, mediating between life on the page and reality. Fiennes, as it happens, is a wonderful companion, showing that the wit and charm that animated Oak and Ash and Thorn still works when applied to the world, rather than just the woods. You can feel the boost that early success has given his writing, too. Everything here is sharper, more confident and, above all, funnier. Whether he’s being butted in the balls by a wolfhound in a Welsh forest, on a hungover tour of the Cadbury’s chocolate factory, or creeping nervously along the cliffs down to Tintagel Castle “hanging on to the fence with sweaty hands”, Fiennes is brilliantly self-deprecating, a genial and good-hearted presence – drinking, smoking and tottering his way haphazardly around Britain. In a brief and cheerful preface, Fiennes sets out his hopes for the book. He wants to use a series of journeys undertaken by writers from Enid Blyton to Wilkie Collins to Boswell and Johnson as the blueprint for his own traipse, passing himself from one author to the next “like a baton in a relay”. He hopes that this will help “to bring modern Britain into focus”, in these “restless times”. And while he is diverted by tempting tangents, and his first “companion”, Blyton, doesn’t really journey anywhere at all, I think he largely succeeds. Footnotes paints the reader a nuanced and temporally layered portrait of Britain, showing how the country and its writers have lived in deep and fruitful symbiosis over the 800 years from the earliest writer Fiennes invokes – Gerald of Wales in the 12th century – to the present. The real pleasure of the book is the cumulative effect of the time spent with Fiennes and his most regular companions – Collins, Charles Dickens, Beryl Bainbridge and JB Priestley. Fiennes appears genuinely fond of the writers whose footsteps he follows, illuminating his reflections on British life with well-chosen snatches of literary biography, quotations and some glorious passages of natural history. I didn’t really know that I’d been waiting for a more literary and stylish Bill Bryson to update Notes from a Small Island, but that’s just what Footnotes is, and I loved it. • Footnotes: A Journey Round Britain in the Company of Great Writers by Peter Fiennes is published by Oneworld (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99