Democrats announced an official impeachment inquiry into Trump this week following a whistleblower’s complaint about Trump’s interactions with the president of Ukraine. A White House summary of a 25 July call shows Trump pressed Volodymyr Zelenskiy to work with the US attorney general and Rudy Giuliani, to investigate his political rival Joe Biden in the run-up the 2020 US election. Trump told Zelenskiy they should look into unsubstantiated allegations that Biden helped remove a Ukrainian prosecutor investigating his son Hunter. Ukraine’s new president was a wildcard candidate who had no experience of politics save for playing the president in a television comedy. In a remarkable plot twist, he’s now been thrust into the centre of an American political scandal. “I don’t want to be involved in democratic elections of the USA,” Zelenskiy said on Wednesday, visibly embarrassed after the release of the summary. “We had a good phone call. It was normal. You read it. Nobody pushed me.” The current frontrunner in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination was the vice-president in 2016, when the Obama administration pressured Ukraine to remove Viktor Shokin, the country’s top prosecutor; the US and other western countries said Shokin was corrupt. There is no evidence of wrongdoing by Biden. “This is not a Republican issue or a Democratic issue. It is a national security issue,” Biden said. Joe Biden’s second son served on the board of Burisma Holdings, a Ukrainian gas producer, from 2014 to 2019. Burisma had been investigated by Shokin for alleged corruption, but the investigation had been dropped by the time the US government urged Ukraine to fire Shokin. The former Ukrainian prosecutor general was widely seen as having blocked the prosecutions of corrupt oligarchs. Reform-minded Ukrainian politicians and international partners pressured the Ukrainian government to remove him for some time, and he was finally dismissed in 2016. He was later reinvented as a kind of heroic victim by Giuliani, who claimed – without evidence – that Shokin was fired on Biden’s orders. The former mayor of New York is Trump’s personal attorney, most strident TV defender and, it seems, occasional diplomat. The rough transcript of the Trump-Zelenskiy phone call shows Trump telling the Ukraine president to work with Giuliani in investigating Joe Biden. According to the whistleblower’s complaint, US officials were concerned about Giuliani’s role in communications with Kyiv. The attorney general is named by Trump in the call with Zelenskiy, the president saying Zelenskiy should work with Barr – and Giuliani – to investigate Joe and Hunter Biden. The Department of Justice, which Barr oversees, said Trump had not asked Barr to work with Ukraine. The DoJ examined the Trump-Zelenskiy call but decided not to open an investigation – a decision which has been criticized by legal analysts. Little is known about the identity of the person who ignited the firestorm engulfing Trump. Testifying on Thursday before Congress, the acting director of national intelligence, Joseph Maguire, said he did not know who the whistleblower was; Trump has said the same. The whistleblower has retained a lawyer and is said to be willing to testify before Congress. On Thursday the New York Times reported the whistleblower is a CIA officer. The acting director of national intelligence only took on the role on 16 August. Maguire has been criticized for not sharing the whistleblower’s complaint with Congress – as is normal procedure. The acting director said he thought issues raised in the complaint might be covered by executive privilege, and he said he consulted with officials at the justice department and White House lawyers over whether to pass the complaint to Congress. The White House eventually published the complaint. After receiving the complaint, Atkinson, the inspector general for the intelligence community, recommended it be shared with Congress. This put Atkinson at odds with his superior, Maguire, who blocked it from being shared. While the complaint was being withheld, Atkinson alerted lawmakers to its existence, saying it raised issues of “urgent concern”. The speaker of the House, and the most powerful woman in Congress, Pelosi decided to initiate an impeachment inquiry after the rough transcript of the Trump-Zelenskiy call was published on Wednesday. In doing so, Pelosi succumbed to long-mounting pressure from Democratic members of Congress, some of whom had been pushing for an impeachment inquiry to begin for more than a year. A veteran on the political scene, Lutsenko replaced Shokin as Ukraine’s prosecutor general but was also viewed with suspicion by reformers. Lutsenko met Giuliani and appears to have been amenable to opening an investigation into unsubstantiated claims of Ukrainian interference in the 2016 US election on behalf of the Democrats. Ukrainian officials have denied any effort to help Hillary Clinton in the election. Yovanovitch was the US ambassador to Ukraine for almost three years before being unexpectedly recalled by Trump in May this year. Trump criticized Yovanovitch in his call with Zelenskiy, describing her as “bad news”. In March, Yovanovitch called on Ukraine to do more to address corruption. Then Lutsenko accused Yovanovitch of giving Ukraine “a list of people whom we should not prosecute”. Lutsenko has since said Yovanovitch did not give him such a list. One of the new brand of politicians who entered the scene after Ukraine’s Maidan revolution, Leshchenko was a leading political journalist who wrote widely on corruption and became an MP. In May 2016, he published information from a so-called “black ledger” that showed under-the-table payments from the pro-Russian former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych’s regime to various figures including Trump’s former 2016 campaign manager Paul Manafort. This led to Manafort’s resignation from the campaign. Leshchenko later became an adviser to Zelenskiy and has said that before this week, it was “a clear fact that Trump wants to meet [Ukrainian officials] only if Biden case will be included”.