Fans of jump racing can begin to relish the prospect of a big-name clash at the start of the core season, as Altior has been committed to taking on Cyrname at Ascot this autumn. The news was announced by Nicky Henderson on the eve of his annual owners’ day and the trainer went so far as to suggest at least the possibility of a Gold Cup tilt by his star horse, who has remained unbeaten in 19 runs over obstacles but has never raced beyond two and a quarter miles. “After plenty of input from everyone, we have decided that we are going to go down the King George route,” Henderson announced through his Unibet blog on Saturday evening. “Therefore the obvious race to start in is the Christy 1965 Chase at Ascot on 23 November.” That means Altior will finally take on the upstart Cyrname, who shot to prominence with a couple of runaway wins at Ascot early in the year. According to the official handicapper, Cyrname is the better horse by 1lb, though fans of Altior will be unwilling to accept that without visual proof and can point to his spotless record over the past four years. The pair were due to meet at Sandown in April until Cyrname’s connections decided the ground was too quick for him. Henderson appeared cool about the idea of a clash at Ascot when asked about it three weeks ago but he and Altior’s owner, Patricia Pugh, have now decided it is “the only and obvious road”. Henderson added that he had been considering taking Altior to Huntingdon for the Peterborough Chase but that race is less than three weeks before the King George. “The timing for the Ascot race is ideal,” he added. “While nothing is set in stone, that is very much our intention at the moment. “Obviously, we’re forfeiting the Tingle Creek but he’s going to get beaten one day, so I think we have to go down another road. If it doesn’t work out, we can always go back to the Game Spirit, Champion Chase and do all of that again, but hopefully we won’t have to. “Assuming we get to the King George in one piece and win, then I guess the Gold Cup questions will start being asked but until we get to Kempton on Boxing Day we simply cannot answer anything else before then.” The Ayr Gold Cup was won by Angel Alexander, part-owned by Michael Owen and trained by Tom Dascombe at the ex-footballer’s stable in Cheshire. A raucous tweet from Owen showed what victory in the £200,000 sprint handicap meant. His 28-1 shot was drawn against the supposedly unfavoured stands’ rail and most runners switched to the far side from an early stage. “He’s always promised to land us a nice one,” said the winning jockey, Richard Kingscote. “He’s shown his true colours today.”