This week started out like most weeks for Donald Trump: a Monday morning spent sending a flurry of unhinged tweets then a quick break to indulge in some offline racism. Addressing reporters on the White House lawn before heading to a campaign rally, Trump said he was keeping a close eye on the situation in the Bahamas. Particularly since the people fleeing the grim aftermath of Hurricane Dorian and trying to come to America might be dangerous drug dealers. Presumably because they are black. “The Bahamas had some tremendous problems with people going to the Bahamas that weren’t supposed to be there,” Trump said. “I don’t want to allow people that weren’t supposed to be in the Bahamas to come into the United States, including some very bad people and some very bad gang members and some very, very bad drug dealers.” Like most things Trump says, this statement is very, very removed from reality. But who needs facts when you can appeal to racist feelings? Trump’s smearing of Hurricane Dorian survivors builds on his tried-and-tested strategy of dehumanising non-white people by describing them as “bad hombres,” rapists and MS-13 gang members. It builds on his strategy of describing any non-white person seeking refuge in America as a threat to the country. Trump’s comments, it should be noted, were prompted by a question about an incident on Sunday in which 119 Bahamian evacuees, including children, were told to get off a ferry bound for Florida because they didn’t have US visas. This came as a shock because Bahamians don’t need visas to visit America if they don’t have a police record and plan a short stay. According to an American reporter on the ferry, the evacuees he spoke to didn’t plan to move to the US, “They were coming to go grocery shopping, stay in a hotel with AC [air conditioning], chill for a little and then head back.” Nobody is entirely sure where the last-minute visa order came from. The US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) agency’s Florida office initially pointed the blame at Baleària, the ferry company. “It breaks my heart,” a CBP spokesman told Newsweek on Monday. “It’s like when you raise somebody’s hopes and then you pop the balloon ...That, in my opinion, is what Baleària did.” Baleària, on the other hand, has said it was advised of the documentation requirements by the CBP. Meanwhile, Trump’s acting CBP head, Mark Morgan, blamed the ferry fiasco on confusion. It is perfectly possible that nothing more insidious than administrative confusion led to those 119 Bahamians being kicked off a ferry. But Trump’s comments about “very bad people” also means it’s perfectly possible that more malicious motives were at play. No matter who is at fault, however, this episode should leave us all very unsettled. As the climate crisis progresses, there will be more climate migrants seeking temporary or permanent reprieve. They will not be met with open arms and open borders. They will be met with no legal recognition and little protection, as they won’t have refugee status. They will be met with racism. They will be met, as a UN expert recently warned, with a growing system of climate apartheid. And, if the likes of Katie Hopkins (Trump’s favourite Brit) have their way, eventually they will be met with gun boats.