A case pitting hundreds of thousands of owners of manipulated diesel vehicles against German car manufacturer Volkswagen has opened, four years after the country’s largest post-war industrial scandal erupted. The first hearing in what is likely to be a grinding, years-long trial began at 10am (8am GMT) on Monday in Brunswick, 19 miles from the VW headquarters in the northern city of Wolfsburg. About 450,000 people demanding compensation from VW have joined a first-of-its-kind grouped proceeding, introduced by politicians after the “dieselgate” emissions cheating scandal broke in 2015. Consumer rights group VZBV, representing the plaintiffs, says the carmaker deliberately harmed buyers by installing motor control software that allowed vehicles to pollute far more on the road than under lab conditions. “I would like Volkswagen to reimburse the purchase price”, said Andreas Sarcletti, a customer who had made the trip from nearby Hanover, “but I’m worried the trial is going to last a very long time.” The trial is Germany’s largest so far in the tentacular diesel scandal, which last week saw VW chief executive, Herbert Diess, charged with market manipulation over his role. In the mass lawsuit, the most important of around 50 questions for judges to consider is whether Volkswagen caused harm by acting “dishonestly”. “We’re confident of our chances, since Volkswagen committed fraud,” said VZBV lawyer Ralph Sauer before the hearing. But VW lawyer Martine de Lind van Wijngaarden said there was “no harm and no basis to this claim” because “hundreds of thousands of cars are used” on the roads without problem. Even if judges find in favour of the plaintiffs, there will not be an immediate compensation payment as each owner registered in the trial will have to claim individually. VW does not expect a final judgment to be made until 2023 at the earliest, if the case goes all the way to the federal court of justice. Individual proceedings could then take at least another year – in the court of first instance. By then, the cars’ market value could have further eroded, making a buyback cheaper for the firm. To avoid such delays, the VZBV says it is open to an out-of-court settlement but “in that case, VW would have to pay a significant sum after all,” said Mueller. Given the wide variety of cases under the group action umbrella, VW finds a mass settlement “hard to imagine”. In early July, judges noted in a preliminary opinion that some plaintiffs were living abroad, which could mean German law does not apply to them. Volkswagen said 2% of those listed lived abroad and that 10% were duplicate entries. Alongside the grouped proceeding, 61,000 individual lawsuits have been filed in Germany, and some have already led to out-of-court settlements. Since 2015, when Volkswagen admitted to manipulating 11m vehicles worldwide to fool emissions tests, the scandal has cost the group over €30bn (£26.6bn) in fines, compensation and legal costs. Most of that sum – $22bn (£17.8bn) – has gone to the US, while in Germany VW has so far paid just €2.3bn spread across three fines. Alongside car owners, investors are claiming damages for losses they suffered when the group’s share price plummeted after it came clean.