A clinical first half from Kim Little and Vivianne Miedema, added to by the Dutch top scorer and Lisa Evans after the break, ensured Arsenal travel to Borehamwood with a surely unassailable four-goal lead on their Champions League return. If there was a fear that Arsenal lacked European experience, their dominance here after an absence of five-and-a-half years almost made it feel like time had stood still for them. Gone were the worries of preseason defeats by Wolfsburg, Bayern Munich and Barcelona – tests designed to ready them for this competition – and instead the slick passing football that has become synonymous with the manager, Joe Montemurro, was well and truly back. Fiorentina, though, while not the toughest opponents the unseeded Gunners could have drawn, were not the easiest on paper either. In their third year in the competition, though having not progressed past the last 16, they readied themselves for the Arsenal onslaught, a back four swiftly reverting into a back five and sometimes six. That meant Arsenal struggled, despite controlling possession, to find the space to shoot in the opening phase of play. In an early warning for the visiting side, Jill Roord found herself robbed in the middle by Stephanie Breitner who played through towards Lisa De Vanna but Jen Beattie got to the ball just ahead of the Australian. However, playing a high back line, Arsenal spent much of the half camped around the edge of the Fiorentina box. Leonie Maier lashed a dipping strike from 25 yards, almost in frustration, just 13 minutes in. It had to be the combination of Little and Miedema that would split the resolute defence, not once but twice. Less than 20 minutes in and Little sprung Miedema free in the box, with purple shirts rallying, she dropped a shoulder, switched on to her right foot and hesitated before swiping past Francesca Durante as she fell off balance. It temporarily silenced the home crowd but there was a moment of celebration from the vocal support shortly after, when Italy’s World Cup star Tatiana Bonatti had a crack from wide on the left, but the ball pounded the side netting with the Arsenal keeper Manuela Zinsberger watching closely. The home side’s best play came from De Vanna, Janelle Cordia and Frederikke Thøgersen dancing triangles down the right and catching out Katie McCabe. But just past the half‑hour Arsenal had a second. Little and Miedema played a one-two to outfox a dishevelled back line and put the Scot clean through to stroke past Durante. Beth Mead and Evans then switched wings while Leah Williamson, who was making her 100th start in red and had pushed forward to sit in front of a back three with Roord, slipped back to line up with Beattie at the centre of a more familiar back four. Arsenal’s versatility helped them through a testing period of injury last season. After Arsenal had crawled over the line in the title race, Little said: “We’ve got players who have been able to change positions because we’ve not had players fit and I think the adaptability of everyone and being able to do that is something I’m extremely proud of.” In Italy, though, the versatility was used as Montemurro has always intended it, to create a fluidity to their play that confounds the opposition. Arsenal then turned the screws and the former Gunner Janni Arnth handed them their third on a plate. The centre-back, who joined Fiorentina from Arsenal in the summer, dawdled in the box and Miedema pounced, relieving her former teammate of the ball before almost sauntering a few yards forward and driving low past Durante. Four minutes later and it was four as the team in purple broke. Mead flew to the byline, looked up and seeing Miedema, chipped her cross towards the waiting Dutch forward, clipped over her by a defender the ball swooped to Evans at the back post who hammered in a volley from five yards. It was enough to make Montemurro feel able to rest some legs and off came Miedema, who missed Arsenal’s season opener against West Ham with a knock, for Jordan Nobbs to get some vital minutes in her recovered knee, as the clock ran down on one of the supposed toughest ties in the round.