I’m at my wit’s end trying to persuade Tesco to deliver groceries to my house – the vans pass the end of my road but will not stop. This has gone on for over five years (as you’ll see from the correspondence I have forwarded to you). The company keeps saying my postcode is not covered by deliveries from its Perth store – I am apparently on the “wrong” side of the border – and that there is nothing they can do. I really need common sense to prevail. I currently place my orders with Asda, as I have no choice, but as a vegan I would much prefer to take advantage of Tesco’s bigger and better range.RA, Pitlochry, Perthshire Good news – Tesco tells us that it is adding your postcode to its system for its next scheduled update on Monday 30 September. So you will be able to see the new slots from 1 October. It says: “It’s common practice to expand our catchment areas following feedback … and often add individual postcodes to the home delivery service.” We hope it’s worth the five-year wait! Following our recent item on Whirlpool about a reader whose supposedly “safe” dryer turned out to be one at risk of bursting into flames, we received this letter which suggests it was not a “one-off”: Like AK of Brighton I, too, checked Whirlpool’s website to see if my Hotpoint dryer (purchased sometime around 2008) was safe and got the response that it was “not one of the affected models”. This was in June 2016 when I was letting out my house. I took a screenshot of the response and gave it to my tenants – a professional couple with a baby – to reassure them the dryer was safe. I have been back in my house for about a year so you can imagine my horror when, on hearing the latest announcement by Whirlpool, I checked its website and this time got the response that my dryer was, in fact, affected. This was earlier this month and I received my replacement dryer yesterday (all handled very efficiently). However, the thought of what might have happened to my tenants and their little girl in the two years they lived in my house haunts me. I plan to use my new dryer very sparingly but you can rest assured I will not leave it unattended when I do. How can I trust this company?BS, London Whirlpool apologised for the distress and added that safety is its top priority. It said it was “difficult to determine the exact cause” as to why your machine was not identified earlier as at risk. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication subject to our terms and conditions at gu.com/letters-terms