I’ve played at World Cups and in Olympics, been at tournaments where attendances and TV viewing figures have been amazing, and as players you’re thinking: “What effect is this going to have on the domestic league, and on my club?” And then a few weeks later you’re playing in front of a few hundred people, and reality hits. There have been a lot of false dawns, but it looks like this year might be different. What I felt had changed during this World Cup was that it wasn’t just England games that were really well watched and followed, but the tournament grew in momentum as it progressed until people were tuning in whatever nations were involved. Following all this from France was sometimes spine‑tingling. This time the FA was ready to capitalise on the momentum, and on the commercial side the game has made massive leaps. I remember when teams would launch their new kits using players from their men’s team and women models. It used to infuriate me, when the women players were just being ignored. Now we’re seeing our Lionesses become the faces of their clubs. It hasn’t just happened by accident: the FA has put in massive resources over the last 15 years which have got us to this point. Having been a small part of it personally, I feel really proud of where the game is now. On the opening weekend of the new season Chelsea’s women played a league game at Stamford Bridge for the first time, and Manchester City did the same at the Etihad. I was at the Manchester derby, where there was a great atmosphere. Blue and red shirts mingled peacefully, and the people there were a real cross-section of the community: men, women, families, older men and women, a lot of people who maybe had not experienced women’s football before but were drawn by the opportunity to support their sides at the Etihad, on the back of what they had seen at the World Cup this summer. If we continue giving people the opportunity to access women’s football, the game will continue to grow. • Suzanne Wrack: Women’s football must be played in more big stadiums It wasn’t just the occasion and the atmosphere that made the first Manchester derby in the women’s top-flight memorable. There was slick, top-level football on display, live on TV. Jackie Groenen, the Netherlands midfielder and World Cup finalist who signed for United over the summer, stood out. She kept Keira Walsh, City’s midfield heartbeat, very quiet in the first half, an opening period which was dominated by United. There was a wonderful move down the left that ended with Leah Galton – who would have caught the eye of Phil Neville with an excellent performance – putting the ball on a plate for Jane Ross, a former City striker, who forced Ellie Roebuck into a world-class save. At half-time Nick Cushing, the Manchester City manager, was absolutely raging, and the girls responded. Caroline Weir scored with a rocket early in the second half and City held on for the win. Still, United certainly didn’t look out of place in their first game since promotion. It is great to see a former England women’s player managing in the WSL for the first time, and Casey Stoney seems a perfect fit at United. Her work ethic, intensity and attention to detail sit perfectly with how particular and meticulous United are and should be. City have been one of the dominant teams of the last few years, and Manchester is still blue – but maybe not for long. • Match report: Manchester City 1-0 Manchester United With Vivienne Miedema out with a hamstring injury, Beth Mead started down the middle as a No 9 and proved that she hasn’t forgotten how to play in that position since moving to Arsenal and being moved to midfield. She scored the first goal as the champions got off to a winning start against West Ham, while the new signing Jill Roord was also on the scoresheet, but a rebuilt and reinvigorated West Ham side didn’t make it easy. Since last season the Hammers have got rid of three players, all English, and brought in six players, all from overseas – the unchecked trend towards foreign signings is something the FA might have to address if they want to protect their investment in England’s youth structure – and they brought new energy to their team, which didn’t stop for 90 minutes. Martha Thomas – English-born but raised in the USA and brought in from Le Havre in the summer – pulled one back and Arsenal found themselves under real pressure. Kenza Dali, another new signing, hit a post with a free-kick and later hit the crossbar with another. It was clear from this game that West Ham have improved massively, and people will fear them this season. • Daniëlle van de Donk: This season Arsenal will be even better At Stamford Bridge, Beth England scored another beautiful goal to give Chelsea a 1-0 win over Tottenham. Strikes like that and Weir’s in Manchester are what you want when games are being played in big stadiums and live on TV. England has worked so hard to get to this point: she has gone out to Doncaster Belles, gone on loan to Liverpool, and has come back to Chelsea, won a place in their first-team and just made her international debut under Phil Neville. What a week it has been for her. Chelsea stuttered a bit last season but they looked more like their own selves on Saturday. Guro Reiten hit the woodwork, and she is definitely an exciting player who could be one of the stars of this season, having stood out in the Norway team that had an excellent World Cup before being eliminated by England. She is fast, dynamic, and can cut inside from either wing before driving down the middle. One of their problems last season was coping without their longstanding captain Katie Chapman, who had just retired. This summer Karen Carney has hung up her boots, and it will be interesting to see who now steps up to the plate as a leader. They have strong characters – the likes of Maren Mjelde, Magdalena Eriksson and Maria Thorisdóttir – and one of them has to galvanise the team. Spurs were quite impressive, having made a huge jump from being part-time last season. There is still work to do there – they don’t work at the men’s training-ground, for example, so there are challenges in terms of the basic working environment – but they showed their character where a team that wasn’t completely happy might have caved in. They won’t be the pushovers that some people thought they might be. • Match report: Chelsea 1-0 Tottenham 0 At 35, Fara Williams has just got back into the England squad and her 25-yard free-kick won the game for Reading at Liverpool. It was a stunning strike, and they needed it to break through a stubborn Liverpool defence – a backline that was far from impressive last season. The Reds seem to have improved and the same is true of Everton, who won at Birmingham. Willie Kirk has used his first transfer window to bring in the style of player he wants, and add a bit of quality. They have stood still for a couple of seasons but now seem ready to move forward. The opposite seems true of Birmingham, who have been just behind Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester City in recent years but have had a difficult summer, losing several key players. I have heard that there were other members of their first team who also wanted to leave, but were forced to stay as they are under contract. It looks like something is not right at the club, and having been a huge part of the women’s game during the WSL era, and despite the positivity around the game at the moment, I fear a bit for their longevity. • WSL club-by-club guide to the 2019-20 season BT Sport is set for its biggest season of women’s football, with coverage on 16 September of Manchester United v Arsenal on BT Sport 1. Go to sport.bt.com for more information