I found this off-the-shoulder Vivienne Westwood top in a vintage shop in Hampstead, north London. It’s ripped and has boning hanging out of it, but it still fits beautifully. I find that Westwood’s clothes fit your figure like nothing else, and there’s something really powerful about them. I love vintage shopping – it really is my No 1 thing because I hate having what other people have. I love being individual, and obviously it’s helping the planet as well. I found a Westwood jacket on an online vintage shop, too, and I’m really proud of that one because it’s quite rare. I also absolutely love [the clothes-buying app] Depop. You can get so many good bargains on there. These platform shoes from the 90s cost me $30 (£25). They’re by Mudd. I think that when you’re going out, it’s important to feel confident more than anything else, so I tend to buy clothes that make me feel good. Usually, dresses are my favourite thing to wear; I’ve got so many it’s unreal, and I love 50s styles. I also try really hard to buy only from female designers because it is important to support women. I’m very conscious about my carbon footprint, so I have become more aware of the things that I’m buying. When I was a teenager, I was such an emo that it’s embarrassing. Now I’m all about that Hollywood style: I’ve really grown into myself. I’ve got boobs and I’ve got hips, so I like to wear clothes that flatter my figure. I think that, for years, women were expected to fit into styles that didn’t necessarily suit them, just because that was what the media said looked good. I really try to dress for my shape now. I think brands need to do more to encourage body positivity; fashion can be a lot more influential than people perhaps realise, and I think it has the ability to make people feel really good about themselves. For a long time, there was this culture of [fashion and beauty] being unattainable, and I think you can still create that fantasy element while making it accessible to everyone. The Fashion Fix with Charli Howard is available now on BBC Sounds