Steven Gerrard was quietly pleased with how his Rangers side responded on an emotional night at Ibrox, with a hard-fought 1-0 Europa League win coming a day after the loss of Fernando Ricksen from motor neurone disease. The death of the 43-year-old Dutchman, a former Rangers captain, was marked with a minute’s silence beforehand and then applause in the second minute to mark that he had worn the No 2 shirt. His latest successor wearing the armband, James Tavernier, struck the outside of the post with a 10th-minute penalty but Sheyi Ojo fired in a glorious 20-yard drive in the 24th minute for what proved to be the winner. Gerrard said: “We gave the supporters a performance to be proud of. It has been an emotional 24 hours for everyone connected with the club so that put more pressure on the players. Everyone was looking for that performance for Fernando’s young family to be proud of and thankfully we got the win. “I thought my players were outstanding, especially the first half. We carried the gameplan out really well, to be aggressive, press on the front foot and try to take them to a place they are not used to going from a domestic point of view. “I was slightly disappointed not to go in at the break further in front. Feyenoord improved in the second half but over the course of the 90 minutes I don’t think anyone can take the three points away from us, we deserved it, the fans were fantastic. It was very fitting.” The former Liverpool captain, however, noted that Allan McGregor was also called upon to make several good saves to keep Feyenoord at bay. He said: “We’re going to need Allan McGregor in every game we play, playing at this level … Feyenoord, Porto, Young Boys. That’s Champions League opposition and Allan is going to have to be big for us and he was again tonight.” Jaap Stam said his side did not take advantage of the openness of the game. The Feyenoord manager said: “Rangers gave us a lot of space to play football and we didn’t use it, we never made the right choices.”