The Manchester City manager, Nick Cushing, said he hopes some of the Women’s Super League record crowd of 31,213 will be convinced into coming to their home at the Academy Stadium after a patient City beat their noisy neighbours. “We’ve had an opportunity to play in front of 31,000 people,” said Cushing after a trademark 25-yard strike from Caroline Weir was the difference as a slightly rusty City waited out a sprightly first half from United. “We can drive a lot of those people into the Academy Stadium. Our club does an excellent job of showcasing our football teams, men’s and women’s; we just want the fans to consistently come now.” The previous modest record of 5,265 was set last season at the Amex stadium as Arsenal secured their first league title in seven years against Brighton. In Manchester, rumours of close to 30,000 ticket sales held up, throwing down the gauntlet to Chelsea who have given away 40,000 tickets, but expect a fall-off, for their Stamford Bridge game against Tottenham on Sunday. The promotion of Manchester United and Tottenham to the top tier has shaken things up, with some of the most potent rivalries of the men’s game now ready to be transferred to the Women’s Premier League. But, with Casey Stoney’s team in their second season of existence, and making their top-flight debut, most would have expected a comprehensive home victory from the winners of a domestic double last term. If there is one thing Manchester United love to do, though, it is upset the narrative. “It is all we have been talking about for three weeks: ‘Let’s smash City, get that out of the way’,” said their new recruit, and Netherlands international, Jackie Groenen before the game. United’s Championship entry last summer was all about preparing the players and the club’s structure for this moment. Their enthusiasm showed in the first half. Leah Galton and Jess Sigsworth ran England full-backs, Aoife Mannion and Demi Stokes, ragged, forcing Gemma Bonner to put in an all-action shift, covering for her left-back a little more often than Cushing would have liked. Midway through the half, a whipped-in cross by Galton was side-footed by Scotland forward Jane Ross, forcing a point-blank save from the outstretched hand of Ellie Roebuck. “I say it every year but every year the WSL gets harder and harder to win,” said Cushing of United’s performance. “Every team is improving. Those days where it was us and Chelsea fighting at the top of the league in 2015, 2016, those days are gone. This year I really believe that it will be the most exciting WSL season and we’re excited for that because it grows the game.” If United had cause for concern it was at the back. A lengthy pause while Mary Earps had her ankle strapped had them worried. They had already been forced into the late recruitment of the Norway Under-23 keeper Aurora Mikalsen, announced days before the derby, as they tried to paper over the loss of Fran Bentley to a broken arm. An elbow injury had already sidelined Emily Ramsey, while Siobhan Chamberlain is pregnant. But it took three minutes for City to make up for a disappointing first half. A clearance from their new captain, Katie Zelem, fell straight to the feet of Caroline Weir who lashed the ball into the far corner from 25-yards . It was a crushing blow to the visitors who had the better first half, but this is a Manchester City side that is brutally efficient and their experience and patience finally told. With less than 10 minutes to play, Groenen weaved her way past Steph Houghton and Bonner, recovering from a slip, but a deflection off Mannion meant her shot rebounded off the inside of the post for Roebuck to fall on.