Nurse JackieI nominate Nurse Jackie created by Liz Brixius, Linda Wallem and Evan Dunsky. I don’t think I’d have written Happy Valley if I hadn’t seen Nurse Jackie. You could feel the creative energy buzzing through every episode, in the way it was written, shot and performed. Every episode had a hundred stories riddled through 25 minutes. It was surprising, dark, relevant and very funny. It was a show in which all the characters were complicated, flawed, sometimes unlikable but always funny and deeply engaging. It has an unparalleled place in my head as inspirational telly. God should appear as a character in TV shows more often. The ReturnedThe French drama The Returned has really stuck in my mind. First because it’s incredibly gripping and you don’t know what’s going to happen next. But also because I think both in its story – and in the mood it creates – it somehow captures the strangeness of how it is to live in our present world. It’s that feeling of living in a bubble, where inexplicable events come and go like in a strange fever dream. Yet however much you try and escape, you always find yourself returning to where you came from. You can’t break out to any other kind of future. This bubble is it, but it’s odd and frightening – the past keeps coming back again and again, and you don’t know who to trust, and you don’t even trust yourself. Battlestar Galactica I was bowled over by Ronald D Moore’s 2004 reimagining of Battlestar Galactica. The best form of sci-fi, powerfully dramatising contemporary themes such as terrorism, rebellion, prejudice, artificial intelligence and good government. All in space! No aliens, no transporters and a hugely complicated, pathetic, funny and devious bad guy in Gaius Baltar, one of the most fallible villains ever screened. The SopranosEven with all the groundbreaking and original TV that’s been made in the last 20 years – and there’s been a lot – it’s still The Sopranos. For the world and the language and the humanity and the inhumanity and the complete disregard for the lives of beloved characters, because who gives a fuck here comes a better one. And for Gandolfini. Chernobyl Both intimate and epic, Chernobyl is a character-driven drama that becomes a portrait of a nation and a belief system. Every word and frame and sound and performance within the five episodes feels weighed with forensic precision. The result is a lean, compelling, propulsive and relentless piece of storytelling. Chernobyl is a great example of the achievements of a collective: an extraordinary piece of dramatic teamwork. Mad MenI would nominate Mad Men, a show I was completely obsessed with, and my first experience of true “bingeing.” Its representation of the 1960s, the era of my own teens – I was 21 in 1970 – was extraordinary. The period can be unconvincing on screen, but here was a show that was authentic and moving and, at the same time, stylish and smart. I loved Jon Hamm, who was a complete revelation to me, and I had a crush on January Jones, in fact all of them were wonderful, Christina Hendricks, John Slattery, Elisabeth Moss, Jared Harris, I could go on and on. The OA I’d say The OA is my show of the century. It’s like nothing else. It’s so earnest and so ambitious and not trying to be cool or edgy; I assume its creators didn’t ask themselves “What’s hot right now?” before they pitched it. It just swung for the fences AND it got killed by its network smack in the middle, so it can live forever in my imagination, which is inferior to those of Zal Batmanglij and Brit Marling. The OfficeWhenever any person is thinking about writing a TV show, they’re advised to look at this for reference. I did it before I made Awkward Black Girl, and again before I wrote another pilot that would not see the light of day. I was a fan of the British version and was certain the US version would butcher it, but I was so happily wrong. The US version was so perfectly, achingly relatable. From the Diversity Day episode to one of the greatest TV love stories of all time, it has truly influenced my sense of humour and it is in my canon of all-time great TV. Friday Night Lights I’m sure everyone is wrestling with the incredibly tough task of identifying a single show from such remarkably strong competition, most recently Chernobyl and also Narcos, Six Feet Under to name just a few. I’m going with Friday Night Lights for its heart and soul, the compelling nature of its characters and storylines, the way it’s filmed and how the music is scored. Once you fall in love with this series, there are just so many episodes to lose yourself in. Is it really possible that a television show can have you sharing the mantra Texas Forever? House of CardsIf I have to pick just one it would be House of Cards. The first season about the American politician Francis Underwood, his wife and their ambitions for the presidency was great fun and mind-blowing at the time. It had the whole package and seemed almost flawless – great acting, a complex and provoking story, and creators who knew how to balance the genre. Maybe the most impressive thing about the show was that we actually came to love Francis Underwood even though he was ruthless.