In January 2009 I had lunch in Moscow with the oligarch Alexander Lebedev. There were reports that Lebedev wanted to buy London’s loss-making Evening Standard newspaper and that negotiations had broken down. Over pasta with octopus, Lebedev told me talks with Lord Rothermere were going well. “I’m buying the Standard on Thursday,” he added nonchalantly. It was, by any standards, a pretty decent scoop. The story wrote itself: former Russian spy who spent the 1980s at the Soviet embassy in London becomes British media mogul. Or as one headline put it: “I’m from the KGB! Give me your papers!” A year later, Lebedev acquired the Independent titles and launched the mini i, his son, Evgeny, installed as gentleman proprietor. What prompted Lebedev’s foray into the British media? Lebedev told me he valued the importance of a free press, especially its role in exposing corruption. He was disdainful about other super-rich Russians, amusingly so. They were a bunch of greedy, uncultured, semi-literate yobs who thought the only way to impress was to buy a big yacht. Lebedev explores these themes in Hunt the Banker, his entertaining and wildly self-indulgent account of his life and career in Russia. Of billionaires, he writes: “They have lacklustre eyes, look abysmal and have a toxic personality and an off-putting physical appearance.” Money leads to bad habits, including “paying girls for their services”. “A sin I too have been guilty of,” he admits. As Lebedev tells it, his fortune was made honestly, through talent and endeavour. He grew up in a two-room flat in Moscow, father an engineer, mother an English teacher, and queued with everyone else for Soviet cheese and sausage. In his final year at university he was approached by “headhunters” from a mysterious organisation: KGB foreign intelligence. The problem is, Lebedev says nothing about Putin, the person who sits at the top of Russia’s mafia state Lebedev, of course, joined up. He takes pains to portray himself as an almost dissident – an in-system free spirit who was sceptical about Marxism-Leninism, read Solzhenitsyn and Shalamov under the bedcovers, and told political jokes. He did a stint in Libya and three years of drudgery at the KGB’s translation bureau before getting a plum posting abroad, to London. Lebedev specialised in economics. He met visiting proto-oligarchs and worked out of the Soviet embassy in Kensington, not far from the offices of the newspapers he would later own. In 1989 Mikhail Gorbachev flew in for talks with Margaret Thatcher. Lebedev says he told Gorbachev that the USSR would default on its debt. In 1992 he returned to Moscow and piled into the new ethics-free world of Russian capitalism. Much of Lebedev’s book concerns his battles with ancient business rivals. After a profitable bond deal, Lebedev bought a small bank. Within two years it had become one of Russia’s biggest – not because it was stuffed full of KGB money, he writes, but because he, Lebedev, was a “financial Mozart”. Inevitably, crooks and conman tried to chew away at his assets, aided by corrupt prosecutors and a man with a grenade launcher. Overlong chunks of the memoir are devoted to score-settling. The bad guys ultimately prevail. By 2012, Lebedev had been dispossessed of most of his empire – his stake in Aeroflot, his budget airline and his bank depositors, scared away after FSB goons in balaclavas raided his office. At his lowest point, Lebedev thinks about suicide. “One moment I opened my eyes and realised I didn’t want to go on,” he writes. These confessions make it easy to like Lebedev – a capitalist-idealist, in his words, and a brain guy too. Ultimately, though, the book rings hollow. There’s nothing wrong with his analysis of global corruption, and of the trillion dollars stolen annually in the developing world and elsewhere, and hidden in offshore accounts, often by western fixers. The problem is, Lebedev says nothing about Putin, the person who sits at the top of Russia’s mafia state. Lebedev understands perfectly the rules of the game, as played by Russia’s elite. Yes, you can call out rotten bankers and officials. No, you can’t suggest Russia’s president bears any systemic responsibility. Nor can you point out that Putin’s mates, judo partners and St Petersburg dacha neighbours have become multi-billionaires, their business projects blessed as if by a divine wind. My last breakfast with Lebedev was a testy affair. In 2016 the Guardian and others published details of $2bn found in the Panama Papers and linked to Putin’s best friend, Sergei Roldugin. Lebedev is in favour of investigative journalism but took to the Evening Standard to rubbish the story. The Putin evidence was “tenuous”, he wrote. “Why is it always about Putin?” he said after I suggested the column was a mistake. These days, Lebedev has good relations with the Russian government. In 2017 he hosted a media conference in Crimea. Its title was: Open Your Eyes. Lebedev said he’d convened it because of British media bias in reporting on Ukraine. He shared a platform with Maria Zakharova, hardline spokesperson for Russia’s foreign ministry. Zakharova is best known for her sardonic attacks on London following Sergei Skripal’s poisoning. In April 2018, Boris Johnson was spotted at an airport in Italy, dishevelled and hung over. He had spent the night partying at the Lebedevs’ Perugia mansion. The then foreign secretary left his security detail behind. Why would he do that? This summer the Evening Standard endorsed Johnson as the best Conservative candidate for prime minister. This was a curious editorial decision in a city that is strongly Remain. The Kremlin is a foe of Brussels. And a fan of Johnson. It regards him as a human wrecking ball who will knock chunks out of the EU and weaken Britain at the same time, to Russia’s strategic advantage. You can read Lebedev’s takeover of the British press as a noble effort to save an industry in trouble. Or you can see it as a soft power play, designed in the best traditions of the KGB to weaken the enemy from inside. Luke Harding is the author of A Very Expensive Poison: The Definitive Story of the Murder of Litvinenko and Russia’s War with the West. This review is from the Observer • Hunt the Banker: The Confessions of a Russian Ex-Oligarch by Alexander Lebedev is published by Quiller Publishing (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99