The seven-times British champion Michael Adams was eliminated 4.5-3.5 after an eight-game marathon in the first round of the $1.6m World Cup on Thursday as the Cornishman, 47, was gradually worn down after seven consecutive draws by 19-year-old Chithambaram Aravindh, one of the many emerging talents from India. It was a bitter defeat for the longtime England No 1, who in his peak years had some of his best results in this prestigious knockout event and even reached the final in 2005 when it counted as the global body Fide’s official world championship. The 128-player biennial World Cup is one of the major competitions in chess. An extra incentive for its two finalists is that both will qualify among the eight candidates contending to become Magnus Carlsen’s next world title challenger. Carlsen himself took part in the 2017 World Cup, when the Norwegian was knocked out early. He has stayed away this time along with the world No 2, Fabiano Caruana of the US, and India’s former champion Vishy Anand. In their absence China’s world No 3, Ding Liren, is the top seed and can play without pressure since his candidates qualification via the rating list is already assured. As No 1 seed, Ding was paired in round one with No 128, Shaun Press of Papua New Guinea, and made short work of an opponent rated a massive 851 points lower. Press qualified as runner-up in the Oceania zonal after its winner, Australian GM Max Illingworth, withdrew, and still received $6,000 as a first round loser. Russia’s eight-times champion Peter Svidler won in elegant style in one of the best games of the opening round. England’s Gawain Jones and Luke McShane both reached round two against lower-rated opponents. Jones won convincingly while McShane drew his two classical games before winning 1.5-0.5 in speed tie-breaks. The English duo have a reasonable chance to reach the third round, but at that stage Jones would likely be paired with France’s No 3 seed, Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, while McShane would probably meet the Azeri No 10 seed, Teimour Radjabov. Round two started on Friday morning and continues at 11am BST Saturday, with tie-breaks on Sunday, and is free to follow live online with grandmaster and computer commentaries. One of its most interesting pairings is Alireza Firouzja v Daniil Dubov, two creative and fast rising young talents. Fide has announced Ekaterinburg, the former Sverdlovsk, as its venue for the 2020 candidates. In earlier years the host city was only settled after all eight players were known, and the successful organisers would then choose a wildcard. This early decision means that Russia’s top three, Ian Nepomniachtchi, Alexander Grischuk, and Sergey Karjakin, have the wildcard in reserve as insurance against failing to qualify via other routes. Pairing rules ensure that players from the same country meet in an early round, but the venue is still a negative for Ding and especially for Caruana, who is qualified for the candidates as the defeated 2018 challenger but has not played in Russia since 2015. Another significant Fide decision announced this week is that the 2021 World Cup will be expanded to 206 players, with the top 50 having a bye to the second round. The qualification routes are complex, with Continental championships and Olympiad teams involved. More participants means three extra playing days over 2019, and thus a heavy expense for the organisers. Fide stipulates that whoever organises the biennial Olympiad must also undertake the previous year’s World Cup, so the combined operation is a financial commitment which few countries can contemplate. Oil-rich Khanty-Mansiysk is the current venue and could probably repeat, but that would be contrary to Fide’s declared policy of spreading major events around the globe. Meanwhile, Saturday features the final two qualifiers, in London and Manchester, for the UK Open Blitz championship, which are sure to attract plenty of interest from players from grandmaster to novice. Online entry or entry on the day is still possible. GM David Howell, the current England No 1, won in 2018. 3636 1…Nf3+! 2 gxf3 (2 Qxf3 Rxe1+) Rg5+ 3 Kf1 Qh3+ 4 Ke2 Rg2 wins the queen, and Black easily converted.