1) The studio can be an embarrassing place for former sports stars. Just ask Jonny Wilkinson, Sam Warburton and Brian O’Driscoll, who have been asked to demonstrate rugby tackles in a virtual dojo while stripped to their socks for ITV’s Rugby World Cup viewers. “It’s shoes off,” says Martin Bayfield, in a show of respect for Japanese culture. Mind you, at least they have not yet taken a tumble live in the studio. Here’s the great man Shaquille O’Neal tripping over a wire, causing a mini earthquake as he crashes to the floor in TNT’s Half-Time Report. And here’s the best mountain biker in Germany introducing herself on Aktuelle Sport by flying over her handlebars. Oof! 2) It was slippery in Yorkshire for the poor cyclists trying to keep their dignity intact while time-trialling through the rain in the road race world championships. Perhaps they should have watched stunt cyclist Danny MacAskill’s guide to powering through a six-foot puddle. 3) It was also an interesting week for goalkeeping shenanigans. There was some maverick behaviour in Egypt, Loris Karius kept on being Loris Karius for Besiktas, while this Qatari goalkeeper enacted a video game goalkeeper glitch here, the poor soul. 4) Let these mesmerising skateboard tricks ease you towards peak relaxation. 5) Oh, and speaking of relaxation, in 1959 Gloucester City employed a hypnotist to help in their promotion push. We’re not sure the players committed fully to it but an upturn in results suggests it kind of worked: 6) James Letcher Jr scores only the third 100-yard kick-off return in Washburn University’s history. It’s quite something. 1) The longest underwater walk with just one breath. 2) Parkour … on a bike! 3) There are still pockets of sportsmanship left in the world. Keegan Messing holds the Japanese flag aloft for Yuzuru Hanyu in what is perhaps the most Canadian thing ever. 4) Highly recommend the Salvador Sánchez song by Sun Kil Moon (another boxer’s name). Singer Mark Kozelek has written about boxing many times under the SKM guise. 5) Tonga beating France at the 2011 Rugby World Cup. Worth it just for the reaction of the Tongan fella late on, just before the last scrum. Spotters’ badges: BlackCaeser, whobroughtoranges, GramGram, denothemeno. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.