Tonga’s coach, Toutai Kefu, was worried about his team’s “typical tier-two errors” against Argentina, everyone else should be more concerned that he reckoned they had had to put up with some typical tier-two refereeing, too. Argentina won 28-12. It would have been a different game, Kefu said, if Tonga had been awarded a try right before half-time, when their winger David Halaifonua was barged into touch by Tomás Lavanini as he dived for the line. “I thought it was a shoulder charge,” Kefu said. He felt Tonga should have had a penalty try. The referee, Jaco Peyper, and the television match official, Rowan Kitt, didn’t think it was even worth a penalty. “If we had got that, we would have come out in the second half with a lot more belief and confidence,” Kefu said. He had seen the replays and understood that the TMO seemed to think Lavanini had tried to wrap his right arm around Halaifonua’s back. He just didn’t agree with him. When he was asked if he felt referees apply consistent standards to both tier-one and tier-two teams in games between them, Kefu demurred. “There were a couple of fifty-fiftys we didn’t get as well, like a penalty for high tackle by our captain, Siale Piutau, that I thought was harsh, too. But I’m used to it, I’ve had it four years now, so we move on.” Kefu is more bothered by the way his team played in the first 25 minutes, when they conceded four tries and fell 28-0 down. “Poor skills, poor communication,” he said. Three of those tries were scored by Argentina’s hooker Julián Montoya, who has spent his entire career playing replacement to Agustín Creevy. Montoya is the first Argentinian to score a hat-trick in the World Cup since Martín Gaitán did it against Namibia in 2003, and the first hooker since Keith Wood in 1999. You would have got long odds on it. Montoya had scored only five tries in 55 Tests before this World Cup but has four in two matches here and is the tournament’s leading scorer. They will not necessarily feature in the highlight reels when it’s all over, though. The first was made with a bit of lineout trickery. Argentina set themselves up for a maul and then snapped the ball back to the hooker, lingering unmarked on the touchline. The other two were even more straightforward: one was a rolling maul, the other was off the back of one, the last in a series of pick-and-go drives. In between, their strapping winger Santiago Carreras scored another try after Tonga’s inexperienced fly-half, James Faiva, spilled a loose pass. Carreras pounced and ran it in from the halfway line. Tonga weren’t in the mood to roll over. After the restart Zane Kapeli, the man who knocked over Billy Vunipola when they played England last week, clattered Argentina’s fly half Benjamín Urdapilleta with another thunderous tackle. Tonga swept forward towards the line and Telusa Veainu finished the try out wide. Veainu hadn’t played for Tonga in three years and has only just recovered from the foot injury that ruined his season at Leicester. Kefu was so happy to have him back he stuck him straight into the team. He scored their second try, too, with 15 minutes to go. Those were the only points anyone managed in the second 40 minutes. Argentina were listless and messy then, and the match became a scrap. They have played two good halves of rugby in this tournament, spread across two Tests. Against France last week they came back from 20-3 down and ended up losing 23-21. “My answer’s the same as last week,” said their coach, Mario Ledesma, when he was asked what was going wrong. “If I knew the reason for it, it wouldn’t happen. In the match against France it was the first half, in this match it was the second. I will talk with the players, but I think we are in a vicious cycle.” Argentina have lost 10 Tests in a row coming into this match. Still, their problems are easier to fix than Tonga’s are. “We need more time together, more games against tier-one teams, and better access to our better players,” Kefu said when he asked what his team needed to improve. “That’s the first thing we need, more time together and more competitive games.” He’s only asking for his team to be treated the same as everyone else. He won’t be holding his breath.