The World Athletics Championships have been branded a disaster by the decathlon world-record holder, Kevin Mayer, because of the sparse crowds and brutal conditions. The IAAF has also been accused of treating some of its stars as guinea pigs by making marathon runners and race walkers compete in 31C heat and high humidity. In signs of a growing backlash, Belarus’s Volha Mazuronak, who finished fifth in the women’s marathon in the early hours of Saturday morning, claimed the sport’s governing body had shown disrespect by staging the race outdoors. Forty out of 68 runners finished the race, and several others were carried off the course on stretchers looking in a bad way. “The humidity kills you,” Mazuronak said. “There is nothing to breathe. I thought I wouldn’t finish. It’s disrespect towards the athletes. A bunch of high-ranked officials gathered and decided that it would take the world championships here but they are sitting in the cool and they are probably sleeping right now.” Canada’s Lyndsay Tessier, who finished ninth, said: “You see somebody down on the course and it’s just extremely grounding and scary. That could be you in the next kilometre, the next 500m. It was really scary and intimidating and daunting. I’m just really grateful to have finished standing up.” Although track-and-field athletes are helped by an air-conditioned stadium, which reduces the temperature to 23C, the marathon and walking races are held outside. That led to obvious frustration among many athletes and teams at the women’s marathon, which started a minute before midnight on Friday, with the Ethiopian squad’s marathon coach, Haji Adillo Roba, saying: “We never would have run a marathon in these conditions in our own country.” The IAAF defended its decision to hold the race in the severest of conditions, despite 30 athletes visiting the medical centre afterwards. It pointed out that the race was completed without any cases of heat stroke, “despite very challenging weather conditions for endurance events”. It added: “In the women’s marathon 68 competitors started and 40 finished – which is comparable to the completion rate at previous world championships in Tokyo (1991) and Moscow (2013) … Thirty athletes visited the medical centre as a precaution. A small number were kept under observation and one athlete was referred to the hospital for observation but later released.” However, the response continues to frustrate some athletes. France’s Yohann Diniz, who is attempting to retain his world title in the 50km walk, was unhappy that races were outside rather in the air-conditioned Khalifa International Stadium. “I am extremely upset,” he said. “If we were in the stadium we would have normal conditions, but outside they have placed us in a furnace, which is just not possible.” But it is the criticisms from Mayer, who is one of the top stars in the sport, that will sting the IAAF the most. “We can all see it’s a disaster, there is no one in the stands, and the heat has not been adapted at all,” the Frenchman told L’Équipe. “There have already been nearly 30 withdrawals in the women’s marathon. It’s sad. “We have to leave reason aside and concentrate more on the passion, because if not I would have boycotted these championships. We haven’t really prioritised athletes when organising the championships here. It makes it difficult.” Team officials are also expressing their concerns. One said: “This is making the Daegu world championships in 2011 look like paradise.” On the track, Britain’s Dina Asher-Smith cruised into Sunday’s 100m semi‑finals with an efficient 10.97sec. However, she was given a stark warning over what it will take to win gold by the performance of the 2012 Olympic champion, Shelly-Ann Fraser‑Pryce, who qualified in 10.80 – the fastest ever time in a world championships heats. Asher-Smith was one of the few athletes who did not stop to speak afterwards but Fraser-Pryce was clearly delighted with her short evening’s work. “It was a good run,” the Jamaican said. “This is my first championships after two years [after having a baby in 2017] so I’m excited to be back. “I tried to execute the best way possible because my technique is not the best. There are so many talented women and it is a blessing to do it again.” Among those who impressed was the Marie-Josée Ta Lou, a silver medallist in the 100m and 200m in London two years ago, who ran a personal best of 10.85 in her heat. Britain’s Daryll Neita, the fifth-fastest qualifier in a personal best time of 11.12, said she was stunned at her time. “I am really happy,” she said after finishing behind Fraser‑Pryce. “I looked at my heat and thought: ‘Oh, I have to run really well here.’ It was great to be second to a 10.8.”