In the last six months, Irina Busova, a 30-year-old from Geraldton, Western Australia, estimates she’s bought more than 100 houseplants. Her prized possession, which she saved for two months to acquire, is a monstera deliciosa (commonly called a Swiss cheese plant or fruit salad tree) with striking, green and cream split leaves. It’s the variegation that makes this plant so prized. She paid $330 for the plant which she describes as “a unicorn find”. On Gumtree, cuttings – not even mature plants – from similarly coloured monstera varieties have sold for $650, while the prices for established plants can run into the thousands. One particularly popular variety, the Thai constellation monstera (so-called because the flecks of cream in its green leaves are meant to resemble stars), is grown specially in a laboratory in Thailand to achieve the variegated effect. “A couple of months ago you couldn’t get them anywhere and they were really expensive,” says Rick Schmutter, who runs Uprooted.com.au, a small business selling indoor plants. “Now they’re a bit more accessible and people are getting a bit more excited about it.” Schmutter sells small variegated monsteras for $180 a plant. He buys 50 at a time from his wholesaler, and says that he usually sells out within a month. Because the plants must be imported, “the process to get them into the country is really complicated and expensive. It’s not worthwhile to bring in one or even 100, you have to bring in thousands.” The logistical difficulty of importing the plant creates a lag between when a plant starts to trend, and when the supply catches up – which inflates the pot plant’s value. Busova first fell in love with variegated monsteras six months ago, on a closed Facebook group called Crazy Indoor Plant People Australia, which has 63,000+ members. Schmutter is also a member of this group, which he uses to market his business. Here, plant lovers trade advice and swap stories of bargain buys. That bargain-hunting has made the Thai constellation monstera a controversial choice, with many in the group labelling the plant “a rip off”. Some members have even made fun of those who are prepared to invest in the plant. This doesn’t phase Busova, who penned a defence of the plant’s price on the group. “Some people spend thousands on handbags, that they wear and show off. It makes them happy. That’s how I’m like with my plants,” she tells the Guardian. As for how she shows them off: “I have an Instagram account where I post photos of my plants.” The main reason Busova saves up for prized plants, and spends up to an hour a day caring for them is less tangible than a perfect photographic moment. “I think it’s how striking they are, especially if they have the crisp, white variegation. It just catches my eye. As soon as I saw it something sparked inside me.” Thai constellation monsteras are not the most popular plant Schmutter sells. That honour goes to a variegated Picasso peace lily – which sells for a far more affordable $35 a plant. Schmutter started selling plants a year ago, after he noticed how many he was buying for himself. In that time, while some plants inflate in value when local supplies run low, he doesn’t think people’s tastes in plants have changed that much. They want what they can’t get. “People really appreciate unpopular and rare plants, and variegated plants.” As for the next variegated monstera – he’s heard rumours. “Some of my suppliers are working on a special philodendron, but I can’t get the details.”