This was supposed to be a day of celebration for Wolves as they marked the 130th anniversary of their first match here. Instead it turned into an embarrassment for the hosts, as thoughts of their rich history were blown away by signs of Chelsea’s bright future. Three of the young English talents introduced by Frank Lampard stole the show for the visitors, for whom a hat-trick by Tammy Abraham was bookended by goals from Fikayo Tomori and Mason Mount. Dear old Molineux had been a fortress for Wolves for most of this year, with Nuno Espírito Santo’s team unbeaten here in any competition since January. By half-time that was irrelevant folklore, with Wolves 3-0 down and alarmingly ragged. For Lampard it was a joy to behold and he suggested that the performance of Abraham, in particular, must push the striker higher in the esteem of Gareth Southgate, who has yet to summon him for England. “The way he’s going is obviously going to put him into that bracket,” said Lampard. “Without telling Gareth what to do, to score seven goals in his last three games and play with the quality he’s playing with in his all-round game [is impressive]. “The three different types of goals he scored here are exactly what you want from Tammy: a messy one, a good header and a fantastic-feet-and-finish goal. That next England squad is only a few weeks away so he needs to keep playing [at] that level and then he’ll have a great chance of being in it.” Lampard’s main concern was to tighten up a leaky defence, though he said the switch to a back three was intended not just to nullify a Wolves team well versed in that formation but also to boost Chelsea’s firepower. “To have three centre-halves gives you the feeling of a bit more security but also I want us to be more adaptable in an attacking sense,” he said. “What it allowed us to do was get Mason and Willian into good attacking positions behind Tammy and they caused Wolves exactly the sort of problems we wanted them to.” The first half-hour, though, was a damp squib, with midfield skirmishing betraying no sign of the pyrotechnics to come. But in the 31st minute Tomori detonated a scorcher, stepping out of defence to curl a superb shot into the top corner from more than 25 yards out. Nuno raged at his players for giving the defender so much time to measure up an exquisite effort. Three minutes later, Tomori strode forward again and pinged a low pass to Mount in the box. When the attacker went down under a challenge, the referee waved play on and Abraham pounced, finishing smartly from eight yards. Adama Traoré briefly spread panic in the visiting defence with a couple of bursts down the right followed by good crosses, one of which was headed wide by Raúl Jiménez. But Chelsea suppressed any idea of a comeback when Marcos Alonso was given time to chip a cross in from the left just before the break. Abraham leapt high to head into the net. Kurt Zouma was introduced for the second half in place of Antonio Rüdiger, who suffered a groin strain. Nuno’s worries, meanwhile, increased in the 54th minute, when Abraham ran on to a cute pass by Jorginho and rammed the ball into the net. The way the striker held off Wolves’ last defender and finished showed true quality and did nothing to advance the Conor Coady for England campaign. Wolves restored a smidgin of pride when Romain Saïss rose to meet a corner by João Moutinho. Kepa Arrizabalaga made a feeble attempt to keep out the ensuing header, succeeding only in pushing it into the net via the foot of the helpless Abraham. The goalkeeper was fallible again in the 85th minute when he failed to swat away a shot by Matt Doherty, allowing Patrick Cutrone to nudge the ball into the net from close range for his first goal for Wolves. Chelsea had the last laugh, though, when Mount collected a super pass by Michy Batshuayi and finished nicely. Nuno lamented a “bad performance with too many mistakes” but dismissed suggestions that his team are starting to pay the price for their Europa League adventures. “It has nothing to do with that,” he said.