The early 90s: a time when a generation spent Friday nights trudging through a field trying to find a rave, gave up, and ended up slumped on the sofa in front of the telly. As they sponged the mud off their flares and dreamed of a more exciting life, a baby-faced Terry Christian brought a glimpse of it with The Word. This anarchic banger of a show wasn’t just a post-pub TV fix; The Word was a place where you could discover a world outside your Hitman and Her-shaped small town. A magical universe where you first saw Liam Gallagher honking out Supersonic, where Tim Burgess’s floppy fringe cast its spell and where L7’s Donita Sparks whacked down her trousers for a defiant muff-to-camera moon. If you hadn’t mustered the correct fake ID, The Word was your pub. Oliver Reed was treated like a boozy foie gras until he was refreshed enough to belt out Wild Thing with Ned’s Atomic Dustbin, Katie Puckrik was tucked up in bed in between a naked Jeff Koons and La Cicciolina and Christian was quizzing Whitney Houston about some new film about a bodyguard she was thinking of doing with Kevin Costner. In the early series, this glossy TV chaos, with its 808 State theme and risque opening credits, was at the top of its game and anyone who mattered to the “yoof” was invited to the party. The tabloids were delightedly morally panicked: the show was like the Meghan Markle of the time, inviting outrage with its every move. Terry Christian was the Mancunian anchor (a manchor, if you will) who held the raucous party together, like a cool stepdad suddenly left in charge of a sleepover, breathlessly struggling to regain control while Faith No More threw water in his face. Amanda de Cadenet brought a regal presence to the proceedings, while Puckrik was your go-to gal for daredevil roving reporting and a habit of taking the piss out of Terry Christian in every link. But towards the end of The Word’s run, the mood changed. The addition of a more polished presenter, Mark Lamarr, with his face leaking contempt for everything about the show, upset the balance. Then there was smooth-headed geordie powerhouse Huffty, fondly remembered as the worst interviewer ever. Gradually, as the mid-90s dawned, a dark force stole the limelight. One that’s now credited as the precursor to reality TV: the dubious segment called The Hopefuls. “I’ll do anything to be on TV,” bleated the ever-more extreme bunch of victims. Armpits were licked, old women were tongued, and in the days long before “complaints welcome”, Channel 4 was flooded with them. The Hopefuls became talked about more than the good bits of the show, and in 1994 one of these desperados had a colostomy bag emptied over his head. Complaints flowed like the contents. The world was shitting on The Word. By 1995, it was gone, but the show holds a special place in hardcore fans’ hearts. Not for its sick-in-the-mouth stunts, but for the glory days when, if you missed The Word, you were a week behind on life.