I have achieved a sort of cycling singularity. The UK cycling scene is obsessed with professional racing, hills, Yorkshire, social media – and pretentious coffee. And a couple of weeks ago, I set out to ride the undulating West and North Yorkshire route of the 2019 Road World Championships with a small-batch coffee roaster called Ben whom I’d met on Twitter. Over the past five years, Yorkshire has become a global cycling destination. As Ben and I, and another Twitter acquaintance called Tom, rode out of Otley, north of Leeds, there were dozens of other riders heading out of town, up Wharfedale towards Bolton Abbey. None of them was in an organised group – just ones and twos, including quite a few children and teenagers. I doubt many of them were doing what we were planning: a 200km section of the men’s elite race, involving a long loop north from Otley to Hawes, east up the gloriously named Buttertubs Pass, and then south through Ripon to finish in Harrogate. I’d mentioned my plans to Otley native and 2015 world champion Lizzie Deignan. “If I press on a bit it shouldn’t take more than about six hours,” I said. There was a pause. “I think you might have underestimated that,” she replied. I found it hard to find volunteers to keep me company. I asked the local Otley club. “Bit too much for most of us,” was the response. I was undeterred. I shouldn’t have been. The explosion in Yorkshire cycling hasn’t happened by accident. In 2014, the Tour de France started in Leeds, after Yorkshire had snatched the Grand Depart from under the nose of a rival Scottish bidder – largely, so the story goes, because the then chief executive of Welcome to Yorkshire, Gary Verity, flew to Paris in a chartered helicopter and brought the Tour’s top brass back to Yorkshire for a pub lunch. Verity was clear about his desire to win the bid for Yorkshire. “The world’s biggest sporting event is the Olympics. We couldn’t get that: it was too big. The Fifa World Cup was too big. But the Tour de France? We could get that.” The event itself was extraordinary. No one had ever seen anything like it. Huge crowds lined the entire route, to the extent that staff in the team cars following the riders arrived at the finish with bladders the size of space-hoppers because there had been nowhere in 200km to stop for a quiet pee. The 2014 Tour de France’s legacy is the men’s and women’s Tours de Yorkshire – held every year since and sufficiently Frenchified that the climbs are now “côtes”, as in the Côte de Buttertubs and Sheffield’s legendary Côte de Jenkin Road. Cyclists come from all over the world to ride the now-famous roads. The Zwift virtual cycling app has a Yorkshire route, allowing riders on stationary bikes to sprint past Betty’s Tea Rooms in Harrogate from the comfort of their own homes. And now the week-long World Championships festival is arriving. To those of us who’ve been in the world of UK cycling for years, none of this was a surprise. Yorkshire is cycling country. It always has been. It is a wonderful place to go for a ride – as long as you like your riding hard. Ben, Tom and I had three significant climbs to get over: Kidstones, Buttertubs and Grinton Moor. The first problem is that they sneak up on you. In the Alps, you can see a climb coming for miles as you approach along the valley. In Yorkshire, the roads undulate all the time. I was halfway up the Côte de Kidstones before it dawned on me this wasn’t just another random lump – this hill was going to keep going. By that point, of course, I was committed to riding up it at an unwise pace. I suspect Yorkshire does this to you deliberately. And here is something else: in other cycling meccas, the climbs have hairpins to even out the gradient. In Yorkshire, the roads go straight up. The climbs are not long, but they are steep. It’s not at all unusual to find yourself out of the saddle, grunting to get the pedals round on a one-in-five gradient. This sort of thing might punish the unwary outsider, but it manufactures great bike riders, such as Brian Robinson, the first British Tour de France stage winner, in 1958; Barry Hoban, who won eight Tour stages between 1967 and 1975; and world champion Tom Simpson, who grew up in Harworth, Nottinghamshire, but learned his riding over the border. Deignan will get to race through her home town at this year’s Worlds. And, of course, there’s the peerless Beryl Burton, winner of seven world titles in the 1960s and 70s and an astonishing 72 UK titles at various distances between 1958 and 1986. It’s the relentlessness of the roads that makes it different. You have to work for everything. An hour’s ride in Yorkshire is worth an hour-and-a-quarter in most other places. “It’s not just that the roads are hard – the weather can be bad, too,” said Deignan. “When I turned pro, I’d find myself riding up some French mountain in the pouring rain, and that was fine.” The Côte de Buttertubs is brutally steep, an incline of almost one in five. It comes too early in the race to really play a decisive part, but it’s the climb that will produce the defining images of the World Championships. Just a few minutes away from the little town of Hawes, it feels untouched and wild. It’s barren and exposed, with no shelter beyond some low drystone walls. There are no trees on Buttertubs; even the grass is close cropped by the sheep. The narrow road clings to the side of the steep valley then turns inland to run through a natural amphitheatre which, when the race arrives, will be crowded with fans and flags. It’s the essence of Yorkshire, and it’s utterly lovely. The climb took us about 20 minutes – the pros will probably do it in 13. But 200km was, as I’d been warned, too much. By the time we were heading back south towards Ripon and Harrogate, I was finding every excuse I could to freewheel for a moment’s respite. More than once I tried freewheeling only to discover that I wasn’t even going downhill, I just desperately wanted to be. Of course, I didn’t say anything. I was pleased beyond words when Tom said he was exhausted, too. “Go on ahead, if you want to get back,” he said. “That’s OK,” I said magnanimously. “Let’s back off a bit. I don’t mind at all.” The sense of achievement in getting to Harrogate (after seven hours) was immense, but I’d have to admit that Deignan and the Otley club were right. I had underestimated it. And I’d do it again tomorrow. • The UCI Road World Championships run from 22-29 September. For those who don’t fancy 200km of properly hard riding, the events are held over a variety of courses and distances, starting at 14km. See worlds.yorkshire.com for details and spectator guide Bloomfield Square, OtleyThe unofficial clubhouse for several local cycling groups, this cafe offers single-origin coffee from a variety of independent roasters. The (smallish) menu is spot on, and they’ll even lend you a lock. It’s co-owned by Terrorvision singer, Tony Wright. Prologue, HarrogateA bike shop-cum-cafe that offers good coffee and food, and the chance to ogle some nice kit. If you’re having doubts about your ability to complete a ride, it also sells a range of ebikes. Penny Garth Cafe, HawesBefore tackling Buttertubs, we stopped at this cafe that has been a Yorkshire Dales cyclists’ (and motorcyclists’) stopping-off point for many years. The food is straightforward and inexpensive – more bacon butty than smashed avocado – which is usually just what you want mid-ride. The Commute, IlkleyAnother cafe-cum-shop, this is generally quite busy on any day with half-decent weather (ie, if the rain isn’t horizontal) and serves excellent coffee from Allpress. Echelon Coffee, LeedsBefore you head out, fortify yourself with some excellent small-batch roasted coffee bought from Ben, my riding companion.