Name Victoria O’DwyerAge 42Income £24,000 Occupation Gardening trainer When I was younger I threw myself into the drugs and dance scene. It was a form of escapism – although I grew up in a very nice family, I felt like I didn’t fit in. I was always looking for an escape through substances, partying or travelling. When I was 18 I left home for university in Wales. I spent two years of university living in a tent in the Gower. I wanted to get away from campus. Somehow I did end up scraping through and I returned home with an arts degree. I worked in the hospitality industry for 13 years; it suited my lifestyle at the time. But, under the radar, I was using substances. Nobody noticed during all those late nights as everyone was drinking. However, when I was in my mid-thirties I realised I needed to change my lifestyle. I decided to study psychodynamic counselling. I was always interested in psychology – I think it stems from wanting to understand my family dynamics. I moved out of hospitality and worked for seven years running a tennis centre. I thought that hanging around healthy people might help me, but actually it didn’t work. I gave up my job and entered rehab. It was there that I was encouraged to try garden therapy. I’d always had gardens growing up. Actually, my garden was always a good indication of where I was with my wellbeing – if I felt good, it was buoyant and green. If I was partying hard, my garden was full of weeds and uncared for. I returned from therapy and was put in touch with the St Mungo’s scheme, Putting Down Roots, which teaches gardening skills to homeless people or those at risk of homelessness. I’m now a gardener and trainer. I’ve been in my role for 18 months now and I love it. I enjoy helping others who have found themselves in a less preferable situation, and being an example of that you can actually pull yourself out. I’m really lucky to be living by myself in council housing. I can’t imagine doing a houseshare at this age. My rent is low compared with other people – with bills, it comes to about £600-£700 a month. I spend about £80 a week on food, and also grow my own. My dream afternoon or evening after work is coming home and picking up a handful of spinach and some tomatoes from my garden and cooking it with some pasta. I do like to spend money on good coffee, crackers and pasta. I love to travel. In the past few months I’ve driven over 1,000 miles across California. I headed off on Christmas Day and spent two and a half weeks in a transit van travelling from San Francisco down the desert then back to LA on my own. In the past year I’ve also visited Berlin and France. This year I’ll probably spend about £5,000 on holidays. When I recently passed my driving test, I bought myself a car. Lessons were a massive outlay but I’ve got a little runaround now. As I don’t drive it a huge amount I just spend about £10 a week on petrol. I’m starting to think about the future. I put £100 month into a pension scheme and my work matches it. I have money set aside for when my Mac goes down and I squirrel money away so I’m not surprised by a bill or card payment. I feel more responsible now. Before I rarely slept and was often hanging on by a thread. I didn’t have much confidence. Now I work really hard and my confidence is real confidence. St Mungo’s is one of the UK’s leading homelessness charities. Each night it provides housing and support to 2,800 people across London and the south. It also helps thousands of others with advice, welfare, skills and work services. www.mungos.org