Australian rugby league has always had an on-off love affair with English players. But South Sydney and Canberra have taken the relationship to brave new heights, as what was once a trickle of UK talent has now become a flood. The NRL has gone British in a big way and on Friday night history is likely to be made when a record seven English players, 20% of those on the field, clash in the preliminary final at GIO Stadium. The Rabbitohs’ Burgess brothers – Sam, Tom and George – will take on Raiders quartet Josh Hodgson, Elliot Whitehead, John Bateman and Ryan Sutton for a spot in the grand final. It’s a clash that will captivate those not only in Australia, but on the other side of the world as well. While new arrivals Bateman and Sutton have caught the eye in the nation’s capital this season, history tells us that English players in the NRL is not new. There were 12 across the competition this season – James Graham and Gareth Widdop at the Dragons, Ryan Hall at the Roosters, Kallum Watkins at Gold Coast and youngster Herbie Farnworth at Brisbane. But the best British players have been heading down under for the best part of 50 years. In 1966 Flimby-born Test forward Dick Huddart helped St George win the grand final, becoming the first Briton to claim a premiership in Sydney. Three years later Wiganer Dave Bolton did the same with Balmain. In the 1970s the catalyst was the hard-as-nails lock Malcolm Reilly, signed for a then world record fee of £15,000. He helped Manly to back-to-back grand final victories in 1972 and 1973. Others soon followed as the potency of English talent was fully appreciated by Australian clubs – Phil Lowe, Steve Norton, John Gray, Roger Millward, Mike Stephenson and Bill Ashurst. Another wave of transfers in the 1980s took place. Garry Schofield starred for Balmain and was followed to the club later by Andy Currier, Ellery Hanley and Shaun Edwards. This would gather pace around the competition with players such as Kevin Ward and Andy Goodway at the Sea Eagles, Lee Crooks at Western Suburbs, Joe Lydon and Martin Offiah at Eastern Suburbs, and Andy Gregory and Steve Hampson at Illawarra. Schofield helped the Tigers win the Panasonic Cup in 1985 and became the competition’s equal top try-scorer alongside Phil Blake in 1986, the first Englishman to do. “It was sensational,” the five-eighth remembers. “I couldn’t wait to get out there and show people what I could do, and what better place to do it on the biggest stage. “Considering the quality of players that Balmain had, if I couldn’t realistically prove myself in that side then I was never going to do it. I believed in my own ability and if I got the right service I was going to score tries. And that’s exactly what I did.” In the 1990s there was only a handful of British players who ventured to Australia. But one forward was such a big hit at the turn of the century at the Roosters that he made Englishmen in demand again. Adrian Morley won the grand final in 2002, played in deciders in 2003 and 2004, and inspired a generation of his compatriots to follow. “I always had aspirations to play in the NRL,” Morley says. “I got offered more to stay with Leeds. It wasn’t a financial decision, it was just a challenge really. The NRL was regarded as the toughest competition in the world. I thought if I don’t go now, I might not get another opportunity to go. I don’t regret it for one moment, I loved every minute of it.” Morley is proud that the likes of Gareth Ellis, Burgess and Graham followed his lead and became stars of the game in Australia. “When you do go to Australia you do feel you have to prove yourself a little bit more,” he says. “I had a bit of a reputation in the UK but no one knew me in the NRL so I had to prove myself all over again – which was great as it gave me a chance to start again, and that was quite motivational for me. “The NRL is a lot more evenly contested with competition for places and the competition between other teams, so it does bring out the best in players. And that’s what we’re seeing with the English boys now.” Now with the NRL salary cap growing exponentially and the appeal of an Australian lifestyle, Morley believes more Englishmen will take the plunge. Canberra have already signed up Wigan halfback George Williams for 2020. Expect more of his countrymen to follow suit. “I’m sure we’ll see a number of NRL clubs looking at the Super League trying to get some English players,” Morley says. “It is a lot more lucrative now in the NRL. So it’s just human nature that we’ll be seeing daresay more British lads over there.”