The Art of InnovationScience has been inspiring art ever since Leonardo da Vinci tried to fly, and this exhibition surveys their interconnection from the Enlightenment to the age of the Hubble Telescope.• Science Museum, London, 25 September to 26 January Es DevlinThe celebrated theatre and opera designer creates an epic installation about the nature of memory in the country house of architect Sir John Soane. • Pitzhanger Manor, London, 26 September to 12 January Damien HirstThis is Hirst’s best exhibition in Britain for a long time – a concentrated and disciplined array of astounding butterfly art. • White Cube Mason’s Yard, London, 20 September to 2 November Mark LeckeyA Merseyside motorway bridge and memories of childhood feature in the Turner winner’s latest fusion of art and pop. • Tate Britain, London, 24 September to 5 January Anna Maria Maiolino: Making Love RevolutionarySensual drawings and organic objects from a lifetime rebel against authoritarian regimes. • Whitechapel Gallery, London, 25 September to 12 January Rain, Steam and Speed: The Great Western Railway, 1844, by JMW Turner One of the first locomotives in the Romantic age was called the Rocket, and that sense of speeding in a train being like flying in space is made vertiginously real in this painting of a black engine pulling passengers through a swirling void of misty light. The train is crossing a bridge over the Thames at Maidenhead while people watch from the riverbank below, but it might be soaring to the stars as it pushes the limit of human speed. When Turner was born, in 1775, it took several days to cross the country. This painting registers his awe at the new age he has lived to see, when human beings can attain dizzying speeds of 30 miles an hour.• National Gallery, London A hole in the Blenheim Palace floor where Maurizio Cattelan’s £5m solid-gold toilet stood before it was stolen in the early hours of Saturday. The art whizz and serial prankster panned claims he orchestrated the theft himself. “Who’s so stupid to steal a toilet?” he said. “I want to be positive and think the robbery is a kind of Robin Hood-inspired action.” Read the full story. A ‘conceptually bankrupt’ artist is making waves in Brooklyn Just 2% of art auction spending is on work by women Da Vinci and Raphael have brokered peace between Italy and France A conveyor belt ‘skin’ sculpture opened at Yorkshire Sculpture Park Damien Hirst found ecstasy in real butterfly wings A ‘giant dildo’ sculpture was removed from Byron Bay Augmented reality ice slabs appeared in a London park for Frieze Galway will be ‘Barcelona with rain’ as European capital of culture Fairfield Halls, Croydon, came back from panto hell We picked the 25 best visual art works of the 21st century … and Ragnar Kjartansson was particularly pleased We also picked the best buildings … and Jacques Herzog told us more The police have nothing to go on after Cattelan’s golden toilet was stolen Antony Gormley wows the crowds at the Royal Academy … and he talked to us about his approach to sculpture ‘Art insider’ is a fashion-forward look … while photographer Tim Walker takes an ‘extreme’ interest in beauty John Squire is modest about his abilities New sculptures welcome visitors to New York’s Met Istanbul Biennial is targeting waste and greed Mark Leckey talked about his Tate Britain show Paris recalls how Francis Bacon made a sensational debut The Great Depression is in focus again We revealed another twist in the tale of Nazis and art Chicago Architecture biennial has a social foundation Paul Cupido captures small moments of wonder Shipwrecked mariners have a favourite sea view We remembered Mexican artist Francisco Toledo To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.