Rhys Patchell takes his time before settling on the word to describe his feelings after learning this week that he was going to the World Cup as one of Wales’s two outside-halves. It was a prospect that had seemed even less than remote at the end of last season when he did not make the Scarlets’ 23 for a crucial league match against Edinburgh. “Relief,” said the 26-year old finally. Patchell will on Saturday start his first Test match for 15 months, back when he had established himself as Wales’s first-choice at 10 before injury struck. “It has been a challenging year, that’s for sure, but it is worth it in the end when you get into the World Cup squad. It was relief for me, but to see the smile on the faces of my parents when I told them I had made the cut was particularly satisfying.” Patchell owed his selection to the knee injury suffered by Gareth Anscombe at Twickenham last month and the calm manner in which he led Wales’s fightback against Ireland in Cardiff last Saturday. Having come on at the start of the second half and after they conceded a penalty try to trail by 19 points, he helped create one try and scored another with the home side pressing for an unlikely victory at the end. Jarrod Evans had been given the first half with the Wales head coach, Warren Gatland, admitting before the match that the two outside-halves were effectively shooting it out to rival Dan Biggar in the position in Japan. Evans struggled to impose order on a side containing unfamiliar combinations, presenting Patchell with an opening that he darted through. “Jarrod dropped me a text after the squad announcement,” says Patchell. “Of course I felt for him and could empathise having been there myself four years ago. It is not an easy position to be in, but that is sport. Jarrod and I were distinctly aware last weekend that as a 10 you have to do your best for the team and you can only deal with what is in front of you. The night before the game, I was talking to family and friends saying this was it. If the cards fall your way, great. If they don’t, that’s the way it goes. Thankfully, the coaches liked what they saw, I suppose.” Just a few months before, it had been a case of the land of the setting sun for Patchell rather than the rising one. He had started both of Wales’s two Tests in Argentina in 2018, scoring 30 of their 53 points, but in his first match of the season for the Scarlets he suffered concussion, his second in less than a year, and when he passed the return-to-play protocols, he was starting to find some form when he had another head injury. “I won’t be looking back on it too many times,” he says when asked how tough the season had been for him. “It was not the disaster many outlets made it sound like, but it was not the year you would like going into a World Cup. A lot of people make sounds about how you play, but their opinions are by-the-by. The couple of concussions were tough to deal with, and three in the space of 12 months was concerning, and then I suffered a torn hamstring. It stuttered any momentum; I was forever chasing my tail. “I went to see a specialist [on head injuries] in Birmingham and that was really helpful in terms of putting my mind at ease,” Patchell adds. “He said that structurally there was nothing wrong with my brain or anything like that. It’s a bizarre injury. You can’t see anything. You do not have any scars. There is no benchmark that you can work against. I do not know if I dealt with it particularly well and it took six months before I started feeling like myself again on the field. People do not give you an opportunity to play yourself back in; you are expected to be as you were before. I tried to push the pace, but just as a muscle will tell you when you are ready after a tear, you have an innate feeling after a concussion that you are ready to go. It is not a case of somebody else saying you are good to go.” Patchell started the 2018 Six Nations campaign and was instrumental in the opening round thumping of Scotland in Cardiff. Gatland had decided to look at alternatives to Biggar, wanting to develop alternative ways of playing having achieved success with a direct, attritional approach. Patchell stood flat against the Scots and set a high tempo as Wales recorded their first try bonus point in the Six Nations. He kept his place in the side for the following match at Twickenham and was singled out before the match by the England head coach, Eddie Jones, who warned he would command special attention and wondered whether he would be able to cope with it. He lasted 55 minutes before Anscombe was switched from full-back and his only other appearance in the tournament was as a replacement against Italy. Wales worked on his confidence, as they have done this summer, recognising they have a player with the ability to challenge Biggar rather than understudy him. “It is a long time since I have been this excited for something,” said Patchell. “A World Cup is the pinnacle and to go deep into it would be really special.”