Boris Johnson is looking like Saint Sebastian, pierced with a thousand arrows but with a saintly smile on his face. Next week more judges join in the archery, as the supreme court begins his prorogation case. Who knows what damage they might do? Their task is simple. The purpose of a supreme court is not to avoid politics but to set its rules, to frame it in law. This week’s Scottish judges were right. The advice given by the prime minister to the monarch must be reviewable where its implications are plainly constitutional. Johnson’s potentially deceptive advice to the Queen on proroguing parliament must be open to review – not just condemnation – if his ulterior motive was to curb parliamentary freedom. If the court refuses to intervene, whatever it decides, it will be inviting future monarchs to dispute the advice, thus sucking them into politics. The supreme court must adjudicate. Of course that gets us nowhere. The judges may call down hellfire on Johnson’s head, but this crisis remains political and its resolution must be political. Here the issue – in Dublin, in Brussels and formerly in parliament – is that a British prime minister persists in asserting the impossible. He demands that Britain leave the European single market but with a gaping hole in its border, in Ireland. He wants a border and no border. This week’s official Whitehall Yellowhammer report may outline a “reasonable worst case”, but it says that while a no-deal Brexit will merely cause chaos, in Ireland it is physically impossible. The House of Commons has shown itself a pusillanimous, tribalistic chamber over the past year. It does not know what it wants, only what it does not. However, in recent weeks its pusillanimity and tribalism have diminished. Such is the chemistry of British politics that, while MPs find cross-party liaison stomach-churning, they have progressed. They cohered sufficiently to pass a law against no deal, in defiance of the government. Were Johnson to disobey that law he would blatantly defy parliament and be vulnerable to impeachment. If this were Jeremy Corbyn in action, we can only imagine the fury and frothing at the mouth of the Johnsons, Rees-Moggs and others. The bones of a Brexit deal are dimly emerging. London has indicated that it can accept an all-Ireland agri-foods deal. This will have to be negotiated to embrace a wider range of goods passing through Belfast, plus regulatory collaboration on standards. Since some such arrangement, eventually with tariff certificates, will have to pertain in the longer term if Britain leaves the single market, the EU might concede that it need not be subject to a formal backstop. Necessity would be the backstop. If Dublin’s Leo Varadkar is agreeable, so should now be Brussels. This contains a string of ifs, but should not be beyond the talents of a now panic-stricken diplomacy. If the sting can be removed from the Irish issue, it is hard to believe most MPs would not support a reinstated withdrawal agreement and transition period. This in turn would activate the UK’s departure from the EU on 31 October. But for tempers to calm and opinion to cohere behind it – and behind Johnson – requires something of a wartime spirit. It means an urgent recall of parliament and the postponing of inevitably divisive and acrimonious party conferences. Johnson suffers from a reckless personality and a wayward inconsistency. He is glaringly short of wise counsel, and putty in the hands of his eerie adviser, Dominic Cummings. This is not good news. But the man must have some survival instinct. A compromise on the Irish backstop may not be easy, but it is unavoidable if the nation, or at least its Irish portion, is not to plunge into a high-profile economic emergency. That emergency, we should remember, is caused not by any external crisis but entirely by Johnson’s personal ambition for power. It is truly medieval. This calls for a deep breath. Johnson can now forestall the supreme court’s decision – and his possible humiliation – by unilaterally recalling parliament. In a spirit of reconciliation, he could reassure MPs that he will obey their no-deal law. He should offer to liaise with any group of MPs – including compliant members of the Labour party – willing only to leave the EU on 31 October, as already mandated by parliament. Johnson should stop wandering the countryside electioneering, and apply himself single-mindedly to the Irish question. He should re-establish the bones of Theresa May’s withdrawal deal with whatever tweaks to the border arrangement his negotiators can devise. Johnson himself voted for such a deal on 29 March. He can point out to Brexiters that the deal was not for ever, but for a transition. Issues of general elections and referendums, customs unions and single markets, can all be left for later negotiation. The crisis is now. Johnson will have to abandon some of his last-ditch fans. He will need to deploy his talent for charm and inconsistency to the full. But finding some way of refashioning the only deal in town, May’s deal, is not some desperate climbdown. It is brute necessity. The issue is not Johnson versus the EU but Johnson versus reality. The prize here for the Tory leader is colossal. He will not have broken the law. He will have led Britain out of the EU on 31 October as promised. He could then surge into a general election, with Nigel Farage neutered and Corbyn’s party split. He could pose, as did a battered Margaret Thatcher after her Falklands victory in 1982, as a leader who delivers under pressure. He would be hard to beat. Can’t he see it makes sense? • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist