Good morning – Warren Murray doing the paperless round this morning. NHS hospital trusts are being crippled by the legacy of the private finance initiative (PFI) championed under Tony Blair and will have to make another £55bn in payments by the time the last contract ends in 2050, a report reveals. Some trusts are having to spend as much as one-sixth of their entire budget on repaying debts falling due as a result of the “toxic” PFI scheme, says the IPPR thinktank. The £13bn of investment that PFI brought into hospitals will end up costing the NHS in England a staggering £80bn by the time all contracts come to an end, the IPPR says. Sherwood Forest trust in Nottinghamshire has a £326m PFI deal that costs it £50.3m a year in repayments and eats up the largest proportion of its budget of any trust: 16.51%. The £1.2bn outlay to build the Royal London hospital will have cost the Barts Health trust £6.2bn by the time it ends, according to Treasury figures. “All trust debts should be wiped clean by the Treasury, and contracts renegotiated and brought back into public ownership on grounds of poor value,” said Dr John Puntis, co-chair of the campaign group Keep Our NHS Public. Lawless Johnson warned – Civil service union the FDA has put Boris Johnson on notice not to make its members break the law, after his refusal to comply with legislation to prevent a no-deal Brexit. The union has told the PM that the civil servants’ code binds them to “comply with the law and uphold the administration of justice”. Leaked warnings about a no-deal Brexit that the government previously dismissed as outdated have been affirmed after MPs forced the government to release its plan, known as Operation Yellowhammer. No deal could result in rising food and fuel prices, disruption to medicine supplies and public disorder on Britain’s streets, according to the documents. In Ireland the price of bread is likely to go up: the only two industrial-scale flour mills on the island are in Northern Ireland, so cross-border tariffs would be introduced. The uncertainty is leaving the all-island agri-food sector in disarray, Lisa O’Carroll writes. Ivor Ferguson, Ulster Farmers Union president, says: “All in all, no deal will be a total disaster and a percentage of farmers would be out of business.” Litter louts all – Jeremy Paxman will today indict Britain as “a nation of litter louts” and blast government efforts to clean up the country’s act. “There is, in truth, only one way to solve this problem,” the patron of Clean Up Britain will tell a waste and recycling conference. “People have to change the way they behave. Our ambition is to reach a point where dropping litter is as socially unacceptable as drunk driving.” Paxman has called for measures including number plate recognition to catch litterers at drive-throughs. He hit out at the government and the Keep Britain Tidy charity as both “useless” – the latter responded that it was “disappointed” to be attacked by a kindred campaigner. Meanwhile MPs have been told that increasingly used biodegradable alternatives to plastic packaging can be just as harmful if not broken down in industrial composting facilities as intended. MPs say the focus should be on reducing plastic packaging rather than using other materials. And farming may be under threat because the earthworms that ensure soil health are stunted by ever more prevalent microplastic pollution, scientists have found. Health records thrown open – Britain is to allow pharmaceutical firms, doctors and academics access to millions of NHS patients’ medical histories to help the search for cures for ailments from cancer to mental illness. Seven “data hubs” will be set up. It is likely to raise anxiety about possible breaches of patients’ privacy and the commercialisation of patient records. The programme will be run by Health Data Research (HDR) UK, a non-profit body independent of government. It says the data will be anonymised. Separately, chances of surviving cancer are improving in the UK but have not caught up with other comparable countries, a 20-year research exercise has shown. Other countries are doing better thanks to new technologies and efforts to catch and treat cancer early. ‘Loot boxes’ under scrutiny – Video game “loot boxes” should be regulated as gambling and children barred from purchasing them, a House of Commons committee has advised. The in-game rewards offer a random selection of items to players who buy or earn them. The digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) committee says games that include the purchase of loot boxes for real money should be marked as containing gambling and age-rated content, and the government should consider regulating them as games of chance under the Gambling Act 2005. The recommendation is part of the committee’s report on immersive and addictive technologies, to be delivered today. Keep working – A study commissioned by the Labour party has come down against a French-style legal cap on the length of the working week. The cross-bench peer Robert Skidelsky found a reduction in hours was desirable but a blanket limit was unrealistic. Instead he proposed a sector-by-sector approach. The report notes full-time workers in the UK do longer hours than in any EU country except Greece and Austria. “At present the rules governing employment are largely set by financial logic. This is inimical to a civilised reduction in hours,” Skidelsky wrote. “There is therefore a strong argument for setting up countervailing institutions to ‘nudge’ society in a direction which science and technology makes possible, and which is also desired by most people.” John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, said he would use the report in formulating Labour policy. Oliver Laughland tells Rachel Humphrys about the destruction he witnessed in the Bahamas in the aftermath of Hurricane Dorian. Also today: Chris Hanretty on the Scottish court’s ruling that the British government’s suspension of parliament was unlawful (more on that here). Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/09/11-65356-190911TIF_bahamas.mp3 In August 2010, the captain of the South Korean fishing trawler Sajo Oyang 70 ordered the net back over the side one more time. At about 3am on 18 August, the ship’s first mate roused Captain Shin from his sleep. The net was too full, the first mate told him. It was pulling the boat under. But Shin demanded that the deckhands keep hoisting. When he would finally belay that order and allow the net to be cut free, the knives came out too late – the ship rolled over. Six crew members, including Shin, lost their lives in the waters of the Pacific. From bullying and sexual assault to squalid living conditions and forced labour, working at sea can be a grim business – and the deep-sea fishing fleet of the Sajo Group is particularly notorious, Ian Urbina reports. Joe Root has said the planning for England’s next Ashes tour to Australia begins right away, after dropping Jason Roy for today’s fifth Test, which the tourists’ captain Tim Paine has described as a Grand Final, despite having already retained the urn. Dylan Hartley has said friends reacted to the news he had missed out on England’s Rugby World Cup squad almost as though he had died. The Sri Lankan cricket board says it has been warned about a possible terrorist threat during its planned tour of Pakistan. As Europe and the US prepare to face off at Gleneagles the claims that the Solheim Cup is ‘the pinnacle of women’s golf’ fall flat with only two of the world’s top 10 playing. And Gareth Southgate has admitted he fears the worst when it comes to England’s next two qualifying matches and the potential for disorder involving the team’s supporters. The Hong Kong stock exchange has made a surprise £32bn bid for the London Stock Exchange in the latest example of growing Chinese interest in British companies. It is the seventh bid for the LSE since 2000. All have failed and Nils Pratley, our financial commentator, reckons this one won’t be any different because it doesn’t offer enough of a cash incentive and there’s too much exposure to political uncertainty in the territory. Asian markets were up overnight on hopes of more monetary easing from the European Central Bank today. The FTSE100 is seen rising 0.5% while the pound is at $1.233 and €1.119. The Guardian reports: “Fears of no-deal chaos as ministers forced to publish secret documents”, the Times has: “PM blocks key memos on shutting Commons” and the Express reports: “Boris: I won’t do deal with Farage”. The i (“Queen dragged into ‘unlawful’ shutdown of Commons”) and the Mirror (“Boris lied to the Queen”) take aim at Johnson’s advice to prorogue parliament being deemed illegal. The Telegraph says: “Tory rebels offered an olive branch”, with news there may be a way for them to return to the fold. The Sun has news of Freddie Flintoff: “Freddie in 124mph Top Gear smash”, the Mail reports of Britain ranking bottom of an international survival table: “UK’s cancer care shame” and the FT has: “London Stock Exchange poised to rebuff £32bn Hong Kong bid”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com