Catriona Matthew can take solace from the fact golf is not played on paper. Bare statistics heavily suggested a gap in quality in favour of the United States over Europe in the 16th Solheim Cup, meaning the hosts’ best hope of an upset seemed to rest in building a useful lead before the singles. The depth of US talent, it has been assumed, will shine through in that Sunday format. Matthew and Europe have been afforded no such leeway. A fourball session on Saturday afternoon won two and a half to one and a half by the US means the visitors will feel the more comfortable about an 8-8 tie with 12 individual jousts remaining. The fourball matches were incredibly tight, as much of this entire contest has been thus far. Anne van Dam and Suzann Pettersen took to the 18th against Brittany Altomare and Annie Park needing to win the hole to salvage a half. As a lame attempt at a birdie from Pettersen stopped short, the US had a key point. Georgia Hall and Céline Boutier had been four down to Ally McDonald and Angel Yin after seven. On the 18th tee, Europe were 1up. They won the last for good measure sending Europe 8-7 in front. Moments later, Danielle Kang slammed home a putt for a two at the 17th meaning she and Lizette Salas saw off Carlota Ciganda and Azahara Muñoz, 2&1. Caroline Masson’s final putt hit the hole but stayed above ground as she and Jodi Ewart Shadoff halved with Lexi Thompson and Marina Alex. Europe, you felt, needed such fine margins to fall in their favour. The fourballs were again beset by slow play, a recurring theme which threatens to totally undermine this as a sporting spectacle. Match four took three hours and 12 minutes to play just nine holes. Match one was five hours and 55 minutes to 18th green handshakes. As on Friday, there was regular evidence of rules officials trying to jostle players along but this – and the lack of penal action – had no impact whatsoever. There is so much to admire about women’s golf and the Solheim Cup but the glacial pace of play has dominated the narrative around this event to such an extent that steps must be taken to ensure no repeat in two years’ time. On a gusty morning Van Dam and Anna Nordqvist had been 4up after six against Morgan Pressel and Alex. By the time this match headed to the 14th tee, the US were 2up in what was quite an extraordinary turnaround. Nordqvist has looked completely bereft of confidence over the first two days. Pressel and Alex prevailed 2&1, in what represented a serious blow to Matthew. Hall and Boutier improved the mood of Europe’s captain with a 3&2 win over Salas and McDonald in foursomes match two. Hall, who is familiar enough with the vagaries of British golf in September, branded the wind “atrocious” and worthy of four-club adjustments. Boutier added: “It was unbelievably tough. The course itself, without the wind, is pretty challenging. So add the wind, it was like 40km an hour … But I think we did a very good job. We were very steady all day and didn’t really give them any opportunities.” It was no surprise at all to see this European duo remain together after lunch. Charley Hull and Muñoz beat Kang and Megan Khang, 4&3. The bottom foursomes match only lasted 13 holes as the Korda sisters, Nelly and Jessica, thrashed Ciganda and Bronte Law 6&5. Should the US fall short in its bid to retain the cup, the captain Juli Inkster will inevitably be criticised for not keeping the Kordas as a team for either fourball session. In fact, neither played at all on Saturday afternoon, giving a nod towards Inkster’s desire to stick to her pre-event plan. So far, the US approach has borne fruit; on paper, that is.