League leaders Swansea saw their unbeaten start come to an end as a smash-and-grab raid from Nottingham Forest snatched all three points at the Liberty Stadium. Lewis Grabban found Alfa Semedo to tap in with just five minutes left on the clock. The Kiyan Prince Foundation Stadium was the place to be if you wanted goals in the second tier. QPR and Luton scored four in the first but unfortunately for the visitors it was not an even divide. Eberechi Eze put Rangers ahead after three minutes, Nakhi Wells added two more before the break, before Harry Cornick reduced the arrears after a howler from Joe Lumley. James Collins set up a tense finale with a goal three minutes after the restart but Rangers held on. Sean Maguire put Preston ahead against Brentford in a tight contest at Deepdale, where Declan Rudd had to be at his best to keep out the visitors. Tom Barkhuizen tapped in from close range to double the lead with 20 minutes left and ensured Preston moved up to fifth. Struggling Stoke took the lead after just four minutes against Bristol City when Sam Clucas gave the Britannia Stadium faithful reason to believe, turning home in the aftermath of a corner, but that was the peak of their afternoon. Eight minutes later Joe Allen was sent off, Famara Diédhiou headed in an equaliser and then just past the hour Stoke defender Tom Edwards inadvertently bundled a cross into his own net. A topsy-turvy game between Hull and Wigan ended with the teams sharing the points. Wigan were ahead through Chey Dunkley but Jarrod Bowen’s fifth of the season and Kamil Grosicki’s wonderful free-kick turned the game on its head. Joe Gelhardt, 17, got his first senior goal to rescue a point. At the Riverside, Marvin Johnson scored the only goal as Middlesbrough grabbed an unconvincing win over Reading. Blackburn moved into the top half with a routine 2-0 victory over Millwall, Derrick Williams and Bradley Dack getting the goals for Rovers. Fulham 1-1 West Brom, Blackburn 2-0 Millwall, Charlton 0-1 Birmingham, Hull 2-2 Wigan, Middlesbrough 1-0 Reading, Preston 2-0 Brentford, QPR 3-2 Luton, Stoke 1-2 Bristol City, Swansea 0-1 Nottm Forest Sunderland took advantage of some favourable results around them to close the gap on the top two. Jordan Clark put Accrington ahead but that lead lasted just two minutes and the Black Cats were 3-1 up at the break. As Sunderland cruised, Wycombe slipped from first to third as they fell to defeat at Gillingham. Coventry and Ipswich could only manage goalless draws with Burton and Doncaster respectively, but both moved up a place, leaving the Sky Blues top of the table. At the wrong end of the table Bolton’s misery continued as Rotherham inflicted a 6-1 defeat on the downtrodden Trotters. Thibaud Verlinden had actually put Bolton ahead after four minutes with their first goal of the season, but after that it was all Rotherham who scored three in each half. Peterborough also hit six at home to Rochdale; Ivan Toney grabbed a hat-trick, Marcus Maddison a brace and Mohamed Eisa got the other. The result means the Posh move into the top six. Fleetwood saw three points snatched from their grasp when Stephen Humphrys grabbed Southend’s second equaliser of the day in the 87th minute. The two sides had to settle for a 3-3 draw. Accrington 1-3 Sunderland, Blackpool 0-3 MK Dons, Burton 0-0 Coventry, Gillingham 2-0 Wycombe, Ipswich 0-0 Doncaster, Lincoln 0-1 Bristol Rovers, Oxford 3-0 Tranmere, Peterborough 6-0 Rochdale, Rotherham 6-1 Bolton, Southend 3-3 Fleetwood, Wimbledon 1-1 Shrewsbury There was almost a shock at the top as leaders Exeter scored very late to earn a 2-2 draw at home to Leyton Orient. The Grecians led through Pierce Sweeney but Lee Angol equalised just minutes later in a flurry of goals before the break. Louis Dennis fired Orient ahead from outside the box five minutes after the restart only for Nicky Law to level in injury time. Swindon Town punished Macclesfield to close the gap on Exeter with a 3-0 win. Keshi Anderson got the first, firing into the top corner in the 37th minute then Eoin Doyle made his mark on the game, scoring the second and third goals either side of the break. Defeats for Newport and Crewe meant Forest Green’s 1-0 win at home over Colchester sent Mark Cooper’s side up to third, as Luke Prosser put through his own net for the game’s only goal. Mark Sampson’s first game with Stevenage ended in defeat as Harry McKirdy’s second of the game gave Carlisle a 3-2 win at the Lamex. Boro’s fellow strugglers Scunthorpe had a better day. They got into a 3-0 lead at the break at home to Morecambe and that was that. Crawley 1-0 Mansfield, Crewe 2-3 Cambridge, Exeter 2-2 Leyton Orient, Forest Green 1-0 Colchester, Northampton 2-0 Newport, Oldham 2-2 Grimsby, Port Vale 1-0 Plymouth, Salford 0-2 Cheltenham, Scunthorpe 3-0 Morecambe, Stevenage 2-3 Carlisle, Swindon 3-0 Macclesfield, Walsall 0-1 Bradford