Halfords has issued another profit warning, blaming poor summer weather and flagging consumer confidence for a slump in sales. The UK’s biggest bike retailer said total revenues slumped 3.9% in the 20 weeks to 16 August as the business struggled amid a “challenging retail backdrop” on the high street. Halfords said in light of the tough conditions it expected underlying profits before tax this year to be in the range of £50m to £55m. In May, Halfords told investors to expect profits “broadly in line” with its 2018 earnings of £58.8m. The company’s share price fell more than 3% in early trading on Wednesday hitting a new 52-week low. “After the hottest summer in 100 years last year we weren’t expecting to see massive growth in cycling sales this year,” said Graham Stapleton, the chief executive. “We don’t think there is a structural issue here, we think there is a consumer confidence issue affecting the timing of some spending, with some weather.” Total retail sales fell 3.9%, with cycle sales down 1.1% – strong growth in electric bikes and children’s cycling failed to offset “weaker big-ticket discretionary mainstream cycling” purchases. Motoring-related product sales slumped 5.9% against a tough comparison with last year’s hot summer which fuelled a surge in sales of touring, camping and car cleaning products as holidaymakers opted for staycations. The bike and car maintenance chain has endured a torrid time over the last 18 months and its market value has more than halved – from £770m in April 2018 to £343m on Tuesday. More than £120m was wiped from its stock market value in January, when the group issued its second profits warning in a year, blaming the weather and weak demand. Halfords said parts of its business that did not rely on such discretionary purchases, particularly its motoring services operation, have proved to be more resilient, with revenue from its autocentres rising 1.1%. The company said online sales continued to grow strongly, up 8.4% in the year to 16 August, with 85% of Halfords.com customers choosing to pick up their purchases in store. Stapleton said uncertainty about the UK’s departure from the EU was likely to weigh on sales. “In the second half, we believe the economic and political uncertainty will continue to impact big-ticket discretionary spend,” he said. “We set out a new strategy for the business last year and while it is still early, we have already seen encouraging signs of progress. We remain confident it is the right strategy to drive the sustainable growth of the business.” Last year, Halfords announced a back-to-basics turnaround plan focusing on motoring and cycling to capitalise on the surge in popularity of electric vehicles. The company said it would scale back the sale of products such as power tools and camping equipment and turn Halfords into a bike and motoring specialist to make it more competitive in a “rapidly changing retail environment”. Halfords has about 800 shops and garages offering MOT testing and repairs, and is raising this to 1,000. This includes opening a further 100 autocentres – it currently has 316 – and doubling the number of bike shops that trade under the upmarket Tredz and Cycle Republic brands to 50. Stapleton said six underperforming Halfords stores would close this year, the same number as last year. “With the current economic conditions we will continue to review every store on a case-by-case basis,” he said. He said unlike many high street retailers, Halfords had many stores on short-term leases – more than 200 – due for renewal in the next couple of years which gave it flexibility.