Back in May, a Tesco lorry dropped a steel cage on my car while delivering to a Metro store. The back of my car was smashed and the interior covered in glass. If anyone had been inside they could have been killed. Tesco has been very difficult to deal with. On the advice of the store manager, I called my insurance company, which organised a repair that took two weeks. During this time my insurer and I tried repeatedly to get Tesco’s accident management company to take action. Four weeks later it wrote saying I should use its authorised repair company. By this time the car was already repaired. I still have not had my insurance excess of £100 refunded, as the claims management company has not refunded the cost of the claim to my insurance company. After many fruitless calls, I received a £100 Tesco card to compensate for the inconvenience. However, this does not compensate for the two weeks without my car, the cancelled travel plans, the effect on my future insurance premiums, the £100 excess and the hours of phone calls. When I emailed the chief executive I received a reply saying that they considered the matter closed.SW, Glasgow Tesco seems remarkably laid back about your appalling ordeal. “As SW decided to go through her own insurer, her insurance company would need to pursue a claim with us,” it says. “We can confirm that we have not received anything to date.” It ignores the fact that comprehensive insurance policy holders have to lodge a claim through their own insurer, and that its own store manager advised you on this. Moreover, your insurer has given you a timeline of its unhelpful contacts with Tesco’s claims handlers since May. Happily, Tesco’s insurers have finally paid up, so you have been refunded the excess. After the Observer got involved you were invited to claim for uninsured losses while your car was out of action, and you have now been offered £200 by Tesco’s insurer. Meanwhile, Tesco insists on restricting its contrition to a voucher. It declined my suggestion to convert it to cash. So, if you want to benefit from its “goodwill”, you have to grant it your custom. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions