In locked back rooms across the land designers and brand consultants are choosing logos, slogans and the best walk-on music for candidates before the likely general election. But one British political party has already come up against a common hitch: what to do when an artist is not pleased to be associated with your vision? Wendy Taylor, a sculptor who specialises in large-scale public work, discovered last month that an image of her imposing sundial sculpture Timepiece, which stands on the banks of the Thames near Tower Bridge, had been adopted by the Time party. Her Grade II listed work features at the top of the party’s website and drawings of it are reproduced on its merchandise. “I was bloody livid when I found out,” Taylor told the Observer. “Quite frankly it feels like my work is being manipulated without my permission.” The Time party, which is pro-Brexit and is calling for greater investment in industry and entrepreneurship, among other policies, said this weekend that it is working to find a solution to the issue and that it in no way disputes Taylor’s original creative copyright on the sculpture. “We expect to resolve her questions amicably in the next few days, and both parties are committed to that,” said the party’s deputy leader, Tim Considine. “We do not subscribe to the view that displaying an artwork on our website suggests in any way that the original artist is a member of the Time party, or that he or she supports the Time party.” Using works of art can easily turn into a public relations disaster for politicians. When Nigel Farage plumped for the theme from the 1963 film The Great Escape when he appeared in public promoting Ukip in 2016 the children of the late composer Elmer Bernstein were incensed. “Our father would never have allowed Ukip to use his music because he would have strongly opposed the party’s nativism and thinly disguised bigotry,” they said in a statement. In fact artists often have little right under the law to stop such use. If a song has been licensed for broadcast then the musicians involved cannot do much about a politician’s team deciding to play a few bars of it to a crowd. Similarly Taylor’s sculpture beside the Thames is considered to be in the public domain. The copyright to the images being used by the Time party actually belong to the photographer who took them rather than to Taylor herself. The sculptor fully accepts this fact, but said she is still unhappy to see the outline of her work appearing on items that are for sale in the party’s shop. “It is not so much about the politics for me,” she said. “It is about using Timepiece in a way I did not intend. The Time party may say that the image is just a sundial, but it is clearly based on my work.” Once a song or an image has been associated with a particular political standpoint it can be hard to disentangle it. D:Ream’s Things Can Only Get Better will forever be associated with Tony Blair’s victory in 1997 while Bill Clinton’s 1992 election triumph is rarely mentioned on air without a soundtrack provided by Fleetwood Mac’s hit Don’t Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow). Despite repeated protests from the Rolling Stones, Donald Trump continues to use their track You Can’t Always Get What You Want at the end of political rallies. Mick Jagger has explained the situation on Twitter: “So, the thing is, when you appear in America … if you’re in a public place like Madison Square Garden or a theatre, you can play any music you want, and you can’t be stopped. So, if you write a song and someone plays it in a restaurant that you go to, you can’t stop them. They can play what they want.” The band are just one in a long list of musicians who have attempted to stop the Republicans using their recordings to promote Trump. Others include Pharrell Williams, Rihanna, Adele, Neil Young and REM. Elton John also objected but argued more generally that he did not want his music involved in any American campaigns. British music remains popular with American politicians. This summer the sound of the Clash was chosen by two of the prospective Democratic presidential candidates. Bill de Blasio chose Rudie Can’t Fail and Beto O’Rourke went for Clampdown. Also perennially popular in the US is the music of Bruce Springsteen. This year Joe Biden walks on with We Take Care of our Own, while Michael Bennet chose The Rising. Ronald Reagan was one of several Republicans to be asked by Springsteen to drop the song Born in the USA from their campaign rallies. The verse lyrics, which are an attack on the lack of support for US veterans, are regularly ignored. Elizabeth Warren, one of the Democratic frontrunners, used Dolly Parton’s 9 to 5 without permission, which quickly backfired, although no formal complaint has been made so far.