“Endometriosis is a bitch,” a gynaecological surgeon informs Laura, the narrator of Please Read This Leaflet Carefully. By the time he does, we already know as much. Laura has told us all about the intense pain, and agonising surgical procedures she has endured for years, thanks to the swellings, ulcers and related problems in her uterus. She has also spent most of her life plagued by allergies: “As a child I was always in the hospital – asthma, allergic to more and more things, wheezing, coughing, itching, always a bellyache for some reason or another. My test results were always borderlining something dangerous.” There is no cure for endometriosis. As that none-too-gentle surgeon says: “We know what happens but we don’t know the causes; we can’t stop it. Too much surgery makes it worse, the medications regulate it only partially and have bad side effects, but if we don’t treat it, you’ll get worse every month.” So that’s Laura’s fate. “I was an endless receptacle for pain,” she says – and Please Read This Leaflet Carefully duly details that pain, surgery to alleviate the agony, then more pain, worry about pain, visits to the doctor, and pain again … Many books about illness have definite end points: cure or death. A chronic disease is different. For Havelin’s narrator, it’s always ongoing and ever present, even if there are peaks and troughs. But we get a sense of the way the illness has progressed as Havelin moves backwards through Laura’s life. We start in New York, where she often struggles to navigate daily tasks. On bad days, even commuting to work and shopping can push her to the verge of total exhaustion. Touching her baby’s skin can bring her out in a rash. Then we see her as she first moved to the city, followed by her decision to leave her native Norway after long periods of illness - and so on, into her teenage years where she is already all too familiar with physical debilitation, but also training to be a figure skater. By the time we get to this end point we realise both how far Laura has come, and how much of her destiny has been dictated by illness. She notes with bitterness the people who prescribe that we should all “take complete responsibility” for our lives, “as if the external forces don’t matter at all”. For Laura, there’s no escaping such forces. And her kind of “hopelessly under-researched female misery” is not uncommon – and almost certainly wouldn’t be so under-researched if men had to endure it themselves. Out of the necessary solipsism of illness emerges an empathetic picture of the way endometriosis has blighted millions of lives. It’s been estimated that up to one in 10 women will suffer from it during their reproductive years. That’s about 146 million people right now – although it’s still depressingly difficult to know precise numbers, because the disease is so often misdiagnosed, dismissed and misunderstood. Havelin was diagnosed with endometriosis a decade after she started suffering. She speaks from angry and agonising experience and that’s reflected in the passion and urgency of her narrative. There’s no questioning her sincerity or the significance of her demand for understanding. But whether or not that makes for quality literature is a more complicated question. Havelin has talent, for sure. Alongside the vivid descriptions of physical pain, there are some lovely passages showing what it means to be able to enjoy your body. A description of Laura’s return to ice skating leaps and twirls from the page, the required physical prowess serving as a counterpoint to her illness. But I also found the inclusion of a series of extracts from a real book about the sport (Skate: 100 years of Figure Skating by Steve Milton) crude and unnecessary. If you’re going to read the book, you’re also going to have to get used to this kind of thing: “My life is limited. I can’t take long, time-consuming detours any more. I have to go straight there. I have to burn it all to the ground or I won’t survive this. The destruction has been so complete that it closes all windows to the past, until there’s nothing left but a big burnt scar on the ground and smoke tearing through my lungs, my hands black with soot.” It’s a lament and a harangue – but because there are only so many ways of saying “it hurts”, it can also be repetitive. By the end, that didn’t feel like a problem so much as a source of power. Part of the book’s message is the importance of hearing stories like Laura’s – and Havelin’s – when many won’t listen. “It’s crystal clear to me that no one wants to hear about it,” Laura notes. “But I will never finish needing to tell how much it hurt, how much it hurts, how bad it is.” Havelin dares you to turn away – but that’s impossible. Our next book is: The Unauthorised Biography of Ezra Maas by Daniel James. We’re going to take two weeks for this one – I’ll be posting my review on 16 September.