The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has suggested that Thomas Cook directors could have some of their bonuses seized or be disqualified from serving as directors after the tour operator’s implosion. Speaking in the House of Commons, Shapps outlined options for penalising directors available to the official receiver, a government employee overseeing Thomas Cook’s liquidation. He said the official receiver could “seek to overturn a range of transactions made prior to the liquidation, which includes things like bonuses”. “There is also the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986, and I fully support that idea,” he said. The act outlines circumstances in which directors can be barred from City jobs. The shadow transport secretary, Andy McDonald, pointed to £4.6m in “undeserved and unwarranted” bonuses awarded to the company’s chief executive, Peter Fankhauser, which he said should be returned. However, the vast majority of the £4.6m in bonuses paid to Fankhauser was given to him in shares, which the Guardian understands he did not sell and are now worthless. In practice, it is likely to be difficult for the receiver to seize bonuses or for directors to be barred from holding similar positions in future, despite a collapse that cost 9,000 UK staff their jobs and left 150,000 passengers stranded overseas. Thomas Cook’s legal contract with directors, detailed in its annual report, allows clawback of bonuses in a narrow set of circumstances such as misstatement of finances or gross misconduct. It is also rare that executives are stripped of their right to hold directorships. The legislation has not been used in other high-profile insolvencies that cost the taxpayer, such as the collapse of the outsourcing  company Carillion. MPs lined up to criticise the government for failing to heed its own review into airline insolvencies, which was commissioned by the former transport secretary Chris Grayling, who promised to act swiftly on it. The review called for a mechanism to allow airlines to keep flying temporarily during a bankruptcy, sparing the government from having to fund the repatriation of passengers, an operation expected to cost more than £100m in the case of Thomas Cook. Shapps said he hoped to start work on changing the airline insolvency regime soon. As MPs debated the 178-year-old tour operator’s failure, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) was due to operate more than 70 flights on Wednesday to bring a further 16,500 people back to the UK. After those flights, almost a third of the 150,000 people stuck overseas will have been repatriated. More than 1,000 flights are due to operate until 6 October. Shapps said he believed the CAA had resolved all instances of holidaymakers who had been “held to ransom” for hotel bills, with a party in Cuba now having been flown home. He also pledged not to ignore Thomas Cook staff who were stranded abroad, saying he had “asked the CAA to be as flexible as possible”.