On Full Frontal, Samantha Bee took a deep dive on a developing scandal for the White House: Donald Trump’s use of his hotels on the government’s dime. For instance, the vice-president, Mike Pence, made headlines last week for staying at the president’s resort in Ireland when his meetings in Dublin were nearly 200 miles away. Pence said the unusual arrangement was due to family ties to the Trump resort town, but his chief of staff, Marc Short, offered a different explanation. “I don’t think it was a request, like a command,” Short told reporters of the decision to stay on Trump property. “I think that is was a suggestion.” “Calm down everyone, it wasn’t a command,” Bee said mockingly. “It was a suggestion – you know, like how waking up to a horse’s head in bed is a suggestion that you … find the rest of the horse, I guess?” Trump has also said he hopes to host the next G7 summit at his golf resort in Doral, Florida. “You might think housing seven heads of state and dozens of people on their staff is just a way for Trump to funnel more money into his pelican jowls,” Bee commented, “but he’s actually got a very reasonable explanation.” The resort is the best option, Trump said, because it’s five minutes from the airport. “Obviously the president only wants the G7 conference at his golf resort because he knows it’s the best place to hold it,” Bee said sarcastically. “It definitely has nothing to do with the fact that as of 2017, income from Trump’s Doral resort has dropped 69%.” And finally, Politico reported how a routine air force run between Kuwait and the US made a surprise pit stop in Scotland, where the crew spent the night at the Trump Turnberry resort. In fact, according to CNN, there have been 629 refueling stops for the air force at Turnberry’s closest airport since October 2017, totaling $11m spent on fuel. In other words, “Trump finally found a business model that works: deploy the entire air force to spend money on you,” Bee said. “It sucks that the US government is now just a coupon for the president’s shitty resorts,” Bee concluded. “We used to consider ourselves the greatest country on earth; now we’re basically an Expedia pop-up.” Drug companies are starting to pay the price for their role in the opioid crisis. pic.twitter.com/cTUmxXt0Qq On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah pivoted from Trump to the quieter developments in lawsuits against the pharmaceutical companies behind America’s opioid crisis. Earlier this week, Noah said, Purdue Pharma – the makers of OxyContin and one of America’s most prolific opioid manufacturers – reportedly reached a settlement in a joint lawsuit brought by 20 states and 2,000 local governments. The company will probably pay up to $12bn over time, with $3bn of that from the Sackler family, who own Purdue and will subsequently give up control of the company. Noah expressed conflicting feelings over the news: “I’ll be honest with you: I’m torn about this story. Yes, I’m happy that the opioid companies will have to pay, but at the same time, they misled so many sick people about how addictive their drugs were.” Purdue also lobbied to lift limits on how many opioids doctors could prescribe, Noah continued, and made billions from the use of opioids spiraling into epidemic. Now, “they just get to be like: uh, how about we give some of that money back and we call it even? “I think that’s bullshit,” Noah said. He compared the situation to someone breaking into your home and saying, once you bust them, “Alright, you got me! How about I break you off $100 and we call it even?” It was a “solemn day” for New York City and the country, said Stephen Colbert on the Late Show, as America acknowledged the 18th anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks. So after providing a brief tribute and moment of emotional levity (through a viral and heartwarming clip of two toddler friends greeting each other on the street), Colbert pivoted to the news. Specifically, the confusion around the former national security adviser John Bolton’s exit from the White House this week. The terms of his exit have been confusing, prompting the New York Times to ask, in a headline: “John Bolton is fired. Or did he resign?” On Wednesday, Trump called reporters in to discuss the departure. Apparently, Trump’s main complaint with Bolton was that he angered the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, by talking of sanctions. It was not a question of toughness, Trump said, but of Bolton being “not smart” with his comments. “Sorry, John, you’re just not up to keeping us safe from America’s greatest enemy,” Colbert said in Trump’s voice. “You know who agrees with me? America’s greatest enemy.”