You can keep your “Pinaturbo”. Star Catcher and Logician are all very fine, I suppose, if you like that sort of thing. But the horse from last weekend’s racing that I can’t wait to see next time didn’t even get a place. I won’t be alone in this. There was an enormous quantity of top-class racing on Saturday and Sunday but surely nobody failed to notice the classy animal who spent most of the Irish Champion Stakes trying to crawl over the backs of the rivals in front of her. Deirdre, for it is she, absolutely flew home once she was in the clear but that happened so late that she could only manage fourth place. Even so, that was long enough for her to rocket past Madhmoon and Headman, who had both started the race at half of her odds. Who could have guessed that a five-year-old mare from Japan would become the most interesting horse for the end of the European season? I don’t mean that as any kind of slur on Enable, because of course we have a pretty good idea how good Enable is. With Deirdre, we’re still guessing about the limits of her ability but we now know for sure she can mix it with the very best. The mighty mare’s next move was discussed last night by Yoshitake Hashida, the assistant trainer. “I believe she has the two options of going to Ascot, which I believe would be more likely for the Champion Stakes, or the Arc,” he said. Connections may travel to Longchamp this weekend to have a look at the Arc course. The French race has a serious grip on the imagination of Japanese racing folk, so it would be completely understandable if Deirdre went there. But that would require her to step up in trip by two furlongs and Hashida also noted: “Since she has got used to a mile and a quarter, we might keep to a mile and a quarter.” The betting market doesn’t seem to think she’s a contender either way. You can have 33-1 for the Arc or 25-1 for the Champion Stakes. I shall certainly be taking a bit of the latter and hope Deirdre’s connections do the conservative thing and keep her to 10 furlongs. We can’t know if she’d have beaten Magical with a clear run on Saturday but it would have been close and Magical is 7-2 with most firms for the Ascot race. Turning to another case of “close but no cigar”, Star Shield (4.00) put up a career best effort when second at Redcar last month and he returns there today with every chance of going one place better. David O’Meara’s four-year-old drops slightly in class and can cope with the extra 2lbs. He appeals at 100-30. The market doesn’t seem gripped by Desert Land (4.30) in the following novice race, but he has a fine chance against a favourite, Call Me Ginger, whose only two races were more than half a year ago. Desert Land has shown a solid level of form and there is every reason, in view of his races and his pedigree, to expect that this drop to six furlongs will help. O’Meara’s Rebel Soldier Boy (2.00) is attracting interest at 11-4 for his debut in the opener. He’s bred to get involved here against a vulnerable favourite. The nap is shorter than I hoped at Chepstow and it seems people are now alert to the skills of Peter Fahey, who had a winner at York recently. His Canford Art (4.50) looks surprisingly well treated in view of her win at Limerick in June and her second at Down Royal the next month but she’s no bigger than 5-2. Redcar 2.00 Rebel Soldier Boy 2.30 Light The Fuse 3.00 Athollblair Boy 3.30 Black Isle Boy 4.00 Star Shield 4.30 Desert Land (nb)  5.00 The Fiddler Yarmouth 2.10 Blausee 2.40 Buhturi 3.10 El Misk 3.40 Sea Of Mystery 4.10 Imhotep 4.40 Awsaaf 5.10 Excellent George Chepstow 2.20 Prevent 2.50 Mustadun 3.20 Broken Rifle 3.50 Festival Day 4.20 Gleeful 4.50 Canford Art (nap) 5.20 Giving Back Newcastle 5.30 Dreamweaver 6.00 Wise Ruler 6.30 Festina 7.00 Faakhirah 7.30 Fiery Mission 8.00 Indra Dawn 8.30 On Route