Boris Johnson has rejected the idea of using a Northern Ireland-only backstop to solve the Brexit impasse, dismissing the idea during a stage-managed Downing Street event in which he answered questions via social media. The self-styled “People’s PMQs” saw the prime minister spend slightly under 14 minutes answering pre-selected voters’ questions on a live Facebook feed from Downing Street, with no follow-up or scrutiny of his answers. Answering one question on the backstop – the insurance policy for ensuring no hard Irish border by maintaining elements of the customs union and single market if no other permanent solution can be found – Johnson again ruled out the idea of having this just for Northern Ireland – which would create a trade border in the Irish sea. While this has been discounted before by the government, there has been speculation Johnson could resort to the idea as a way to reach a deal palatable for the EU and potentially able to pass through the Commons, albeit without support from the DUP and some Tory Brexiters. “I’ve seen a bit of chatter about this, stuff in the media about this – we will not accept a Northern Ireland-only backstop,” Johnson told viewers. “That simply doesn’t work for the UK. “We’ve got to come out whole and entire and solve the problems of the Northern Irish border, and I’m absolutely certain that we can do that. But we’re working very, very hard, flat out, to do that.” In the same answer, the PM stressed his wider opposition to the backstop: “The backstop is going to be removed, I very much hope – I insist – because that’s the only way to get a deal. The UK parliament will not accept the current withdrawal agreement, there’s no way that is going through.” The session was the second edition of the format, which has faced criticism for allowing Johnson to hand-pick questions and face no scrutiny over his answers. Had parliament not been prorogued, Johnson was likely to have faced tougher questions in the Commons at prime minister’s questions, and then later from senior backbench MPs in an appearance before the liaison committee. Noting the brief running time of the Facebook event, Labour MP Jess Phillips called him “a coward” and “frankly idle”. The man is a coward and a liar and also frankly idle....14 minutes. https://t.co/nkiF1gkwRM Opening the session, Johnson argued that using Facebook was a good way to communicate directly with voters, adding: “I’m worried that people feel disconnected from politics, and this is a kind of answer.”