This is a tale of presence and absence. A mystery, a fantasy. It begins more than a century ago, on 4 March 1914, in a small house in Hanover, New Hampshire, when a child called Barbara Newhall Follett was born. Or perhaps it begins in 1918, when she was four? See in your mind’s eye a small girl standing silent outside the door of her father’s study. She can hear music. Curious taps and clicks and whirrs and tings of a small bell. She knows what she is hearing is the music of writing. And even at the age of four she understands how this music translates to words, how words gather to become stories, and she wants this with the clear sharp focus of a fierce four-year-old. So she waits, and later, when she hears her parents talking downstairs, their voices muffled by distance, she creeps back to her father’s study, wraps her arms around the object of her desire and carries the typewriter back to her room. Four years old. And now she is a writer. Barbara had always loved stories. She learned to read in the way that most children learn to walk, a natural process, not a taught one. And as much as she loved reading (and writing), she also loved spending time outside, in wild places. The two passions grew side by side and frequently intertwined, as she often composed poems and stories about the natural world. It was Barbara’s custom, on her own birthday, to give her mother a gift. At the age of eight she decided that on her ninth birthday this gift would take the form of a book. And so, alone in her room, with the door shut tight, she worked at her typewriter, shaping her tale until it was almost perfect. She was educated at home so she had plenty of time to write. Day after day, week after week, she wrote. She hoped to make a handful of copies, to share with friends, but the original copy was for her mother. It was a story about a small child in the wilderness. It was called The House Without Windows. Just a few days after she finished writing, while the family were sleeping, a fire broke out in the kitchen. The Folletts were lucky to escape with their lives. Most of their belongings were destroyed, along with the fresh manuscript, so lovingly typed. Every word Barbara had written – gone. At this point many children would have given up. Not Barbara. Immediately she began the long task of reconstructing her story, word by carefully chosen word, from memory. Three years she spent, sometimes leaving her text for months at a time, but always returning to it, frustrated and determined in equal measure. Eventually, she stopped trying to remember the original and began to imagine anew, letting her mind run wild once again. Barbara wrote of a little girl called Eepersip, who loves the outdoors as much as she did, who doesn’t want to be confined in a house with walls and windows, binding her life. The world of brick and glass is too restrictive for the wild child, and Eepersip longs to shed the trappings of civilisation. So she runs away from home. She runs first to the meadow, then to the sea, and last to the mountains, and she gives her heart in equal measure to all of them. She lives in these wild places without fear, learning how to be free, and she sees joy and glory everywhere. In 1926, Barbara was 12 and the book was finally complete (again). Her father was so impressed that he took the manuscript to work with him. He was, at this time, working for the publisher Alfred Knopf. Imagine the excitement when a blue letter arrived, and within it the offer to publish Barbara’s story: 2,500 copies were printed, and all sold out. Her story of Eepersip and her life in the house without windows went on to become a bestseller, and Barbara was hailed as a child genius. I first came across the book through a review. I tracked down a copy – scuffed and well read, with wonderful paper and deckled edges – and fell immediately in love. This is a book that demands to be read outside, in the open air. This is its natural habitat. It is clearly the work of a vibrant, untamed mind, filled with colour, movement, fearlessness and beauty. I was struck by how Eepersip is equal to, and inseparable from, the natural world in which she lives. In 1939, Newhall Follett walked out of the apartment she shared with her husband, Nick. She left no note and took only a few dollars Success with a first novel is an unusual thing. Success at the age of 12 is almost unheard of. A child who had led a solitary life, Barbara took this success in her stride. She met her literary heroes and was photographed smiling beside them. She was interviewed on the radio and found herself being asked to review books such as Now We Are Six by AA Milne. But, like all good writers, by the time The House Without Windows was published she had already fallen in love again. This time, it was with the sea. She had begun work on a book about pirates. Barbara threw herself into learning the names and shapes of sailing ships, sails, ropes and knots, all from her favourite Webster’s Dictionary. She studied the points of the compass, hoping they would point to a new direction for her restless imagination. But the dictionary and her imagination weren’t enough. She knew that real-life experience informed the best passages of her stories. And she knew that she had to experience life on the water. She had to feel the salt wind in her face, the ropes against her hands, the sway of the hull. She had to sleep on the sea-rolled deck beneath a sky of stars. And so she set sail, without her parents and aged just 13, signing on as the cabin “boy” on a ship bound for Nova Scotia. A few months later she returned and handed in the manuscript of her second book: The Voyage of the Norman D. By 18, Barbara was hiking the Appalachian Trail in the company of a young man called Nickerson Rogers, each night sharing his small tent or lying together beneath the ceiling of stars. Later they travelled to Europe, wandering through Spain, France, Germany, sometimes working, always writing, keeping notes for future manuscripts. And what things they must have seen, as they worked and walked their way through this turbulent time between the wars. On their return to America they settled into an apartment, marrying in 1934 and taking jobs. And Barbara began to feel her dreams slipping away to the familiar tune of work and domesticity. She still wrote, but her work was no longer in favour with publishers and the rejections hurt. And then, in 1939, on 7 December, Barbara Rogers, née Newhall Follett, walked out of the apartment she shared with her husband. She left no note, took only a few dollars and some shorthand notes. She was never seen again. Why? Where did she go? To the sea or the mountains? Barbara once joked with a friend that if life became too much she could always disappear. She could always make a new story to live in. Barbara’s words and her spirit have haunted me for so long. To see the world through her young, bright eyes is a wonderful thing. To meet her soul, in Eepersip, and walk with her in the meadow, swim in the sea, sleep beneath a blanket of snow, across a century and a wide ocean, is the purest magic. It is a magic she herself would have understood – the kind made by stories. Whenever I read her words, they paint the most extraordinary pictures in my mind. Back in 1927, it was suggested that The House Without Windows might be republished in an illustrated edition, if it proved to be a success. I hope she would be pleased with what I have done, trying to catch the ghosts of her wild creatures in ink and in water. People search for Barbara in her archives, looking for the answer to the mystery of her absence. Some search for murder clues, others for signs of escape. Reader, do not look for Barbara there. Search instead in the pages of her stories. Hear her voice, and listen. On summer days you can hear swallows call the name of Eepersip, threading it through the sky. Look, if you have eyes to see and a heart to believe, between the wings of butterflies, and you will find her. • The House Without Windows by Barbara Newhall Follett, illustrated by Jackie Morris, is published by Hamish Hamilton (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.