“A no-deal Brexit could cause far more damage to our future economic success than a Corbyn government, the former chancellor Ken Clarke told the Observer this weekend. It is an extraordinary sign that the Conservative party has imploded beyond the point of no return that someone who until days ago was its longest-serving MP would now rather see not Boris Johnson, but a man whose politics he has staunchly opposed for decades as prime minister. The party’s crisis was compounded last night by cabinet minister Amber Rudd resigning the Conservative whip. “I cannot stand by as good, moderate Conservatives are expelled,” she said. Any Tory who feels a shred of responsibility to the country should agree with Clarke and Rudd. This state of affairs is the inevitable consequence of Johnson’s strategy to smash up and reinvent his party in the image of Nigel Farage. Hence his pledge to take us out of the EU on 31 October “do or die”, despite the vanishingly small prospect of a negotiated deal. He is willing to sacrifice his party, plunge the country into economic crisis and risk the union so long as it keeps him clinging to the reins of power. But in behaving as though he could ride roughshod over our sovereign parliament, Johnson has miscalculated. In proroguing parliament for five weeks as Britain experiences its worst political crisis in living memory, he galvanised the parliamentary opposition to no deal. In threatening rebels in his own party with immediate expulsion should they try to prevent no deal, he destroyed his own working majority. In trying to force a quickfire election to his own tactical advantage, but to the detriment of the country, he has encouraged unity among his opponents. Parliament has finally exerted itself, as it always had the power to do. And so a terrible week for Johnson has been a good week for Jeremy Corbyn, who appeared prime ministerial where Johnson did not. The 21 Conservative rebels who put the national interest ahead of party and career in voting for the extension bill deserve credit and respect, as does Jo Johnson. Those ministers who have spent months warning of the dangers of no deal but who continue to prop up Boris Johnson should follow his lead. But none of last week’s drama changes the fundamental reality that politics is as gridlocked as ever. While parliament is opposed to no deal, there is no majority in favour of anything constructive. The Observer has long argued that a referendum on a negotiated exit versus the status quo is ultimately the only way to resolve this. Asking voters to decide only on the basis of a yes/no question, with no concrete Brexit plan on the table, could never have imbued a vote to leave the EU with sufficient democratic legitimacy. The fact that parliament has repeatedly rejected the withdrawal agreement, which contained all the real-world trade-offs that the Leave campaigns denied ever existed, only provides further impetus. But there is currently no parliamentary majority for a referendum either. The only way out of this bind is a general election. Any general election will inevitably be treated as a quasi-referendum, however. So it must be held at a time that allows for as considered a debate as possible, not rushed through because it is to Johnson’s political advantage. Corbyn is absolutely right that now parliament has mandated the prime minister to ask for a three-month article 50 extension if he cannot agree a deal, the election should be called only once that extension has been requested. We live in a parliamentary democracy, where a prime minister’s authority to govern derives solely from parliament. If Johnson cannot bring himself to obey the law it has just passed, he must resign to make way for someone who will. The quasi-referendum status of a forthcoming election means it is vital voters are offered a clear choice. That is much harder in an election, where the two main parties are split on Brexit, than in a referendum. Labour’s position – that it would negotiate its own Brexit deal, put that to a referendum and allow its MPs to campaign whichever way they wished – falls far short. It means that a vote for Labour could be interpreted both as a vote for Brexit and a vote to remain in the EU. The options facing the country are clear: staying in the EU; a soft, Norway-style Brexit that includes signing up to free movement; a hard Brexit with an Irish backstop; or no deal. It is disingenuous for Labour to avoid saying which of these four options it is for in a doomed attempt to keep all its voters happy. Corbyn must be clear that if Labour were to be elected it would put the withdrawal deal, which allows for a wide range of different Brexits as a final destination, to a referendum against the status quo and that Labour would campaign to remain in the EU. This will be a general election like no other, to determine the way forward on a question that cuts across traditional party divides. It would be a travesty if it returned a majority for the pro-Brexit parties despite more people voting for pro-referendum parties. The best way to avoid this is to maximise the anti-Brexit seat share through efforts to encourage people to vote tactically and candidates stepping aside where there is another pro-referendum candidate better placed to win. The stakes have never been higher. Britain’s economic wellbeing and the future of the union hang in the balance. Voters deserve a clear choice.