Hearts came from behind to win the Edinburgh derby 2-1 at Easter Road and alleviate the pressure on their manager, Craig Levein. Aaron Hickey scored his first Hearts goal in the 84th minute to lift his side off the bottom of the Scottish Premiership and seal their first league win in 13 matches. Levein had been backed by the Hearts owner and fellow board member Ann Budge in midweek but saw Stevie Mallan’s superb long-range strike put Hibernian ahead two minutes into the second half. However, Uche Ikpeazu levelled 20 minutes from time from close range after holding off several defenders before Hickey found the winner with a shot that took a slight deflection en route to the top corner. It is now the Hibs manager, Paul Heckingbottom, who is now feeling the pressure after his side dropped to 11th amid a run of one victory in 11 league matches. Odsonne Édouard helped himself to a double as Celtic came from behind to overpower Kilmarnock 3-1 at Parkhead. Killie striker Eamonn Brophy fired the visitors ahead in the 33rd minute against the run of play but Édouard headed in a leveller a minute before the break then slid in a second eight minutes after the restart for his eighth goal of the season. Ryan Christie added a third soon afterwards before Hoops goalkeeper Fraser Foster saved a late penalty from Kilmarnock midfielder Alan Power. Celtic have now won six out of six league matches and after eight successive Premiership title wins, look more than capable of the ninth, with a performance which – by and large – will have pleased manager Neil Lennon. Jermain Defoe capped an impressive second-half performance from Rangers with two late goals as Steven Gerrard’s side coasted to a 4-0 victory over St Johnstone at McDiarmid Park. From the moment Alfredo Morelos broke Saints’ resistance two minutes after the interval with his 12th goal of the campaign, all three points were heading back to Glasgow. Defender Connor Goldson doubled the advantage to remove any possibility of a post-Europe hangover before substitute Defoe finished things off with his late brace.