Defending the Guilty (BBC Two) is a promising new sitcom that mines the potentially less-than-hilarious world of criminal law for its surprisingly plentiful absurdities. Based on the 2011 nonfiction book of the same name by the barrister Alex McBride, it has an insider’s fondness for what it mocks. Will Sharpe stars as Will Packham, a pupil barrister fighting three other trainees for tenancy. It is a highly competitive, badly paid, scrappy existence. “I’m only three months in, there are four of us and chambers are only going to give us one place,” he explains. Unfortunately, he says this to a gangster facing a murder charge, who gives such a withering look that you suspect he may squash Will with it. The cut-throat competitiveness of Will’s fellow trainees is treated like a sport, and he is fourth out of four on the “tenancy deathball” whiteboard. Each of the newcomers is listed by cutting nicknames only. He is DJ Stupid because he wears headphones and nods along to the indie soundtrack whenever Belle and Sebastian or Metronomy is turned up loud. Welsh Danielle is Angry Chav and steals most of the best lines, Liam is your obligatory entitled posh boy, Lanky Poison Twat. And then there’s Pia, AKA Hot Robot, and, so far, my money is on her. Will is apologetic about Hot Robot being objectified in such an appalling manner, much to Pia’s airy confusion. “Oh yes, feminism,” she smiles, unconvinced. The writing owes a foul-mouthed debt to the creative crudeness of political comedies such as The Thick of It. Danielle, in particular, takes no prisoners, and watching her chew up Liam, “that human lube stick”, will be a delight that keeps on giving. This knockabout viciousness is where Defending the Guilty works best. At times, though, it can feel as if it’s trying too hard to be clever, particularly when it comes to the adults in the room. Katherine Parkinson is Will’s pupil master, Caroline, a tough, seen-it-all kind of woman who reminds Will what it takes to be a barrister: “Brain of a fox, liver of an ox, the hugest of cocks.” I am a big fan of unapologetically awful characters, and Caroline has the potential to become one. She refers to herself gruesomely as “mummy” and Will as her “baby boy”, despite his objections. She also treats him as an errand boy, and is more interested in pastries than pastoral care. I suspect, though, that she will turn out to have a soul. More’s the pity. I would love her to be an all-out monster, which would poison the well nicely. I am predisposed to like anything Sharpe does because he was responsible for Flowers, one of the most inventive, touching comedies of recent years. As the desperate but hapless Will, he is very good here. His naivety is endearing rather than irritating, even if, as a trainee, he is so out of his depth that someone needs to call the RNLI. Will is idealistic enough to want to do his job for the sake of justice – a word so offensive to Caroline that she shushes him immediately. It means the criminals can run rings around him. “He is very guilty,” he whistles at one point, as he attempts to work out how to get a very guilty person off a murder charge. The battle between his morals and his hunger will be a curious one. If Caroline does get a soul, it will be very interesting indeed to watch Will losing his. Aside from This Life, which took the brutality of the same world and turned it into drama, British legal shows tend to be either unbearably earnest or wretchedly cynical, and this falls somewhere in between. There is a faint air of self-consciousness, particularly in this first episode, as if everyone involved is aware that trainee barristers are not, on paper, natural magnets for sympathy, despite the long hours, poor pay and lack of guaranteed employment at the end of it. The whole series has been put on iPlayer, though, and, after this opener, it starts to bed in. Mark Bonnar arrives and turns up the full smarm, and some of the writing quirks (“We’ve got fewer defence options than I’ve got viable eggs,” says Caroline, sounding more like a script than a character) ease off. When it lets go, loosens up and embraces the silliness of its world, Defending the Guilty really steps up to the bar.