When James Haskell, the former England bruiser, announced recently he was swapping the rugby pitch for the MMA octagon, he explained that an inspiration for the switch was Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic. “I was only thinking during Wimbledon that I wonder what it’s like to be an individual sportsman at the highest level,” he said, “when you have to look after yourself and don’t have teammates to fall back on.” It’s true, a court can be a lonely place. Which is probably why the top players all speak so highly of the teams behind them. No victory speech is complete without thanks for the coach, physiotherapist, psychologist, chef, stringer, clothing sponsor and a respectful genuflection to their opponent’s counterparts. The TV cameras have picked up on these relationships to ramp up the drama. An Andy Murray winner is followed inevitably by a cutaway to his wife, Kim, fist pumping or his mum, Judy, grinding her teeth and looking steely. At the US Open, there is an extra razzle-dazzle to the players’ boxes. Naomi Osaka was watched last week by Kobe Bryant and Colin Kaepernick. “It’s really cool,” she said after beating Magda Linette in the second round. “But, honestly, I really wanted to finish as fast as possible because I didn’t want them to stay in the sun too long.” In perhaps the most exciting personal development for Johanna Konta since she took ownership of Bono, what the Sun calls “a German dog” – it’s a dachshund (a popular breed in Britain since Queen Victoria’s day) – she was watched in New York twice this year by the actor Tom Hiddleston. The pair met, apparently, in the street just a few days before. Konta said: “I did the Good Samaritan thing and said: ‘Don’t bother him, he’s obviously busy.’ And then he said: ‘I don’t usually do this but I’m a massive fan,’ and I was like: ‘What, who?’ It was basically that and then we got chatting and he’s super nice.” The players’ box is so integral to tennis that I am dangerously close to being able to tell Federer’s identical twin sons, Lenny and Leo, apart. It’s so established as part of the sport that sometimes you forget how weird it is. When Harry Kane misses a penalty, the cameras don’t pan to his wife, Katie Goodland, for her distraught reaction. When Anthony Joshua is dumped on his backside, you don’t get to see his mum wincing. It’s not always been ingrained in tennis, either. When John McEnroe and Björn Borg waged their famous fourth-set tie-break in 1980, viewers would not have had a clue who their girlfriends or even their coaches were. We had no idea that McEnroe was hanging out with Jack Nicholson and the Rolling Stones off-court or that he would skip the Champions’ Dinner after his win in 1981 to go on a bender with the Pretenders. The action, what we could glean of their contrasting personalities, was enough. A shift seems to have taken place in the mid-1980s, and McEnroe was partly responsible. He started dating the actor Tatum O’Neal in 1984, they married in 1986 and, as his career wound down, her presence at his matches was almost as anticipated as his meltdowns. The trend stepped up a level in the mid-1990s with Andre Agassi and Jennifer Capriati, both of whom surrounded themselves with physical and mental gurus. Around this time, the US Open organisers built a new show court, the Arthur Ashe Stadium, and increased the capacity of the players’ box from eight to 15. “They say I travel with all these people because it feeds my ego,” Agassi wrote in his 2009 autobiography Open. “They say I need this many people around me because I can’t be alone. They’re half right. I don’t like to be alone. But these people around me aren’t an entourage, they’re a team. I need them for company, for counsel and for a kind of rolling education.” Some players clearly lean on their team more than others. Murray’s team stands in unison and enthusiastically applauds when he wins a key point. Serena Williams has perhaps the starriest box of all – she has hosted Beyoncé, Jay-Z, Kim Kardashian and Eva Longoria – but the front row is always dominated by her family. Mirka Federer never misses a match, while Xisca Perelló, Rafael Nadal’s girlfriend since 2005, is hardly ever present. “Just the idea of me hanging around and waiting on his needs all day tires me out,” Perelló has said. As a viewer, there is an irresistible allure of tittle-tattle – Eugenie Bouchard in Nick Kyrgios’s box – but there is also an immense satisfaction in watching a match live and realising you can concentrate on the body language of the players, their frustration, how they gee themselves up, their strange tics, what they do between points … And not just being force-fed another reaction shot of their gurning lackeys. Also, we should be wary of reading too much into the personalities who appear – often they are selected by an agent or a manager, rather than the player. Caroline Wozniacki had never met Donald Trump or his wife, Melania, when they were invited to her box at the US Open in 2010 and it’s hard to know how she feels about them now: when Trump was elected president in 2016, Wozniacki simply tweeted: “Wow!” There is even a cautionary tale. When Boris Becker walked out to play Stefan Edberg in the 1990 Wimbledon final, he was shocked to see the figure skater Katarina Witt in his box. He knew his fellow German but only a little – she was a guest of someone else in his team – and he was sure the British tabloids would make the coincidence it into something it was not. He claims he was distracted enough to lose the first two sets 6-2, 6-2 (and eventually the final in five). Becker never won Wimbledon again.