Tim Paine has admitted to having sleepless nights over Ben Stokes as the gripping battle for the Ashes resumes in Manchester on Wednesday. Four sold-out days at Old Trafford and a fifth with 18,500 tickets shifted speaks volumes about the enduring appeal of Test cricket and the national fervour sparked by Stokes through his series-levelling century at Headingley. This side of the Pennines even the traffic sign on Princess Parkway heading into the city was warning drivers of delays because of “Sir Ben Stokes v Australia” – something that feels appropriate given the way Australia’s captain was talking 24 hours before the resumption of hostilities. Paine said: “I haven’t lost a hell of a lot of sleep thinking about my captaincy but I have lost a bit of sleep thinking how we’re going to get Stokes out. He’s a class player and he’s really confident at the moment. He’s going well. We’ve got some plans for him – but we’ve just got to execute them a bit better.” Australia still hold the whip hand knowing one win from the remaining two Tests will retain the urn. As well as dropping Usman Khawaja for the returning Steve Smith – the right‑hander is newly restored to No 1 in the Test batting rankings – Paine hinted strongly at a recall for Mitchell Starc’s left-arm pace. England have also made a change for what tends to be the bounciest surface in the country as the 6ft 5in Craig Overton comes in for Chris Woakes. It is another seamer who has seemingly got under Paine’s skin, however, after Jofra Archer’s assertion that Australia “panicked” in Leeds. Paine said: “Jofra’s entitled to his opinion, he’s had plenty of those that’s for sure. We made some mistakes, it happens, we’ve addressed it as a team. We’ve spoken about it honestly. I was certainly one of those people who made mistakes. It happens, we’ve moved on and we’re here ready for a great Test match.” On Smith, who sat out the one‑wicket defeat at Headingley because of the concussion inflicted by Archer at Lord’s, Paine said: “I think everyone in the world is looking forward to watching Steve Smith bat. Steve has missed one Test match, he hasn’t been out for 12 months. He came back from a 12-month layoff pretty well, so I expect he will handle six days without batting pretty well.” The 12-month absence alluded to followed Smith’s role last year in the ball‑tampering scandal, something Paine was happy to make light of when the subject of reverse swing arose. Old Trafford has a reputation for the phenomenon and though a green square may not be conducive this time around, it furthers Starc’s claims for a first outing of the series. Asked whether his side will change their ball management methods with reverse swing in mind, Paine said with a smile: “No, we just use saliva and shine it on our pants. That’s the way we look after the ball. That won’t change this Test match. “But certainly the dryness of the square as well can play a part in that and Starc is a great exponent of reverse swing if he can get it to happen. If that is the case he will be a dangerous proposition.” Paine’s opposite number, Joe Root, was hopeful the feelgood factor from this summer’s World Cup win and Headingley rolls on. But this will hinge chiefly on how his batting lineup, fresh from a Jekyll and Hyde performance – 67 all out followed by a record chase of 359 – fare. Jason Roy has dropped from opener to No 4 in a swap with Joe Denly and a concession that the Surrey right-hander, averaging 9.5 this series, will need the shine taken off the Dukes ball to produce his best. Root said: “It’s not gone exactly how we’d have liked and [Roy] hasn’t scored the runs he would have liked. We’re still trying to find a formula that works for us. It’s been difficult in English conditions and it’s not just us, every side that has come over the top order have not performed. “Jason is a high-quality player and could be better suited to four. We all know what he can do when he gets himself in and hopefully batting a little lower down helps him to do that.” Overton’s recall comes off the back of 32 wickets at 21 from eight appearances for Somerset this season. The 25-year-old has experience of Ashes cricket too, having played twice during the 2017-18 series and opened his account in Adelaide with the prized scalp of Smith. Root said: “The extra bounce of a taller bowler gives us a different option on a ground that does perform slightly differently. It will balance our attack really well in these conditions. “Craig is a competitor. You saw him come into Ashes cricket on debut and looked very much at home and got himself in a battle. I expect him to do that again this week.” On Stokes, enjoying a golden summer and with two centuries already this series, Root said: “He’s a great team man who will go out of his way to help anyone. He will always offer advice and is a brilliant senior player and leader who has a good balance of when to say the right things. He’s very passionate and just a genuinely good bloke. The skill and ability he has is a great combination.”