The future of HS2, Britain’s most ambitious infrastructure project, is hanging by a thread after the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, announced a delay of up to five years to complete its first phase, accompanied by a massive increase in the estimated cost. For the beleaguered construction sector, the timing could hardly have been worse. Orders for new work have been drying up at a rate not seen for a decade, so the scrapping of such a large infrastructure project would come as a severe blow. That, though, is not really the point. In terms of overall economic impact, it would make little difference whether the government spends upwards of £80bn on HS2, roads, home insulation or tax cuts. Shapps has to decide what else could be done with the money earmarked for HS2 and then decide whether the government has got its priorities right. That was a stretch even when the price tag for HS2 was nearly £56bn four years ago. Now the estimated cost could be as high as £88bn, there is an even stronger case for a rethink. So here’s the question. Would it be better to spend £88bn building a railway northwards from London with a scheduled arrival time in the north of 2040, or does it make more sense to spend the same sum linking the big cities of the north first and then – resources permitting – building HS2 southwards to London? If the government really is seeking to rebalance the economy, the answer is obvious. Cut your losses on HS2 and plough the money into Northern Powerhouse Rail instead. Britain has long had a more laissez-faire approach to foreign takeovers than other countries. Ministers are, for example, doing nothing to stop the acquisition of the Dorset-based aerospace and defence company Cobham by the US private equity firm Advent. Donald Trump would almost certainly adopt a more protectionist stance if the boot were on the other foot. The government has powers to intervene if a takeover is deemed to be a threat to national security but is reluctant to use them. A rather more vigorous approach might be needed in the current environment, with high-performing UK companies looking particularly vulnerable as a result of the weakness of the pound. Other than during the 2016 “flash crash”, sterling is at levels not seen since the mid-1980s. While it would be tempting to interpret the jump in inward merger and acquisition activity reported for the second quarter by the Office for National Statistics as a direct consequence of the falling pound, that could not be the explanation, because sterling’s nosedive came in the third quarter. But while the increase from £7.6bn to £18.4bn in foreign takeover activity was largely the result of one big deal, it could still be the harbinger of things to come. A weak currency and weak safeguards weakly policed point in one direction: a fire sale of assets. Like a once-great football club fallen on hard times, Marks & Spencer has been involved in its own relegation battle. That struggle will end when it is officially confirmed that the retailer – one of the founder members of the FTSE 100 – has lost its place in the City’s flagship index. The reasons for M&S’s problems would be familiar to any long-suffering football fan: too much living on past glories, too much chopping and changing at the top and a failure to move with the times. M&S has had a decade to sort out its clothing division and is now facing the consequences of failing to do so. It’s possible for M&S to make it back into the top division, just as it was possible for Wolves and Aston Villa to win promotion to the Premier League. But it will be tough because, unlike football, Britain’s high streets are not booming. And M&S still seems some way from sorting itself out.