On Monday night I rushed home from work to watch the latest episode of Succession, HBO’s sleeper hit following the toxic machinations of the Roy family. The characters are stand-ins for the Murdochs: a news, media and entertainment dynasty trying to stay relevant in a rapidly changing world. For the most part I followed what happened in the episode. I got the call backs to earlier drama, caught the in-jokes, and more or less stayed afloat of the swirling plot that’s made the show a critical darling. But honestly, if a show like this came out two decades earlier I don’t know if I could have said that. Much of my appreciation (and understanding) of the complex plot and its real-world references is supported by the framework of recap articles and podcasts I turn to when the credits roll. They do more than remind me of what happened on a show I watched minutes earlier; they contextualise rivers of information that might have flowed past me. Without Vanity Fair’s Still Watching podcast, I wouldn’t have the background on how corporate boards work, the legal complexities of high-level mergers, and the politics of thought leadership camps for billionaires. Skipping out on Hunter Harris’ Vulture Power Rankings would leave me less informed on the lasagne of layered character development. Succession isn’t an outlier. Since Alan Sepinwall began blogging episodic reviews of NYPD Blue from his college dorm room in the 1990s, the culture has grown steadily. As TV entered its much discussed “platinum age” in the early 2000s – becoming darker, smarter and more complex with the influx of premium cable shows – the writing surrounding it also evolved. It moved beyond reviews and recommendations; shows like The Sopranos and Mad Men offered more to unpack each week and, thanks to the internet, there was a lot more room to do it. Sites including Television Without Pity were born to offer dedicated, detailed and addictive commentary around everything from Dawson’s Creek to The Shield. By the time we were facing down such mega-shows as Game of Thrones and Westworld in the 2010s, it was clear that not only were shows impacting TV criticism, but the writing was changing the shows themselves. Thanks to the ravenous appetite for the books, it’s safe to say the screen adaptation of Game of Thrones would have landed an audience – with or without recappers. But from its first season the show was supported by a fandom that lived first on Reddit and later on entertainment sites and podcasts. The complex plot and cascade of characters were supported by a scaffolding of endless recap and explainer articles. Anyone who didn’t get it first time round could find some charming online culture writer to lay it out for them later. But just as these writers enhanced the show when it was at its best, they also propped Game of Thrones up when it began to wane. As characters were introduced with little to no context, it fell to recappers to fill the gaps. Writers including Joanna Robinson, Jenna Guillaume and the brains behind Thrillist’s Beyond the Wall coverage spent hours plugging holes with their own understandings of the books, the wider Game of Thrones universe, and leading internet theories. Recap culture can also extend the life of a weaker show, by hooking viewers who might otherwise become frustrated and switch off. When Westworld’s third season was announced my first reaction was, “Really? We want more of this?” While the show’s first season was ambitious and thought provoking, the second was widely considered an overworked puzzle box that wasn’t as clever as it thought. But, in an ironic turn, the reduction of the show’s quality lead to an elevation of the writing surrounding it. The infuriating mix of half-baked clues and vacant characters created a vacuum for fan theories and speculation. I’d drag myself through an impenetrable episode to be able to tune into the Decoding Westworld podcast. While the show seemed lost over what to do with its churning plot, hosts David Chen and Joanna Robinson (the Gore Vidal of TV recaps) dove in with lungfuls of possibilities that ended up better than those the writers coughed up. (Its fate mirrored that of Lost: by the finale Jeff Jensen deserved a production credit for the story support he had offered through his Entertainment Weekly recaps.) All this has led to a wonky new space in TV culture where sometimes the recaps are better than the shows. I’m going to go out on a limb here and say The Bold Type isn’t great TV. But its surrounding chatter has elevated it to a position where Jia Tolentino blogs about it for the New Yorker. Much of this is due to media’s ironic-not-ironic love of it. While on the surface the show is a disconnected look at working in magazines (big apartments, an editor-in-chief who hears your pitches directly, weeks to work on rambling first-person essays about exhausted topics), recaps have refined its sometimes clunky exploration of female ambition, friendship, class and job uncertainty. They pick up conversations the show starts but doesn’t always master, and carry them along. Perhaps the biggest impact of TV writing in 2019 is that it has the power to change the way shows are watched, written and understood. It makes shows elastic, existing beyond the screen, so we can hold on to them for longer and change their shape to fit our own conversations. Television has always been a lens to view our own lives through – now recaps allow us to adjust the focus ourselves.