One consequence of the topsy-turvy landscape created by Brexit is that we currently have a prime minister who says he doesn’t want an election pushing for one and an opposition leader who has spent much of the past two years calling for one refusing to immediately back a snap poll. As Boris Johnson put it – with glee – to Jeremy Corbyn in the chamber on Wednesday night after the prime minister’s motion for a general election failed to win sufficient support: “This is the first time in history that the opposition has voted to show confidence in Her Majesty’s government.” The Labour leader has suggested he won’t back the election he craves until he is certain the imminent threat of a no-deal Brexit has been averted. A debate is ongoing within Labour as to when that can be known – whether there can be an election before an extension has been agreed, or whether it needs to come after. The government last night called off its efforts to filibuster the cross-party bill to legislate against a no-deal Brexit in the House of Lords. The plan to talk the bill out in the Lords – which led several peers to turn up with sleeping gear and razors in preparation for a long shift – had been seen as a long shot but worth a try. For the filibustering to be called off is in theory strange optics from a government hell-bent on proving it has done everything possible to fight a delay to Brexit. What the government is trying to do, however, is remove Jeremy Corbyn’s excuse for refusing to agree to a general election. In the Commons chamber on Wednesday night, Corbyn suggested Labour would back an election as soon as the extension legislation had received royal assent. This ought to now happen by Monday, meaning Johnson can once again seek support for an early election. Should Corbyn refuse, he can go on the attack and ask Corbyn what he is waiting for. Expect more calls of chicken. However, figures in the Conservative party privately voice concern with the strategy. “I am getting the sense that we might have messed this one up,” sighs one Conservative MP. While Dominic Cummings used his Wednesday night meeting with special advisers to make clear that he remained confident an election was imminent, Labour could opt for other tactics. Corbyn is under pressure from figures including Keir Starmer to hold off on an early election until after an extension has been requested on 19 October. So, what options is the government considering? With Labour’s support, Johnson could on Monday call an election under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act and seek the backing of two-thirds of the Commons. However, anti-no-deal campaigner Nick Boles has suggested John Bercow could block such a move so soon after his first attempt failed. There’s talk within government of proposing a one-line bill that would say something along the lines of “not withstanding the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, there will be an election on 15 October”. That would require a simple majority – and the SNP has suggested it could back such a measure. However, what’s troubling government figures is that such a vote would be amendable and after a mass operation to withdraw the whip from Tory Brexit rebels this week, Johnson is far short of a working majority. One member of government tells me they fear an amendment could be added to try to change the date – or reduce the voting age to 16. “They could make the circumstances for an election very difficult for us.” Should Labour resistance continue and a bill be viewed as too risky, there are a handful of other options Johnson could try. There’s some talk in the party of Johnson trying to call a confidence motion in himself – would Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour really want to go on the record saying they had confidence in a Tory prime minister? Or, if the bill reaches royal assent and there is pressure on Johnson to request a delay, he could simply refuse and see what his critics do. Launch a legal challenge? Perhaps. But the one thing Downing Street is adamant about is that Johnson will not request a Brexit delay in any shape or form. Should push come to shove, the prime minister could resign rather than go through with it. Johnson could suggest that the Queen ask Corbyn to request and sign any extension, thereby putting pressure on the remain alliance, and highlighting rifts over a so-called government of national unity. Such a move would also be seized on by Tories in an eventual election as proof Corbyn was against Brexit. In the topsy-turvy world of Brexit, the unthinkable is now possible. • Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editor