What’s your usual look? It’s not this dramatic. I don’t usually do anything to my hair, just wash it and put my hands through it. How has your look changed with age? I wear much less makeup now. At one time I would have been contouring, but I wouldn’t dream of doing it these days. Do you feel beauty brands cater for you? Yes, more so than they used to – especially when you’ve got people such as Isabella Rossellini as the face of Lancôme. Who is your beauty inspiration? Lauren Bacall. It’s completely unattainable and not my style, but she always looks naturally elegant, intelligent, sassy and in control. What has been your biggest makeup disaster? I’ve had a few Oompa Loompa moments using fake tan. Top tip? Sun protection – I aim for factor 30-50, as I spend a lot of time on my allotment. What Nina Fay Robinson, our make up artist, did for Maggie Glossier’s Boy Brow gives unbeatable brows. Add a barely-there base with the brand’s Perfecting Skin Tint and highlight with Haloscope in Moonstone. What’s your usual look? I generally wear only a light foundation with Estée Lauder’s Double Wear light mascara. How has your look changed with age? I use less makeup. I used to put kohl on my bottom rim but found it closed my eyes up as opposed to opening them. Do you feel beauty brands cater for you? The industry preys on women needing to look younger and younger, as opposed to embracing the lines and wrinkles, with creams and potions that claim to “halt signs of ageing”. I do not use any of them – too many chemicals. Who is your beauty inspiration? Grace Jones, for growing old disgracefully, and that skin! Lauren Hutton for her pure style, and Maya Angelou for being a woman’s woman – and what a face. What has been your biggest makeup disaster? A sky-blue eyeshadow in 1970. Top tip? I make my own facewash and moisturiser, wear a light foundation to protect from everyday dust and pollution, always remove makeup and keep a positive attitude. Smiling helps to keep the glow – and I could not live without wheatgerm oil. What Nina Fay Robinson, our make up artist, did for Di Nars featherlight liquid illuminator in Hot Sand is great for cheeks and brows. Lend a fun dash of colour to eyes with Rimmel Wonder’Swipe in Yassss. What’s your usual look? I don’t generally wear makeup on a daily basis; when I do, it’s really just a foundation base. How has your look changed with age? I never wore makeup when I was younger. But as I approached 40, I began to explore and now that my daughter is older and has an interest in it, she often uses me as a guinea pig to experiment. Do you feel beauty brands cater for you? Higher-end brands do more than chemists’ products; there’s more variety. Who is your beauty inspiration? My daughter, Leanne – she encourages me to try new things. What has been your biggest makeup disaster? I’ve had a couple of funny experiences trying to find the right shade of foundation. Top tip? Moisturise, moisturise and moisturise some more! What Nina Fay Robinson, our make up artist, did for Joan Nars Natural Radiant Longwear foundation in Macao gives an even base. Add contour with Fenty’s Sun Stalk’r bronzer in Mocha Mami and finish with MAC’s Diva lipstick – a bold, elegant red. What’s your usual look? I wouldn’t normally wear yellow eyeshadow or accentuate my lips. I prefer to wear subtle pink lipstick and brown tones on my eyelids. How has your look changed with age? I wear cream blush, use less mascara and wear a foundation that doesn’t require a powder finish, to avoid drawing attention to wrinkles. Do you feel beauty brands cater for you? They do; there is lots of choice in texture, tone and colour. I never struggle to find what I want. Who is your beauty inspiration? Rihanna with her Fenty lip glosses. What has been your biggest makeup disaster? Wearing orange lipstick with a pink blouse once, back in the 80s. But these two together are fashionable now. Top tip? Beauty comes from within. A smile from the heart can add beauty to a face. More practically, in hot weather, put your lipstick in the fridge: it will keep its consistency and apply better to your lips, and will stay on for longer. What Nina Fay Robinson, our make up artist, did for Fabia Kryolan’s multipurpose pencil in 901 is a great staple. Add Nars Creamy Concealer and make a statement with MAC’s Pigment.