Jake Trueman celebrated his first call‑up to the Great Britain train-on squad by cutting through Hull FC to score a hat-trick and put Castleford in pole position for a Super League play-off place, In the week Wayne Bennett’s squad was revealed for the autumn tour of the southern hemisphere, Trueman could not have timed this performance much better. With Castleford’s season on the line, this was as masterful an individual display as any Tigers fan could have hoped for. “Fantastic,” was how Daryl Powell summed up his stand-off’s performance: and he was right. Trueman’s treble provided the headline, but this was a superb all-round show from a 20-year-old who continues to defy his years. And it ensured Castleford a priceless victory. As it transpired, the 20-0 lead the Tigers had established after 25 minutes was more than enough to beat a woeful Hull side. Lee Radford had promised a response after Hull’s Challenge Cup semi-final defeat to Warrington in July; instead, they have lost four of their last five games and, having been in the play-off places for six months, are now outside the top five at exactly the wrong time. With one week remaining of the regular season, Hull have the unenviable task of needing a result against the league leaders, St Helens, next Friday to stand any chance of a play-off spot. On this form they are rank outsiders. “They’ve saved some of their strangest decisions for the biggest of stages,” was Radford’s damning assessment. Trueman and Castleford wasted little time in setting about dismantling Hull. His magnificent pass enabled Cheyse Blair to break the deadlock after eight minutes, before back-to-back solo tries from Trueman himself, coupled with three goals from Jamie Ellis, made it 18-0. Ellis’ penalty five minutes later extended the hosts’ lead. Masi Matongo’s try 11 minutes from half-time offered the visitors a glimmer of hope, but that was extinguished by Trueman two minutes after the restart when he completed his hat-trick. “The boys call him ‘world-class’ around the place and he’s a very good chance of being that for a long time,” Powell said of his protege afterwards. But Trueman’s night was not done. Although Hull scored their second try through Jack Logan, Castleford finished much the stronger. Jordan Rankin sent James Clare over before Trueman’s reverse kick enabled Rankin to extend the lead further. There was still time for Matt Cook to cross for Castleford’s seventh try in the closing minutes, before Jake Connor was sent to the sin-bin for dissent with seconds remaining. Asked how Hull can manage Connor’s temperament issues, Radford quipped: “Apart from taping his mouth up, I don’t know.” Connor has made plenty of headlines this season for various reasons but for once, this night did not belong to him: it belonged to another young Englishman with the same first name. Castleford Rankin; Clare, Mata’utia, Blair, Minikin; Trueman, Ellis; Watts, McShane, Millington, McMeeken, Sene-Lefao, Massey. Interchange Cook, Milner, Holmes, Smith. Tries Blair, Trueman 3, Ellis, Clare, Cook. Goals Ellis 8. Hull FC Shaul; Naulago, Connor, Tuimavave, Logan; Kelly, Sneyd; Taylor, Houghton, Paea, Manu, Griffin, Ellis. Interchange Bowden, Matongo, Satae, Minichiello. Tries Matongo, Logan. Goals Sneyd 2. Sin-bin Shaul (55), Connor (78). Referee B Thaler. Attendance 6,712.