Romelu Lukaku believes football is “going backwards” in the fight against discrimination. The Belgium forward has called for stronger action from the game’s governing bodies and social media platforms after being subjected to monkey chants by Cagliari fans on Sunday. Lukaku was abused while preparing to take a penalty for his new club, Internazionale, at a stadium where Moise Kean, Blaise Matuidi and Sulley Muntari have suffered racist chants from the crowd in the recent past. Lukaku, a £74m signing from Manchester United last month, scored the penalty and stared back at those behind the goal as his teammates celebrated, with the visitors going on to win the game 2-1. Serie A have launched an investigation into the incident. “Many players in the last month have suffered from racial abuse ... I did yesterday too,” Lukaku wrote in a statement on Instagram. “Football is a game to be enjoyed by everyone and we shouldn’t accept any form of discrimination that will put our game in shame. I hope the football federations all over the world react strongly on all cases of discrimination!!!” The incident on Sunday came after Lukaku’s former United teammates Marcus Rashford and Paul Pogba, as well as Chelsea’s Tammy Abraham and Kurt Zouma, have been racially abused on social media this season. “Social media platforms [Instagram, Twitter, Facebook ...] need to work better as well with football clubs because everyday you see at least a racist comment under a post of a person of colour,” Lukaku said. “We’ve been saying it for years and still no action. Ladies and gentlemen it’s 2019. Instead of going forward we’re going backwards and I think as players we need to unify and make a statement on this matter to keep this game clean and enjoyable for everyone.” The Inter manager, Antonio Conte, had been unaware of the abuse at the time but later said: “We need to improve a great deal in Italy and be more respectful to people who are working, in general. When I was working abroad, the fans would cheer on their own team, not spend their entire time insulting the opponent.” Cagliari published a statement on their website and social media platforms. It said Cagliari “firmly rejects” what happened and “underlines, once again, its intention to identify and ban those ignorant individuals whose shameful actions are completely against” the club’s values. The statement concluded by saying: “Full solidarity to Romelu Lukaku and an even stronger commitment toward annihilating one of the worst plagues that affects football and our world. However, as we are aware that technology is not enough, we believe our commitment needs real support from the rest of football’s stakeholders: starting with all the true supporters, to all the stewards in the stands, from police and security staff, to the media and through to Serie A and the Italian FA.”