A former doctor for New England Patriots wide receiver Antonio Brown claims the NFL star repeatedly farted in his face and laughed about it during an appointment where he turned up three hours late and never paid $11,500 in fees. Dr Victor Prisk, an ex-bodybuilder who runs Prisk Orthopaedics and Wellness in the Pittsburgh suburb of Monroeville, said he admitted Brown for an initial consultation despite his “flighty” reputation during a nine-year stint with the hometown Steelers and has since filed a lawsuit in Pennsylvania seeking compensation for the unpaid bill from the All-Pro wideout, according to an SI.com investigation published on Monday. TMZ obtained footage of the August 2018 visit where Brown can been seen laughing while passing gas as Prisk tests his body fat. “It seemed just childish to me,” Prisk said. “I’m a doctor and this man is farting in my face.” The SI.com report, a scathing collection of accusations from a number of people who have dealt with Brown, came one week after a civil complaint filed in US district court for the southern district of Florida alleging Brown sexually assaulted Britney Taylor, a gymnast he met while they attended Central Michigan University together. The suit didn’t prevent Brown from making his debut with the Patriots on Sunday against the Miami Dolphins, where he caught four passes including a 20-yard touchdown in a 43-0 victory. USA Today reported the league had considered placing Brown on the commissioner’s exempt list ahead of the Week 2 contest, which means he would not be counted on the Patriots’ active roster while the league investigates the allegations, but declined since the charges against the wide receiver were not criminal. Brown, 31, who was traded from Pittsburgh to Oakland in March, inked a reported one-year, $15m deal with New England last week that includes a $9m signing bonus and a $20m team option for 2020, following a tumultuous offseason that culminated with his release from the Raiders, and the forfeiture of more than $29m in guaranteed money, without having played a single game for the team. The south Florida native recorded 686 catches and 9,145 receiving yards over the past six seasons with the Pittsburgh Steelers, the highest totals for a receiver over a six-year span in NFL history.