As flocks of seagulls caw and swoop to retrieve discarded chips and candyfloss, 90-year-old Gloria Maltby takes a moment on a bench near Blackpool’s historic Winter Gardens. The great-grandmother has lived through 18 prime ministers – the same number as the Queen – yet none has ever incensed her as much as Boris Johnson. During a brief din from the wailing of the birds, the former factory worker describes her outrage, but above all her deep embarrassment. “He has brought this country to its knees,” she says. “He is a liar and not only has he embarrassed the country and the Queen but what he did was illegal. There seems to be one law for Boris and another for everybody else.” Maltby, like many others in the Irish Sea coast resort, voted to leave. In the 2016 referendum it was the most Eurosceptic place in north-west England with 67.5% saying they wanted to leave the EU. Amid reports that the government will seek to lay out a people v parliament campaign in any general election, one of the key questions about the supreme court’s decision that the prorogation of parliament was unlawful is whether voters will conclude that the judges were justified – or decide that Brexit is being thwarted by an establishment stitch-up. “Yes, we voted to leave but we didn’t ask for this mess,” Maltby says. “This is undemocratic. Now all I want him [Johnson] to do is get us a deal and then resign.” Outside JK’s steakhouse and cafe bar, leave voter Tony Shaw, 76, and his partner Brenda Green, 70, who voted to remain, are now in agreement. They both feel Johnson’s position has become untenable. “I am not impressed,” says Shaw, who was pleased by the judges’ decision. “He’s tried to overrule the country and stop democracy and that is way out of order. He should not be allowed to get away with this. I voted to leave because I did not like the idea of being ruled by the European Union but what is the point when our own politicians just do what they want and get away with it?” But for James Sullivan, 26, who also voted to leave, there has been one delay too many and now there is only one drastic solution. “The politicians obviously can’t seem to get this right. All they seem to think about is tactics. We should be following the examples of Scandinavian countries like Denmark and Norway where the royal families get involved in politics. It’s time for the Queen to take charge!” NP In Kingswood, South Gloucestershire, 66-year-old Ken Balkwill declared himself a staunch fan of Johnson. “Boris will sort it out,” he said. “When there’s an election I’ll vote for Boris, my wife will vote for Boris, my son will vote for him. The whole country will vote Boris.” Balkwill did not accept the supreme court’s ruling. “Boris never broke the law,” he said. “It’s not for the law courts to decide how the country should be run. The government is there to run the country. The courts should let it get on with it.” Paul Boyce, 72, a retired railway worker and a leave-supporting Tory, agreed. “I think the law courts have too much power. What’s going to happen now? Is the government going to have to go the courts every time it passes a new law?” Kingswood lies three miles east of Bristol city centre, its name originating from the time when it was part of the royal hunting estate. Bristol voted for remain but Kingswood falls within South Gloucestershire, where 53% voted to leave. Jake Turner, a 19-year-old worker at the fruit and veg shop in Kings Chase shopping centre, was too young to vote in the EU referendum. He thinks he would have voted leave but if there is a second referendum might plump for remain. On Johnson, he said: “I don’t think he’s the man for the job but actually I’m not sure who could do that job. I certainly don’t trust Jeremy Corbyn, he scares me. He promises so much but the country wouldn’t be able to afford it.” Yvonne Kelly, 51, who runs the flower shop in the shopping centre, was one of the few that thought the court had been right to find against Johnson. “I think Boris is arrogant, I don’t think he’s in touch with real people and what they want,” she said. “To turn round and close parliament like he did shows that arrogance. I’m more leaning to Labour at the moment.” SM Kenneth Sloan was pretty clear that Johnson deserved to lose in the supreme court. “I think Boris wanted to game the system,” Sloan said as he waited outside Primark in central Perth for his wife with their small white dog. “We’re a parliamentary democracy, and we need to go back to parliament.” Sloan, 42, added: “This talk about how they shouldn’t get involved in the political system: there’s the rule of law, you can’t just do what you please. He said it wasn’t about Brexit in the first place but it clearly was, otherwise they wouldn’t need such a large prorogation.” In many respects Perth exemplifies Scotland’s recent political history and its political tensions. Once regarded as a Tory stronghold, it is now represented by Scottish National party MPs and MSPs. In the 2017 snap election, the Conservatives came within 21 votes of beating the veteran SNP MP Pete Wishart in Perth & North Perthshire – one of the narrowest margins of the election. A day after the supreme court judgment, voters in the city were split over whether the court was right to overrule Johnson: there were furious leave voters and delighted remain voters. Douglas Glen, a pro-Brexit businessman and former army officer, said the court’s intervention raised profound questions that could only be resolved by a fresh election. “I think it’s the beginning of a major constitutional crisis in the UK,” he said. Glen was nonplussed by the earlier high court ruling in England that said the prorogation was lawful and dismissive of the three senior Scottish judges in the court of session whose ruling against Johnson was upheld by the supreme court. They were too easily influenced by Scotland’s nationalist devolved government, he said. “It is important, once again, to emphasise that these cases are not about when and on what terms the United Kingdom is to leave the European Union. They are only about whether the advice given by the prime minister to Her Majesty the Queen on 27 or 28 August, that parliament should be prorogued from a date between 9 and 12 September until 14 October, was lawful and the legal consequences if it was not.” “The first question is whether the lawfulness of the prime minister’s advice to Her Majesty is justiciable. This court holds that it is. The courts have exercised a supervisory jurisdiction over the lawfulness of acts of the government for centuries.“ “It prevented parliament from carrying out its constitutional role for five out of the possible eight weeks between the end of the summer recess and exit day on 31 October. Proroguing parliament is quite different from parliament going into recess. While parliament is prorogued, neither house can meet, debate or pass legislation. Neither house can debate government policy. Nor may members ask written or oral questions of ministers or meet and take evidence in committees…This prolonged suspension of parliamentary democracy took place in quite exceptional circumstances: the fundamental change which was due to take place in the vonstitution of the United Kingdom on 31 October. Parliament, and in particular the House of Commons as the elected representatives of the people, has a right to a voice in how that change comes about. The effect upon the fundamentals of our democracy was extreme.” “The court is bound to conclude, therefore, that the decision to advise Her Majesty to prorogue parliament was unlawful because it had the effect of frustrating or preventing the ability of parliament to carry out its constitutional functions without reasonable justification.“ “This court has already concluded that the prime minister’s advice to Her Majesty was unlawful, void and of no effect. This means that the order in council to which it led was also unlawful, void and of no effect and should be quashed. This means that when the royal commissioners walked into the House of Lords it was as if they walked in with a blank sheet of paper. The prorogation was also void and of no effect. Parliament has not been prorogued. This is the unanimous judgment of all 11 Justices.” “It is for parliament, and in particular the Speaker and the Lord Speaker, to decide what to do next. Unless there is some parliamentary rule of which we are unaware, they can take immediate steps to enable each house to meet as soon as possible. It is not clear to us that any step is needed from the prime minister, but if it is, the court is pleased that his counsel have told the court that he will take all necessary steps to comply with the terms of any declaration made by this court.” The full judgment and the summary judgment can be downloaded from the Supreme court website. “In the future, how on earth will this work if anyone who doesn’t like anything will take it to the supreme court?” Glen asked. “What we need is an election. I think the House of Commons has become divorced from the people. People know when they’re being had and the people of this country are being really, really had.” A fellow leave voter, Elaine, who declined to give her full name, said the court ruling had shattered her confidence in democracy. “I was disappointed that the judges got involved because they shouldn’t be above parliament. Parliament should be making our decisions, whether they’re right or wrong,” she said. Fern Smith, a 19-year-old student who was too young to vote in the 2016 referendum, said she would vote remain if there was a second vote and backed the supreme court’s decision. But since the country had voted leave originally, she said, that should be honoured. “I’m glad that it was ruled out because the rest of parliament didn’t seem happy with it. It felt right that someone outside parliament told him not to do it,” she said. “I don’t want to say it has definitely been screwed up. I’m quite optimistic that it will all come right somehow. It’s going to happen so we might as well embrace it and hope for the best.” SC