As regular readers will know, I have become a bit of a begonia obsessive. And with all sorts of new species being introduced from the jungles of Asia, it seems after years in the doldrums these exotic houseplants are finally experiencing a much-deserved renaissance. In fact, rarer specimens now frequently exchange hands online for almost £100, which continually surprises me considering how easy it is to clone these plants for free. While there are loads of different propagation methods for begonias, many are only suitable for very specific varieties, which can make the whole process confusing for non-geeks. However, there is one that in my experience works for any variety going and, as luck would have it, is also by far the simplest. If you fancy trying your hand at cloning your own begonias, now is a good time of year to do it and all you really need is a glass of water. To get started, identify a section of begonia stem from a healthy plant that is about 10cm long, with at least a couple of leaf nodes with buds on them. What is a node? Well, along the stem you will see striped bands like you would see on a bamboo cane. On these bands, facing outward from the stem, will be little buds. This is where the cells that are capable of generating new growth come from. Snip the stem off with a clean pair of scissors and remove all but the top two new leaves. I have a strike rate of about 75% using this technique, so if you have the material, take a few cuttings just in case you end up with a casualty or two. Next get a small glass jar (the smaller the better) and pop the cutting in, cut side down. Begonia plants will exude rooting hormones into the water, so using a smaller container (such as an empty spice jar) will mean these growth-promoting compounds are more concentrated. I used to fill the jar with water straight from the tap, but having recently read about how the chlorine and chloramine in tap water can suppress new root growth in cuttings, I am testing out a new product that is said to remove this by a company called Ecothrive, based on pure vitamin C. Let’s see how that goes. Finally, sit your glass of water in a bright, well-lit spot out of direct sunlight, a place where you can comfortably read the small print of a paper without squinting from the glare of sunlight. Keep an eye on the water level to ensure this doesn’t dry out, especially given the small size of the container. Within a few weeks, most of your cuttings should be sending out roots and once these get to about 3cm long they will be ready to pot up in regular seed and cutting compost. From one smallish plant you should be able to get up to five cuttings at a time, to give you plenty to share with your friends and family. And, as all plant parents will know, there is no gift quite a wonderful as a plant you grew yourself. Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek