Authors often say “write the book you want to read” and Zainab Kwaw-Swanzy has done just that. She “would have loved to have” a history of the black-girl afro when she was younger, she says: the 25-year-old’s book will explore the personal and political histories of the hairstyle, as part of a groundbreaking new series by young people about the history of black Britain. “Myself and almost everyone I know has had their own personal journey relating to afro hair. It’s not just hair – it can be political, it can be a statement, so many things,” says Kwaw-Swanzy, a founding member of award-winning magazine gal-dem. “There was a time when lots of products weren’t available and there wasn’t a lot of education out there about how to manage this hair best, because it’s not the norm in our country. So to have a book that explains why it is important would have probably helped me learn to love my own hair a lot quicker than I did.” Kwaw-Swanzy’s is one book in A Quick Ting On, a groundbreaking new non-fiction series focused on the black British community, all written by young black British writers. Created by 24-year-old publisher Magdalene Abraha, the series is the first of its kind and will cover topics from grime music to bamboo earrings, plantain to the black British power movement, Afrobeats to black British business. “There’s nothing like this out there – that’s one of the reasons why I had to do it,” says Abraha. “I created this series to provide a space that can celebrate, pay homage and explore culture. It’s about the everyday conversations that we have about art, music, hair, history, politics, food and so much more.” Everyone she approached – often by WhatsApp – to write for A Quick Ting On is making their publishing debut. All are under 30, and Abraha describes them as a collective. “They’re embarking on this writing journey together, learning to do it together in the form of a series, which I think is really powerful,” she says. “It was really important to me to launch it with young, passionate, debut black writers, and to work on developing them.” Christian Adofo, 29, is writing A Quick Ting On Afrobeats, and believes the series will be “a seed that allows us to represent ourselves unapologetically … Growing up in the UK while having roots in Africa and the Caribbean is a nuanced and ever-shifting experience, especially as you reach the age at which your parents migrated here and you begin to emphasise the sacrifice and foresight for your own future,” he says. “I want readers to acknowledge the influence of the transatlantic slave trade that follows a similar route to the music. This constant feedback between Africa, the Caribbean and the west is rich, which effortlessly influences popular culture.” Sophia Tassew, who is writing A Quick Ting On Bamboo Earrings, says: “I feel like this book is not only a win for me but a win for young women who also grew up in a similar environment. This book is a love letter to the women that have raised me, along with a nod to my culture.” Her book will explore how bamboo earrings have been “a point of identity for many black and Latina women but … shunned by the mainstream fashion industry” until recently. Kwaw-Swanzy says she loves that the series could help readers outside black British communities understand the importance of their culture. “Black history tends to be focused around slavery – which was such a big part – but to be able to say there are so many other things that are important to this culture and this country, that’s something I would have loved to know more about in school. It wasn’t until I got to uni’ that I started to find myself. It would be great if some of this stuff was covered earlier,” she adds. A Quick Ting On will be published by Jacaranda Books, the award-winning independent publisher dedicated to diverse books, in October 2020, with new titles to come out over the following year. Other writers set to contribute include Chanté Joseph, 22, Tobi Kyeremateng, 24, Rui Da Silva, 25, Tskenya-Sarah Frazer, 25, and Franklyn Addo, 26. “Writing a book is something I never considered I’d be capable of, but it’s really exciting to be a part of a series that feels relevant and integral to archiving black Britishness,” says Kyeremateng, who will be writing A Quick Ting On Theatre Sh*t, named for Arinzé Kene’s play Misty. “It’s important to open up the conversation around what we think theatre is and how contemporary black British theatre smashes these traditional western ideals.” “The whole point of the series is that the subjects are limitless, it can last forever,” says Abraha. “There are never going to be too many topics to cover.” • A Quick Ting On will launch in October 2020.