The head of the TUC has called for parliament to outlaw discrimination against working-class people at work, in an impassioned speech calling for parity of opportunity for lower-paid employees. In her address to the union umbrella body’s annual conference, Frances O’Grady reinforced demands that companies should be forced to report any gaps in pay between workers from different social backgrounds. Addressing hundreds of union delegates in Brighton, the general secretary said: “I want to issue a challenge to politicians. It’s high time we outlawed discrimination against working-class people. Let’s change the law and stamp out class prejudice once and for all.” She said the UK was wasting talent and skills because working-class people were shut out of opportunities. “It’s hard to rise by hard graft and talent alone. The system is rigged from the start. Where you come from. What your parents do. Your accent. Which school you went to. If you’re from a working-class family, the odds are stacked against you,” she said. O’Grady illustrated her argument by raising the behaviour of the leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, who was widely criticised for slouching across three seats in the chamber during a crucial Brexit debate last week. “Let’s be honest, Britain is still blighted by old-fashioned snobbery, too. Inflated egos and a sense of entitlement. Picture Jacob Rees-Mogg. Treating the government frontbench like his own living room sofa,” she said. The TUC has said that without new laws, people from working-class backgrounds will continue to face direct forms of discrimination, such as employer bias during job applications and interviews. It has also warned of indirect forms of discrimination such as the use of unpaid internships as a gateway into jobs. Issuing a challenge to the “Hovis ad” image, O’Grady redefined the term working class for the present day. “Today’s working class looks like modern Britain. As likely to work in an office as a factory. To be a care assistant, as a car worker. And to wear a hijab, as a football shirt. Or, quite possibly, both,” she said. O’Grady also issued another warning that the union movement would take action if Boris Johnson attempted to trick the UK into a no-deal Brexit or refused to obey the law. “If the prime minister tries to trick us or refuses to obey the law that stops no deal and workers vote to strike to defend their jobs, then the gloves are off. And I want to make this crystal clear – this whole movement will stand together,” she said.