Fungi aren’t just umami-rich, flavourful morsels, they are an exemplary sustainable foodstuff we should all be eating more of. In the wild, they play a key part in a forest’s ecosystem, working with the trees to break down living matter into rich soil, storing carbon. Cultivated, they take little water, space and power to grow. Stored in the right way, mushrooms will last for weeks and can be preserved for months. To store, remove them from any plastic packaging and refrigerate either in a paper bag or ceramic bowl, so any excess moisture can escape. Do not wash the mushrooms, because they will absorb the water and become slimy. The moment your mushrooms start to turn, check they are OK by smelling them. If they still smell nice, cook up the whole batch – stalks, skin, the lot. I’d recommend frying them finely diced with onions to make a sauce or soup (this could then be frozen, if necessary). Another way to prolong their life for a month or more is this 18th-century-inspired mushroom ketchup. This recipe is based on an 18th-century mushroom catsup, but made more modern by giving it a thicker consistency. To make an 18th-century-style mushroom catsup, don’t blend the mushrooms with the liquid: strain and press out the liquid using a fine sieve and the back of a ladle. The thin liquid should be used like Worcestershire sauce. Dry the remaining mushrooms by spreading out on trays in the sun or in the oven. I like to save electricity by drying the mushrooms alongside other items which I need to cook. Once they are completely dry, store them in a jar and use as a seasoning for plates of food or stews. Use this ketchup as a marinade for meats or vegetables or as a condiment with any meal. I particularly like it with eggs on toast for brunch. Rest 8 hr+ Cook 30 min Makes enough for a 500ml bottle 200g mushrooms, roughly chopped 1 tsp sea salt ½ tsp black pepper 1 small onion, finely chopped 1 garlic clove, peeled 1 bay leaf ⅛ unwaxed organic lemon, including skin 1 tsp grated horseradish or English mustard 1 pinch all spice 1 pinch nutmeg 1 pinch cayenne 80ml apple cider vinegar Combine all the ingredients in a bowl, mix well, cover and, if you have time, leave to rest for about eight hours or overnight. Pour into a saucepan, bring to a boil, reduce to a simmer and cook for about 25 minutes, stirring occasionally. Remove from the heat and leave to cool until safe to blend. Blend until smooth and transfer to a sterilised bottle. It will keep for a month or longer in the fridge.