Jeremy Corbyn is facing a backlash from Labour MPs who fear they will be playing into Boris Johnson’s hands if they back a general election before 31 October. A meeting of the parliamentary Labour party (PLP) was hastily convened on Wednesday morning to allow MPs to express their concerns about the idea of going to the polls before a no-deal Brexit on the Halloween deadline has been ruled out. One veteran Labour MP said the overwhelming view was that Corbyn should reject an election before 31 October. They said: “The one thing we must not do with a thoroughly untrustworthy person such as this prime minister is fight an election on his terms. We wait until after he has gone to the EU and see what he comes back with.” Another said there were some Labour MPs who favoured an immediate election. “We should not give them a chance to accuse us of running away,” one said. A third MP said the view that an election should not be held until after 31 October was confined to “the usual suspects”. The prime minister announced on Tuesday night that he would table a motion under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, seeking to call a general election. Corbyn immediately told the House of Commons Labour would not support an election until legislation drawn up by backbench rebels aimed at ruling out a no-deal Brexit had been passed. “[Johnson] wants to table a motion for a general election, fine. Get the bill through first in order to take no-deal off the table,” Corbyn said on Monday night. The prime minister needs a two-thirds majority to pass the motion and trigger a snap election, with Downing Street pencilling in 15 October as a potential polling day. The motion was due to be voted on later on Wednesday. Corbyn held a meeting with fellow opposition leaders on Wednesday morning, telling them he would support a general election – but only after the threat of a no-deal Brexit had been removed. The rebels’ bill would mandate Johnson to request a three-month extension to article 50 if he has not secured a new Brexit deal by 19 October. They hope the legislation could pass all its parliamentary stages this week – potentially clearing the way for Labour to support a general election if the government tabled another amendment on Monday. But many Labour MPs are nervous that backing a 15 October election could allow the prime minister to press ahead with a no-deal Brexit on 31 October, if the public hand Johnson a majority. One shadow cabinet member said it would be “wholly irresponsible” to accept an election before 31 October. Another MP accused the Labour leadership of drawing up its strategy based on placard-waving protesters in Westminster. Several senior Labour figures, including the shadow justice secretary, Richard Burgon, spoke at a People’s Assembly rally on Tuesday evening organised under the slogan “Stop Boris Johnson! Tories Out! We Demand a General Election Now!” Nick Brown, Labour’s chief whip, will ask the party’s MPs to abstain on the Johnson motion on Wednesday night to try to force an early general election. Brown told the meeting on Wednesday some MPs could vote against the motion if they had already made a public statement on the vote. “He made it clear that if a previous commitment has been made, that is a perfectly acceptable,” a source said. Lady Angela Smith warned the meeting that the large number of amendments tabled in the Lords as a filibustering measure could well mean all-night sittings that spill into next week, a source said.