Donald Trump has used his address to the UN general assembly to deliver a nationalist manifesto, denouncing “globalism” and illegal immigration and promoting patriotism as a cure for the world’s ills. Trump’s third UN speech of his presidency was a largely philosophical tract delivered in a muted monotone, which bore the hallmarks of his most long-serving hardline White House adviser and speechwriter, Stephen Miller. In his address, the US president echoed the rhetoric of far-right nativist groups who argue that citizens with long family history in a country have a more profound grasp of national interests than recent arrivals, and that the established population should be on its guard against forces aimed at its “replacement”. “The free world must embrace its national foundations. It must not attempt to erase them, or replace them,” Trump said. “The true good of the nation, can only be pursued by those who love it, by citizens who are rooted in its history, who are nourished by its culture, committed to its values, attached to his people.” In the course of his 36-minute speech, Trump repeatedly referred to “patriots”, an undefined group of citizens uniquely able to interpret national interest. “Patriots see a nation and its destiny in ways no one else can. Liberty is only preserved, sovereignty is only secure, democracy is only sustained, greatness is only realised by the will and devotion of patriots,” the president said. The potency of the rhetoric was at odds with the softness of its delivery, which was hushed, bordering on soporific. Trump’s commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross, was pictured nodding off in the audience in the giant general assembly chamber. Trump railed against globalism, which he claimed had “exerted a religious pall over past leaders causing them to ignore their own national interests”. “The future does not belong to the globalists. The future belongs to patriots,” the president said, echoing another consistent theme of the hard right. “Looking around and all over this large, magnificent planet, the truth is plain to see. If you want freedom, take pride in your country. If you want democracy, hold on to your sovereignty. And if you want peace, love your nation. Wise leaders always put the good of their own people and their own country first.” Ben Rhodes, who was Barack Obama’s foreign affairs adviser and speechwriter, was scathing in his assessment of content and style. “Trump’s UNGA speech is warmed over nationalist garbage delivered like a late night talk radio host trying to put you to sleep,” Rhodes wrote on Twitter. Trump’s rhetoric was remarkably similar to the speaker who immediately preceded him, the Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, who portrayed international concern about the fate of the Amazon as a conspiracy of global elites. The resurgent nationalist tone of both presidents was in strong contrast to the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who opened proceedings at the week-long UN general assembly general debate, with an appeal for collective action against the threats of the climate crisis and nuclear weapons. Guterres notably called for the New Start arms control agreement between the US and Russia to be extended. It is due to expire in 2021, after which there will be no agreed constraints on the world’s nuclear arsenals. In his address, Trump mentioned neither the climate emergency nor arms control. Instead, he began his speech with an ominous reminder of the military power at his disposal. “The United States, after having spent over two and a half trillion dollars since my election to completely rebuild our great military is also by far the world’s most powerful nation,” he said. “Hopefully, it will never have to use this power.” Trump spent some of his speech railing against US adversaries including China, Cuba, Venezuela and in particular Iran. But in line with his insistence the US would not respond militarily to the 14 September attacks on Saudi oil infrastructure, the president’s emphasis was on peaceful resolution of conflict. “Many of America’s closest friends today were once our greatest foes,” he said. “The United States has never believed in permanent enemies. We want partners, not adversaries. America knows that well, anyone can make war. Only the most courageous can choose peace.” While many of Trump’s talking points were familiar, there were some new elements in his address. He spoke out first for the first time in support of pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong, saying the US was monitoring the situation and expected China to uphold its treaty obligations “to protect Hong Kong’s freedom, the legal system and democratic way of life”. While echoing allegations of some social conservatives that “global bureaucrats” at the UN were promoting abortion around the world, Trump broke with that part of his electoral base (and a lot of the activity of the US at the UN) by emphasising support for other sexual and gender rights. “[M]y administration is working with other nations to stop criminalising of homosexuality,” he declared. “And we stand in solidarity with LGBTQ people who live in countries that punish, jail or execute individuals based upon sexual orientation.”