First performed at La Monnaie in Brussels in 2015, Penthesilea was Pascal Dusapin’s seventh opera. Based on Heinrich von Kleist’s 1808 treatment of an episode from the Trojan war, it offers one of the alternative versions of the death of Achilles. In Kleist’s tragedy, Penthesilea is an Amazonian queen who sides with Troy and takes her warriors to fight against the Greeks. But she ends up as a prisoner of Achilles, with whom she falls in love, believing that she has defeated him. When she discovers the truth, though, she kills the Greek hero and joins her dogs in tearing apart his corpse, before killing herself in horror at what she has done. Goethe thought Kleist’s tragedy unperformable, and the spare libretto, by Dusapin and the writer Beate Haeckl, pares the German text down to 11 short scenes, framed by an even shorter prologue and epilogue, and focusing on the confrontations between Penthesilea and Achilles. Penthesilea’s friend Prothoe, Achilles’ ally Odysseus and the Amazonian high priestess are the only other significant characters. The voices are mostly low – a mezzo Penthesilea, baritone Achilles – and much of Dusapin’s orchestral writing is similarly dark-toned, with the twang of a cimbalom and the jangling of a sistrum adding an archaic edge to the sounds. As an unbroken 90-minute span, it makes an impressively taut, compelling drama. The pacing may be generally slow, almost meditative, but that restraint makes the occasional eruptions of violence in the score, and above all the terrible denouement, even more shocking. The recording from the Monnaie performances is wonderfully clear and spacious. Every detail of the orchestral writing, with the electronics that Duspain uses very sparingly, registers under Franck Ollu; the solo performances – Natascha Petrinsky a suitably histrionic Penthesilea, Georg Nigl a slightly thuggish Achilles, and Werner Van Mechelen a plausible Achilles – are mostly outstanding; only Marisol Montalvo’s rather hit-and-miss German as Prothoe jars occasionally. But this is a lingeringly powerful piece of music theatre, no doubt of it. The staged “oratorio vulgare e militare”, The Raft of the Medusa, which Hans Werner Henze provocatively dedicated to the memory of Che Guevara, caused a sensation at its premiere in Hamburg in 1968. Now, it seems a rather dated piece of musical agitprop, which certainly has its moments, alongside passages that seem tendentious and didactic. But the new recording from SWR Classics, conducted by Peter Eötvös, with Camilla Nylund as La Mort, Peter Schöne as Jean Charles and the great director Peter Stein as the narrator, makes as good a case as any for its merits.