Will Hutton hits the nail on the head (“The sheer scale of the crisis facing our decrepit constitution has been laid bare”, Comment). Our “constitution” is palpably broken and needs replacing. The key elements he wants in the new version are precisely those we have needed for a long time: federalism, an elected head of state and a fair voting system. While priority must be given to ensure that we do not crash out of the EU on 31 October, the need for a Speaker’s conference to draft a new constitution should be pretty high on the agenda. One is reminded of the Tennis Court Oath taken by the members of the French Third Estate in 1789 when they vowed not to dissolve until they had given their country a constitution. MPs would do well to swear something similar this week.Andrew McLuskeyAshford, Middlesex Will Hutton is correct to say that Switzerland has elaborate rules for the conduct of referendums. Any citizen or organisation that collects a defined number of signatures can demand that a referendum be held. The exact wording is drawn up by civil servants and constitutional lawyers in discussions with the proposers to ensure that voters know precisely what they are being asked to agree to. It is even permitted to propose a motion to strike down legislation recently approved in parliament. This ingenious balance between direct democracy and representative democracy has the enormous benefit that legislation for significant change is couched in moderate terms for fear of subsequent rejection by the people. Under such a system, the Brexit vote wouldn’t even have reached the starting line.Karl GehringSheffield Nick Cohen says that the Brexit movement “has no purpose now other than to secure an empty victory” (Comment). It has been clear from the outset that the people behind Brexit have very clear intentions. The EU is a capitalist entity that not only rejects the worst aspects of the US system but has the clout to resist its encroachments. The disaster capitalists who want to discard laws designed to limit the ill effects of capitalism on employment, the environment, the climate, food, health etc and unleash an unrestricted race to the bottom will get even richer if Brexit goes through. This was always the purpose behind Brexit, whatever lies have been put up to hide it. These are not people who will be harmed by a no-deal Brexit; on the contrary, the potential to take advantage of it is almost unlimited.Jeremy CushingTaddyforde, Exeter My experience was similar to that of Sophie Hastings’s daughter (“Why my daughter said no to Oxbridge”, Focus). I grew up in a working-class family in Barrow-in-Furness and at sixth-form college, it was clear that I was expected to apply to Oxbridge. When the vice-principal, a Cambridge alumnus, took several of us on a visit it seemed a stuffy place to a young man from such a different environment. The trip did a good job of deterring me, but there was still pressure from staff at my college. So I applied to Oxford, did well in the exam, was successful at interview and was made an offer of 2 grade Es. After I rejected Oxford, selecting Warwick, Oxford told my college that it wasn’t too late for me to change my mind and I was called to a meeting with the vice-principal. I remained adamant. When the A-level results came out, the local newspaper had photos of the highest achieving students. Mine was captioned: “Damian Rogan: turned down place at Oxford.”Damian RoganLondon, E16 Peter Beaumont (“WWII: eighty years on, the world is still haunted by a catastrophe foretold”, Comment) blames the allied governments, most notably the British and the American ones, for failing to offer relief to the persecuted Jews of Europe, despite the unequivocal evidence of the horrors taking place. He relates the resistance offered by authorities on both sides of the Atlantic, for a variety of reasons, to the very idea of offering sanctuary to the threatened Jews. No doubt this resistance played its part, but surely the crux of the inaction lay in Anthony Eden’s statement to parliament after Ed Morrow’s radio broadcast in 1942: the “immense geographical and other difficulties in the matter”. Bombing of the camps and railways may have been considered impractical (although that might have seriously disrupted the mechanised killing), but the options for Jews already locked inside a Nazi-occupied Europe were virtually non-existent. Some in southern France may have been able to escape into neutral Spain or Portugal, and from there to the US or Britain, but the vast majority would have had no chance of reaching friendly shores, especially the millions trapped inside Poland or the Soviet Union. Even if there had been more political will to do something to prevent further slaughter of the Jews, in practice there was very little that could be done before the camps were overrun towards the end of the war and it is unfair to the wartime allied leaders to suggest that they could have prevented the Holocaust.Melvin HurstVentnor, Isle of Wight It is disappointing to see that prominent cultural figures Grayson Perry and Olivia Colman, who, one would hope, would put their popularity to good use as beneficial social influencers, are instead encouraging the perpetuation of environmentally damaging behaviour (“Strikes, IT failures, customer unrest: can BA pull out of this nosedive?”, Business). At a time when we must transform our way of life, including a significant reduction in flying, in order to avoid the worst effects of global heating, I hope they will both recognise their mistake and find a way to make amends.Teresa BeltonNorwich Fast fashion is not qualitatively different to most other consumer industries in its impact upon the environment (“Can fashion keep its cool?”, Special Report). Consumer goods in general are too cheap, leading to over-consumption and waste, while things that improve the quality of our lives are too expensive (decent housing) or increasingly unavailable (public services). We need higher taxes on most goods (as well as on high incomes and wealth) to fund housebuilding, green public transport and other public expenditure.Richard MountfordTonbridge, Kent The MSC Gülsün’s containers (“The shifting patterns of English: Measurements that are meaningless”, Comment), being stacked outside the hull, are built of steel to withstand the onslaught of waves, the weather and the ship’s pitching and rolling during a long ocean voyage. Today, most containers being FEUs (40ft equivalent units), the Gülsün can carry up to 11,878 FEUs, each weighing 3.6 tons empty. That’s 42,000 tons of dead-weight steel, the equivalent of 5,701 old London Routemaster buses – over half the weight of the old Queen Mary – before a single banana is loaded. David GilesLondon W11