When was the last time Tottenham produced a performance as complete as this in a league game? One would probably have to go back to last season’s Boxing Day demolition of Bournemouth to find one, which goes to show how long it has been since Mauricio Pochettino’s side played with this much energy, class and craft. In that context this thrashing of Crystal Palace could end up being remembered as one of the most important wins of the Pochettino era. After a spluttering start to the season, not to mention all the angst caused by a fraught transfer window, Spurs had a lot of fun ending Palace’s brief hold on fourth spot. Son Heung-min was rampant, scoring two goals of the highest quality during a remarkable first half, and it was telling that Pochettino spoke about new beginnings after his team climbed into third place on goal difference. The Spurs manager wants his squad to regain the harmony of old and he viewed this game as an opportunity for players who wanted to leave during the summer to demonstrate their commitment. With that in mind he was pleased to see Toby Alderweireld and Jan Vertonghen form a solid base in central defence, Danny Rose keep Wilfried Zaha quiet and Christian Eriksen knit everything together in his floating role in attack. “I think that showed the team was unsettled,” Pochettino said. “When the team is unsettled it is so difficult in the way you want to perform. I am not complaining. It is only that in football it is so easy to discuss situations and when the focus wasn’t to play football or to try to improve it is not easy to play. When you are focused it shows in the first-half performance of the team. I am so happy to recover that feeling. Now keep pushing. It is the first step.” By the end it was strange to think this had been billed as a potential banana skin for Spurs. That said, they have been stodgy against deep defences in recent months and few teams are better at spoiling a spectacle than Palace, who used their counterattacking expertise to great effect when they won at Manchester United last month. Roy Hodgson’s side were blown away here, though, and Pochettino put that down to Spurs rediscovering their intensity, aggressiveness and togetherness. “When you have all these things, you see the quality we have,” the Argentinian said. Palace’s suffering began when a peach of a long ball from Alderweireld drifted over Mamadou Sakho’s head and gave Son the chance to control with his left thigh, skip round Gary Cahill and wrongfoot Palace’s goalkeeper, Vicente Guaita, with a shot that bobbled inside the near post in the 10th minute. Plan A was out of the window for Palace, whose increased adventure gave Spurs space to attack. In the 21st minute Serge Aurier sauntered forward from right-back, received a pass from Son and saw a low cross go in off Patrick van Aanholt. Poor Van Aanholt. The left-back was horribly exposed by Andros Townsend’s failure to give him enough cover and Spurs made it 3-0 after another fast raid down that flank, Son meeting Aurier’s deep cross with a ferocious left-footed volley at the far post. Son was in a waspish mood and he was involved in the fourth goal too, spinning clear in the middle and finding Harry Kane, whose cross from the right presented Érik Lamela with an easy finish. “We are unhappy with our first-half performance and we are all - manager, coaching staff and players - happy to accept responsibility,” Hodgson said. “We didn’t show the intensity I hoped we would. But I don’t want to take too much away from Tottenham.” After a gloomy few weeks everything felt lighter in Pochettino’s world. Spurs, who visit Olympiakos in the Champions League on Wednesday, had taken their foot off the gas long before the end.