The speaker, John Bercow, has said the House of Commons will reconvene from Wednesday morning, as opposition parties called on Boris Johnson to resign for unlawfully asking the Queen to prorogue parliament. In a statement on College Green in Westminster, Bercow said the Commons would sit from 11.30am on Wednesday following the judgment that the suspension of parliament was unlawful. He said there would be no prime minister’s questions on that day but there would be scope for urgent questions, ministerial statements and emergency debate applications that could hold Johnson to account. The prime minister was in New York at the UN general assembly when the ruling was made but he later gave an interview to the BBC saying he strongly disagreed with the supreme court judgment and claiming his attempts to carry out Brexit had been “not made much easier by this kind of stuff in parliament or in the courts”. He said he would respect the law but went on to hint at the possibility of another prorogation to allow a Queen’s speech. “I don’t think the justices remotely excluded the possibility of having a Queen’s speech but what we will certainly do is ensure parliament has plenty of time to debate Brexit,” he said. Corbyn, who brought forward his Labour conference speech by 24 hours to Tuesday afternoon in order to return to parliament on Wednesday, led calls for the prime minister to consider his position. “It demonstrates a contempt for democracy and an abuse of power by him,” he told conference delegates in Brighton. “I will be in touch immediately to demand that parliament is recalled so that we can question the prime minister, demand that he obeys the law that has been passed by parliament, and recognise that our parliament is elected by our people to hold our government to account. “I invite Boris Johnson, in the historic words, to consider his position and become the shortest-serving prime minister there’s ever been.” Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, said Johnson should resign and called for a no-confidence vote in his leadership if he refuses to do so. She told Sky News: “If the rules of democracy are to mean anything then I think a prime minister with any honour would tender his resignation today … If the prime minister isn’t prepared to do the decent and honourable thing then I think parliament should quickly come together to force this prime minister from office.” Jo Swinson, the Lib Dem leader, said: “This confirms what we already knew – Boris Johnson isn’t fit to be prime minister. He’s misled Queen and country, and unlawfully silenced the people’s representatives. I’m on my way to resume my duties in the Commons and stop Brexit altogether.”  The Observer breaks the story that Boris Johnson has sought legal advice on closing parliament for five weeks Other media organisations begin to receive leaks that Johnson will make a statement on prorogation Three privy counsellors, including Jacob Rees-Mogg, travel to Balmoral to tell the Queen of the prorogation plan. Cabinet ministers are informed by conference call Tens of thousands protest against prorogation. Cross-party group of MPs steps up preparation for blocking no deal when parliament makes a brief return Parliament returns and the prime minister loses six votes in six days. MPs vote to prevent a no-deal Brexit, and refuse Johnson's attempts to force them into a general election. Legal campaigner Gina Miller vows to continue her “fight for democracy” after the high court dismissed her claim that the prime minister acted unlawfully in giving advice to the Queen to suspend parliament at a time of momentous political upheaval. Parliament is dissolved amid chaotic scenes as some MPs hold up signs saying they have been silenced, try to prevent Speaker John Bercow leaving the chamber, and  sing the Red Flag. The court of session in Scotland rules that Boris Johnson’s decision to prorogue parliament for five weeks was unlawful. The case will go to the supreme court. The Supreme court begins three-day hearing to join together all the appeals and legal challenges to the prorogation. The judges unanimously decided that prorogation was justiciable, and it was in the power of the court to rule on it. They additionally found that the prorogation was unlawful, as it had the effect of preventing parliament from being able to carry out its constitutional functions. The court found that the prime minister’s advice to the Queen was unlawful, void and of no effect. Their unanimous judgement was that parliament had not been prorogued. Parliament is due to go back to work. Condemnation also came from Nigel Farage, the Brexit party leader, who stopped short of calling for Johnson to resign but urged the prime minister to sack Dominic Cummings, his most senior aide who is thought to have been behind the prorogation plan. “The calling of a Queen’s speech and prorogation is the worst political decision ever. Dominic Cummings must go,” he said. In New York, where the verdict was delivered at 5.30am, the prime minister and his aides had a series of instant and tricky decisions to make. Officials with Johnson had said it would take time to digest what they called an “extraordinary” ruling and provide a response, and there was no indication when or how this would come. The prime minister was scheduled to make what had been billed as the major Brexit-related speech of his two-day trip at about 8am (1pm BST), telling US business leaders and investors about how the country would change after departure. Johnson was expected to have a series of bilateral talks, including with President Donald Trump and Ireland’s Leo Varadkar, and to make his speech to the general assembly. Johnson and his team face a difficult decision on whether to keep to this agenda, or to head to London. One option could be to take the prime ministerial plane back to London late on Tuesday rather than, as planned, first thing on Wednesday. If the current schedule is maintained, Johnson would not be back in No 10 until late Wednesday night – a long delay amid calls for his resignation. Speaking to reporters on the flight over, Johnson had said he would not resign if the case went against him. Conservative MPs were largely silent on the issue but Rory Stewart, who lost the whip over Brexit last month, called for a new cross-party effort to pass a Brexit deal.