The decision to disqualify an Alaskan high school swimmer for wearing a swimsuit that exposed too much of her buttocks has been reversed after coming under heavy criticism. Lauren Langford, a swimming coach in Anchorage, published an online account of the disqualification over the weekend. “The rest of her team was wearing the same uniform, and she was the only one disqualified,” Langford said. “It is my opinion that she has been targeted and singled out over the course of the last year.” Langford later told the Washington Post she believed that race may have been a factor in the disqualification. “All of these girls wearing suits the same way and the only girl who gets disqualified is a mixed-race girl with rounder, curvier features,” Langford told the newspaper. The Anchorage School District, which governs the city’s schools, said that the decision to single out the 17-year-old girl for a uniform violation was “heavy-handed and unnecessary”. On Wednesday, the Alaska School Activities Association said it had agreed to overrule the disqualification. “ASAA has determined the disqualification was the result of misapplication of the rule and as a result is being overturned,” it said in a statement. The district had confirmed earlier this week that the swimsuit was considered to be in compliance with national rules and had been used without incident at three prior meets. The National Federation of State High School Associations in August notified high school coaches of a rule change that allows for disqualification of an athlete if a uniform is not within guidelines. “There is a growing trend in high school swimming and diving of athletes wearing training and competitive suits in a manner that contradicts with the intention of their original design and manufacture,” the NFHS executive director, Karissa Niehoff, wrote in a memo. “Specifically, suits are being worn in such a way as to expose the athlete’s buttocks. This issue is not gender-specific and is occurring in various states across the country.” Langford said the renewed emphasis on modesty is well-intended but has gotten out of hand, especially when the rule is vague. “It does not state that that coverage of the buttocks needs to be full coverage,” Langford said. “That’s something that we have gotten carried away with. If we are going to police this rule and if it’s not a thong or a G-string, then it is in compliance.” One of Alaska’s top swimmers who had just won her race was disqualified by a ref because of how her school-issued swimsuit fit her body. The constant policing of women’s bodies is offensive, sexist, and wrong. This must end. https://t.co/DwzvOSiqLz Tennis champion and longtime women’s rights activist Billie Jean King criticized the decision to disqualify the swimmer. King tweeted on Tuesday: “One of Alaska’s top swimmers who had just won her race was disqualified by a ref because of how her school-issued swimsuit fit her body. The constant policing of women’s bodies is offensive, sexist, and wrong. This must end.” Calls and emails to the referee who made the disqualification have not been returned.