Another year, another week, another big win for the Patriots. It doesn’t matter if the coaching staff is ripped apart, or if the greatest tight end to ever play the game walks away before he even turns 30, or if big-time contributors from last year’s championship team leave during free agency, or if the quarterback is 42 bleeping years old. If it weren’t so thrilling, it would be exhausting. Sometimes the Patriots start slowly. They can be sluggish through the early months of the season. Bill Belichick likes to experiment, always with an eye towards December and January: he’s not playing for October. But sometimes everything slots perfectly into place. His teams coalesce into a juggernaut from the get go. After their 33-3 thumping of the Steelers on the opening Sunday of the 2019 season, it looks like it will be the latter. Pittsburgh are expected to be one of the top contenders in the AFC. The Patriots dispatched them with the kind of brutal efficiency that signaled to the league that they are as good as ever. The Steelers couldn’t move the ball on offense. The Patriots revamped offensive line effortlessly pushed the Steelers front seven backward. Receivers ran wide open. Tom Brady threw for 341 yards. It could have easily been 500. And he did so without Antonio Brown, the team’s latest addition and one of the best receivers in football. (Brown is currently under investigation from the league after a civil suit that claims he raped his former trainer. Whether or not he ever sees the field for the Patriots remains an open question. Brown’s attorney says his client denies the allegations.) The results are the same. But the style, as ever, is evolving in real time. Belichick is a shapeshifter. It’s the key to his unprecedented success. Losing Rob Gronkowski – the greatest to ever play tight end – was an incalculable blow. Most teams would dip into the draft to find their next star or scotch-tape their way through a season with a grizzly veteran and a talented yet unrefined rookie. Not Belichick. He overhauled the team’s offensive design, subbing in a wide receiver for a tight end. During their win over the Steelers, the Patriots ran 25 plays without a tight end on the field. During the entire 2018 season, New England ran only 24 offensive plays with zero tight ends on the field. Belichick redefined the geography of the Patriots offense. If there is one thing that distinguishes the coaches who have had sustained periods of success – Belichick, Bill Walsh, Chuck Noll – it is that they have always been able to evolve. They are crazed self-evaluators: great is never good enough. They figure out when it’s time to bin a winning formula and implement a new one. Nobody has consistently adapted as much as Belichick, this is just his latest volume. And this may be his most devastating team since the Patriots went 16-0 in the 2007 season. Yet dig deep enough and you find the question marks. Offensive lines and pass rush win Super Bowls. The right line can elevate an average quarterback into a championship-caliber one. Consistent pressure can vaporize the skills of even the very best. Creating pressure on the opposing quarterback is the Patriots’ biggest weakness. They pressured the Steelers on just 6% of dropbacks in week one, dead stinking last in the NFL (the league average last season was 23%). No team during the 2018 season had a single game where they pressured the quarterback on fewer than 8% of snaps and won. Having a $25m star pass-rusher is not part of the Patriot Way. They’ve had a pair on their roster in recent years, but they let Chandler Jones and Trey Flowers walk. Instead, the Patriots scheme pressures. They have the best secondary in the league. The Patriots look to contain and confuse quarterbacks on the back end, buying the team’s pass rush a couple of extra beats to get home. It was enough against the Steelers, but pressuring on fewer than 15-20% per game is an unsustainable model. The Patriots pressured opponents on 33% of dropbacks in 2018, the sixth-best mark in the league. But when Flowers walked out the door he took his 42.5 pressures with him. Rather than pen Flowers to a big deal, the Patriots are looking to recreate his figure by committee. Michael Bennett joined in the offseason, fresh of a 34-pressure season in Philadelphia, a number good for 23rd in the league. Deatrich Wise and rookie Chase Winovich, both young, talented players, will look to make up the difference. There are also potential problems among the men employed to protect Brady. Tackle Trent Brown left in the offseason; center David Andrews, one of the league’s best, is out for the season with blood clots; right tackle Marcus Cannon went down in week one with an injury. He will miss time, but not the whole season. That group was dominant last season. They conceded pass pressure on just 22% of snaps, the best in the league. For the uninitiated, that’s a bonkers number. Some of that was thanks to Brady getting rid of the ball quickly, but mostly it was due to the big guys up front. Can their replacements maintain that level? Week one suggests it’s possible. But the offensive line’s margin for error is slim to none. If the team suffers even more attrition over the course of the season, it could derail everything they’re trying to do on offense. Which brings us to Brady. He will turn 43 this season, but he looked 23 on Sunday. He remains homicidally competitive. Never has he been surrounded by such receiving talent: Julian Edelman, a Super Bowl MVP and Brady’s best buddy; Josh Gordon, revitalized, sober, a Hall of Fame talent who was downright unstoppable on Sunday night; N’Keal Harry, the only wide receiver selected with a first-round draft pick in the Brady-Belichick era; Phillip Dorsett, one of the quickest players in the league. And if Brown’s legal issues don’t stop him playing, they will have one of the finest receivers of his generation. How do you stop that? You probably don’t. The most fearsome franchise in US sports won it all again and still improved. They’re deep, multi-faceted and laden with star power on both sides of the ball, as well as facing the easiest schedule of any team in the league by DVOA. Issues in the trenches may doom them, as it has many sides dubbed a “dream team”. But there’s something different about this because everything is always different with the Patriots. Except winning.