To make a half-decent sequel one must have a fundamental understanding of what prompted the demand for it in the first place, something which seems to have been lost on the makers behind such epic turkeys as Exorcist II: The Heretic, Jaws: The Revenge and Highlander II: The Quickening to name just three from a very long list of ill-advised follow-ups to movie classics made by numbskulls with no idea what made their predecessors so watchable in the first place. Of course, while it could reasonably be argued that the biannual production of Deadline Day on Sky Sports News is already two days of hysterical transfer chatter most right-thinking people could do without, the brains behind this weirdly popular circus clearly don’t concur. To this end, the closure of the transfer window across Not The Premier League Or Championship is being lamely marketed on the network’s website as Deadline Day 2. Eschewing the expensive production values that entail placing camera crews and reporters at training grounds the length and breadth of the country to check in on clubs doing last-minute business, they have instead focused on the cheaper option of scouring the newswires and Social Media Disgrace Twitter to keep us updated on which players are going where. Footballers like … … Arsenal’s Henrikh Mkhitaryan, who has gone to Roma. … Inter forward Mauro Icardi, off for a loan at PSG. … Southampton’s Mario Lemina, who might be going to Galatasaray. … Nasty Leeds’s Laurens De Bock, who has gone to Sunderland. … Bournemouth’s Asmir Begovic, who is going to Qarabag. … Nottingham Forest’s Arvin Appiah, who is going to Almería. … Liverpool’s Bobby Duncan, who is going to Fiorentina. … Liverpool’s Ryan Kent, who is going to the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers. … the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers’ Graham Dorrans who might be going to Kilmarnock. … Chelsea’s Kenedy, who is going to Getafe. … Manchester United’s Matteo Darmian, who has gone to Parma. … Nottingham Forest’s Liam Bridcutt, who is one of up to 20 players going to Bolton as the recently-rescued-from-oblivion League One side hastily try to assemble a squad so they are no longer forced to field a team of 12-year-olds. Much like Deadline Day, its sequel has thus far been largely underwhelming even if the tantalising prospect of some big-name cameos still remains. Will Neymar leave? Will Eriksen stay? After a summer of ill-informed but thoroughly entertaining nonsense, these and other questions will be definitively answered once the final scenes are filmed and we have a long overdue wrap. “We have young players and they’ve got to learn to score those nasty little tap-ins that I did” – Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s ego continues to develop at a pace much greater than the evolution of his Manchester United side as he figures that things would be much rosier at Old Trafford if only they had a striker as lethal as him. Football Weekly will be in this general vicinity. Meanwhile, the live shows are heading to Manchester and Leeds. “I am unsettled. Sheffield United are in the top division, and so far The Fiver, and Big Paper in general, have not only failed to deliver a broadside of witty zingers (may be another reason for that), but have also produced a number of disturbingly heartwarming profiles. Before you turn us into the Brighton of the North and commission a column from our second-choice right-back or something, could you say something both sarcastic and a bit harsh about, say, Enda Stevens, and set the world back on its axis?” – Jon Millard. “Unlike The Fiver, I’m a cultured soul and so, rather than watch Spurs in the north London derby, I chose to spend Sunday at the Proms attending a performance of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky’s Symphony No 2 in C minor, a piece that was an initially joyful success before rapidly fading and considered thoroughly unsatisfactory by its originator due to a raft of basic errors. I could have just gone to the game instead” – Noble Francis. “Re: Friday’s Bits and Bobs. You know that Astana is in Kazakhstan, don’t you?” – Gareth Bayford (and 1,056 others). Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Jon Millard. Romelu Lukaku says “we’re going backwards” in the fight against discrimination and called for strong action after being subjected to racist chanting by fans of serial offenders Cagliari. “Football is a game to be enjoyed by everyone and we shouldn’t accept any form of discrimination that will put our game in shame,” said the Inter forward. Former Charlton and Southend boss Chris Powell will work under England manager Gareth Southgate this season as the FA rolls out the next phase of its scheme to tackle the under-representation of BAME coaches in England. After spending three weeks with Atalanta, Mrtn Skrtl’s contract has been terminated. Arsenal whelp Matteo Guendouzi is in for the knacked Paul Pogba in France’s squad for their upcoming Euro 2020 qualifiers. Sheffield United causing bother dept: Oli McBurnie has apparently addressed his Scotland teammates after pre-match tunnel footage emerged of him saying he hoped to avoid an international call-up. “Hopefully we draw a line under that one now and move on,” tooted assistant boss Steven Reid. England’s Jade Moore reckons the scheduling of Women’s Super League games is a bit bobbins and has disrupted attempts to capitalise on post-World Cup good vibes. “I never understand how we don’t have enough weeks in the year to play a game a week,” she sighed. “I don’t get why we cram games in.” Meanwhile, the WSL is set to be broadcast overseas for the first time this season, which will see the competition shown live to viewers in Mexico, Central America, the Dominican Republic, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark, it says here. And Casemiro thinks he can put his finger on why Real Madrid can’t win. “What’s lacking? Everything,” he bawled, after a 2-2 draw with Villarreal in which Gareth Bale scored twice and got sent off on a lively night for the Welshman. Sid Lowe. Poets. The Basque derby. That’ll be a quiet night in at the library … not! Come and get your juicy Premier League talking points – we’ve got 10 of them, right here, including more tedious references to the Blades. Gonzalo Higuaín looked like he wouldn’t have a future at Juventus a few weeks ago, but the big-boned striker rolled the clock back and starred in the 4-3 win over Napoli, writes Nicky Bandini. Why is Germany rocking? Because Union Berlin beat Dortmund and the world feels upside down, roars Andy Brassell, while holding on to the nearest thing that is bolted to the floor. PSG’s transfer strategy is bad news for their academy graduates, write Adam White and Eric Devin. Fitter. Happier. More productive. Jonathan Wilson channels Radiohead as he explains why Arsenal are now physically superior to Spurs. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!