So what was the Boris Johnson masterplan?Spend the summer insisting Britain will leave the EU at the end of October, blame parliament for trying to stop it and make a series of eyecatching spending announcements. Then call an election for 15 October, before Brexit day, to secure the majority needed to put the plan into practice. Easy! What’s gone wrong?All was going well with the Johnson plan, masterminded by his chief adviser and Vote Leave supremo Dominic Cummings, until Labour turned down the offer of an election. Under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, governments need a two-thirds majority to secure one, so Labour’s refusal was crucial. Meanwhile, parliament has passed the “Benn-Burt bill”, forcing the prime minister to seek a Brexit extension by 19 October to avoid no deal. It leaves Johnson in a bind. He has said he would rather “die in a ditch” than ask for a Brexit extension, but the new law means he will have to if he remains prime minister. Should he do so, or if an election happens with Britain still in the EU, Johnson risks losing voters to Nigel Farage’s Brexit party. What is stopping Labour backing an election?Jeremy Corbyn has been demanding an election for months, but there are several factors behind the current refusal to go to the polls. Labour claims Johnson has proved he cannot be trusted not to force through a no-deal Brexit and want to make sure he obeys the law and secures an extension. Forcing Johnson to delay Brexit hands a big advantage to Labour, because it means he has to break his promise to leave the EU at the end of October “come what may”. That could see Leave voters flock to Farage. On top of all that, many Labour MPs do not want an election. So will we have an election in October? An election could still happen before the Brexit deadline of 31 October, but it looks unlikely. On Monday, the government will have another go at securing the two-thirds majority needed to force an election. There is no sign it will succeed. Another option could see the government call a vote of no confidence in itself. If successful, this would start a 14-day period in which someone else could form a government. If no one can, an election is triggered. Crucially, a no-confidence vote only needs a simple majority. So if Johnson could find another party to back the motion, say the SNP, he could be successful. Isn’t having no confidence in yourself a bit daft?Apart from the obvious absurdity of the whole idea, there are other problems. First, he may not win the vote (to make things even more absurd, opposition parties could vote that they did have confidence in him, to keep him in post). There is also a timing issue: once the 14-day period has elapsed, there is then a five-week election period, which would see an election at the end of October – by which time Johnson would have had to do his legal duty and ask for the Brexit extension he has vowed never to do. How else could he force an election?Johnson could introduce a law to sidestep the Fixed-term Parliaments Act. The one-line bill would simply call for an election on 15 October. However, such a bill could be amended. Opponents could try to change the election date until after 31 October, or make 16- and 17-year-olds and EU nationals eligible to vote. Will we have an election this year?Once Labour and other minority parties are happy that no deal has been put off, they will embrace an election – so it could happen in November or December. They will probably need to secure one by holding a no-confidence vote in Johnson’s government. If the government and former Tories don’t want an election, winning that vote may not be straightforward. Can Johnson avoid asking for a Brexit extension?There are ways to avoid this, but they are nuclear options. He could resign before he has to ask for an extension; he could find a way to ignore or challenge the law making him do it; or he could just disobey it. What on earth happens if he resigns?Constitutional experts are grappling with what would happen next. Johnson would remain prime minister until someone else took up the job, but it would be up to the Queen to call upon the person best-placed to command the confidence of parliament. Would that be Corbyn, or a figure like Ken Clarke? Would Johnson really allow Corbyn to be installed as PM? The fact it is even being talked about is a sign of the current political madness. Could Johnson really disobey the law? What happens then? His team are also looking at ways in which they could avoid asking for a Brexit extension. He could challenge the legality of the bill passed to force him to ask for an extension, but legal experts suggest it would have little chance of success. If he simply ignores the Benn-Burt bill, one legal opinion suggests he would end up “in contempt of an order of the court and would be exposed to a full range of sanctions”. Not ideal. Have we definitely avoided a no deal?Despite last week’s anti-no deal law, there is still uncertainty about whether Johnson will respect it. The law only delays Brexit, though, pushing the no-deal cliff edge into next year. We could all be here again in a few months. Has Johnson already blown his chances?The past week cannot be categorised as a good one for the prime minister, but aides hope ordinary voters won’t care about Westminster ups and downs, and will give him credit for his commitment to leaving the EU. That hope will surely be tested in a general election soon, but the exact timing remains beyond Downing Street’s control.