The third title in the comic book-inspired sci-fi looter-shooter series takes its familiar cast of antiheroes on another hyperactive, ultra-violent alien hunt across a range of post-apocalyptic planetscapes. The more complex progression system and an incredible arsenal of weapons will thrill fans and newcomers alike. Out 13 September This turn-based road trip adventure looks almost cute with its simple, toy-like visuals, but lying beneath is a chillingly uncompromising post-apocalyptic survival game, where players have to drive across America gathering fuel and other resources, while deciding on who to save and who to leave behind. An utterly compelling ride. Out 19 September The classic Game Boy adventure reimagined for the modern era, with beautiful, colourful visuals enhancing the original’s isometric viewpoint and simplified combat system. Series hero Link finds himself shipwrecked on a remote island and must explore its villages, forests and dungeons to find a way out. A soulful quest filled with memorable characters, puzzles and enemies. Out 20 September Experimental Melbourne studio House House probably didn’t expect its goose simulator to become a cult social media hit, but thanks to its lovely pastel graphics and honking, flapping protagonist, that’s exactly what happened. Players control the titular bird as it annoys the inhabitants of a small village, biting them and stealing their stuff. Out 20 September In January, Destiny developer Bungie announced its split from publisher Activision; Shadowkeep is the first game expansion to be released since the sensational divorce. Featuring a new campaign, fresh multiplayer maps and a rebuilt version of the Moon setting, its an ambitious package designed both to please fanatics and tease newcomers to the sci-fi shooter series. Out 1 October Following highly successful miniaturised versions of the Super Nintendo and PlayStation consoles, Sega is getting in on the retro hardware act. The teeny new Mega Drive comes complete with two three-button control pads and 40 classic games, including Sonic, Comix Zone and Streets of Rage II. It’ll be on the Christmas lists of 16bit veterans everywhere. Out 4 October Once the biggest selling entertainment brands in the world, Call of Duty has seen a few rough years, but the latest addition promises a return to form, taking us back to the contemporary, controversy-baiting combat of the Modern Warfare titles. Expect a globe-hopping campaign and turbo-charged online multiplayer. Out 25 October The latest super massive role-playing adventure from Obsidian Entertainment (Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, Fallout: New Vegas) is a Wild West adventure set amid the galaxy’s most distant colonies. Players control a band of space misfits taking on the sinister mega corporations ruling this new frontier. Promises to be both epic and darkly comic. Out 25 October The supercute ghostbusting series returns, with a greater array of weapons and gadgets, and a larger more open environment in the form of a luxurious abandoned hotel, crammed with spooks to catch. Lead character Luigi is now accompanied by a gelatinous doppelgänger who can access different areas. He is called Gooigi. Literally only Nintendo could get away with this. Out 31 October Now operating his own studio with seemingly few creative constraints, Metal Gear Solid creator Hideo Kojima has crafted a bizarre science-fiction fantasy in which a delivery man must save the isolated members of a dying society while caring for babies in a portable artificial womb. God, when will video games get some new ideas? Out 8 November The first major Pokémon titles to arrive on a home console rather than a handheld, Sword and Shield feature co-operative raids and open-world environments as well as Pokémon that can transform and grow to a giant size. Set in the Galar region, which resembles Britain, the games unexpectedly feature a (family-friendly) version of the Cerne Abbas giant. Out 15 November Set in the chaotic period between Episodes III and IV, the latest Star Wars video game conversion features new Jedi Cal Kestis battling Imperial forces on a range of familiar worlds. A five-year project from Titanfall and Apex Legends developer Respawn Entertainment, Fallen Order promises dramatic Force powers and complex lightsaber combat seemingly inspired by the Dark Souls and Ninja Gaiden titles. Out 15 November Dreamcast veterans have waited almost 20 years for the groundbreaking Shenmue series of open-world martial arts adventures to continue. Barring some last-minute calamity, we’re almost there. Ryo returns on a new quest, exploring picturesque villages, making friends and combating the local heavies. It will look dated to newcomers, but fans will surely be taken straight back to a golden era of game design. Out 19 November Other shooters come and go, but Doom really does seem to be eternal. Unashamedly old school in its “run down corridors and shoot stuff” design, the game adds to the fluidity of movement with wall-running and double dash capabilities, while the armoury is boosted with a grappling hook-equipped super shotgun. Macho, bloody and ridiculous, Doom Eternal is the bleu steak of video games. Out 22 November The latest turn-based sci fi strategy sim from Julian Gollop, the creator of the legendary XCom series, has players defending a near-future Earth from alien invaders that mutate and evolve in response to the player’s tactics. Between fights, you must research and develop devastating new weapons, a gameplay rhythm that will be delightfully familiar to XCom veterans. Out December