Britain is five weeks away from the ruinous and dangerous position of leaving the European Union without a deal. There is no sign of the country having made any progress towards getting one. Boris Johnson did not meet the 30-day deadline set by Angela Merkel to come up with an alternative solution to replace the Irish backstop to resolve the Brexit impasse with the European Union. This week he suffered a devastating judicial blow in the supreme court over an attempt to suspend parliament for an unprecedented five weeks at a time of political crisis to evade scrutiny. In a worrying sign of how far the Tories have embraced radical populism, its MPs responded by calling for the court to be abolished. And instead of remorse Mr Johnson offered offence in parliament, couching his bluster in the jingoistic terms of “betrayal”, “surrender” and “sabotage”. He is exasperated that his opponents refuse to fall into the trap of calling for an early election. Mr Johnson, like his predecessor Theresa May, describes Brexit as the will of the British people. It isn’t – not least because there was no shared vision as to what “leave” actually meant – but the language is designed to remove dissent, and any acknowledgment of diverse voices and views. The contraction of Brexit and the national interest has curdled and soured British politics. While the result deserves respect, almost half the country opposed it. During the referendum campaign Mr Johnson, a prominent leaver, did not engage in a deliberative, honest and respectful argument with opponents – a historic failure in light of the gravity of the decision. In office he has continued to offer insouciance and belligerence. This must end. The nation will only be able to move on when the breach between leavers and remainers can be addressed in a calm and considered way. The reopening of parliament had offered the prime minister an opportunity to make amends for his errant behaviour, but humility does not come easy to him. Mr Johnson’s embrace of a hard Brexit might be explained because it offers a revolutionary way to a new social, political and economic order based on a weaker set of environmental, consumer and worker rights. Northern Ireland could pay a very high price for such a foolish move. So could the economy. The Bank of England estimates that the shock of a hard Brexit would see GDP decline by about 5.5%, an economic shock comparable to the 2008 financial crash. Then the UK economy took five years to get back to the size it was before the recession – and wages have yet to recover in real terms for the average worker. In his book Beyond Brexit, Vernon Bogadnor warns that in leaving the EU, Britain could again become a country with no legal remedy for breaches of human rights. At present, when courts make a declaration of incompatibility between convention rights and British law, ministers act to put things right. That might not be the case in the years ahead. We could become a “paradise for an overweening executive”. Brexit populism is pouring arsenic into the water supply of our national conversation. Brexit raised questions that it cannot answer because it identified problems that politicians did not recognise and were unprepared to solve. They should start. Only dullness in parliamentary government can heal the divisions.