James Maddison’s turn as a roving No 10 was the standout display as Manchester United broke a three‑game run without a win at Old Trafford. Leicester City may have lost to Marcus Rashford’s early penalty but their 22-year-old midfielder lit up the contest via a performance that illustrated how he would immediately make Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side better. Maddison embodies the type of quick-minded, technically astute player the United manager wants. To hear his manager, Brendan Rodgers, say Maddison has a “swagger” and is reminiscent of “Philippe Coutinho” strengthened that sense while also highlighting the situation vacant at United marked “playmaker”. In Jesse Lingard’s injury-enforced absence Juan Mata was given the role by Solskjær on Saturday but failed to spark and was withdrawn 20 minutes from the end. Even if Lingard had been fit there remain doubts about his best position, and having not scored or made a single assist in the league in 2019 there is a further question regarding his worth. Of Maddison, Rodgers said: “He’s got big potential. I think he’s going to improve in his game, the management of his game, but he’s a big talent and we’re just trying to prepare him in order for him to play at the highest level for as long as he can. He has to be consistent, [but is] a really humble boy, has a lovely swagger, a lovely arrogance, and he is a good kid who will get better. He loves his football.” Against a United who flared at the start before fading, Maddison propelled the visitors. The manager had him running the game in a manner that showed zero intimidation about performing at the home of English football’s 20-times champions. “He’s got a really strong belief in his ability [and] it’s not misplaced,” Rodgers said. “He’s a very good player, fantastic talent but is constantly working to be better which is what you want.” Maddison could be spied in the classic trequartista position, or drifting wide to either flank, or dropping into his own half to orchestrate the contest. This movement caused the comparison with Coutinho, his manager citing it as a potential issue. “He’s the type of player who will drift from position to position,” Rodgers said. “I remember working with Coutinho at Liverpool, sometimes he’d play inside, sometimes he’d drift off the side. James is a little bit like that in terms of positioning. He will continue to work. “His job was to create and score goals, he’ll keep working on that. He has a threat to get in behind, he was unlucky when the keeper makes a save with his ankle, I think it was [in the first half]. He was unfortunate there. That’s what it’s about for him: numbers, creating goals, scoring goals. It’s only his second season at this level and he’s already showing great talent.” In the summer United were reportedly interested in the former Norwich City player and Solskjær will surely consider targeting him in the future. Maddison’s talent would appear an ideal addition as the Norwegian continues his rebuild. As, too, would his strut. “It does help [as a No 10],” Rodgers said. “It’s having that confidence. He certainly has that, but he’s a humble boy behind it. People look at it, will think it’s misplaced at times, but it’s not. “He’s a really, really talented player who is learning that to get to the top you have to work and you have to work hard.”