Where I live in Hackney, London, there is a Turkish kebab shop on every corner. The mum or granny of the family often sits in the window, rolling gozleme and bases for their pizza-like lahmacun: I challenge you to find a better, cheaper lunch. I rarely make them at home though as I’m not as adept at rolling, but I found myself out of town the other day and craving them. So this was dinner, with an ezme salad featuring mandarin, inspired by a recent trip to the restaurant Bubala in London, where they put grapefruit in theirs. I am sure neither of these dishes are traditional: I’ve simplified the lahmacun dough and added a few things like harissa to the ezme salad, but that’s exactly what recipes should be, and what I love about where I live in London: a tapestry of food, people and culture. Lahmacun are often nicknamed “Turkish pizzas.” There are as many variations of these flatbreads in Turkey as there are pizzas in Italy, from bazlama to manaqish, depending on where you are. The breads vary in how the dough comes together and how they are cooked, as well as what they are topped with. I obviously go for the vegetarian version: here, earthy spices lift finely chopped sweet peppers and late-summer tomatoes. Prep 45 minRest 1 hrCook 5 minMakes 4 pizzas For the pizza dough350ml luke-warm water1 tbsp dried yeast1 pinch sugar2 tbsp olive oil500g strong white bread flour (or 00 pasta flour)1 pinch salt For the topping2 red peppers, deseeded and chopped3 tomatoes, finely chopped1 fresh green chilli2 garlic cloves2 tsp cumin seeds1 tsp ground coriander1 tbsp tomato pureeZest of ½ lemon To serve1 handful fresh mint, roughly chopped 1 handful fresh parsley, roughly chopped1 tsp sumacExtra-virgin olive oil Mix the warm water, yeast, sugar and oil in a bowl, and leave for about 10 minutes. In a stand mixer with a dough hook, mix the flour and salt for a few seconds. Then, with the motor still running, slowly add the liquid, and keep mixing until the dough no longer sticks to the sides and is soft, glossy and stretchy – about five minutes. Alternatively, you can mix the dough and then knead by hand for 10 minutes. Stretch the dough between two hands, if you can see through the thin layer of dough that forms then it’s ready. Cover the dough so it’s airtight,  and leave somewhere warm for about an hour. Once it has doubled in size, turn out and knead for a few more minutes, until soft. Heat the oven to its hottest setting and put a pizza stone or heavy-based frying pan in to get really hotside. Finely chop or blitz the topping ingredients in a food processor to a rough, salsa-like texture. Season well with salt, then pour the topping into a sieve and stir until most of the liquid has drained off, and you’re left with a thick, tomatoey salsa-sauce. On a well floured surface, split the dough into four and roll each piece out into a 5mm-thick round. Remove the hot pan from the oven and carefully put a circle of dough into the pan. Put two tablespoons of the sauce on top and spread evenly in a nice, thin layer. Bake for about five minutes, until bubbly, golden and charred at the edges. Remove from the oven, sprinkle with the fresh herbs and sumac, then finish with a drizzle of olive oil. Repeat with the rest of the dough and topping and serve immediately. An absolute staple of Turkish cuisine. You will find a bowl of this spicy salad as part of many meze spreads. I first tried it in an east London takeaway, alongside falafel, Turkish feta and stewed green beans, and now I can’t get enough. Leave the flavours to mingle for a couple of hours if you can. Prep 20 minServes 4 as a side 2 ripe vine tomatoes, finely chopped 1 red onion, peeled and finely chopped1 garlic clove, peeled and finely chopped1 mandarin or clementine, peeled and segmented 2 red peppers, finely chopped½ cucumber, finely chopped2 tbsp capers½ bunch parsley, leaves pickedZest and juice of ½ a lemon2 tbsp pomegranate molasses2 tbsp olive oil1 pinch each salt and pepper1 tbsp harissa½ tsp sumac1 pinch chilli flakes Put the tomatoes, onion, garlic, mandarin, peppers, cucumber, capers and parsley in a serving bowl. In a jar or small bowl, mix or shake the lemon juice and zest, pomegranate molasses, olive oil, salt, pepper and harissa together. Pour this over the salad ingredients, toss together, then sprinkle over the sumac and chilli flakes. Serve straight away or put in the fridge, covered, for later.