Featuring his trademark dishevelled blonde hairstyle, a blimp depicting Boris Johnson as a wailing toddler flew high over Westminster earlier this summer. But now, just like the prime minister who has faced a bruising week after a series of humiliating defeats in the Commons, it appears the 23ft balloon has had the wind taken out of it. It will stay grounded when it is inflated with air in Parliament Square on Saturday during protests, the Guardian has discovered, because organisers have balked at the cost of helium. It comes as tens of thousands of demonstrators are expected to take to the streets amid continued protests against Johnson’s decision to suspend parliament this month. Protests will take place in London, including in Parliament Square at 2pm and later outside the gates of Downing Street, and in cities across the country such as Bristol, Nottingham, Norwich, Leeds and Sheffield. The Johnson blimp, inspired by the Donald Trump baby blimp which flew in protest against the US president’s visit to London, cost roughly £3,000. The money was raised through crowdfunding by March for Change, a network of grassroots pro-EU groups. The Johnson blimp features the prime minister wearing a T-shirt with a red bus showing the figure £350m in reference to Vote Leave’s infamous claim during the 2016 referendum campaign that the country sent the sum to the EU each week. One of March for Change’s core group of a dozen organisers, Elle Dormer, revealed that the blimp is not going to be filled with helium “because we feel that some of the wind has been taken out of his sails”, adding: “He’s flying less high these days. He’s grounded … He’s been weighed down by his troubles.” Dormer, a school governor from London who used to work for the Conservative party in the press office, explained that there was a worldwide helium shortage and the cost of the gas has shot up meaning “it would have cost a fortune” to use it. The March for Change rally will feature speeches from former Conservative MP Anna Soubry, who defected to the Independent Group for Change earlier this year, Mandu Reid, leader of the Women’s Equality Party, human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell and broadcaster Paul Mason. Meanwhile, outside Downing Street a separate protest at 2.30pm will feature speakers including the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, Green party co-leader Siân Berry, Laura Parker, the national coordinator of Momentum, and Guardian columnist Owen Jones. A Facebook page for the “Stop the Coup” Downing Street event – which is being organised by Another Europe is Possible, the Green Party and Momentum, among others – is calling for Johnson’s resignation. It reads: “An unelected government is attacking our democracy so that it can drive through its Brexit agenda. We don’t just have the right to resist it – we have a duty. This week will change Britain for ever. Don’t be silent, don’t be absent – stand up and be counted.” In a statement, Berry urged people to take to the streets, adding: “We are witnessing the birth of an inspiring new movement to demand democracy and a key part of that process has to be getting rid of this rotten government and remaining in the EU by giving people the final say. “If we want to stop Brexit, or make Britain a fairer place, we need to stop this abuse of power. It’s not just MPs whose actions matter – we all have agency in this, and we all need to mobilise.” A Momentum spokesman added: “From proroguing parliament to disenfranchising young people, Boris Johnson is trying every trick in the book to stitch up the country and force through his no-deal, Trump-first agenda. We won’t stand for yet another establishment power grab, and that’s why we’re backing the protest on Saturday.” It comes after tens of thousands protested in London and around the UK last weekend against Johnson’s decision to prorogue parliament. 