When your Ashes tour around England extends from days into months, you start to read the local consensus. Pub talk, pundit talk and player talk overlap, sometimes divergent and sometimes repeated. When this year’s subject has been Steve Smith there has been a general despondency; for Australia’s fast bowlers a general disquiet; for the wicketkeeping captain, Tim Paine, more often a general disdain. Perhaps this was given an early boost when a Birmingham reporter asked Paine whether Edgbaston was the most intimidating venue in cricket. Paine’s brush-off was received as an insult, as though a cherished source of national pride was to believe that a hundred drunk idiots dressed as watermelons should strike fear into the sporting heart; as though the Hollies Stand was some modern battlefield where the distant strains of the “Don’t Take Me Home” beer song came from the mouths of an advancing army, washing over the parapets and making the mud tremble. Then there is the perceived risibility of an Australia captain talking about things like decency and respect which, given the history, is not entirely unreasonable. A lot more walk will need to be walked before talk is given weight. Whatever the factors feeding into this discontent, it manifests in Paine being needled as a cricketer: first with the portrayal of him as an accidental captain, then as an insufficient player. The contention is that his place in the side is assured only because there is no suitable alternative as captain since the Cape Town debacle of 2018. England’s players have taken up this line, getting stuck into Paine while he bats about not being good enough to play at international level. It is a bit of an irony given the Test claims of some of England’s batsmen are written on rice paper but it has led to prickly exchanges on the field, most notably between Paine and England’s huddle as he walked off during the third Test at Headingley. A certain amount of the same disregard emanates from home shores too, with cricket followers questioning his ability with the bat. Returns of 5, 34, 23, 4, 11 and 0 from the first three Ashes Tests were meagre enough to amplify this. How much more, then, he would have enjoyed his innings of 58 in the fourth match at Old Trafford. It was the ideal Paine innings: digging in for a long stay, quietly assembling a total but more importantly supporting Smith as his premier batsman built towards a double century. There was an early dropped catch but luck has otherwise been against him. When he came to the crease, the team’s 224 could still have slumped; when he left at 369 it was safe. Much is made of Paine’s first‑class record, most notably the lone century all the way back in 2006. English press colleagues have enjoyed bons mots about his last hundred coming before the invention of the iPhone. The Paine of those young years was a stylish batsman who was expected to make big runs. The later model with his rebuilt fingers does a different job: stitching together innings that are in trouble, working with the lower order, putting together some impressively brave innings since his Test recall in late 2017. Australia cricket followers were spoiled by Adam Gilchrist, who was on another statistical planet with his 17 Test centuries and an average that for most of his career topped 50. Since then every wicketkeeper is expected to match the best batsmen and plenty of batsmen around the world have been pushed into keeping wicket. But look at the history and that is not how it works. Put Gilchrist aside and the next best average for an Australia wicketkeeper is Brad Haddin’s 32.98. Paine sits one run behind him. They are the only two to average more than 30. For a long time keepers did not even average more than 20. Ian Healy and Rod Marsh may have combined for seven centuries but they took 215 Tests to do so, while both averaged less than 28. Those five plus the Bradman-era Bert Oldfield are the only Australia keepers to make more than a thousand runs. Statistically then, Paine has one of the best batting records for Australia in the role. The idea that he needs to be peeling off tons to be worth a place in the side is fantasy. Such players are extremely rare, in any team. There was plenty of excitement about Alex Carey’s work in the World Cup but the idea he could just come in and replicate that in Test cricket should be given pause by Jason Roy’s struggles in this series for England. At Old Trafford Paine stayed marooned on 49 for half an hour, mostly because he got very little of the strike and did not want to squander it when it came along. He allowed Smith to drain England, after which Mitchell Starc would come in and batter them. Paine’s 58 did not become a hundred. Craig Overton moved a ball away and took his edge immediately after tea. But by then it did not matter. By then he’d done enough.