Jeremy Corbyn asks Boris Johnson if it is right that his Brexit strategy involves running down the clock. Johnson attacks what he calls the “surrender bill” again. He challenges the Labour leader to agree to an election. “Or is he frit?” Corbyn says Johnson did not answer the question. He tries again. What proposals have been put to the EU? The fact Johnson won’t answer suggests there are none. If the PM thinks he has made progress, will he publish those proposals? Johnson says you don’t negotiate in public. “We are making substantial progress,” he claims. The PM says he will get a deal. The only thing that is undermining him is “this surrender bill that will lead to more dither and delay”. Corbyn says he cannot be accused of undermining negotiations because no negotiations are taking place. Corbyn says Johnson is refusing to answer questions about food supply. He says the government is spending £100m on an advertising campaign, but refusing to answer the facts. He says the government refused to provide figures to the Poverty Alliance about food supply. What has he got to hide? Johnson repeats the claim that Corbyn would spend £1bn a month on staying in the EU. He says Corbyn will not submit his “surrender bill” to the verdict of the people. Johnson says he thinks the friends of the UK are in Paris and Berlin and in Washington. Corbyn thinks they are in Moscow and Tehran and Caracas. “Corbyn is Caracas,” he says. And Corbyn is calling for a general strike. A shadow minister said Corbyn’s economic policy was “shit or bust”. But it is both, says Johnson. PMQs has never been one of the enlightened features of our political debate. It is a shouting match all too frequently dominated by slogans, displays of machismo and cheap jokes. But even prime ministers who have been most comfortable in such a crude and brutal arena, such as David Cameron, have also acknowledged that they have been under some obligation to answer questions and address matters of policy and detail, and that while insults can get you through some of the time, they won’t work on their own. Today it felt as if PMQs has become even more diminished, because in his first appearance in this arena Johnson seemed to show no interest whatsoever in addressing the issue at hand. He has probably set a new record for dodging questions – he did not even half-answer them, as Theresa May frequently did – and instead he seemed intent on using the entire session to road-test some election slogans, principally his claim that Corbyn is championing a “surrender bill”, and that he is scared of a general election. Johnson was also even more dishonest than usual. Corbyn said Michael Gove told Andrew Marr that food prices would go up in the event of a no-deal Brexit. Johnson claimed Gove said no such thing. But here is the quote. Asked if food prices would go up, Gove said: Some prices may go up. Other prices will come down. Corbyn focused on a no-deal Brexit, and the government’s refusal to publish details of its Operation Yellowhammer assessment. He was dignified and forensic, and grown up in a way that put Johnson to shame. And yet, those Johnson slogans sounded not just rehearsed, but tested. Will they resonate with the public at large? Who knows, but it is not impossible. Johnson to Corbyn: There’s only one chlorinated chicken that I can see in this house, and he’s on that bench. Corbyn to Johnson: He refuses to publish the Yellowhammer documents, and he talks about scaremongering. Where does the information come from, other than his office, in his government?