The BBC appears to have lost sight of the purpose of its procedures (BBC defends censure of Naga Munchetty over Trump comments, theguardian.com, 27 September). The BBC guidelines are not laws. They are there to guide and are, therefore, open to interpretation. They are there to help producers make editorial decisions and, when a question about a programme is raised, to help frame a response. My experience of them is that they are a handy set of tools with enough wiggle room left for programme editors to make a judgment call. Television presenters are human beings. On Breakfast (unlike, say, the news) there is a conversational atmosphere between the presenters, who are expected to interact. And unlike news readers they are expected to project their personalities. The question here is how else should or could Naga Munchetty have reacted when discussing the US president’s undeniably racist, sexist and flagrantly inaccurate comments? Not to have reacted in the measured, humane way she did would have left her looking like some kind of automaton, simply spouting whatever was coming down her earpiece. Invoking the letter of the guidelines is not an adequate response. An ill-considered kneejerk reaction to a single complaint is what has set this off, not Munchetty’s entirely understandable comment.Peter GrimsdaleFormer BBC TV executive, London • There is some muddled thinking in the Hirsch/Henry et al letter (BBC’s flawed Munchetty decision, Journal, 28 September). Of course future BBC journalists won’t be hired on the basis of remaining “impartial” about their experience of racism. The BBC ruling states that Munchetty was justified in describing her feelings. Neither is racism to be endorsed as a legitimate opinion. But BBC journalists are required to avoid airing their political opinions or allowing them to influence the output. I understood that when I worked for the corporation, and did my best to train overseas journalists to do so when they came to work for the World Service. What puzzles me is how the editor or director of Breakfast could have allowed or encouraged Dan Walker to ambush Naga Munchetty live on air. That’s where criticism should lie. And, as so often, the BBC shoots itself in the foot in the way it handles a complaint.Roger HarveyHemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire • Well done. Appropriate and constructive criticism. BBC – you have to change.Anthony O NeillGlasgow • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition