Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing. If you’d like to receive this as a weekly email, sign up here. You can also catch our latest Brexit Means … podcast here, and for daily updates, head to Andrew Sparrow’s politics live blog. Plot twists galore, but – not for the first time – nothing you might describe as actual progress. A Scottish appeal court ruled that Boris Johnson’s decision to prorogue parliament was unlawful – but did not order MPs to return. The government was forced to release its secret Operation Yellowhammer “planning assumptions” for a no-deal Brexit, which warned of rising food and fuel prices, disruption to medicine supplies and public disorder on Britain’s streets. Johnson continued to insist “huge progress” was being made – although No 10 played down hopes of a breakthrough involving an all-Ireland regulatory regime for food and agriculture which it thinks could help replace the backstop, and Michel Barnier said there were “no grounds” for formally re-opening talks. Increasingly alarmed at the possibility that the PM might try to break the law by forcing a no deal, however, a cross-party group of MPs looked at bringing back a version of Theresa May’s deal, plus a vote on a second referendum, in late October. And the outgoing Speaker of the Commons, John Bercow, warned that he was prepared to rip up the parliamentary rulebook to stop any illegal attempt by the prime minister to take the UK out of the EU without a deal on 31 October. Johnson did, at least, meet the outgoing president of the European commission, Jean-Claude Juncker. It did not go well. Before heading to Luxembourg, the PM compared himself to the Incredible Hulk, throwing off the shackles of the EU. Despite EU officials repeatedly insisting they had seen no concrete British proposals whatsoever on alternatives to the backstop, the foreign secretary, Domic Raab, said the bloc had heard enough and was indulging in “political posturing”. Johnson told Juncker the UK would not ask for a further Brexit extension and would not accept one if the EU offered it – nor would it request any extension to the EU transition period beyond December 2020 if he got a Brexit deal. Unfortunately, the PM was then humiliated by his Luxembourg counterpart, Xavier Bettel, who went ahead with a planned joint press conference that Johnson dodged because of protesters – and savaged Johnson’s Brexit approach. All eyes, meanwhile, are on 11 supreme court judges who this week will hear the politically charged claim that the PM acted unlawfully in advising the Queen to suspend parliament for five weeks in order to stifle debate over the Brexit crisis. Some people worry that if the government wins, Johnson may even decide to suspend parliament for a second time when it returns on 14 October. Who knows? But four main scenarios seem to present themselves: Unlikely as it may seem, Johnson could still get a deal, probably based around a border in the Irish sea. He would find getting it through parliament very hard, but perhaps not impossible, helped maybe by Labour MPs in leave-voting constituencies. He could decide to break his promise, request an extension and then immediately demand an election, counting on a fiercely anti-EU, people-versus-parliament campaign to see him through. He could, theoretically at least, go for no deal on 31 October, testing or even ignoring the law. Early elections would follow, with the PM trusting that with Brexit delivered, the Brexit party would be no more – and that no deal would not be too catastrophic. Or he could resign or be pushed out. Rather than the divisive Jeremy Corbyn, a more neutral figure (Ken Clarke?) might then head up a temporary government whose sole purpose would be to ask the EU for an extension, with elections to follow. EU citizens feel safer in Scotland than in England, report says. David Cameron: Johnson said leave campaign would lose minutes before backing it. Brexit uncertainty triggers first September fall in house prices since 2010. Britain is facing its most prolonged investment slump in 17 years. Only half of UK universities are ready for a no-deal Brexit – study. Labour members to push for anti-Brexit stance at conference. Five things we learned from David Cameron’s memoir. Nicky Morgan says she would vote to remain in the EU in a second referendum. Hopes of a clean break with the EU are nonsense, says ex-Brexit official. Criminal gangs will cash in on no-deal Brexit, police warn. MPs condemn ‘misleading’ no-deal Brexit publicity campaign. Anti-Brexiters file new legal challenge to force article 50 extension. Retailers: fruit, vegetables and wine will be scarce and costly under no-deal Brexit. Boris Johnson says it is ‘absolutely’ not true he misled Queen over prorogation. Lib Dems pledge to revoke Brexit without referendum. In the Guardian, Matthew d’Ancona says Boris Johnson’s invocation of the Incredible Hulk was apt – his behaviour is monstrous: During the leadership contest, Johnson said that the chances of no deal were a “million to one against”. Last month he said it was “touch and go”. Now, in advance of his meeting Jean-Claude Juncker, he claims that “we will get there”. Which Johnson to believe? Frankly, all this briefing about “breakthroughs” and diplomatic “movement” strikes me as mere preparatory work for the attribution of blame as 31 October approaches. Imagine Johnson and his acolytes raging as the deadline gets near, and how they will complain that the prime minister’s superhuman efforts have been undermined – by Brussels, by remainiacs, by disloyal Tories, by judges, by Larry the cat. It will all be someone else’s fault. That, at least, is what they will say. But don’t believe a word of it. Inside the Hulk, there is and has always been a small and fearful man, wondering, with good reason, what will become of him when he loses all his strength. A thread from a professor of EU law that is a wonder of clarity and concision: Got a nice (well, angry and abusive, actually) email to finish my working day, including the golden oldie: "Leave won. So why don't you just get over it?" Very happy to answer that one. Here's a brief summary of my main reasons for not "just getting over it":