I come off cold or unapproachable, when in fact I’m just insecure. I’m hypercritical of how I look, how I act, how I come across in interviews. Every new year I make the same resolution: be kinder to yourself. I try to stay positive, but it never lasts. I’ve been in therapy for a couple of years now, and I don’t look at photos of me, or read what people say. My mum made sure I always felt powerful. My parents were loving, encouraging my brother and me in everything we did – whether that was pursuing performing after seeing Annie on Broadway aged five, or spending hours rolling around in the front yard. By my teenage years I’d grown despondent, I was ready to leave the small town I grew up in earlier than I could. Make lists after break-ups, they focus your mind when you are pining or desperate. Mourning the end of a relationship is important, but so too is perspective. I write down all the things that didn’t work as a reminder of the bad stuff; another with what I want from a future partner. Passionate flings are an antidote, too, who doesn’t want an ego boost there and then? Bernie Sanders is punk as fuck, plain and simple. I’m petrified of the US government right now. We need someone radical to take Trump on, and Bernie’s record as a senator speaks for itself. Honestly, at this stage, I’ll campaign for whoever runs as a Democrat. We just have to get out and fight. My father passed away when I was 20 and, to be honest, I’m still figuring out how to deal with the loss. I have a picture of my dad in a necklace that I wear, and his initials on my keychain. I was driving to a wedding in upstate New York a few weeks back and got pulled over by the cops for speeding. They ran my licence and found I had an outstanding warrant from 1991 that I had no recollection of. I could have been arrested, but the trooper let me off. I haven’t driven since. My garbage causes me a lot of anxiety. I look at how much trash I generate and it fills me with dread, and I end up flying a lot to work. It all just feels like total hypocrisy given we’re on the verge of environmental catastrophe. I’m working on it, though, but I wish I could be better. Intimacy matters to me more than sex. I don’t know if it’s because I’m a triple Scorpio, or that I was showered with so much affection as a child, but I always crave the physical touch. Performative sex is boring, for me it’s all about feeling something, actually connecting. That’s how I approach sex scenes: they only work if you trust your partner and together you can find some truth. Chloë Sevigny’s perfume Little Flower is available on regimedesfleurs.com and at Dover Street Market now