Circus Maximus was sensationally allowed to keep the Prix du Moulin on Sunday, despite having given a significant shove to the runner-up, Romanised, in the closing stages. The Longchamp stewards’ failure to act was a surprise to many onlookers, as the head-on showed the winner had hung across the track by about eight horse-widths, carrying Romanised with him and making contact in the final strides. As a photo-finish was required to separate the two and Circus Maximus had barely an inch in hand when he hit the line, it seemed a straightforward decision to reverse the places. But just a few minutes after the inquiry began, it was confirmed the result would stand. “I think he was the best horse on the day,” said Ryan Moore, who gave Circus Maximus an efficient and determined ride but was unable to straighten him up close home, despite switching whip hands. “He was always kind of holding off the second horse. I think he had a bit more in the tank, if I’m being honest. “He’s obviously well suited to a mile. There were six Group One winners in the race today and you’d have to be very happy with what he’s done. He’s won the St James’s Palace and run very well in the Sussex.” An appeal will now be made to France’s ruling body by the connections of Romanised, who hope the prize may eventually be theirs. “I’m disappointed to get beaten,” said Ken Condon, his trainer, who had a happier trip to France last month when Romanised won the Marois. “We’re very proud of our horse and what he’s achieved this year. The good news we’ve had is that he’ll stay in training next year, when I imagine he might start off in the Lockinge. That’s him done now for this season.” It was impressive that the mild-mannered Condon retained his composure in the face of twin disappointments, on the track and in the stewards’ room, but his horse was wronged on Sunday and his appeal should surely succeed. The head-on replay showed Romanised being intimidated across the track by his Aidan O’Brien-trained rival throughout the final furlong, when he was trying to mount a challenge after travelling strongly into contention. That being said, Circus Maximus deserves credit for another gritty performance in his sixth outing since May, none of which have been a home game for the Irish horse. In his three runs at a mile, only the flashy Too Darn Hot has been able to finish in front of him. Godolphin’s Line Of Duty was a game, one-paced third, meaning that French runners were kept out of the frame as we near the end of what has been a disappointing season for that country. Phoenix Of Spain could finish only fifth and it seems he cannot repeat the effort that brought him glory in the Irish Guineas in the spring. Brighton  1.45 Knockabout Queen (nap) 2.15 Dontaskmeagain 2.45 Joyful Dream  3.20 Atalanta Breeze 3.50 Freckles 4.20 Thunderoad 4.50 Harlequin Rose (nb) Perth  2.05 Beast Of Belstane 2.35 Ballycrystal Court 3.10 Green Zone 3.40 Indian Temple 4.10 Lake Baikal 4.40 Mustmeetalady 5.15 Doyen Breed Newton Abbot  2.25 Rebel Leader 3.00 Black Anthem 3.30 Sizing Granite 4.00 Capitoul  4.30 Midnight Magic 5.05 Guardia Top Wolverhampton  5.30 My Motivate Girl 6.00 Say It Simple 6.30 Um Aljadeela 7.00 Havana Jane 7.30 Charlie D 8.00 Vampish 8.30 Court Order