As an inveterate armchair baker, who laughs knowingly as raw dough gets the Paul Hollywood finger or unset fillings ooze, I watched enthusiastically as every single contestant failed the technical challenge in the latest episode of The Great British Bake Off. Hollywood described the efforts to make maids of honour – a kind of curd-filled tart – as “awful”. But how would I get on when I gave this recipe – beloved of Henry VIII – a try? I begin by boiling milk then adding vinegar: everyone’s favourite way to start a dessert. This lumpy horror should be separated using a muslin cloth. Obviously, I don’t have any muslins: it’s not the 1890s. I use a grubby cloth that came with a pot of cleanser. Perhaps any essential oils will enhance the flavour? The face cloth is definitively too small to hold 200g of hot, separated vinegar milk, but I catch it with a sieve. The rough puff pastry is confusing: the instructions are more GCSE geometry (30x12 centimetre rectangle, rotate 90°, find X) than baking. I confess I don’t use all the butter because it feels terribly wasteful: these tarts will surely be disgusting and I respect butter. Next is lemon curd: reaching for my manky, back-of-the-fridge lemons, I spill vinegar everywhere. Unfortunately, I don’t have time to mop up. Ah, the heady scent of baking: lemon, boiled milk, vinegar. I am determined not to make the same mistake as Bake Off’s Priya, whose dreamy curd-stirring led to disaster. I do anyway, and end up way behind schedule to roll out my pastry. Rereading the instructions, I notice I was supposed to fold it repeatedly over the past 20 minutes: “TOO LATE FOR THAT, PRU,” I hiss. Grated butter leaks out alarmingly as I try to cut out rounds using a smoothie cup. Putting the cases in to blind-bake, I realise I have misread the oven temperature and whack it up to 230C. Making the filling involves whisking my unholy cheese – a sinister, pale mass that looks like something the government might distribute to nursing mothers after 31 October – with eggs, sugar and lemon zest. It looks as appetising as you would imagine homemade sweetened vinegar curds might. As the deadline approaches, I attempt a rose template to decorate the top. I am interrupted by the smell of burning: the pastry cases have somehow scorched in half their allotted time. I add the filling. Fifteen minutes left. I take out my maids of shame, dust with icing sugar, and taste. Verdict: they are edible. Perhaps even delicious, if you love overdone pastry, lemon and vinegary cheese. My tongue is burnt, my kitchen trashed and my pride in tatters. I feel fresh respect for the GBBO bakers – and new sympathy for Henry VIII.