Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day by Winifred Watson has come out of the hat and will be the subject of the reading group this September. First published in 1938, hindsight suggests that this funny, escapist book might have been just the tonic people needed in a darkening historical era. Certainly, it became a huge hit in its time. But if it was a book that people were craving, Watson’s publishers didn’t know it at first. They only agreed to put it out when Watson also agreed to write the kind of rustic bodice-ripper with which she initially made her name. World events also conspired against the book’s success. It was just about to be published in France when the Nazis invaded. Musical and film versions were similarly stymied by the bombing of Pearl Harbor. (A film finally emerged in 2008 starring Frances McDormand and Amy Adams.) It’s also worth noting that even if this book is determinedly amusing, there are darker shades in the background. The titular Miss Pettigrew is a “superfluous woman”, of the generation after the first world war when women far outnumbered men, leading to those who didn’t land a husband being considered “on the shelf” and all too often ending up in domestic service. Miss Pettigrew has had to spend a dowdy and impecunious life as a governess “living in other people’s houses and being dependent on their moods”. But this sad situation makes it feel all the more splendid when she is offered a reprieve from her threadbare existence and falls into the “the way of sin” with the louche younger woman Miss LaFosse. The result has been described as a “cross between Cinderella and Mary Poppins”; in 1938, the Times Literary Supplement promised that the book was “entirely delightful”. When it was re-released in 2000 by Persephone Books, a publisher dedicated to reviving women’s authors, the Guardian asked why we had had to wait half a century for this “wonderful flight of humour to be rediscovered”? Probably, came the conclusion, because “it is high entertainment not serious social comment or great literature”. We’ll be able to judge that for ourselves over the coming weeks – and also whether it is, as the Sunday Times called it, “the sweetest grownup book in the world”. I’m hoping it will be just the tonic we need. Persephone’s edition, a beautifully illustrated facsimile, is still available. We have five copies to give to the first five people from the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, constructive suggestion in the comments section below. If you’re lucky enough to be one of the first to comment, email the lovely folk on culture.admin@theguardian.com, with your address and your account username, so they can track you down.