For years now Agustín Creevy has been one of Argentina’s key players and, to quote one of England’s coaches, their “spiritual leader”. His hooking deputy, Julián Montoya, consequently, has spent most of his international career on the bench: this was his seventh start in 57 Tests. His hat-trick of tries inside the first 26 minutes, therefore, gives Mario Ledesma a tricky selection dilemma, particularly given how Argentina perked up in the second half of the French game after a dire start and faded when Creevy came on in the 45th minute against Tonga. The 25-year-old Montoya now has six tries in his past nine appearances and the bearded forward would be a candidate for most other international teams in the world. Only one other hooker, Keith Wood, has scored more tries in a single game in the World Cup. Given Ledesma was a hooker and never managed a single try in 18 World Cup appearances, it will be fascinating to see whether he sticks with the status quo. The Pumas continue to possess better players than their recent results would suggest. Tonga wheeled out 11 of the same starting line-up beaten 35-3 by England in Sapporo yet the Pumas had eased into an uncatchable 28-7 lead by half-time. Admittedly, they were assisted by an initially muted Tongan performance, but when the Pumas have an opportunity close to the line they have a strong mauling game and some tricks up their sleeve. Instead of opting for a straightforward penalty early on, they went for a nifty lineout move that led to their scrum-half, Tomás Cubelli, setting off left on a persuasive decoy run, diverting attention from the blindside where the ball was swiftly returned to an unmarked Montoya who scored in the corner. It showed the Pumas are capable of thinking smart and do not solely rely on brute force. This was the Pumas’ first win in 11 Tests. They are not exactly oozing confidence, underlined by a total of nine tries in their past eight Tests. Their missed tackle count and ball retention increasingly disrupted their rhythm and against better opponents such little mistakes will cost them. “To have lost the ball so many times and miss so many tackles ... it will be very difficult if we do that against England,” Ledesma said. On a warm, humid, energy‑sapping afternoon, they ran out of steam in the second half; stringing 80 minutes of good rugby together continues to be an elusive concept. Defensively out wide they also looked vulnerable at times, with Leicester’s Telusa Veainu twice scoring tries despite the presence of several Argentina players in extremely close proximity. Veainu has wonderful feet but England will look at some of Matías Moroni’s positioning and if he plays will look to put him under pressure, whether by kicking in behind him or running at his inside shoulder. There is no question the Pumas would be a stronger side if the overseas-based trio of Juan Imhoff, Santiago Cordero and Facundo Isa were involved at this tournament. If Argentina are going to seriously worry England in Tokyo on Saturday they will need plenty of physicality in the forwards. Their no-nonsense 6ft 7in lock Tomás Lavanini, who is heading for Leicester after the World Cup, was lucky not to receive a yellow card for the shoulder charge that prevented David Halaifonua from scoring in the left corner but his height and attitude will be important. His second-row partner, Guido Petti Pagadizábal, who played on despite a slight second-half knock to his shoulder, is another important presence, as is the hard‑working captain, Pablo Matera, and the openside Marcos Kremer. Not many props, either, get the better of the Saracens tighthead Juan Figallo. Given some forward momentum, the Pumas backs will not be afraid to try their luck but neither of their fly-halves, Benjamín Urdapilleta and Nicolás Sánchez, are currently taking games by the scruff of the neck. On this evidence England should not be overly worried, with Ledesma admitting a lot of work will be required in the next week. The biggest danger is hiding in plain sight: Argentina, having been beaten by France, will almost certainly miss out on a quarter-final place should they lose. A sense of desperation allied to the passion generated by their wonderful supporters can be a powerful combination.