A 40,000-nautical mile (74,000km), 11-month round-the-world yacht race has set sail from St Katharine Docks in London. The race, which is made up of eight legs, will see 11 teams of amateur crew members in identical yachts sailing across six oceans and returning to the docks in August 2020. On Sunday afternoon, hundreds of people eagerly waited at the start line of the Clipper Round the World Race near Tower Bridge, while some of the 688 crew wished each other well before setting off on the journey of a lifetime. Crew members undergo rigorous training and can opt to take part in the full circumnavigation or select individual legs. Cheers went up among some of those onboard the yachts, which have a wide range of sponsors including the Korean tourist board. On the Unicef boat, the team – dressed in logoed polo shirts and shorts – chanted in unison to gear themselves up. Fireworks were let off as each crew was introduced by former competitors. Just after 3pm, spectators applauded as the yachts began to slip their ropes individually and exit the dockside under the drawbridge at St Katharine’s. They then each completed a loop down to Wapping and back under Tower Bridge. At 4pm, the bridge was scheduled to rise to allow the 21-metre (70ft) ocean racing yachts through on their way to the sea. This year’s is the 12th edition of the race, which was started in 1995 by the British sailor Sir Robin Knox-Johnston. Knox-Johnston, now 80, became became the first person to perform a single-handed nonstop circumnavigation of the world in 1969. The race’s aim is to see “ordinary, everyday people” take up the colossal challenge usually only taken on by seasoned professionals. Knox-Johnston’s company, Clipper Ventures plc, provides crews with the yachts. Each team has a fully qualified skipper and first mate to guide them through the oceans. This year, the youngest crew member is 18, while the oldest is 76. Earlier this year, the family of Simon Speirs, a retired solicitor from Bristol who drowned in the Southern Ocean while taking part in the race in 2017, claimed that more lives could be at risk unless organisers implemented safety recommendations. A Marine Accident Investigation Branch report on his death said damage to a guard rail may have contributed to Speirs, 60, falling overboard and have hampered his rescue.