Warning: the article contains spoilers. Dallas – Who shot JR? Best cliffhanger? How is this even a question? It is, as anyone old enough to be sentient by 1980, the season three finale of arguably the greatest soap, Dallas, in which the inarguably greatest soap antihero took two .38 calibre slugs to the gut and bloodily birthed the question that ricocheted round the world: Who Shot JR? Gerald Ford wanted to know. The Queen and the Queen Mother wanted to know. We all wanted to know. It was perhaps the first great globally uniting TV moment. T-shirts were printed with the legend (and the hilarious variant “I shot JR”). In the US, Republicans gave out badges during the election campaign that Ronald Reagan (a Hollywood actor! Can you imagine falling so low?) would win which claimed “A Democrat shot JR”. He had so many enemies it could have been almost anyone. Eight months later, 83 million of us tuned in to the new series to find out the answer. A perfect cliffhanger in form, content and reach, it will surely – in this world of fragmented viewing – never be bettered. Lucy Mangan Lost – Through the Looking Glass “WE HAVE TO GO BACK, KATE. WE HAVE TO GO BACK.” With this compilation of quite boring words the greatest cliffhanger of all time – and by ‘time’ I mean Lost time – dropped. A cliffhanger so game-changing that one wonders, in the grand brain-fogging tradition of Lost, if it was a cliffhanger at all. Can it be if it offers us a ladder instead of dangling us off a precipice? Except the ladder is unstable. And it’s been hung by a thread-spinning mercenary called Jacob we won’t see for another three seasons. And the cliff rises from an island that might not be real. In this flawless finale, the cliffhanger is set up from the start. Jack, who will unleash those mindblowing words, is on a plane. Drunk, depressed and most disturbingly of all for this most clean-shaven of doctors, bearded. He sees a newspaper clipping announcing someone’s death. His response? To try and kill himself. Here is your classic cliffhanger: who’s the dead guy? The person in the still unopened coffin that near the end we see Jack weeping and popping pills over at a funeral parlour called Hoffs/Drawlar. Which, keep up, is an anagram for ‘flash forward’. And so we are dragged, Black Smoke style, to the real cliffhanger. That earth-shattering lament in the dark, to a creepily preened Kate, lit by the underbellies of overhead planes descending into LAX. None of this is happening in the past, as we foolishly assumed from all our past experience of TV, nay, life. It is the future. The place beyond the cliffhanger. What is there to do but fall off the sofa. Grab our phones on the way down. And start typing: WTF … just ... happened? Chitra Ramaswamy ER – Be Still My Heart ER always had the capacity to jolt us out of our comfort zones (see George Clooney as Dr Ross stuck in a storm drain with an injured little boy, the water level speedily rising). But no moment was more horrifying than the one where we cut from the County General Valentine’s day bash – with blue cake and that fateful line “I think we have a bigger knife in the lounge” – to the dim room where Dr Carter stood, picking up a discarded Valentine’s card for Lucy and smiling. Out of the dark emerged a schizophrenic patient named Paul, slicing Carter in the side and leaving him for dead on the floor. But the real sucker punch, and the moment still seared into my mind after all these years, comes when Carter gazes under the gurney to see beloved med student Lucy, blood everywhere and cheek pressed into the floor, gasping what is surely her last. Such was this show’s audacious genius that we had to wait four – FOUR – agonising minutes into the next episode until Dr Weaver found the bloody footprint outside the door and discovered the pair. Kate Abbott My So-Called Life finale No teen show ended on as great a cliffhanger as In Dreams Begin Responsibilities, the still heavily debated finale of My So-Called Life. Earnest young Angela Chase (Claire Danes) suddenly found her dreams answered when Jordan Catalano (Jared Leto) decided the way to win back her heart was via the best love letter of all time. The catch? Viewers knew the letter was written not by Jordan but, Cyrano de Bergerac style, by the nerdy Brian Krakow (Devon Gummersall) who had long nursed an unrequited crush on Angela. The show’s final scene, in which Brian told Angela he wrote the letter just as she got into Jordan’s car, left fans desperate to know what happened next. Would Angela have got bored of the gorgeous but monosyllabic Jordan? Would she have chosen the smart but overkeen Brian? My So-Called Life’s premature cancellation meant we never uncovered the truth, although creator Winnie Holzman recently hinted that Angela would have stuck with Jordan … at least at first. Sarah Hughes EastEnders – Kat and Zoe Slater The year is 2001. Y2K has been averted, low-rise flared jeans are on the up and EastEnders is unleashing a glut of jaw-dropping revelations, each one more unbelievable than the next. The biggest (and most quotable) of the post-millennium pre-credits moments came when a raging Kat Slater revealed to her supposed sister Zoe that she is in fact her mother. The two face off in the deserted Walford market, like a budget beer-soaked western. Zoe shouts: “You ain’t my mother”, and with the timing of Clint in his prime, Kat screams: “Yes I am!” It’s been a rocky road for the Slater clan ever since, but this is the cliff-edge from whence the plummeting began. Ammar Kalia Barry – The AuditionThe last nine minutes of the Barry episode The Audition are as tense as anything I have ever seen. They’re Breaking Bad tense. They’re stop-breathing tense. At the end of the first season, Barry is forced to kill the partner of a man who has grown to become his father figure, played by Henry Winkler. Over the course of the second season, Barry’s other father figure (Steven Root) decides to reveal the truth to Winkler. When this eventually plays out, it feels like a fist to the chest. Barry sprints to stop the revelation, but it’s too late. Winkler sees the body. Root pulls out a gun and holds it to Winkler’s head. The screen cuts to black, and we have a full week to wait before we know what happens next. I screamed at my television. Stuart Heritage Star Trek: The Next Generation season three finale It’s not just phasers that can stun. The first Star Trek TV continuation lionised a likable crew of do-gooders smart enough to resolve most cosmic conflicts by the end of each episode. So it was a genuine shock when the season three finale in 1990 saw unflappable skipper Jean-Luc Picard abducted by relentless cyber-zombies the Borg. Rapidly brainwashed, the rewired Picard – AKA Patrick Stewart with a laser pointer glued to his temple – instructed the USS Enterprise to surrender or be destroyed. But his loyal lieutenant Riker immediately responded by opening fire with an anti-Borg death ray. Had he just murdered his beloved captain? Suddenly Star Trek: TNG was Star Trek: TBC and agitated fans had to wait three agonising months to find out what really went down. (Short version: Picard survived, but shiploads of other Starfleet personnel did not.) Graeme Virtue Line of Duty – series two, episode oneLine of Duty has so many cliffhangers it’s a wonder Red Bull hasn’t sponsored it and turned it into a spectator sport. Each series is a dizzying ride through moments of “did they just do that?” and “how can they possibly come back from there?”, a tactic creator Jed Mercurio also used to great effect in the blockbuster that was Bodyguard. With such a vast number of dangling plots to choose from – Arnott getting chucked down the stairs by balaclava man, Jackie Laverty and her late-night knock at the door, Roz Huntley waking up as Tim Ifield’s electric saw is almost at her face – its greatest episode-ender is still at the start of season two. We were introduced to Jessica Raine as DC Trotman and teased with a potentially long-running backstory for her, only for her to end up in the wrong hospital room at the wrong time, where she was unceremoniously lobbed out of a very high window. It cut to Lindsay Denton (Keeley Hawes) looking shifty, setting up a season of did-she-or-didn’t-she, and with that one bold shove, reminded the audience that no character was safe. Rebecca Nicholson The Americans finale Although its period stylings, political sophistication and subtle marriage analogies were what made The Americans great, its dramatic engine was powered by something simple: the gnawing fear of being found out. Of course in the last ever episode, fake travel agents Philip and Elizabeth were exposed as crack KGB operatives, but what then? The underlying theme of never really knowing anyone, even your own family, roared up as their stubborn daughter Paige shockingly declined to flee the US – resigning herself to prison, or a new life as a Russian spy or American double agent. Meanwhile, was Renee, the suspiciously lovely wife of failed and broken FBI guy Stan, yet another Russian mole? Unless there’s a comeback season, we’ll never find out. The paranoid uncertainty won’t ever end. Jack Seale 24 – Day 3, 3:00PM to 4:00PMIn many ways 24 was one long cliffhanger, its real-time format necessitating all manner of plate-spinning to keep audiences from losing interest in Jack Bauer and his terrorist-tracking team. It even considered mid-episode ad breaks fair game for sudden twists – witness the outrageous sequence of deaths in its fifth season opener (RIP David Palmer and Michelle Dessler, gone too soon). That said, the most famous end-of-episode shocker in the show’s history – the assassination of Teri Bauer by the coward Nina Myers – wasn’t a cliffhanger at all: we knew Teri was dead, and who killed her, by the time that digital clock stopped clicking. Instead, let’s go for moment at the end of a season three episode where Jack stood over a prone Tony Almeida, leaking claret after being shot in the neck by some criminal goon. It was the sort of scene 24 would deliver with increasing regularity, and diminishing returns, as the seasons rolled on, but here it was still horrifyingly novel enough to leave us punchdrunk. Gwilym Mumford Breaking Bad – To’Hajiilee Breaking Bad made good cliffhangers look easy. Season three finished with Jesse Pinkman pulling the trigger of a gun. But was the pleading chemist, Gale, on the end of a bullet? We had to wait a year to find out. Then there was the final scene in season five’s Gliding All Over, when DEA man Hank worked out his brother-in-law was a master criminal, but was unable to confront him because he was sitting on the toilet. But the biggest one of all came in the scarifying final half-season and the end of To’Hajiilee. The game is finally up for Walter White, but not only him. He has taken out a hit on his partner Jesse, and the pair have been arrested by Hank in the New Mexico desert. As with so many of Walter’s plans, we see it fall apart, but this time with consequences far greater than ever before. Walt thinks he has called off Jesse’s neo-Nazi assassins, but they ignore his instructions and arrive in the desert in the final seconds. A stand-off ensues with Walt and Jesse in two separate cars, while Hank and his partner Gomez are standing outside. Hank draws his weapon. So do the Nazis. There is silence, then an endless stream of bullets, smashing through metal and glass and, surely, flesh? The camera cuts from one point of view to the next, then jerks like it is being shot itself. You are left in no doubt that this will not end well. You can’t watch any more but you must find out what happens. And then, suddenly, the screen cuts to black. Paul MacInnes What’s your favourite ever cliffhanger? Tell us in the comments below.