I arrived at the airport in Billund, Denmark for a KLM flight to Cape Town, only to find that my ticket had been cancelled and my seat sold on to someone else. I had booked a return flight because it was actually cheaper, planning to only use the return leg. However, representatives at the airline told me that flights are automatically cancelled if you miss the first leg. I was forced to buy a ticket with another airline because all KLM could offer instead was a prohibitively expensive business class seat. I found an article in the Guardian that said KLM does not automatically cancel the second leg if you miss the first – contradicting my own experience. KLM customer service agents repeatedly told me the return leg is automatically cancelled, and offered no refund. If this fair? ME, Cape Town Passengers around the world are familiar with complex airline conditions that seem almost deliberately designed to catch you out. You fell foul of an obscure “no-show clause” in KLM’s ticket terms, which prevents customers from taking advantage of deals that mean return flights are cheaper than singles. Airlines argue that this constitutes abuse of their offers – although it really reflects the warped economics of air travel. Consumer group Which? has said the practice is unfair and unjustified, allowing airlines to take advantage of customers who miss a flight and more than double their money in some cases when they sell on the ticket. In this case, KLM told us its ground handlers in Denmark had made a mistake about its policy. It maintains customers must pay an extra €500 fee to access the second leg, rather than having their tickets cancelled. Following our intervention KLM has agreed to refund the £932 cost of the replacement ticket. However, they reduced that by the €500 fee it says it should have charged you to change your original tickets. As a goodwill gesture it also offered a €250 voucher for misapplying policies and wasting a significant amount of your time – an outcome you are happy with. It’s time airlines were forced to end this practice, once and for all. Others take note. KLM is not the only airline that adopts this strategy. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to terms and conditions