The former UK foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt has said Britain would obey a court order to repay £400m to Iran, if the precise sum owed is agreed, but added the cash could not be linked to the release of the imprisoned British-Iranian Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. He also said western policy towards Iran was not working, arguing Europe and the US needed to come together with a new policy that provided a ladder for Iran to climb down leading to sanctions relief. Hunt was speaking on the day the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, was scheduled to meet the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, in New York on the sidelines of the UN general assembly to discuss the release of Zaghari-Ratcliffe. Her husband, Richard Ratcliffe, is in New York to launch a campaign, supported by Hunt, that brings together families from different nationalities that have fallen victim to state hostage taking. Hunt said Ratcliffe was right and that “quiet behind the scenes diplomacy by individual countries is clearly not working”. He accused the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, of explicitly linking the release of Zaghari-Ratcliffe to the UK payment of a historical debt owed by the UK. The debt relates to a deal in the 1980s over the UK’s non-delivery of Chieftain tanks for which a previous Iranian regime had paid. Successive courts have found the UK is liable to pay the debt, but Hunt told BBC Radio 4 there was an outstanding legal dispute over the precise sum. There has also been a hidden political dispute within the UK government over whether the money should be paid. Zarif on Sunday claimed an agreement had been reached with some cabinet ministers such as Philip Hammond for the release of the money, but Hunt as foreign secretary had scuppered the deal. Hunt hit back by saying it was extraordinary that Zarif was admitting “very openly they are holding an innocent woman with a five-year-old daughter as a tool of diplomatic leverage to try to settle a financial dispute with the UK”. He added: “Our policy as the British government had always been absolutely clear. We are a law-abiding government, so if there is a court order that says that this money has to be paid ... then we obey the law”. He said “the court process is still continuing, it is still deciding the exact amount that has to be paid. “We obey court rulings, but what we will not do is link it to the release of a hostage because if you do that you then you encourage countries like Iran to take hostages in the future when they have another dispute.” He denied he had taken a different view to previous foreign secretaries. Ministerial sources say the biggest blockage came from Gavin Williamson during his time as defence secretary, and that the issue is politically off the table due to the UK declaring, along with France and Germany this week, that Iran was responsible for the attack on the Saudi Aramco oil installations on 14 September. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe is arrested at Imam Khomeini airport as she is trying to return to Britain after a holiday visiting family with her daughter, Gabriella. Her husband, Richard Radcliffe, delivers a letter to David Cameron in 10 Downing Street, demanding the government do more for her release. She is sentenced to five years in jail. Her husband says the exact charges are still being kept a secret. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe's health deteriorates after she spends several days on hunger strike in protest at her imprisonment. Iran’s supreme court upholds her conviction. Boris Johnson, then Foreign Secretary, tells a parliamentary select committee "When we look at what [she] was doing, she was simply teaching people journalism". Four days after his comments, Zaghari-Ratcliffe is returned to court, where his statement is cited in evidence against her. Her employers, the Thomson Reuters Foundation, deny that she has ever trained journalists, and her family maintain she was in Iran on holiday. Johnson is eventually forced to apologise for the "distress and anguish" his comments cause the family. Her husband reveals that Zaghari-Ratcliffe has fears for her health after lumps had been found in her breasts that required an ultrasound scan, and that she was now “on the verge of a nervous breakdown”. New Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt meets with Richard Ratcliffe, and pledges "We will do everything we can to bring her home." She is granted a temporary three-day release from prison. Zaghari-Ratcliffe is on hunger strike again, in protest at the withdrawal of her medical care. The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, takes the unusual step of granting her diplomatic protection – a move that raises her case from a consular matter to the level of a dispute between the two states. The UK upgrades its travel advice to British-Iranian dual nationals, for the first time advising against all travel to Iran. The advice also urges Iranian nationals living in the UK to exercise caution if they decide to travel to Iran. Richard Ratcliffe joins his wife in a new hunger strike campaign. He fasts outside the Iranian embassy in London as she begins a third hunger strike protest in prison. Zaghari-Ratcliffe ends her hunger strike by eating some breakfast. Her husband also ends his strike outside the embassy. According to her husband, Zaghari-Ratcliffe was moved from Evin prison to the mental ward of Imam Khomeini hospital, where Iran’s Revolutionary Guards have prevented relatives from contacting her.  Hunt called on Europe and the US to unify their policies on Iran, saying a strategy that left the two allies divided would not work. He said: “The starting point has to be that western policy towards Iran is failing and the policy of maximum economic pressure designed to deter malign Iranian activity is clearly not working if you look at the Iranian attack on the Saudi oil facility on 14 September. You cannot underestimate the significance of that. “By the same merit, the European policy of trying to keep the nuclear deal going is also failing because Iran is in the process of breaching its uranium limits, so we need to rethink. The lesson I think is that when the US and Europe go their separate ways on Iran policy, in the end it does not work and we need to come together.” He said the Iranians needed to clearly know the negative consequences if they behaved negatively, and “at the same time there has to be a ladder for them to climb down so that if they start to behave positively, so they can see a more positive outcome in terms of sanctions relief or whatever it is”. In a joint statement issued on Monday evening, the UK, France and Germany defended the existing Iran deal but re-emphasised a position first adopted by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, in the months leading up to Donald Trump quitting the deal in 2018. Macron had proposed the agreement signed in 2015 could be expanded to include new proposals for how the nuclear deal would function after some of its terms expire in 2025. The expanded deal would also cover the future of the Iranian ballistic programme and Iran’s regional behaviour, according to Macron’s plan.