The increasingly fractious relationship between the Oakland Raiders and their star wide receiver Antonio Brown has reportedly led to an altercation between the player and the team’s general manager. ESPN reported on Thursday that the Raiders have suspended Brown before he has even played a regular season game for the team. According to the NFL Network’s Ian Rapoport, Brown became involved in a “screaming match” with Raiders GM Mike Mayock in front of the rest of the team. Although the argument did not become physical, Brown is reported to have threatened to hit Mayock before saying “fine me for that”. Rapoport says Mayock was unhappy that Brown posted a letter from the Raiders to Instagram that detailed $53,000 in fines imposed on the receiver for infractions such as missing a team training camp. In the post Brown wrote: “When your own team want to hate, but there’s no stopping me now devil is a lie. Everyone got to pay this year so we clear.” Antonio Brown posts his displeasure with fines from #Raiders pic.twitter.com/0OMhdwFu7K Mayock gave a short answer when asked about the situation on Thursday afternoon. “Antonio Brown is not in the building today,” he said. “He won’t be practicing.” The maximum a player can be suspended for behaviour detrimental to their team is four games. According to Rapoport any suspension could also void the $30m in guaranteed money the Raiders owe Brown on his contract. The Raiders are due to start their season on Monday against the Denver Broncos. The Raiders acquired the 31-year-old in March for picks in the third and fifth round of the 2019 draft after his time with the Pittsburgh Steelers ended amid acrimony and tension with other players. His career with the Raiders has not been much better. He missed time this offseason after he suffered frostbite during cryotherapy treatment, and then threatened to quit football altogether after the NFL said he could not wear an outlawed helmet. Brown has been one of the league’s most prolific players in recent years. He was an All-Pro four straight years from 2014-17 and is the first player with at least 100 catches and 1,200 yards receiving in six straight seasons. His 686 catches and 9,145 yards since 2013 are the most for any player in a six-year span.