The pages of Hollywood history are littered with failed attempts to propel movies towards box office and critical success. To pinpoint the basic construct of a film that is likely to appeal to audiences and critics alike is a virtually impossible task. Just ask the Disney executives who chose to remove the “of Mars” suffix from the big-budget 2012 adaptation of Edgar Rice Burroughs’ classic planetary romance novel John Carter of Mars, (ostensibly because previous movies mentioning the red planet had bombed), only to see a perfectly decent fantasy flick lose more than $200m at the box office. Or the executives who felt Ridley Scott’s 1982 sci-fi masterpiece, Blade Runner, was so confusing that it needed a tacked-on happy ending and Harrison Ford voiceover to smooth away all those jagged edges. The result was a movie that languished in critical purgatory for a decade until Scott released his seminal director’s cut in 1992. On the other hand, there are movies that everyone knows are going to struggle. Sadly for James Cameron and Tim Miller, producer and director of the forthcoming Terminator: Dark Fate, it appears the latest sequel to Cameron’s classic has already been written off. Reports suggest the film, which restores the timeline – and to a certain extent the main cast – overseen by Cameron in the original 1984 movie and its groundbreaking 1991 follow-up Terminator 2: Judgment Day, will open to just $35-40m at the key US box office. But much can change between now and the movie’s release date in six weeks’ time. Positive early reviews and word of mouth could build buzz for the project, and there are Terminator fans out there ready to turn this into a major smash if the creative team can restore the brooding, nightmarish, blue-collar futurism of the early films. It’s fair to ask why audiences have failed to get turned on by advance publicity. Trailers showing the return of Linda Hamilton’s Sarah Connor, now protecting a new protege (Natalia Reyes’ Dani Ramos) from termination by sophisticated machines from the future, have been relatively well received. Perhaps audiences have simply turned out too many times to catch previous sequels – the middling to dreadful Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, Terminator Salvation and Terminator Genisys – and found themselves leaving disappointed. Perhaps Cameron’s cache as a hands-on producer has been damaged by the lukewarm response to Robert Rodriguez’s Alita: Battle Angel, another movie the Avatar film-maker would originally have been expected to direct himself? An even more unpalatable prospect is that it is possible Dark Fate is suffering from the kind of misogynist backlash that affected the 2016 Ghostbusters remake. Dark Fate is almost as heavily focused on female protagonists, with everyone’s new favourite sci-fi queen Mackenzie Davis also joining the cast as a human with cyborg implants who has been sent from the future to protect Dani. There has been the usual vile response from sexist trolls in the wake of Paramount publishing images of its three female stars front and centre on the posters, even if such predictably myopic antipathy hasn’t made the kind of headlines that Ghostbusters or Star Wars: The Last Jedi did in similar circumstances. While Cameron has a slightly odd sense of ownership over the entire concept of championing strong women, it’s hard to argue with the fact his films have often done just that. But previous Terminator movies have frequently featured a male triumvirate of John Connor, Kyle Reese and the T-800 Terminator (Arnold Schwarzenegger) at their core, even if for some episodes one or more of those was presented as a shadowy or even unborn figure. There are suggestions that Edward Furlong may return as Connor in Dark Fate, potentially through some form of digital de-aging. What seems certain is that he and Connor are no longer at the heart of Terminator’s future. In every Terminator movie since the original it has been Skynet’s intention to defeat the male leader of the post-apocalypse human resistance, but in Dark Fate it is a young woman, Dani, who everyone is trying to murder or protect from the evil robot oppressors. If that is bothering the trolls – and there are hints in the latest trailer that Dani may be the mother of a future resistance leader, rather than the leader herself – then surely it holds out some hope for the rest of us. This might be a belated attempt by Cameron to wrest Terminator back from the men in suits and put it back on track, and frankly it would have been preferable if he could have been bothered to find time to direct (or even turn up on set). But at least he is finally switching up the narrative and sending us into unknown territory, with the apparent aim of delivering a new trilogy of movies. As Hamilton’s Connor tells us at the end of Terminator 2: “The unknown future rolls toward us. I face it for the first time with a sense of hope.”