The competition watchdog has suspended court proceedings against the ticketing website Viagogo, saying the company had made changes that addressed concerns the site was flouting laws designed to protect UK consumers. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) was seeking to have Viagogo found in contempt of court for persistently failing to comply with consumer law. The regulator had complained Viagogo was not doing enough to inform buyers they might be turned away from events at which the artist, venue or promoter was refusing entry to people who had bought tickets through Viagogo. The company was also publishing “misleading” information about the number of tickets available, it said, while some seat numbers were not being displayed on ticket listings. The regulator’s complaints were among the factors that led Google to ban Viagogo from paying to appear in adverts at the top of search results. The CMA said on Wednesday that Viagogo had made enough changes to the website that it no longer needed to pursue the legal action. Andrea Coscelli, the CMA’s chief executive, said: “The Viagogo website UK customers now visit is worlds apart from the one they faced before the CMA took action. Key information needed to make informed decisions before buying a ticket is now much clearer including on where you’ll sit in a venue and whether you might be turned away at the door.” He said the challenges faced by the CMA in forcing Viagogo to comply had strengthened its argument that it needed stronger enforcement powers, such as the ability to impose fines. “What is clearly not acceptable is the time it’s taken to get to this stage,” he said. “Stronger consumer powers are required in the secondary ticketing sector and we will continue to work with the government on the most effective way to achieve this. “We will keep up the pressure on Viagogo to ensure that it continues to comply with UK consumer protection law.” A Viagogo spokesperson said: “Viagogo is pleased it has been able to work with the CMA to find solutions to the final few areas of discussion, as confirmed by today’s statement. “We have strived at all times to ensure we are correctly applying the CMA order, this has been a complex and detailed process, and open dialogue with the market authority has been essential.”