Any budding screenwriters who want to pen a Hollywood blockbuster about the County Championship should investigate the 1984 season. A campaign that ran from April to September came down to the penultimate ball of a match in Somerset, with the fate of two counties hanging in the air at Taunton. The script would involve an underdog who nearly became a hero, a substitute fielder who earned legendary status for a county he never represented, panic on the streets of Chelmsford, agonising failure for one team and unadulterated delight for another. The story may not have the angle of a love interest but, come the end of 11 September 1984, Keith Fletcher probably kissed Richard Ollis in relief. In a topsy-turvy season, it felt inevitable that the title would be decided in the final set of fixtures. Defending champions Essex were neck and neck with Nottinghamshire for most of the year. As August drew to a close, it looked as if Notts had made the decisive move. Their win over Northamptonshire, coupled with Essex’s frustrating draw with Middlesex in their penultimate match, took Notts to within a point of their title rivals. Crucially, they had an extra match to play. “It’s looking a bit dodgy now,” said Essex skipper Keith Fletcher as Notts travelled down to Sussex to play their game in hand. “We’re just hoping for a monsoon to hit the south coast over the next few days.” Notts had won their three previous matches, with Richard Hadlee recently completing the double of 1,000 runs and 100 wickets – the first player to achieve that feat since Fred Titmus did it in 1967. Some called the county “Hadleeshire”, but Notts were far from a one-man team, with skipper Clive Rice, Chris Broad, opening batsman Tim Robinson, county wicketkeeper of the year Bruce French and spinner Eddie Hemmings all performing well that season. “Ideally, I would like to beat Sussex so we can go into our last match with Somerset needing only a few bonus points,” said Rice . “But it rarely works out the way you want it.” Very true. Notts could only draw at Sussex, which meant they went into the final week of the season with just a four-point lead. Essex were now slight favourites. “It was the best we could have hoped for and now I fancy our chances,” said Fletcher. “I always thought it would go to the last match, which is good for cricket because it keeps the interest alive all the way through.” Both sides were playing away but, while Essex were taking on second-bottom Lancashire, Notts would have to face a tricky match at Somerset. Essex thumped Lancashire in just two days at Old Trafford, the match wrapped up by 7pm on Monday 10 September. All eyes were now fixed on Taunton. “All we can do now is wait,” said Fletcher, who added that he would stay at home during the final day of the season. Notts were left with a very simple equation: beat Somerset to wrest the trophy from Fletcher’s hands. Going into the final day, Somerset led by 84 with all second-innings wickets intact. Predictably enough, Somerset captain Ian Botham would play a significant role in deciding the destination of the title. “I owe it to Essex not to declare at the wrong time,” Botham said on the eve of the championship conclusion. Botham set Notts a target of 297 from a minimum of 52 overs, but with spinners Vic Marks and Steve Booth bowling in tandem for 51.5 overs unchanged, Notts were able to face just under 60 overs. “A lot of thanks are due to Ian Botham for making such a fantastic game of it,” said Rice after the match. Broad and Robinson set the foundation for the run chase with an opening stand of 70. Reaching 159/3 with 20 overs remaining, Notts needed a further 138 to clinch the title, with Rice forming the backbone of the innings. Paul Johnson, Hadlee and French all played cameos and, with four overs remaining, Notts had reduced the target to 42 runs. But then came the first intervention of the day from substitute fielder Richard Ollis. Marks bowled a full toss to Rice and the Notts skipper could only look on in horror as he hit the ball straight to Ollis at deep square leg. Rice’s 98 from 109 balls had pushed his team to the brink of glory, yet when Kevin Cooper and Hemmings were both stumped charging Marks and Booth respectively, it looked as if Notts would fall just short. Enter Mike Bore. The 37-year-old had a career batting average of eight and was playing in just his third championship match of the season, so Notts supporters did not have much cause for excitement as he walked to the crease. Yet, with 27 runs required from two overs, Bore went on the attack, sending ripples all the way to Essex. “When I went out to bat I didn’t think we had a chance,” said Bore afterwards. “But I started to hit the ball well and we got closer.” After hitting 13 runs from Marks’ final over, Notts needed 14 more from the final six balls of the season, with one wicket remaining. First ball: Booth to Bore, four runs towards long-on. Ten to go. Second ball: Booth to Bore, four runs through the covers. Six required. Third ball: Booth to Bore, two runs. Four needed from three balls. “I thought we had had it as I drove into the ground,” Fletcher later admitted. He had spent the day fishing and painting his garage door but, with Somerset pushing Notts all the way, he made his way to Chelmsford. It now looked as if the scheduled party might turn into a wake. Fourth ball: Booth to Bore, blocked. Two balls left. Fifth ball: Booth to Bore. “If it had been a longer boundary I would have probably tried for two, but it was there to be hit over the short boundary and I went for it.” As the ball sailed towards the boundary, Bore thought he had won the title and possibly the freedom of Nottingham. But, just three yards short of glory, Ollis took a catch above his head that handed the title to Essex. “I’m terribly disappointed to lose out by just three yards with that final blow,” said Bore afterwards. “I should have had an extra lunch for strength.” Just after 6pm on the final day of the county season – and with only one ball left after Bore had tried to clear the rope – the county champions were finally crowned. “I’m really relieved we have all winter to recover from it,” said Rice, shocked by the nature of the defeat. “I’m 35 and feel 50.” The devastation of the Notts players was contrasted by the elation felt at Chelmsford. “When Bore got out I thought the roof of the clubhouse had come off as I ran in to join the rest of the lads,” said Fletcher. Becoming the first county to successfully defend the title since 1968, Fletcher immediately targeted a hat-trick of championships. But for now, it was time to celebrate. • This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter