German newspaper Bild say Manchester United want to sign Toni Kroos from Real Madrid and are willing to pay up the thick end of £67m to make a Premier League player of the central midfielder. Despite having failed to sign Paul Pogba in the summer transfer window, Madrid have not given up on prising the Frenchman away from Old Trafford and may use United’s interest in Kroos as leverage in the next round of tedious negotiations between the two clubs. According to the Times, United are also interested in signing James Maddison from Leicester City. In news that will strike terror into the hearts of more highly-strung Liverpool fans, Spanish news outlet AS say Barcelona and Madrid are preparing to duke it out in a bid to employ both Jürgen Klopp and Virgil van Dijk. While it would be rather weird if both Spanish sides weren’t interested in getting either or both men on board, the mere fact the story’s “out there” is bound to be a source of concern at Anfield. Expect Klopp to laugh off the notion of him leaving Liverpool any time soon when he faces the media before his side’s Champions League opener at Napoli on Tuesday night. Having revealed over the weekend that he is frustrated at not being a regular starter in Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s starting line-up, Nemanja Matic could find himself the subject of January interest from Italy. Inter and Milan are both reported to be interested in signing a player who played in Manchester United’s weekend win against Leicester, but said afterwards that he in unhappy at not being a more regular starter. “The coach is the man who picks the team and when you are on the bench you are not happy,” he said. But I am trying to convince [Solskjær] to change his mind and pick me to play.” Invariably the first name on Ole’s team-sheet, the long-term future of David de Gea remains up in the air but speculation abounds that he is about to ink a new four-year deal with United that will earn him £13.5m per year after tax. “I am pretty confident we will get this sorted,” said Solskjær. “David has never, ever said to me anything other than he loves the club, has had a fantastic time and wants to stay. So let’s just hope we get it over the line.” Also in the final year of his current deal like De Gea, Christian Eriksen is being far less cooperative and is refusing to sign any contract placed in front of him by Tottenham Hotspur’s bean counters. He will leave on a free transfer next summer, unless somebody makes an offer Tottenham can’t refuse in January. The Dane is apparently still hell bent on joining Real Madrid. Yet to make an appearance for Juventus this season, Mario Mandzukic continues to be linked with a move away from Turin. The Croatian striker was linked with moves to both Manchester United and Bayern Munich during the summer, but neither came to pass and now speculation abounds he may play out his dotage in the USA. MLS side Los Angeles FC are understood to be interested in bringing the 33-year-old to the Banc of California Stadium in January, while Juventus will happily let him sling his hook and train with whoever he likes if he agrees a deal with any potential suitors in the meantime.