Fregola, from Sardinia, is a pasta-like grain similar to couscous, except that the kernels are much fatter and therefore more satisfying to bite into. It is easy to cook and a great vehicle for robust flavours. Here, I toss fregola with mussels spiced with the pork salumi paste ’nduja for a simple, fast supper packed with flavour. If you are struggling to find fregola, the Middle-Eastern brand Zaytoun sell an almost identical sized couscous called maftoul, which is equally delicious. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4-6 3 tbsp olive oil1 large red onion, peeled and finely chopped3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely choppedSalt250g fregola or maftoul 300g baby tomatoes, halved200ml white wine40g ’nduja paste1.5kg mussels, thoroughly cleaned and de-bearded1 big handful parsley, choppedCrusty bread, to serve Warm the oil over a medium heat in a large, wide casserole or pan for which you have a lid (or that an upturned frying pan can snugly cover). Add the onion and garlic, season with a few pinches of salt, and sweat for 10 minutes, until softened. Meanwhile, bring a pan of salted water to a boil and cook the fregola, shaving two minutes off the cooking time stated on the packet (usually around 10-12 minutes): you are going to cook it again with the mussels and want to maintain some bite to the grains. Drain and set aside. Add the tomatoes to the onions, simmer for two minutes, then stir in the wine, fregola and ’nduja. Turn up the heat and simmer for another two minutes, to allow the grains to absorb the flavours. Now add the mussels, put the lid on and cook for a further four to five minutes, shaking regularly, until the mussels have all opened (dead ones won’t open and you must throw these away). Divide between bowls, sprinkle with the parsley and serve at once with crusty bread to mop up any stray juices. Any leftover ’nduja will transform many suppers: add to tomato sauces, heat and drizzle over pizzas or breakfast eggs, or even use to sauce a sauteed fillet of fish. Leftover fregola or maftoul can be turned into delicious autumnal salads, to accompany grilled vegetables or slow-cooked lamb.