Storm clouds are gathering over Rutland. If the council approves a planning application for a site on the outskirts of Oakham, the county will become the last in England to get a McDonald’s. The fast food chain says it would bring 65 jobs, half of them full-time. Many residents are against the idea, though. “It’s disgusting – Oakham is not the place for it,” Sandra Wells told the council. “I’m proud that Rutland is the only county not to have a McDonald’s,” another resident said. Environmentally, politically and aesthetically, McDonald’s riles people like few other companies, and battles can turn ugly fast. If recent history is anything to go by, the company’s opponents in Rutland would be forgiven for feeling discouraged. This summer, despite a petition signed by 921 people, McDonald’s was given permission to open a drive-thru in the Lake District town of Ulverston. “It will cause so much litter,” the petition said. “Ulverston will become obese!!” Last October, the town of Dolus d’Oléron on the island of Oléron off the French Atlantic coast, lost a four-year legal battle to prevent a McDonald’s drive-thru being built. The mayor, Grégory Gendre, originally refused permission, but a court later ruled that the decision was unlawful. Gendre continued the fight, with the help of public donations and a petition of nearly 83,000 signatures. When they lost, however, it left the town with €105,000 to pay in fines. And it will soon have a McDonald’s anyway. In the town of Tecoma, in Victoria, Australia, local people who did not want a McDonald’s ended up in physical confrontations with the police. In 2011, the council had ruled against McDonald’s, but the decision was later overturned. Protesters responded by planting a community garden, organising a march of 4,000 people and occupying the site on a 24-hour basis until they were forcibly removed. The restaurant was picketed when it opened in 2014 and the protests continued there for years. Today it is still open. If the protesters of Rutland want encouragement, they are better off looking at Tavistock in Devon. A new McDonald’s was boycotted on opening there in 1997, then closed nine years later for lack of customers. The best weapon against McDonald’s, it seems, is simply not eating there.