After the format’s abortive beginnings in the early 1990s, the live-action video game, best described as choose-your-own-adventure television, is enjoying a renaissance. Interest in an experiment once dismissed as an ill-advised splicing of incompatible media (see squirmingly camp examples such as Night Trap) has been supercharged by Bandersnatch, an interactive episode of Black Mirror broadcast at the end of last year. Erica, a lavishly produced thriller about a commune-cum-hospital for troubled teenage girls follows Charlie Brooker’s mode. You play as Erica, a nightmare-racked orphan (played engagingly by Holly Earl, best-known for her role as Agnes in the Channel 4 drama Humans) returning to the institution that defined her childhood. Founded by Erica’s father, the place is unnerving, with tropes including a syringe-wielding matron, murmuring inmates and an ominous, polite and well-dressed director. Every detail, from the ritualistic animal masks in the commune’s lobby to the motif of an ancient symbol scratched on just about every surface, from wall to skin, shrieks 1970s-style institutional abuse. The oppressive ratcheting of atmosphere is tempered by the game’s regular demands for interaction from the player. The designers urge players to use their smartphone to control the game, and with good reason: the swipes and rubs of one’s finger on glass mimics closely the action on screen as, for example, Erica cleans a brass plaque in order to read an old inscription, flicks open a Zippo lighter, or pulls a photo from a sheaf of papers. These somewhat pedestrian interactions sit alongside some stylish effects where, for example, you trail your finger back and forth over the phone screen to trigger a flashback that starts playing in the marks left by your impression. The transitions between video are ostentatiously elegant and show just how far technology has come in two decades. And yet the old questions remain over how much the interactivity and branching paths add to a story that, it seems, could have been just as well told in a traditional mode. No such criticism could be levelled at Telling Lies, a spiritual sequel to designer Sam Barlow’s award-winning 2015 game, Her Story. In Erica and Bandersnatch the player’s role is to jostle the story along by poking at the scenery and, occasionally, choosing one of a few narrative branches to follow. Telling Lies, by contrast, is a thriller built from a thousand fragments, which must be sifted and pieced together as much in the player’s mind as on the screen. You play as a woman who, via her laptop, has access to a vast archive of secretly recorded video calls pulled from the computers and mobile phones of four distinct individuals. The clips, which last between 30 seconds and 10 minutes, are sifted by searching for keywords that appear in the footage. Type “pistol”, for example, and you’ll receive a trove of videos to view. Searching terms is a little like playing Battleship: you fire a salvo and see what strikes. As you piece together the lives of the four subjects, a digital treasure trail emerges. The results of one search term inspire you to query the database for another, following leads much like a private investigator. The result is a truly nonlinear narrative, the shape and effect of which is entirely unique to each player. The plotline builds and twists according to personal whim and interest, and much of the narrative threading is performed in the mind of the viewer, rather than in the authorial arrangement of facts. Ingenious, moody, and curiously well produced for such a constrained narrative lens, Telling Lies is a singular work, whose appeal lies as much in its format as in its presentation and performance. Control(Remedy Entertainment, 505 Games; PS4, Xbox One, PC)Finnish studio Remedy has an obsession with cinematic thrillers built at the stratospheric end of the budgetary spectrum: the developer’s previous games, Quantum Break and Alan Wake were luxurious flops. A more traditional kind of video game than the current crop of interactive fiction experiments, Control casts players as Jesse Faden, director of the clandestine Federal Bureau of Control (FBC). This US government agency functions a bit like the Ministry of Magic from the Harry Potter universe, with oversight of paranormal activity. No wizardy hats and snaggled wands here, however: supernatural matters are dealt with in the traditional American way – down the barrel of service weapon (albeit one with the power to shape-shift). Faden must explore the labyrinthine skyscraper office known as “Tthe Oldest House” in search of answers, not only about the Bureau, but also the supernatural events that defined her childhood. It’s a supremely stylish game, more fluidly enjoyable than the studio’s previous efforts, but expect a multitude of exposition spectres to fight through en route to the action.