Australia’s 39-21 victory over Fiji in their World Cup opener was marred by controversy after Reece Hodge’s high tackle on Peceli Yato went unpunished, calling into question World Rugby’s clampdown just two days into the tournament. Fiji are understood to be privately furious that Hodge was not sanctioned for his try-saving intervention that forced Yato from the field with a concussion in the first half. Yato had been instrumental in Fiji’s flying start to the match but as he closed in on the try-line after 25 minutes, Hodge swept round to make the tackle. The Australia wing appeared to make contact with Yato’s head, and any use of the arms was minimal, but Hodge went unpunished. Yato left the field and failed his head injury assessment, meaning he was unable to return. John McKee, Fiji’s head coach, said afterwards he had not seen a replay of the incident, but added that Yato’s departure was costly for his side. “Some injuries didn’t help us – especially losing Peceli Yato early on in the game. Losing him to concussion was a big loss for us,” he said. The Fiji captain, Dominiko Waqaniburotu, revealed he asked the referee Ben O’Keeffe to consult the TMO, Rowan Kitt, who determined that no further action was required. Fiji were planning on raising the incident with the citing commissioner. Michael Cheika, Austalia’s head coach, also said he had not seen the Hodge incident, claiming instead that O’Keeffe and his assistants had singled out flanker David Pocock during the match. “I heard his name mentioned between them on commentary at least half a dozen times in their own chat, when he hadn’t even been involved in the ruck,” he said. “I’m not sure what the focus on him is because he’s only played one game since he’s been out all year.” Under World Rugby’s decision-making framework for high tackles, introduced in May, there is a strong argument that Hodge should have been shown either a yellow or red card, and that Fiji ought to have been awarded a penalty try. On the eve of the tournament, World Rugby’s head of referees, Alain Rolland, warned that officials would be more rigorous than ever in policing high tackles but in the opening two matches there has been little evidence of that materialising. Fiji were leading 11-8 at the time of the incident thanks to Yato’s opening try, and while Hodge proceeded to score Australia’s second try before half-time, the Pacific Islanders went into the interval 14-12 ahead. Waisea Nayacalevu seized on a loose ball and ran clear under the posts early in the second half but the Wallabies rallied with tries through Tolu Latu (two), Samu Kerevi and Marika Koroibete to complete their biggest ever World Cup comeback. It must be said that Australia’s quality shone through in the final quarter, their set-piece – both the scrum and the driving maul – was significantly superior and there is no guarantee the result would have been any different had Yato stayed on the pitch and Hodge been sanctioned. At the same time, it left a sour taste in the mouth. All in all, it is simply a great shame that Yato was not able to continue. He emerged from the tunnel but it was clear he was not coming back on when he lay down flat on his back, evidently distraught, by the side of the pitch. After Ben Volavola’s opening penalty, Yato scored a glorious try to put Fiji 8-0 ahead, combining with Josua Tuisova and Nayacalevu down the right after the ball was swiftly moved from the left. Australia were shellshocked — Levani Botia and Semi Radradra producing some thumping hits and Yato carving through the Wallabies defence. Michael Hooper put Australia on the board with a close-range try but Volavola’s accurate boot kept Fiji in the ascendancy. He continued to do so after Yato made way, enough to give Fiji a half-time lead despite Hodge’s well-worked try in the right-hand corner. Fiji were given renewed hope when Nayacalevu pounced but ultimately Australia gathered themselves and ground out a lead. Hodge kicked Australia back to within six points and in between Latu’s two tries form close-range driving mauls, Botia was sent to the sin-bin with Fiji’s discipline rapidly deteriorating, the game effectively up. Kerevi and Koroibete – both of whom were born in Fiji – added late tries for good measure but the bonus-point victory will be greeted more with relief than any great celebrations, with Wales coming up in their next Pool D match, in Tokyo next Sunday.