The jockey William Carson admitted taking “eight or nine lines” of cocaine in a pub on a Monday night, just two days before riding in races at Lingfield and Kempton, a disciplinary panel has heard. Carson, who has been battling depression for years, told officials he took the drug on odd occasions last winter as a means of escape from his illness, but it got him into trouble when a test found 1,750 nanograms of cocaine per millilitre of urine, more than 10 times over the threshold for a positive. The grandson of the five-times champion jockey Willie Carson, he has now been given a six-month ban from race-riding. However, he may be back riding in a matter of days, having been suspended since 4 April, when the British Horseracing Authority became aware he had failed the test, and the punishment has been backdated. As Carson rose to leave the hearing room, he was given a parting lecture by Jenny Pitman, the Grand National-winning former trainer who was sitting on the panel. “You’ve got my sympathies,” she said, “but I can’t let you leave without explaining the adverse effects of taking cocaine. It’s not just you, it’s your family.” When Carson told her he had children aged five and three, she replied: “You want to treasure them. I urge you to seek professional help and don’t you ever do that again. “You need somewhere where you can tell your secrets.” Recalling that the horses she trained were her “great mates” and a source of solace in hard times, she added: “I could tell them anything and I wasn’t going to read about it in the paper a few days later.” When interviewed by the BHA, Carson said he took cocaine “purely because I wasn’t happy and I was just trying to make myself feel good”. He had been battling depression since early 2015, was sometimes prescribed medication for it and was prevented by it from riding in races from November to February last winter. He said he was introduced to the drug by a friend, not a racing insider, who also had depression. He was taking it for the fourth time on the night that led to his positive test. The panel chairman, James O’Mahoney, told Carson: “Gone are the days when people said to those suffering from depression, ‘Pull yourself together,’ or regarded it as Monday morning syndrome. It is a serious and difficult illness and we fully appreciate what you have gone through over a long period of time. We earnestly hope the cloud has lifted or soon will lift. “The second thing to say is that horse racing is a dangerous game. If people are riding horses travelling very fast with cocaine in their system, that presents every danger to themselves, the other riders and the horses. Quite rightly, the authority comes down very hard on people who have done something as stupid as you did.” Carson declined to comment as he left the hearing. His solicitor, Rory Mac Neice, indicated the jockey was keen to return to race-riding in the near future and has been riding work for the Newmarket trainer David Elsworth, who is aware of Carson’s troubles and has been supportive. Earlier Mac Neice told the hearing: “Racing can be a lonely place to work and for jockeys very isolating. They spend many hours a day alone in the car. Most of the time their job involves them losing. Most of the time their job involves depriving themselves of what most people would normally eat. “When you win, it’s mostly about the horse. When you lose, it’s mostly about you. It is difficult to think of a profession with more in the way of red flags.” Newmarket 1.50 She's Got You 2.25 Promissory 3.00 Daahyeh 3.35 King Of Comedy 4.10 Society Lion 4.45 Mount Everest (nap) 5.20 DestroyerWorcester 2.00 Royal Plaza 2.35 Follow The Bear 3.10 Stream Lady 3.45 Duke Street (nb) 4.20 Ballyellis 4.55 The Vollan 5.30 Ventura DragonHaydock 2.15 Casting Spells 2.50 Whatabird 3.25 Gifted Ruler 4.00 Ainsdale 4.35 Landa Beach 5.10 Lord Of The Rock 5.40 Earl Of HarrowNewcastle 5.25 Sulafaat 6.00 Gorgeous General 6.30 Crash Helmet 7.00 Home Before Dusk 7.30 Fard 8.00 Magic J 8.30 Epeius