Scotland’s World Cup hopes have suffered a third major blow in as many days after the scrum-half Ali Price was ruled out for the remainder of the tournament. Price suffered a foot and ankle knock in Sunday’s abject defeat to Ireland and will play no further part. Edinburgh’s Henry Pyrgos is now flying to Japan to join up with Gregor Townsend’s squad. But the news means more disappointment for the head coach as it follows on from the dismal 27-3 loss to Joe Schmidt’s team and Monday’s confirmation that the flanker Hamish Watson’s World Cup campaign is also over due to a serious knee injury. Price was spotted on crutches as the team boarded a bullet train to Kobe on Monday. But he has now been given the news he was dreading after an X-ray confirmed he would have to return home for treatment. The change will mean a second World Cup appearance for Pyrgos. He is scheduled to arrive in Japan on Thursday and take his place in the 31-man group preparing to face Samoa at the Kobe Misaki Stadium on Monday. Townsend said in a statement: “We’re disappointed for Ali to have to return home so early in the tournament. Both Ali and Hamish had invested a lot of effort into being in their best physical shape for the World Cup and it’s a shame that they’ve only been involved in one game. However, we have a lot of belief in our wider group and the two new players, Magnus Bradbury and Henry Pyrgos, who have been given this opportunity.” Meanwhile, Japan have accused Cian Healy of illegal scrummaging tactics, cranking up the tension before Saturday’s World Cup meeting with Ireland. The tighthead prop Yusuke Kizu could find himself directly facing down the in-form Healy in Shizuoka – but had no qualms calling out the British and Irish Lions star’s set-piece technique. “Their loosehead prop steps out, so they try to attack from the side, that’s my impression of their scrum,” said Kizu. “Ireland’s forwards really attack close to the rucks so we need to have double collisions to stop their momentum, and we need to execute our system for us to achieve that. “It was a positive tight-five review from the Russia game in that our defence really came up hard and we were able to force them back.” Johnny Sexton did not train fully on Tuesday but Ireland still expect him to be fit for the game in Shizuoka. The skills coach Richie Murphy insisted it “wouldn’t be unusual” for the fly-half Sexton to sit out a training session only 48 hours after playing in a Test. Murphy also revealed Peter O’Mahony and Bundee Aki have passed their head injury checks and returned to full training, leaving both available for the Japan clash. Italy have made 10 changes to the starting XV that defeated Namibia 47-22 for their second match against Canada on Thursday. Only Jayden Hayward, Luca Bigi, Tommaso Allan, Tommaso Benvenuti and Braam Steyn also started against Namibia. Of those five, only Allan at fly-half and Bigi at hooker start in the same position. The lock David Sisi, who was born in Rinteln, Germany, will become the first German-born player to feature in Rugby World Cup match.