Let’s number the qualities Lucy Ellinson brings to the role of Macbeth. Foremost among them is intelligence. Sharp and lucid, she upturns the play’s set-text familiarity, making the language – and its moral dilemmas – her own. She’s tough, too. Her hair a regulation crew cut, her attitude lean and athletic, she has the ferocious gait of a well-drilled soldier. You wouldn’t want to cross her. For all that, she is a reflective kind of fighter, given to introspection, like a battlefield Hamlet. You’d like to know more about her same-sex marriage to Ony Uhiara’s high-spirited Lady Macbeth, because the traditional split between Macbeth as brutal military force and Lady Macbeth as the ambitious power behind the throne is ambiguous here. Surely Ellinson is too subtle a player to be so easily swayed by her wife’s crude machinations, yet she readily goes along with the murderous plan. You wonder, too, about what the couple see in each other. It raises a question, in Christopher Haydon’s noisy, dystopian production, about what motivates this Macbeth. Yes, the techno-driven witches put the promise of power in her head, but she doesn’t seem the sort to be hoodwinked by superstition. More to the point, she is too sensitive to be labelled a tyrant. Paul Hickey’s commanding Macduff calls her a “fiend of Scotland”, but fiendish doesn’t seem right. Her bloody deeds have not brutalised her – they have made her vulnerable and lost. She grows gaunt and distressed. All of which means, as the plan goes horribly wrong, that we lose sight of what created the tragedy. Haydon’s production is not short of ideas. They include the murder of Banquo at a fake roadworks, the banquet as a balloon-strewn masked ball with musical chairs and a porter played by Rachel Denning as a techie dealing with a power outage. Colourful and witty though such elements are, they distract from the dramatic thrust. The tension builds as Macduff learns of his children’s murder and the backlash begins, but there is too little sense of what Macbeth has lost and why she threw it away. • At Royal Exchange, Manchester, until 19 October.