There was much excitement in the kitchen this week with the arrival of a new oven. Mine had been running a little hot, took forever to heat up and the light inside hadn’t been working for a decade. It was one of two, the second being a much newer and more efficient affair, and being more accurate is the one in which we test recipes. The original had done 20 years’ service and was due to go wherever it is that old ovens go to die. Dismantled for parts apparently. It must have carried a donor card. My oven had quite a life, seeing me through hundreds of weekly columns, half a dozen books and a score of currant-freckled Christmas cakes. Sometimes, especially when I was writing a book, it seemed it was never off. Well, goodnight old thing. Sweet dreams. A new oven, especially one where the cook can once again see through the glass door, is the very best sort of present. There is nothing cheffy or flash about this one, but it is a relief to find the door will actually stay open while I retrieve the baked potatoes, so there will be fewer scars on my left arm, and the meat thermometer is now integrated so an alarm – which, so far, has proved itself to be spot on – tells me when my Sunday roast is ready. Much good comes from being brave with the peppers. Let their skins turn black in spots My new piece of kit was christened with two perfectly seasonal dinners of peppers and courgettes. The peppers were roasted until their skins puffed and blackened, their flesh rendered soft and sweet. Half a dozen courgettes, the plump round variety, were toasted until translucent then served with a deeply autumnal sauce of roast tomatoes and fennel. We ate the peppers with green wheat speckled with chopped mint and salted ricotta; the courgettes came with thick triangles of rosemary-spiked focaccia. I imagine a cook remembers their ovens in much the same way a driver remembers the cars they have owned. But shiny modern kitchen kit is hardly in the classic car league and I doubt is capable of holding memories and stories in the way, say, an old Aga does. That said, good things have come from this one already, and, perhaps as a sign of things to come, is already battle scarred from a tray of ribs whose mustard and maple-syrup glaze bubbled over and left its signature indelibly on the bottom – of which more another time. Much good will come from being brave with the peppers, letting their skins turn black in patches. It will add a smoky quality and ensure the flesh is truly soft and the roasting juices sweet and caramel coloured. Freekeh, toasted green wheat, has its own smoky character, too, lending an altogether autumn note.Serves 4 red or orange peppers 5light vegetable stock 1 litrefreekeh 150gcoriander leaves 10gmint leaves 20gparsley 10gsalted ricotta 40g or to taste Set the oven at 220C/gas mark 8. Slice the peppers in half lengthways then pull out and discard their stalks and seeds. Place the peppers cut-side down in a large roasting tin, place in the preheated oven and roast for 20-30 minutes, until the skins have darkened. Bring the vegetable stock to the boil in a medium-sized saucepan. Rinse the freekeh in a sieve under cold running water then tip into the boiling stock, lower the heat and simmer for 15 minutes. Finely chop the coriander, mint and parsley and put them in a mixing bowl. When the peppers are tender, remove from the oven, transfer to a bowl, cover with a plate and leave for 15 minutes. Peel the skins from the peppers, saving any juice that collects in the bowl, then place them on a serving dish. Drain the freekeh, tip into the chopped herbs and season with black pepper and any reserved pepper juices. Coarsely grate or crumble the salted ricotta into the freekeh and check the seasoning. Spoon the freekeh on top of the peppers, finishing with a little more ricotta if you wish. I used the rondo de Nice variety of late-summer squash, because they were irresistible, but any courgette will do. Slice the long ones lengthways and baste them as they roast.Serves 4 plum tomatoes 1.5kg, largefennel 2 bulbsonion 1, largerosemary 6 sprigsgarlic a whole headolive oil 8 tbsp, plus a little extracourgettes or round summer squash 8 Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Cut the tomatoes in half lengthways and place them in a large roasting tin. Cut the fennel bulbs in half lengthways then into strips about 2cm thick, then add them to the tomatoes. Peel and slice the onion into thick rings and add to the tomatoes. Pull the needles from the rosemary twigs and add them, too. Tuck the head of garlic, whole and unpeeled, among the tomatoes. Pour 8 tbsp of olive oil over, season with salt and black pepper and tumble everything together so the vegetables and aromatics are coated, then place in the oven. Cut the courgettes in half, toss with salt, pepper and enough olive oil to moisten them then place, cut-side down, in a second roasting tin. Put them in the oven and leave for an hour or so, until they are soft, translucent and nicely toasted. An occasional baste will be beneficial. Remove the tomatoes from the oven. Break the garlic head into cloves, then squeeze each one to extract the toasted flesh. Stir the garlic among the tomatoes and fennel then process to a thick sauce using a blender or food processor. Return the sauce to the tin and heat thoroughly over a moderate heat. Check the seasoning then ladle into a serving dish. Place the roasted courgettes amongst the sauce and serve. Follow Nigel on Twitter @NigelSlater