The boyfriend in the missing girl police video. The murderer who can’t stop himself revisiting the scene of the crime. The subconscious nearly always betrays you. Midway through an afternoon on which he had avoided facing 45 minutes of prime minister’s questions and a further two hours of interrogation at the liaison committee by proroguing parliament, Boris Johnson decided he would subject himself to a gruelling 14 minutes of cross-examination in “people’s PMQs” on Facebook Live. This was to be guilt expressed as hollow narcissism. Tinged with utter contempt. The only consolation is he must hate himself almost as much as he hates us. The 30-second trailer featured Johnson looking busy and promising to “work flat out to give the country the leadership it deserves”. He really should stop talking Britain down. I know we’ve all made some stupid decisions over the past few years, but surely we haven’t sunk this low? This was politics that took the entire UK for mugs. A simple trolling exercise to which even The Jeremy Kyle Show wouldn’t have stooped. From a set that looked much like the scene of Nicolae Ceausescu’s last broadcast before his execution – a wobbly union jack and a toy bus, behind a makeshift desk, the feed went live and a grinning face flickered into view. Smirky McSmirkface. More quiz show host than prime minister. “I worry that people feel disconnected from politics,” he began. Which is why he had felt obliged to mislead the queen, prorogue parliament, sack 21 moderate MPs and threaten to ignore the law of the country. Grand larceny in the name of democracy. “But we’ve got some pretty tough questions here.” Probably from girly swots. Though luckily he had been able to weed all of those ones out, so the only questions he had to answer were those that had been hand-picked so that even a complete idiot couldn’t screw up. The first question was from Rosie. Could he guarantee that everyone would have somewhere to live? Absolutely. He would do everything in his power to make sure he didn’t become homeless. Would the NHS get extra money? Of course. He was building 12 hospitals single-handedly and was on the verge of a medical breakthrough that would cure all cancers. Boris prodded a pudgy finger absent-mindedly at an iPad. A question from Emma popped up. Why was he behaving in such an anti-democratic manner? “Pifflepafflewifflewaffle,” he said. Nothing could be further from the truth, it was MPs who were being undemocratic by insisting on parliamentary democracy. He was just this honest guy who had wanted to take five weeks off to work on a Queen’s speech in which he could promise whatever he liked because there would be an election long before anyone realised he couldn’t deliver it. A follow-up question from Elizabeth in Balmoral, demanding to know why he had deliberately lied to her and dragged her into a constitutional crisis was hastily deleted by an unseen hand that unplugged the power cable to the internet router. Um, let’s move on to something a bit easier, Johnson burbled. When would we be leaving the EU? “On 31 October,” he said. Though he couldn’t say how. Or whether the Northern Ireland backstop would or would not be removed. Definitely. Maybe.… Andrea L from Westminster wanted to know if it was right to try to conceal the details of Operation Yellowhammer. “Very good question, Andrea,” Boris mumbled. He couldn’t agree more. It was far better for people not to worry themselves about the fact that some of them would almost certainly die. They might even get run over and killed on their way home tonight. Or hit by an asteroid. With any luck. Then he wouldn’t have to choose which bits of the plan not to reveal. The questions came thick and fast. Dom C was in C&A and couldn’t make up his mind whether to buy the green or blue puffa gilet. Green, definitely. It would go down a storm when they all got to meet some really poor people on their trips north. Carrie S wondered if he could buy some more dog food. Sajid J begged to be released from house arrest so he could announce the opening of a new duty free shop at Scratchwood Services. Kwasi K wanted all judges killed. Bit extreme, but he had a point. “Gosh,” said Johnson. Was that the time? He had to bring the people’s PMQs to a close. He’d have loved to carry on but he was all wrung out. He’d given so much of himself. No Clown Prince could have done more. He had the country exactly where he wanted it. A laughing stock. Classic Dom.