Anyone who says New Zealand’s opening game against South Africa will have no bearing on the outcome of the 2019 Rugby World Cup is either ducking reality or being wilfully evasive. Should the All Blacks lose their first pool fixture in World Cup history it will be a major deal, both for the nations concerned and every other tournament contender. While the All Blacks head coach, Steve Hansen, insists the beaten side can still gallop to glory on the same stretch of turf in Yokohama on 2 November, he knows the importance of World Cup momentum more than most. No previous champions have ever lost first up and still gone on to hoist the Webb Ellis Cup. At World Cups the slow-starting tortoise rarely overhauls the hare. The Springboks are a decent case study: in 1995 and 2007 it was their respective morale-boosting early wins against Australia and England that catapulted them towards their greatest triumphs. Not without reason have they chosen to kick off in Japan with their strongest, most settled XV, all hungry for a plateful of thinly-sliced Kiwi sashimi. There is, of course, a flip side. A comprehensive defeat would puncture South Africa’s genuine pre-tournament optimism and suggest New Zealand’s potential vulnerability has been exaggerated. There continues to be a sense, even so, that the defending champions will have to dig deeper than ever this time. A glance at the ages of the two starting XVs reinforces the point: the All Blacks’ walk-on team contains no fewer than six players aged over 30, compared with two in the opposition ranks. Kieran Read and Ben Smith are 33 while Sonny Bill Williams is 34. Japan is home to the world’s most elderly population and Hansen’s selection is fitting in nicely. Given Richie McCaw, 34, and Dan Carter, 33, were not exactly a liability at the last World Cup, however, the All Black management are optimistic the doubts raised by their side’s 47-26 defeat to Australia in Perth last month will be swiftly quashed. “It’s the same noise we heard last time,” sighed Hansen this week. “You get two types, I reckon. You get those who definitely don’t want us to win because it’s not in their interests. Then you get the other group who desperately want us to win and they’re all nervous because we haven’t played any games. As soon as we get this tournament under way we’ll get rid of all that peripheral noise.” Maybe. Wherever they go, the All Blacks never get to wear the cloak of anonymity or enjoy the luxury of sneaking under the radar. This time around, though, the pre-tournament “noise” has been perfectly fair and legitimate. The great Brodie Retallick is still missing with a shoulder problem and a number of other teams, South Africa included, look more threatening than they did four years ago. There can be no disputing, for starters, the dynamism of South Africa’s ball carriers once they get on to the front foot. Duane Vermeulen, winning his 50th cap in the Springbok back row, may be a similar vintage to Read but he has been outstanding under Rassie Erasmus. The hooker Malcolm Marx and the lock Eben Etzebeth will take similarly few steps backwards, with the influential Sale scrum-half Faf du Plessis deftly directing the monster trucks in front of him. There is also the counterattacking brilliance of Cheslin Kolbe and Willie le Roux, although Hansen insists there is scant mystery attached to the Springbok territory-based kicking strategy and associated power game. “It’s easy to say what they’re going to do, it’s a little harder to stop.” If the ball turns out to be wet and greasy it could be tougher still. As important as playing in the right areas, though, will be keeping 15 players on the field. The New Zealand lock Scott Barrett, red-carded against the Wallabies, has already found to his cost that reckless tackles can lead to severe sanctions. He is now about to be reunited with the very same French referee, Jérôme Garcès, who sent him off last month. “We’ve had the briefings so we’re aware of how they’re going to be ruling on high shots and foul play,” confirmed a penitent Barrett. “Possibly I’ve had a bit of a bad habit in the past but I’ve addressed that. Getting the height right in the tackle is a big part of it.” It all makes for a tantalising showdown between two of rugby’s proudest nations who, between them, have won four of the last six Rugby World Cups. There is an argument that finishing second in Pool B might secure a relatively easier path to the final but surprise results elsewhere may yet transform that equation. Hansen, either way, will be spared any number of pointed questions should his side win. “If we lose the game by a massive margin there will be hysteria and probably rightly so.” A far more preferable outcome from a Kiwi perspective would be a dry day, a brace of eye-catching World Cup debuts by their talented young wingers Sevu Reece and George Bridge and an authoritative fly-half display from Richie Mo’unga. The All Blacks also have plenty of experience on the bench, which may well be required. This, even so, is South Africa’s opportunity to make a real statement to all future opponents. Start strongly and the Boks will genuinely feel they can go all the way.