Rebellious former cabinet ministers will have a showdown meeting with Boris Johnson on Monday, as the former justice secretary David Gauke said he believed the national interest would come first if he faced deselection for opposing a no-deal Brexit. Gauke, one of several ministers who resigned from the cabinet after Johnson became prime minister, is among a number of ex-cabinet ministers who will back moves in parliament next week to legislate against no deal. A cross-party alliance of MPs opposed to no deal are expected to begin moves on Tuesday to table a bill mandating Johnson to ask the EU for a further extension to the UK’s membership, which they hope to complete including passage through the House of Lords by the beginning of next week before parliament is prorogued. Gauke said he hoped Johnson would not follow through with reported threats that any Conservative MP who voted against the government next week would face deselection at the next election. “Sometimes there is a point where ... you have to judge between your own personal interests and the national interest. And the national interest has to come first,” he told Sky News’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday. “But, I hope it doesn’t come to that, and I hope cooler and calmer heads will look at this and think that trying to split the Conservative party in this way is not a sensible way forward for the Conservative party, or indeed for the country.”  The Observer breaks the story that Boris Johnson has sought legal advice on closing parliament for five weeks Other media organisations begin to receive leaks that Johnson will make a statement on prorogation Three privy counsellors, including Jacob Rees-Mogg, travel to Balmoral to tell the Queen of the prorogation plan. Cabinet ministers are informed by conference call Sonia Khan, adviser to Sajid Javid, is escorted from No 10 by an armed police officer after being summarily sacked by Dominic Cummings. Javid has no prior knowledge of the sacking Javid confronts Johnson in an angry meeting Javid says his relationship with Johnson is “fantastic”. Tens of thousands protest the prorogation. Cross-party group of MPs steps up preparation for blocking no deal when parliament makes a brief return  The chancellor's spending review is likely to be overshadowed by rows over prorogation, Brexit and Cummings  The state opening of parliament and Queen's speech marks the new session The former chancellor Philip Hammond had previously said plans to withdraw the whip from Conservative MPs if they vote against the government’s policy on Brexit were “staggeringly hypocritical” given that eight members of the current cabinet had defied the party whip this year. Gauke said he and other senior Conservatives would meet Johnson on Monday, ahead of parliament’s return on Tuesday. “I want to hear from him as to what is his plan to deliver a deal,” he said. “When are we putting forward proposals to deal with this backstop issue? And, I want to hear how he plans to deliver the legislation if we get a deal by October 31, because at the moment, frankly, I can’t see how he’s got time to do that.” Gauke said he disagreed with the planned prorogation of parliament for five weeks but stopped short of calling it a coup. “I think the likelihood is that given the widespread sense parliament should be sitting during these crucial weeks in late September and early October, parliament would have sought to ensure that there were extra days that parliament was sitting during the conference recess period,” he said. “And one of the reasons why I think the government has done that is to close that possibility off.” Gauke said detail of the legislation “will become very apparent in the next few days”. “I don’t believe that no deal has a mandate from the 2016 referendum. I don’t think it has got the support of parliament. And, the problem is that if we don’t act in this week, I think that it is likely that parliament will be excluded from this process.” The international development secretary, Alok Sharma, told Tory colleagues to “be very clear whose side you are on” if they rebelled against the government, accusing them of “siding with the likes of Jeremy Corbyn, John McDonnell”. He told Sky News: “Are you on the side of people who want to frustrate Brexit? People who would actually ruin the economy, people who frankly, at the end of the day, are not prepared to stand up for Britain? Or do you want to stand with the people and deliver on the referendum result?” In an interview with the Sunday Times, Johnson suggested Conservative rebels were scuppering the UK’s chance of sealing a new deal with the EU. However, on Sunday the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, again insisted he would not scrap the Irish backstop or amend the withdrawal agreement. Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, Barnier said: “I am not optimistic about avoiding a no-deal scenario, but we should all continue to work with determination. “On the EU side, we had intense discussions with EU member states on the need to guarantee the integrity of the EU’s single market, while keeping that border fully open. In this sense, the backstop is the maximum amount of flexibility that the EU can offer to a non-member state.”