‘In the darkness, you move towards the light,” says Catherine Reynolds. We’re eating pastries in her front room and talking about how she came to paint imperfect stripes and dots on vintage furniture and fabric. “When things shine brighter you instinctively move towards them,” she continues. “And because you’re in such a dark place, you don’t really think about what the light is. You just go towards it. That’s how I ended up in Rye and that’s how Polka started: it was a light and I just loved doing it.” A couple of years ago, Reynolds was not in a good place. Recently divorced, she wound down her successful PR company and moved from a large London flat to a tiny, historic cottage in Rye. She is originally from Merseyside and her accent remains strong. Her friend, Marcus Crane – co-founder of the local art and interior store, McCully & Crane – found her this cottage. “I took it on without even seeing it,” she recalls. “I thought: if Marcus likes it, I’ll like it.” She only planned to stay for six months, then, at the start of 2018, she decided it was time to “lay down some roots”. She asked the landlord to sell her the cottage and he agreed. Designing, sourcing and customising homeware – which she now sells under the brand name Polka – helped Reynolds find new focus. When she first moved to Rye, she staged a Polka pop-up in McCully & Crane, where her hand-painted upholstered pieces are currently stocked. Now she works to commission, sourcing vintage pieces for interior designers and individuals and customising them if they need it. “Sometimes they benefit from a little bit of a polka dot,” she says. “ – they cheer things up.” Her striped fabric – which is hand-painted here on her diminutive front-room floor – is available in any colour and any thickness of stripe. “There’s something about sitting and painting straight lines on fabric that is quite therapeutic for me,” she reflects. Dot Cottage, as it is now known, is in a row of four terraced Grade II-listed dwellings, in the medieval centre of Rye. As a tenant, Reynolds had painted the front room pink and stared to slowly dismantle the fitted kitchen. As the owner, she quickly made it her own. “I’ve dressed the house how I dress myself – and change it often,” she says. “I like stripes, pattern, colour, bows, polka dots – and I don’t buy anything new. Apart from my mattress and duvet, everything is old. I love things that have a story.” The whole effect is unmistakably British – and when Reynolds is abroad, the cottage is available to rent. On the day I visit, a German couple has just vacated, having spent the week immersed in her joyful, nostalgic aesthetic. I like stripes, patterns, colours, bows, polka dots – and I don’t buy anything new. I love things that have a story The front room, which you step into directly off the narrow street, is now a deep, mossy green (Bancha from Farrow & Ball). A green glass chandelier hangs in the bay window above a squishy, floral armchair found at an auction. The second-hand sofa has been reupholstered in chartreuse velvet and stacked with floral cushions. Vintage prints and original artworks hang on the walls. The two small tables have been customised with black dots big and small, the bamboo dining chairs sprayed pillarbox red. Connected to the front room is a miniscule, custom-made kitchen. The starting point for her design was a dilapidated wooden cabinet she found at Ardingly antiques fair. A local carpenter removed the top and transformed it into hidden drawers. The splashback and shelf behind the work surface were made from the sides of an old billiards table. “I can get my hands on so much old wood, why would I need any new stuff?” Behind the shelf is a beautiful brick wall and ancient connecting door that Reynolds found behind plasterboard when removing the old kitchen cabinets. Upstairs, there is one bedroom and a bathroom, both with wide, wonky floorboards and whitewashed walls. Colour comes in candy-striped fabrics in the bedroom, a pair of chintzy bedside lights and faux-rococo gilt mirrors. A collection of straw boaters, cherubs and kitsch ceramics adorns the walls and surfaces. “The stripes and chintz are a family aesthetic,” says Reynolds. “Sometimes I’ll buy something and then go to my granny’s old house and find I’ve bought something that is in that house.” I ask what’s next for Polka. “I didn’t go into it thinking where it would go,” she admits. “That’s the story of my life, really. Things happen and I think – OK, I’ll do a bit of that for now. I love finding objects that have a story. I’m a storyteller, really, and I think life is a tale, too. The beauty is in its imperfection. If everything’s too perfect, it doesn’t really interest me.” @polka_up