An explosion in thefts of catalytic converters from hybrid cars has left hundreds of owners of the vehicles unable to drive them because of a shortage of replacement parts, the Guardian has learned. Criminal gangs are believed to be targeting easily identifiable models such as the Toyota Prius and Lexus 400h, because hybrids contain more precious metals than other vehicles. Toyota said it had experienced a 2,000% increase in demand for parts as a result of the crimewave. While theft of the emission-controlling devices is a nationwide problem, it is particularly acute in London and south-east England. One Lexus dealership alone in the capital told the Guardian it had 500 on order, although it is not expecting to receive them until December. There were 2,900 catalytic converter thefts reported in the first six months of this year, compared with just under 1,700 in the whole of last year, according to Metropolitan police figures provided to the Guardian. 2/2 Thurs 5th a Toyota Prius on Davey Close had it catalytic converter taken.On Ulster Gardens, 3-4am on Thurs 12th a black Toyota, reg WU18KZR was taken by relay attack. Please keep an eye out for it. pic.twitter.com/Y8QZwQZK66 The surge in thefts is believed to be linked to the soaring value of two of the metals used in catalytic converters, rhodium and palladium, with gangs stripping the parts and selling them overseas. Rhodium is trading at double its price at the start of the year and more than eight times its 2016 value. As well as hybrids having higher amounts of precious metals, their catalytic converters tend to be in better condition because they are not used when the vehicles run on electricity. In response to inquiries on its website, a Toyota UK customer services agent wrote on Wednesday: “We have seen a 2,000% rise in demand for parts due to the recent crime wave for catalytic converters in certain areas of the UK. We, and our supply chain, are unable to keep up with demand for this essential part.” The website says some Prius and Auris hybrid models “have been a particular target”. Customers have posted about the difficulties in replacing the part, with some complaining there was insufficient warning about the risk of theft. RobW wrote on Monday: “It’s been six weeks now without my car since the cat on my Auris Hybrid was stolen – just 10 miles from the Derby factory. The car is at the Toyota dealer and they have no ETA [estimated time of arrival] on when the part will be available to fit. They have three other cars with the same problem.” Another driver said their insurance company had told them it could be three months to source a replacement, while one said a garage in Yeovil had been unable to tell them when it would be available. In many instances thieves have operated in broad daylight, with some instances caught on camera. We would like to speak with these men in connection with a theft from a car. On August 8th three male suspects approached a parked car in St Paul’s Car Park, St Paul’s Lane, Lincoln, and made off with the exhaust and catalytic converter. Call 101. https://t.co/1huqsvoCAH pic.twitter.com/nyVmwsq3GR Ironically, the increase in cost of the metals has been driven by their use in catalytic converters, with the automotive industry accounting for about 85% of demand for rhodium and palladium. James Clark, senior press relations manager at Toyota UK, said such thefts were not limited to the company’s products, but added: “The recent rise in the value of such parts for recycling has meant that police forces have seen a very significant rise in these offences in the last few months. “This sudden rise is one we could not have envisaged set against many years of low incidents of theft. This has impacted our ability to source enough of the parts we need in some cases, for which we sincerely apologise; but we are taking urgent action to address this with our suppliers.’ He said the company had posted guidance online for customers and sought to contact them, in some cases through dealers. It has also introduced a “catloc” device, to help defer theft, at a reduced price, sought to minimise the cost of replacement and its French supplier has increased production.