Justin Tipuric says Wales have done everything they possibly can – including extra tackle technique work – to ensure they stay on the right side of the laws at the World Cup. The opening weekend of action in Japan saw the tournament’s officials widely criticised for a series of poor decisions where players escaped red cards despite their dangerous play. Australia’s wing Reece Hodge went unpunished for a high tackle on Fiji’s Peceli Yato, although he was retrospectively cited and has now been banned for the rest of the pool stage. The Samoan pair Rey Lee-Lo and Motu Matu’u did likewise in their win over Russia and Lee-Lo has now been banned for three weeks. World Rugby took the unprecedented step of criticising its own referees in the wake of those incidents and there is a feeling a spate of red cards could now be the result. Speaking before Wales’ crunch match with Australia in Tokyo on Sunday, the flanker Tipuric said: “We spoke about the laws before coming into the tournament and about tackle techniques. Shaun Edwards did quite a bit with us about being aware and adjusting our tackle height a little bit because, with the new laws coming in, you have to be extra careful.” In disciplinary documents released by World Rugby on Thursday it was revealed Hodge was not even aware of the crackdown on dangerous tackles. The governing body expressed its concern at Hodge’s admission which raises serious questions about the Wallabies’ preparations. It is a direct contrast to Wales’ detailed approach. The forwards coach, Robin McBryde, said: “The communication between World Rugby and ourselves has been excellent. Everyone is more than aware of the crackdown on certain rules. Players know they will have to do their utmost to keep their focus and concentration to not make silly errors.” Warren Gatland knows Wales cannot afford to lose a man if they want to beat Australia in what is viewed as a straight shootout to see who will ultimately top Pool D. Wales beat the Wallabies the last time they met in November 2018 and in doing so broke a 13-match losing streak dating back to 2008. Over the course of those 14 games, the average gap between the two sides has been only seven points and another tight battle is expected in the Japanese capital. Tipuric added: “Before we even came here you knew this was going to be a big one. Now we’re here it’s time to perform. Momentum is important. If you keep on building that and put in good performances you are going to be flying and tough to beat. “Ideally we will win on Sunday and it would put us top of the group and make life a little bit easier for the rest of the games.” Wales have been boosted by positive injury updates on Ken Owens and Hadleigh Parkes who will be fit for the match after picking up knocks in Monday’s 43-14 thrashing of Georgia.