The thesis that Boris Johnson is a liberal in Tory clothing is shot to ribbons. His latest proposals on crime, leaked by a “Whitehall source”, are a shameless lurch to the wilder shores of rightwing populism. In next month’s Queen’s speech, he will apparently “get tough” on crime by increasing the severity of sentences. He wants “life to mean life” for child murderers, together with more prison places, simpler stop-and-search and less early release. His source says “most people think all parties and the courts have lost the plot on sentencing”. Johnson will act “aggressively”. The source – we assume Dominic Cummings or a minion – offers no authority for “most people”. It also turns out that the proposed changes are almost all within the competence of the existing judicial system – and are in reality all for show. There is no call for them from within or outside the prisons. The worsening of prison violence and mental health, and the 70% recidivism rate among young offenders within a year, is glaringly due to austerity cuts since 2010. As the chief inspector of constabulary, Sir Tom Winsor, has written, reacting to Johnson’s proposals, “the cost [of crime] in treasure, blood and human suffering” is caused by the failure of prevention, not the laxity of punishment. We must ask if the new draconianism is approved by Michael Gove, who as justice secretary in 2016 called for a drastic cut in the prison population? Johnson is merely repeating Tony Blair’s vote-grabbing “tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime” cynicism. This evening Channel 4 examines the impact of Blair’s get-tough regime through home secretary David Blunkett’s “imprisonment for public protection” (IPP) orders. These orders allowed judges – in effect prison officials – to incarcerate people indefinitely, even when their sentence had been served. It was expected to embrace some 900 tough cases, but ended by imprisoning, without further trial, over 9,000. The programme shows how open-ended sentencing led to mental collapse, drug addiction and self-harm – and prisoners ever less suitable for release. Though IPP was ended seven years ago, some 3,500 prisoners remain under its cosh. Crime is not some satanic visitation, but a result of the way in which countries order their affairs. As De Tocqueville said after studying American jails, “prison is the most complete despotism”, licensed tyranny. Accordingly, societies best show their degree of civility in their prison management. Britain’s prisons, the most crowded in Europe, are appalling and getting worse. British democracy just now is in the grip of a tawdry demagoguery. It is unbelievable that its practitioners can strut the world, lecturing others on civil rights abuses while perpetuating glaring failures on their own doorstep. This year is the 50th anniversary of the abolition of capital punishment in Britain. Johnson’s proposals show how little its penal policy has moved on since then. We shudder at what new obscenity “most people” are ordaining for the new Johnson/Cummings regime. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist