Do you think it’s the best film of the century so far?Who am I to argue? I’ll take it. It’s bragging rights for sure and I don’t take it lightly. But, of course, I could rattle off a long list of great films from this century … that isn’t hard to do. Is there a competition in you to care about such things?I suppose if it was second-best film of the century my first question would have been, “What’s No 1?” It’s very possible by the end of this year it could slip off the list entirely. Is it the same film you would make today? Do you rewatch it? I haven’t seen it in a number of years, but last I saw it I was very proud and satisfied. It was the first time I’d seen it where I had forgotten exactly what was going to happen next – and that was a wonderful experience. Having made something, it’s very hard to get back to that sense of discovery. Everything really seems to fit together about it – the performances, the music, the landscape and the story, all the strands within the larger film, especially the theme of father and son – all work in unison. It’s also very robust, which I like. I know, as I think we all do, that what makes it really great is Daniel Day-Lewis. Which moment or line makes you laugh most?Everything Daniel does makes me giggle with pleasure and joy. His inventiveness, his devilishness, the joy he has in making such a maniacal portrait of a man unhinged. He has a great chemistry with Paul Dano. Do you place more faith in capitalism or religion?Well … I’m kind of equal opportunity confused and rooting for the best sides of both. Do you get sick of the milkshake memes?Nah. Too much is never enough. Do you think the film feels like a yet more urgent prophecy today? Of bleeding the Earth dry, of allowing greed to triumph over human relations?Unfortunately, this story doesn’t seem to be going out of style any time soon. It would be nice to see it as science fiction one day. Or an account of how truly insane we all once were. Donald Trump recently declined to quote any Bible verse he likes. Are there any the film refers to you think may speak to him specifically? Might The Art of the Deal make for an alternative title to There Will Be Blood?I like all the quotes in the Bible, Old and New Testament, and y’know, it’s very private, I’m not gonna get into it … [WEARY FACE EMOJI] I can’t quote the Bible from off the top of my head, I have to go rummage around like everyone else. Or, as Plainview says: “I like all religions. I like them all. I don’t belong to one church in particular.”