To appreciate just how different from the norm the 2019 Rugby World Cup is going to be, one has only to set foot outside. Even on a damp Monday in Tokyo, the humidity is unmissable and so is the air of novelty. Judging by the 15,000 locals who queued around the block just to watch Wales train in Kitakyushu, the next few weeks are going to challenge plenty of familiar assumptions Drive – or rather crawl – through the busier business districts of the Japanese capital and images of the host nation’s players are plastered across the windows of 24-7 convenience stores. There is even a 40ft high action picture of the Australia fly-half Bernard Foley, not normally a household name, on a tower block overlooking one of the main intersections. The All Blacks long-serving coach, Steve Hansen, has traversed the rugby world multiple times but even he looks faintly taken aback by the rising tide of craziness. With Friday’s kick-off approaching, England’s trump card is also becoming increasingly apparent. Having coached extensively in Japan, few individuals have a clearer idea of what awaits than Eddie Jones, who also guided the Brave Blossoms to three pool wins at the 2015 World Cup. Jones has hung around professional sport long enough to know nothing will be easy but his insider knowledge could yet prove invaluable. With the weather forecast for the region unsettled for the next fortnight, this already has the feel of a tournament which could upset even the most carefully laid plans. If it pours down for New Zealand’s game against South Africa in Yokohama this Saturday, for example, one involuntary slip of a greasy ball could reshape the entire competition. When Warren Gatland is rubbing baby oil on Wales’s training balls on the eve of a World Cup and the lead singer of a Japanese death metal band is among the host nation’s interpreters, anything is possible once the actual rugby starts. In that respect the next few weeks will be right up Jones’s street. Never mind that England’s opening game against Tonga will be safely staged beneath a closed roof in Sapporo in the more northerly climes of Hokkaido. Jones has long been seeking people capable of adapting to any temperatures and conditions, to the point where discomfort and adaptability become second nature. This inside knowledge of what will be required has shaped his approach from day one. Every coach wants big, fit players but Jones has spent four years looking specifically for resilience, both physical and mental. From the moment he took over as England head coach he has also been fixated on one date: 2 November 2019. Way back in January 2017 he even let the Guardian into the secret of precisely what would happen in the Rugby World Cup final in Yokohama. “England v New Zealand, with England to win by a point. It’ll be a cracking game.” That sense of unwavering conviction has occasionally flickered, not least when England trailed in a dismal fifth in the 2018 Six Nations. Looking back at his unfolding masterplan with the benefit of hindsight, however, is instructive. When it comes to removing players from their comfort zones, Jones has been relentlessly consistent. All the comings and goings in selection, the ridiculously early alarm calls and the excessive backroom staff turnover now feel part of that same grand design. Love him or not, his players can now sense things starting to take real shape. When England bolt all the various key segments of their gameplan together – fitness, defence, a strong set-piece, pace out wide – as they did against Ireland in both February and August they can look devastating. Maybe, too, Jones’s luck is changing. His team to face Tonga is not due to be unveiled until Friday and both Joe Cokanasiga and Mark Wilson have knee niggles but, just when he needs them, his main men should all be available. Maro Itoje, Billy Vunipola, Kyle Sinckler, Ellis Genge, Courtney Lawes, Manu Tuilagi … anyone repeatedly bumping into them can expect a very tiring, painful afternoon. Add in a fit Mako Vunipola and Cokanasiga and, pound for pound, this is the strongest England squad – in all senses – since 2003. A primed, focused Tuilagi almost feels like a new signing after so many years in the injury doldrums. Hansen also knows his All Black side could have their hands full containing a full-on Springbok pack in perhaps the most heavy-duty opening weekend fixture at any Rugby World Cup in the professional era. Even the hugely experienced Kiwi lock Sam Whitelock, about to commence his third World Cup, is already sensing a different level of pressure. “Regardless of the opposition in the first game, there’s that knot in the stomach,” he said. “You don’t know what that first one’s going to be like.” There is particular uncertainty about South Africa’s rush defence out wide, which Hansen has described as “rolling the dice big time” in terms of the risk/reward equation. It worked pretty well last month when the Boks held the All Blacks to a 16-16 draw in Wellington but Hansen appears keen to put an element of doubt in South African minds if he can. He also argues Saturday’s winner is far from guaranteed to win the World Cup. “Logic will tell you whoever wins this game, probably wins the pool. But as we found in 2011, you don’t have to necessarily win the pool to get into the final. France did it the other way. It’s not the end of the world if you lose … there’s a lot of water to go under the bridge.” Quite literally so if this week’s weather forecasts prove accurate.