In Dreams of Leaving and Remaining, his book of reportage about the EU referendum, James Meek identified two myths that, he said, provided the “psychic maps” by which the Brexit debate was navigated. The myth of Robin Hood, with its injunction to take from the rich and give to the poor, was the remainer’s myth. It represented a belief in slow, almost invisible political change – effected through things like the NHS and progressive taxation – which, while worthy, was in the end slightly boring. In contrast, the leaver’s favoured myth, George and the Dragon, was dramatic and triumphant. It celebrated beating your oppressors and not worrying too much about what came afterwards. As such, it was inevitably more attractive at the ballot box. “The Brexiteers succeeded,” wrote Meek, not because they had better arguments but “because they shared the dream vision of enough of the voters”. Historical fiction usually approaches the dream visions of the past in one of two ways. The first, best exemplified by the sympathetically intelligent novels of Hilary Mantel, plunders them for evidence that things have probably always been much as they are today. The second uses history, as TS Eliot said of James Joyce’s “mythic method” in Ulysses, as a way of “controlling, of ordering, of giving shape and significance” to the contemporary moment. One approach represents history as stasis, the other as allegory. To Calais, in Ordinary Time, Meek’s rich and strange new novel, combines elements of both, and one of the many deep and destabilising pleasures it offers comes from trying to work out precisely what kind of a book – and what kind of a world – you are in at any particular moment. The setting is straightforwardly historical. It is south-west England in 1348, two years after the battle of Crécy, a decisive conflict in the hundred years war when a handful of English archers routed the French and went on to capture Calais. Edward III is on the throne; religious and cultural capital is entrenched on the continent; plague stalks the land. The contemporary parallels – with Brexit, with the existential threat of climate crisis – are there for the making, but Meek never labours them. There are three principal actors: a serf named Will Quate, bound to work the land owned by a local nobleman; Lady Bernadine, that nobleman’s daughter; and Thomas Pitkerro, a proctor or clerical administrator from Avignon on secondment to Malmesbury Abbey. Will is betrothed to the village beauty, but his desires lie elsewhere and he dreams of becoming a free man. Bernadine, fed on a diet of courtly love culled from Le Roman de la Rose, also wants to escape the smallness of village life. She is engaged to a nobleman her father’s age, but thinks she is really in love with a young knight named Laurence Haket. Pitkerro, haunted by guilt over his intellectual and moral failings, simply wants to go home. Haket has raised a band of archers to send to France, led by a religiously fanatical giant of a man named Hayne, and Will, Bernadine and Thomas join them on the road south to Dorset, where a ship waits to take them to France. Coming the other way, as a rumour on the wind, is the plague. You never know with this novel if you’re reading a comedy of manners, a dystopian novel or a medieval porno Like The People’s Act of Love, Meek’s historical moral fable set in 1920s Russia, which was longlisted for the Man Booker prize in 2005, the novel is staged as a series of almost magically strange encounters and scenes: marvels, you might call them. At Malmesbury Abbey the Abbot desperately organises shifts of his choir to sing protective hymns against the plague, until they tire and their voices fail. There is a pageant, balletically violent fight scenes – as good as anything in Cormac McCarthy – and some memorable sexual encounters. The overall effect is of a radical generic ambiguity, so that you never know if you’re reading a comedy of manners, a bawdy romance, a dystopian novel or a medieval porno. Meek’s narrative is shared evenly between the three central characters. Thomas’s sections take the form of journal entries (I did wonder about this: it would be a very rich scholar indeed who could afford sufficient parchment to keep a daily diary in 1348). His prose is fussy, precise and clotted with Latinisms. An archer with a facial scar “has a fissure dividing the dexter and sinister parts of his face, a cicatrix so profound it appears he has been formed of dual semi-humans, conglutined into unity”. Quate is described as “solid of form, pectorally muscled, but with the face of an angel, a tranquil gestus and an intelligent aspect”. Meek has a lot of fun with the comic possibilities of the epistolary mode, where events are narrated almost in real time and characters hurry to keep up with their own writing. “I cannot postpone the manual examination of the symptomatic area,” Thomas scribbles feverishly when he suspects he might be infected with plague. “I must momentarily put aside my scribal implements.” Will and Bernadine’s narratives are written in close third person, the language reflecting their social status and education. Will and his peers speak (and are narrated) in a folksy Cotswold dialect, “as if”, reflects the refined Bernadine, “no French never touched their tongues”. They use “neb” for face, “steven” for voice, “cunny” and “pintle” for vagina and penis. Bodies are “lickerous”. Will’s sections are peppered with syntactic archaisms, double negatives, and the French negative “ne” (“he ne breathed no more”). Bernadine’s – more formal and stuffy – read more like modern English. “She told the porter curtly that the demoiselle required a brief halt to refresh herself and her horse before continuing to Edington.” Metaphors feel both surprising and historically appropriate. A cheese stops a shutter closing “like to the bailiff’s foot in the bondsman’s door”; a man’s voice sounds “like to when a ploughman frots an ear of corn between his hands to know its ripeness”. English myths (and the myth of Englishness) permeate many recent novels. Max Porter’s Lanny, Benjamin Myers’s The Gallows Pole and Anthony Cartwright’s Iron Towns all mine folkloric tradition or use a stylistically exuberant, often archaically mythic register to tell stories about marginalised communities threatened by external forces. The most prominent of these is Paul Kingsnorth’s The Wake, a novel about the Norman invasion written in mock Anglo-Saxon, which was longlisted for the Man Booker prize in 2014. At its best this kind of writing can be excitingly estranging; at its worst it can seem – whatever you make of its politics – portentous and silly. It is an audacious thing to try to create a world sufficient to be described in an invented language, but in To Calais, in Ordinary Time the effect is triumphant. Meek’s language isn’t much like the Middle English Chaucer wrote, but nor is it parody or pastiche. There are anachronisms, but they don’t really matter. Instead the effect generated is of a kind of psychologically realistic medieval pageantry. At the centre of this beautiful novel is an exploration of the difference between romance and true love, allegory and reality, history and the present. It plays out in unexpected and delightful ways, and it would be unfair to make these explicit. To Calais, in Ordinary Time ends with a consummation both of its technique and of its story that is affirming, tender and a little bit glorious. • To Calais, in Ordinary Time is published by Canongate (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15. 