The early reviews of Apple’s new iPhone 11, iPhone 11 Pro and Pro Max are in from publications with early access to the three models. While the iPhone 11 Pro is the technically most impressive, with a new triple camera system catching up to the competition, it was the iPhone 11, the cheapest of the bunch, winning the majority of people over. Although questions remain as to whether it’s worth upgrading at all, if your iPhone is less than five years old. The Guardian will have its own reviews of the new iPhones in the next week or so once they have gone on sale, but in the meantime here’s what those given early access by Apple had to say. Costing from £729, the iPhone 11 has a 6.1in LCD screen, two cameras on the back but the same processor and storage sizes as the more expensive iPhone 11 Pro and Pro Max. In our tests, the iPhone 11 easily lasted a full day at a time and then some. It’s possible you could manage to kill this battery in less than a day, but you’d have to really try. The battery life is great, just like the iPhone XR’s battery life was great. What’s less great is the fact that Apple is still putting its ancient 5W charger in the box, even though the iPhone 11 Pro has an 18W USB-C fast charger. If Apple isn’t going to update the entire line to a fast charger, it should just do the environment a favour and stop putting the 5W charger in the box entirely; there are literally billions of them in the world, and odds are, you have more than one in a drawer already. In reality, the iPhone 11 has a display that will more than satisfy most users. It’s not as sharp in resolution as the likes of the iPhone 11 Pro, or the Samsung Galaxy Note 10 for example, and it doesn’t offer mobile HDR compatibility like these other devices either, but the iPhone 11 still offers a decent screen with ample brightness and arguably more realistic colours than the Pro models and other OLED smartphones. The omission of HDR on the iPhone 11 means that while it tries to deliver a HDR-like experience for compatible content, it’s not the real deal. Smart HDR pictures don’t pop as much when viewing on screen as they do on the iPhone 11 Pro, and you can’t see as much detail on a dark TV show or movie that’s available in HDR, as you can on the 11 Pro - but it’s also one of the few compromises the iPhone 11 makes to the Pro models. The wider-angled front-facing camera is welcome, and digitally zooms in or out to accommodate a wider view that fits in more people and background. The 12-megapixel front-facing camera looks better, and I was happy with the results, but you have to be artful with the wider camera. Sometimes I ended up looking like a little face in a mountain of shirt. My kids instantly started messing around with slow-motion selfie feature. Yes, that’s the Slofie. It’s not a Live Photo, though. It’s just a video mode. That makes it hard to do much with, because the file sizes get large. I do, however, have a lot of extended 240-fps slow-motion scenes of my kids sticking out their tongues. This year’s iPhone 11 has two rear lenses, a wide-angle lens and an ultrawide lens with a 120-degree field of view. Last year’s iPhone XR had a single lens, and any depth effects added to photos were done computationally. This means the iPhone 11 now captures enough information to take better photos from the start—and especially portrait photos. Case in point: Last year’s iPhone XR could capture a portrait photo of a person but not a pet or object. The iPhone 11 now takes portrait photos of my cat, which he is pleased about. Just kidding: He is indifferent, per usual. The iPhone 11 is a very good camera, and in a lot of situations it even performed better than last year’s top-of-the-line iPhone XS. But the iPhone 11 Pro takes noticeably better photos, whether standard photos, portrait images, or night mode pics. Like the XR and 5c series before it, a large part of the iPhone 11’s appeal lies in its range of six shades: red, black, white, yellow, green and purple. This is the first ever purple iPhone, and Apple has chosen the Instagram-baiting shade of lilac popularised by the likes of Ariana Grande and South Korean pop sensations BTS – Generation Z’s equivalent of millennial pink. It’s pretty – a stylish splash of lavender Apple knows will have aesthetically-minded iPhone owners clamouring to upgrade (as evidenced by its new range of transparent cases). These are phones to be shown off, not hidden behind rubber or leather sheaths, and even if you do cover it up with a case, Apple is banking on the satisfaction of owning phone in a colour you’re attached to. Overall the iPhone 11 is a triumph for Apple - if, for nothing else, the fact it’s managed to lower the price year-on-year. We feel enough people are going to be won over by the hard-working camera … and the safety that buying a modern smartphone gives you. You should be able to achieve years of use from this phone, and sure, you could also consider the iPhone 11 Pro or iPhone 11 Pro Max if you want more power and higher spec, but we found the iPhone 11 to be fun to use and often outperformed what we would expect given the price – and that’s a feat some wouldn’t have expected from Apple. Based on my tests of the iPhone 11, 11 Pro and 11 Pro Max, the answer is no. Don’t get me wrong: The newest models are nice. Apple has made them speedier, improved the cameras and lengthened their battery life. The new lineup also starts at a lower price of $700, down from $750 a year ago, which is a relief in an era of skyrocketing smartphone costs. But none of this is enough to warrant an immediate upgrade if you have had your smartphone for only two years. The latest iPhones just aren’t a big leap forward from last year’s iPhones or even the iPhone X from 2017. So here’s what I ultimately suggest: You should definitely upgrade if your current device is at least five years old. The iPhone 11 models are all a significant step up from those introduced in 2014. But for everyone else with smartphones from 2015 or later, there is no rush to buy. Instead, there is more mileage and value to be had out of the excellent smartphone you already own. The £1,049 iPhone 11 Pro and £1,149 11 Pro Max top the iPhone 11 with higher resolution 5.8in and 6.5in OLED screens respectively. They also have a new triple camera system on the back – their main differentiator over the significantly cheaper model. The iPhone 11 Pro Max I’ve been using every day for a week has consistently run for 12 to 14 hours on a single charge, with over 10 hours of screen-on time reported in the battery settings per 24-hour period. That’s compared to 8 to 10 hours of battery life at most for my iPhone XS Max, which is a marked improvement. It’s not enough to make me stop charging at my desk throughout the day, and I’ll definitely still carry a battery pack on trips. Apple has chosen to stick to the same resolution as last year’s handsets but has spruced them up with a new OLED panel with a 2,000,000:1 contrast ratio called Super Retina XDR. In practice, this means the displays are both bolder and brighter and display colours more accurately. I found this was best exemplified when examining skin tones in the same pictures side-by-side with the iPhone XS Max. Caucasian skin on the XS Max appears pinker and more flushed, whereas the same picture looks truer-to-life. Likewise, the 11 Pro Max picks out facial highlights and hair undertones not as apparent in the same picture over on the XS Max. It’s a small difference, but an impressive one. This year’s most expensive iPhone is the $1,449 (£1,499) iPhone Pro Max with 512GB of storage. Even with 256GB of storage – the minimum you’ll likely want for a high-end phone like this – it will set you back $1,249 (£1,299). There are two main reasons to go for this year’s most extreme iPhone: Either you want that larger OLED display (2,688×1,242 versus 2,436×1,125 for the Pro) or you want that extra hour of battery life. I wouldn’t want to spend this much. But if you really are using your phone as a professional camera and you want to see every pixel, you want the best viewfinder and editing display you can get. And, well, this would be that phone. It’s also more fun for movies and games, but at these prices, I’d just buy a separate iPad for that. Overall, the iPhone 11 Pro Max is a real step forward, and the most advanced iPhone yet. However, when thinking about what’s truly new here, we weren’t able to single out much beyond the improved camera (especially Night mode) and the slightly upgraded cinematic experience. If you want to save some money, we’d suggest checking out the iPhone 11 – while we constantly found little nuggets of impressive performance throughout our testing of the 11 Pro Max, we couldn’t shake the feeling that this is really only a phone for the Apple fan who wants the best of everything, with no compromises. While Apple says frequently that its integrated hardware and software enable it to do magical things with cameras—and in some cases, that’s true—that doesn’t mean every shot taken on the iPhone 11 Pro phones was the best photo. In some cases, the photos I took on the iPhone 11 Pro Max were clearly sharper, brighter, and even more (you hate to say it) professional-looking than the iPhone 11 photos of the same scenes or subjects. The iPhone 11 Pro Max captured the best Portrait Mode photo of my colleague Lydia, showing accurate colours, picking up on details like wisps of hair and freckles, and handling highlights and sunlight well. A beach sunset photo captured on the same phone expertly captured the contrast between dark rocks, a glassy ocean, and the sunburnt sky. A photo of yaki onigiri captured in harsh overhead light showed excellent detail, right down to the charred rice. But when pitted against other leading smartphones, the iPhone 11 Pro Max wasn’t always the standout. The Google Pixel 3, a less expensive and soon-to-be-outdated phone, took better, crisper photos of a floral arrangement in a very dark bar. An iPhone 11 Pro Max photo of my friend Kayla, captured in a dark sushi restaurant, showed a lot of detail in easy-to-miss spots like her hands, or the slight wrinkles of her shirt. But Kayla, a video producer, and I both agreed that the colour and temperature of the photo was off, whereas the Pixel 3’s photo was more true-to-life. Best smartphone 2019: iPhone, OnePlus, Samsung and Huawei compared and ranked