The scars from Castleford’s agonising Grand Final defeat two years ago are almost still visible on members of this squad. There is a way to go before the demons of that defeat against Leeds can be definitively laid to rest, but, for now, the noise from their travelling support at full time here as they moved a step closer to a return to Old Trafford underlined how there is belief among their ranks once again. Castleford are flying the flag for Yorkshire, not just the town where rugby league is more a religion than a hobby, in this year’s play-off series. With the other four sides in the play-offs emanating from the north-west, there was a feeling that Castleford were the odd team out for various reasons. This, though, was a display from the Tigers as rugged or determined as you are likely to find. Without a host of frontline players due to injury, the odds were against the fifth-placed Tigers, who have to win three away games in the play-offs to reach Old Trafford. But they ended Warrington’s hopes of the double with the kind of determination required to do something special. “Nobody believes we’re going to do anything but we want to keep up spoiling parties for as long as we can,” Daryl Powell, Castleford’s coach said. Next week comes a tie against the losers of the Qualifier between Wigan and Salford on Friday. It took Castleford half an hour to break the deadlock in a low‑quality game, Adam Milner’s try and Peter Mata’utia’s goal making it 6-0. They took that lead into half‑time but by then Warrington’s plans had been dealt a blow with the departure of their marquee half-back Blake Austin, who did not return after the interval because of injury. While Jake Mamo’s try seconds after the restart briefly levelled the game, Warrington were always second-best on another dismally disappointing evening. Even with the elation surrounding their victory in the Challenge Cup final in August, it is difficult to regard this season as anything but a failure for the ultra-ambitious Wolves. “To win at Wembley was phenomenal but we haven’t recovered,” Warrington’s coach, Steve Price, said. “In play-offs you need to be at your best and in the last couple of weeks, we haven’t been.” One win from nine league games either side of that cup success, culminating with this woefully below-par display, means that the most notable drought in rugby league – they have not won the league title since 1955 – will continue for at least another season. For all the spending power Warrington possess, the failure to make the Grand Final means questions must surely be asked of them over the winter. The outstanding Jordan Rankin put Castleford ahead once again on 49 minutes, before a penalty from Mata’utia with 12 minutes remaining opened up a two-score lead for the first time. Castleford had survived plenty of pressure on their own line but Warrington’s profligacy in attack also contributed to them needing a late comeback. They fashioned one of sorts when Chris Hill scored with 10 minutes remaining, with Stefan Ratchford’s goal making it 14-12 – but when Ratchford missed a penalty on halfway to level the scores in the final minutes it afforded Castleford the opportunity to hang on and ensure their season stays alive for at least another week. Warrington Ratchford; Lineham, Goodwin, King, Charnley; Austin, Patton; Hill, D Clark, Cooper, Currie, Hughes, J Clark Interchange Murdoch-Masila, Philbin, Mamo, Westwood Tries Mamo, Hill Goals Ratchford 2 Castleford Turner; Clare, Mata’utia, Blair, Minikin; Trueman, Rankin; Watts, McShane, Millington, Holmes, Clarkson, Smith Interchange Milner, Cook, Ellis, O’Neill Tries Milner, Rankin Goals Mata’utia 3 Referee Chris Kendall Att 5,627