Born in Kent, Hamnett, 72, studied fashion at Saint Martin’s School of Art. She launched her womenswear label in 1979, followed by menswear in 1981, the year she also released her first slogan T-shirt. In 1984 she was named designer of the year by the British Fashion Council. On 16 and 17 September she is hosting a workshop at Hoi Polloi in London, with proceeds going to the Judy Blame Charitable Trust. When were you happiest?Camping with my parents in the south of France. We went every year with the beautiful bell tent they made on a sewing machine. We even had a lavatory tent which was fabulous except, one day, it blew away with my father in it. What is your earliest memory?Fights in the sandpit. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Craziness. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Idiocy. What do you most dislike about your appearance?That I am approaching 100. Who would play you in the film of your life?Susan Sarandon or Barry Humphries. What do you owe your parents?When I was a fashion student, my mother would say, “Why can’t you get yourself a nice suit from Jaeger?” She didn’t really get it, but she gave me support. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?To my parents, for being such a bitch. What or who is the greatest love of your life?My children, my grandson, my dog. What is the worst job you’ve done?Hop-picking in Kent when I was 13. The smell was dreadful, and put me off beer for life. Which living person do you most despise, and why?Donald Trump: he’s sold out his country, almost sold out western civilisation and is on the brink of selling out life on Earth. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Donald Tusk, Caroline Lucas, Keir Starmer and Nicola Sturgeon. What would your superpower be?Cure poverty, heal the planet. If you could edit your past, what would you change?Boarding school. It was horrible. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?A hydrogen-powered private jet for me and my dog. We’d be zero carbon dioxide emissions, so could go anywhere we liked. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Raising awareness of ethical and environmental issues in the clothing industry. I think I was the original whistleblower within fashion. What keeps you awake at night?Threat of nuclear war, Iran/US situation, Syria, everything. I take sleeping pills. How would you like to be remembered?I don’t care. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Never quell the generous impulse. Where would you most like to be right now?I’m happy here, in my kitchen.