About 500 former Wrightbus employees and their families have held a protest outside a church linked to the owners of the collapsed bus maker. About 1,200 jobs were lost last week when the Ballymena-based former maker of London’s Routemaster bus went into administration. The Unite union has warned a further 1,700 jobs could be at risk in the engineering firm’s supply chain. Colin Graham, a Unite shop steward, said the former workers, wearing T-shirts saying “save our jobs” and banners emblazoned with “shameless greed” and “you reap what you sow” were carrying out a peaceful protest amid heavy security including private guards employed by the Wright family. He said the founder Sir William Wright, who received applause as he arrived at the church, had told workers that he was sorry about the way things had turned out. Graham said: “We’re not here to shame the whole Wright family, we’re here to shame Jeff Wright alone.” Jeff Wright is the son of Sir William and a major shareholder of Wright Group’s holding company. The group’s collapse came after the parent company of Wrights Group donated more than £16.1m to charity between 2012 and 2017. Those donations helped to fund the expansion of Green Pastures, an evangelical church in Ballymena led by Jeff Wright. “How could he donate to the church without looking after the workforce and keeping the company going? That’s what we want answered,” Graham said. The donations came ahead of increasing financial difficulties for Wrightbus which made two rounds of redundancies last year, with 95 jobs going in February and June. The difficulties came despite recent sales successes, including a Transport for London order in May for 20 hydrogen-powered buses, each costing about £500,000 and only emitting water as exhaust. Wrightbus went into administration following cash flow problems and the failure to find a new owner. Protestors have made it clear they do not blame co-founder of Wrightbus, 92yo William Wright, for firm’s collapse. He was warmly applauded as he arrived at Church. pic.twitter.com/oPGUGgk9No Administrators at Deloitte are continuing to seek a white knight investor. They are thought to have contacted a number of potential bidders who previously expressed interest in the firm including Jo Bamford, the son of JCB billionaire tycoon Lord Bamford, the Northern Ireland businessman, Darren Donnelly and Chinese firm Weichai, part of thestate-owned conglomerate Shandong Heavy Industry. The demonstration comes as police investigate death threats against the family. Jeff Wright said in a statement: “I am asking all elected representatives and those with influence in the community to help end this intimidation and fear.”