The shadows of Old Trafford are almost visible from Salford’s AJ Bell Stadium but never has it seemed as close as it does now. It is almost a year to the day since the Red Devils secured survival on the final day of the season: now they are just one win away from a first appearance in the Grand Final. This side, who were simply far too good for Castleford here, have Super League’s second-lowest budget. There are players whom other teams simply did not want. But together, they are greater than the sum of their parts and they will head to either St Helens or Wigan next Friday as a dangerous side to say the least. Salford’s defensive rearguard was the backbone for victory here, epitomised by one moment. With the Tigers trailing 12-0 courtesy of early tries from Tyrone McCarthy and Jake Bibby, both converted by Krisnan Inu, Jordan Rankin’s break in midfield seemed certain to produce Castleford’s first try of the night. That would have made it 12-6 with half-time approaching but Niall Evalds’ try-saving tackle on Rankin underlined the title-winning credentials this side possesses. From there they were defensively faultless and never looked likely to lose. “We’ve built our season on defence, and the scramble from Niall which saved that try gave us confidence,” Ian Watson, the Salford coach, said. “We have the belief that we can now win play-off games.” But while Salford go on to next week’s final eliminator, this was an underwhelming way for Castleford’s season to end. They have dealt with injuries to key players all season and done well to reach this stage of the play-offs but they were thoroughly outclassed here. “It’s been a tough year for all sorts of reasons but we were poor tonight,” their coach, Daryl Powell, said. They are now likely to confirm their scrum-half, Luke Gale, will join Leeds in 2020 in the days ahead. They trailed 14-0 at half-time, after a penalty from the boot of Inu improved those early tries, and a prolonged period of possession early in the second half when the Tigers failed to breach Salford’s stern defence underlined how it would be the Red Devils who were always likely to progress, not Castleford. And after seeing off that Castleford challenge, the script was perhaps written for Jackson Hastings to score the game-clinching try in the closing minutes, which he duly did when he cut through on his final home appearance. St Helens or Wigan had better beware: this band of brothers are in no mood for their journey to reach its end just yet. Salford Evalds; Sio, Welham, Bibby, Inu; Lolohea, Hastings; Mossop, Tomkins, Dudson, Jones, Griffin, McCarthy. Interchange Lussick, Flanagan, Walker, Burke. Tries McCarthy, Bibby, Hastings Goals Inu 5 Castleford Rankin; Clare, Minikin, Blair, Eden; Trueman, Mata’utia; Watts, McShane, Millington, Holmes, Clarkson, Massey. Interchange Milner, Cook, O’Neill, Smith. Referee B Thaler.