Re Lucy Mangan’s review of Inside Cadbury on Channel 4 (G2, 16 September), I sympathise with her over the lack of footage of the chocolate being made and her comments on the Bournville village. In the early 1960s my father-in-law was head of the visitors’ department, which catered for up to 1,000 visitors per day. At that time there were around 16,000 people employed at Bournville, in the factory and offices. The site included playing fields, a theatre, swimming pools, doctors’ and dentists’ surgeries, and a bank. Having so many visitors was good public relations. They were divided into three groups: one was shown a film about the factory and the village, one had a coach trip around the village, and the third a tour through the factory to see the entire process. They had refreshments in the terrace restaurant and were given a tin of samples as a gift before they left. The village housing was never just for employees; others also lived there. I was a pupil at Bournville primary school, which was given to the city by the Cadbury family. A century ago, as it became established, its pupils were healthier, taller and heavier than either city or national averages (partly due to the better housing, with gardens to grow fruit and vegetables, and the accessible leisure facilities.) The school was very forward-looking, having both craft and science facilities. I realised how good it was when my mother was ill and I was sent to live with my grandmother for a term. The school I then attended was so different in ethos, subjects, teaching methods and materials that even an eight-year-old noticed. The big changes came when the Cadbury family were no longer able to hold all the shares. They had to sell to get an accurate value for the calculation of death duties. The Quaker input diminished as their shareholding decreased. Today the firm is just another big company.Val MajorCongresbury, Bristol • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition