Several restaurants that have recently popped up in rural locations do not merely cook you dinner, they also sell you a dream. The Small Holding in Kilndown, Kent, is one of these. It boasts the type of thriving, working kitchen garden with added pigs, geese and chickens for which addled city dwellers yearn. Chef Will Devlin opened the doors a mere 18 months ago, and already this former pub’s single acre heaves with courgettes, kale, fennel, peas, beans and approximately 200 other varieties of veg, fruit and herbs. It’s all very seductive to those of us who have been choking on car fumes, though the reality is that country life is for hardy folk who deal well with heartbreak. Your spuds may drown. Slugs will munch your fennel. No one will eat your Berkshire pig – in fact, it will become a cherished family member. This is why places such as The Small Holding are so wonderful. Pop in and get a load of its polytunnels. You can experience rural delight in small, no-risk snapshots, and in mouthfuls of meadowsweet-flavoured cream, gaspingly fresh bowls of homegrown tomatoes with basil, and in plates strewn with vibrant nasturtium flowers picked that morning. Come for the edible thistles and wild strawberries, stay for the freshly dug radishes, washed and served with a herb mayo. We went to The Small Holding for Saturday lunch a couple of days before Devlin was revealed as the 2020 “chef to watch” by The Waitrose Good Food Guide. The title is completely justified, even if it does sound like an ominous curse. Devlin and gang were clearly relishing life pre-scrutiny, before the hordes of farm-to-table bores turn up wearing their reclaimed potato-peeling gilets, and before anyone calls up for the coordinates so they can land their helicopter, and is then outraged that somewhere 20 minutes from Tunbridge Wells, staffed by family and friends, is not as slickly run as Noma, which has a cast of hundreds. The Small Holding is, however, already up there with another brilliant example of self-sustaining, fun fine-dining: Gareth Ward’s Ynyshir in Powys, Wales. This is skilful cooking that retains joy, pace and mischief throughout. The “Full Acre” 11-course menu is £60 (with a wine pairing starting at £40). With fancy dining, the rule of thumb is that the briefer the menu descriptions, the longer the incarceration. Not here. No, sir. “Sweetcorn, egg, mushroom” is followed swiftly by “courgette, chilli, coriander”, and with cheery service, too. A soft, sous-vide yolk appears dotted with crisp kernels and small, earthy bites of fungus. Then, in prompt succession, courgette comes conjured up into a sort-of turbo-bhaji. This is a magical mouthful, my highpoint of lunch. “Those courgettes are from over there,” our server says perkily, pointing out past the car park. It’s all so refreshingly normal. They push Squerryes’ English sparkling, rather than champagne. Locals turn up sporadically for a pint in the beer garden. You could probably take your gran, although she might balk slightly at the sweet, crimson-coloured fennel and plum choux bun. I’m not sure what she’d make of the raspberry course with tarragon and a sort-of-rösti potato topping, either, but the whole thing hangs together rather beautifully. Our menu (which I expect will have altered by the time you read this) featured a fabulous play on old-school Cumberland pie and peas – mutton with small, heavenly, bright green peas straight from the pod. “This tastes exactly like the pie and peas we used to eat in Cumbria after dance classes when I was about seven,” I wittered on to Charles. “Cooked by my gran, who always made her pie in a plate. Her kitchen always smelled of gas. Do you know what I mean?” Which, of course, he didn’t. Because that’s what the best sort of fine dining does: it shines light into corners of your brain that you’ve not used for decades. Flavours you thought were no longer possible, only to find out they are; you simply weren’t eating the correct item at its exact freshest or in the right combination. There’s still a real sense of the thoroughly unpretentious, 90s-style country pub about The Small Holding, despite it being prettified with designer paints and fancy hand soaps. Please go and watch Will Devlin and his team, but preserve and conserve their normal-ness. They’re just a group of folk growing amazing things, then pulling them out of the ground, sometimes knobbly and lumpy, then cooking and serving them. It’s perfectly imperfect, and I wouldn’t change a thing. • The Small Holding Ranters Lane, Kilndown, near Cranbrook, Kent, 01892 890105. Open lunch Weds-Sun, noon-2.30pm, dinner Weds-Sat, 6-9pm. Set menus, £30 for 6 courses (lunch only), £60 for 11, plus drinks and service. Food 9/10 Atmosphere 9/10 Service 9/10