Charles Leclerc claimed pole for the Italian Grand Prix but his lap that secured the place for Ferrari was put into the shade by the farce of all but two cars failing to cross the line in time to begin their final hot laps. Lewis Hamilton was in second, with his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas in third. Sebastian Vettel was in fourth for Ferrari in front of the Renaults of Daniel Ricciardo and Nico Hülkenberg. Leclerc’s lap for pole was well executed on his first hot run but surely would have been challenged had the rest of the field managed to put in second runs at the end of Q3. That they failed to so made the sport look foolish at one of the blue-riband events of its calendar. On the high-speed, low-downforce blast through Monza, gaining a slipstream from other cars is vital and attempting to find it proved calamitous. On the first hot laps in Q3, Vettel led the pack out as they jockeyed for position on track but he lacked a tow. Leclerc, several cars back using the slipstream, set the quickest time before Kimi Räikkönen went off at Parabolica, bringing out a red flag. Leclerc’s 1min 19.307sec was three-hundredths up on Hamilton in second and a 10th clear of his teammate. It was the second runs that mattered, however, as the teams waited until the last moments to send their cars out. The track would have been at its fastest and the pack subsequently crawled around with no one wanting to suffer the disadvantage of being first on track and punching a hole in the air. They were driving extremely slowly and switching position to dangerous effect and then too late realised the clock had counted out. Only Carlos Sainz, who was seventh, and Leclerc crossed the line in time to start their second quick laps and Leclerc, knowing he had pole, simply toured round. The rest of the field, their chances gone, returned ignominiously to the pits. The FIA announced the final lap is now under investigation. All 10 drivers may yet be subject to penalties. Leclerc was quickest in Q1 but Hamilton went fastest in the second session when the top 10 all set their times on the soft rubber. This is Leclerc’s fourth career pole position, his first at the Italian Grand Prix and his second in a row after he took the top spot at the last round in Spa. It continues his exceptionally strong form over the single lap, in which he has out-qualified Vettel for the past seven races. Having converted pole to his debut F1 victory in Belgium last weekend he will be eager to make it two in row on the occasion of the 90th edition of the Italian Grand Prix. Already welcomed and celebrated by the massed tifosi at Monza, Leclerc will find it especially satisfying to claim home pole for Ferrari on the track where they expected and appeared to have a real advantage but where they have not won a race since Fernando Alonso did so in 2010. The Scuderia is marking the 90th anniversary of their formation in 1929 by Enzo Ferrari this weekend and had hoped to mark it with success on a power-sensitive circuit that played to their strengths. They begin the serious business in the best possible position to do so. With straight-line speed and low downforce key at Monza, Ferrari’s weakness through corners was mitigated and they looked to be on top. Leclerc was quickest in the first two practice sessions, with Vettel topping the time sheets in the final runs on Saturday morning. With the championship beyond them, this is the race at which Leclerc and his team desperately need to deliver. Hamilton leads the title race from Bottas by 65 points. Max Verstappen is 87 points back from the Briton in third, with Vettel 12 points behind the Dutchman in fourth and Leclerc trailing his teammate by 12 points. Red Bull’s Verstappen, McLaren’s Lando Norris and Toro Rosso’s Pierre Gasly will all start at the rear of the grid having taken new engines and power-unit components. Worryingly for Verstappen, however, he failed to set a time as he reported a loss of power on his only flying lap. He finished in 20th place, Norris in 14th and Gasly in 15th. Alexander Albon was in eighth for Red Bull, Räikkönen was in 10th for Alfa Romeo and Lance Stroll in ninth for Racing Point. Antonio Giovinazzi was in 11th for Alfa Romeo in front of the Haas of Kevin Magnussen. Daniil Kvyat was in 13th for Toro Rosso. Romain Grosjean was in 16th for Haas in front of Racing Point’s Sergio Pérez, who had a mechanical failure. George Russell and Robert Kubica were in 18th and 19th for Williams. In the early hours of Saturday morning the family of Juan Manuel Correa, the 20-year-old who was seriously injured in the accident that killed Anthoine Hubert at Spa, announced their son has been placed in an induced coma. He has been diagnosed as suffering from acute respiratory distress syndrome, having already undergone surgery on his legs and his spine after the accident. His family said he is in a critical but stable condition. Earlier in the day the Australian driver Alex Peroni survived a huge accident during the F3 race at Monza. The 19-year old hit one of the raised sausage kerbs on the exit of the Parabolica corner and was launched into the air. His car came down upside down on the tyre wall and catch fencing. Peroni walked away from the incident and was taken to hospital. The kerb was removed soon afterwards.