Lewis Hamilton reiterated his intent to give no quarter when he returns to the track for the Singapore Grand Prix this weekend. The Briton was disappointed after Charles Leclerc was not penalised for squeezing him wide at the last round in Monza. Hamilton said afterwards that he would adjust his driving accordingly, a view he repeated at the Marina Bay circuit on Thursday. Leclerc was issued with a warning rather than penalty at the Italian Grand Prix, a decision in keeping with the recent stewards’ policy of allowing the drivers to race. Hamilton said he would adapt if that was how the rules were to be interpreted. “I look forward,” he said. “There’s nothing I can do about the past. I’m down for hard racing.” His views were echoed by several drivers including Renault’s Daniel Ricciardo and Red Bull’s Max Verstappen. The latter pushed Leclerc wide in Austria and did not receive a penalty, from which Leclerc drew conclusions on how far he believed he could go on track. “I don’t mind a few touches here and there throughout a grand prix,” said Verstappen. “Even if it’s not touches then you should be able to defend yourself. For me it’s fine and every driver knows this so we will all race the same.” Hamilton, who leads the world championship by 63 points from his Mercedes teammate, Valtteri Bottas, has four wins in Singapore, including the past two meetings, while Leclerc comes into the race on the back of two consecutive victories. Ferrari are expected to be on the back foot, however, their car at its weakest on tracks such as Marina Bay that demand high downforce. Robert Kubica announced he will be leaving Williams at the end of this season. The Pole made a remarkable comeback to return to F1 this season after suffering severe injuries in a crash while rallying in 2011. He has struggled, however, in the uncompetitive Williams, and been outpaced by his teammate, George Russell. With most seats for next season already confirmed, it is unlikely he will continue in F1. A move to DTM has been rumoured and Kubica said: “I am looking for different opportunities. In order to evaluate our opportunities, I have taken the decision that I will not continue more with Williams after this year, so I will stop at end of the year with the team and this opens up opportunities for me in the future in different scenarios.”