JD Wetherspoon’s boss, Tim Martin, has pledged to slash the price of lagers, spirits, wine and cider if the UK leaves the EU, after shaving 20p off a pint of ale to illustrate the Brexit benefits he expects for drinkers. Martin has been one of the most vociferously pro-Brexit figures in the world of business, repeatedly insisting that leaving the European Union, even without a deal, will mean cheaper prices for customers. JD Wetherspoon has cut the price of Ruddles, an ale made by Greene King, by an average of 20p across its 900 pubs. Although Ruddles is made in the UK, Martin said a low-tariff regime would cut overall costs for the company, which it could then pass on to drinkers. Leaving the EU would allow the government to slash tariffs on imported goods, Martin said: “The reality is that if you’re running a business and you get a cost reduction, then you can allocate it to whatever part of the products you sell you want to. “There are no import tariffs on Ruddles bitter but pubs are synonymous with beer and I strongly believe that if we get a reduction in tariffs on non-EU imports, the most beneficial thing for us to do is to make our beer more competitive. “Depending on what they [the government] do, my first move on 31 October would be to do something for a lager, a cider, a glass of wine and for a spirit, so there’s something for everyone.” He said that neither suppliers, nor employees, some of whom have complained of earning poverty wages, would suffer as a result. “We think we’ll be able to maintain our operating margin and reduce prices to customers,” he said. Martin has already axed drinks from the EU in its pubs and replaced them with less well-known brands from outside the single market in a move to demonstrate post-Brexit opportunities. He insisted that drinkers were as willing to order substitute products as they were the better-known staples of the drinks cabinet. “On the basis that the ports might block up, which I think is a fiction by the way, we buy brandy from Australia and America rather than France. On a taste test it was better than Courvoisier and it’s 10p a drink cheaper. It sells as well as Courvoisier.” Martin added that industries such as the automotive sector, which has warned repeatedly that leaving the customs union could deal huge damage to carmakers, were overstating the likely impact. “If those sorts of problems apply, businesses can reorganise their supply chains,” he said. 