A “lost” novel by Françoise Sagan has been published in France. Four Corners of the Heart, an unfinished 200-page story by the author of Bonjour Tristesse – which caused a sensation with its portrayal of the empty lives of the idle rich – was found by her son Denis Westhoff after her death in 2004. Rumours had been rife in Paris of a shock entry into rentrée littéraire, the frenetic weeks in autumn when most of the year’s biggest titles are published. Like her debut novel, which Sagan wrote at 17, the latest release is a laconic dissection of the lives of the haute bourgeoisie. It is centred on an unusual love triangle involving Ludovic Cresson, a businessman who made his fortune in vegetable production. But, like Sagan, he has a serious car accident, and then becomes amorously entangled with his mother-in-law. At the height of Sagan’s fame in 1957, she crashed her Aston Martin and fell into a coma. The incident did not extinguish her love of cars and, after she recovered, she would drive from Paris to Monte Carlo to gamble at its casino tables. The young Sagan was a bisexual hedonist who scandalised Parisian society  as the first sparks of the youth revolution began to fly in the late 1950s. Her son said the novel was typically sarcastic and “Saganesque – an incredible adventure, sometimes impudent, with a baroque tone”. Westhoff, a well-known photographer, said he spotted the two-volume manuscript in a drawer. He described the discovery as a “miracle” amid a series of legal battles over her estate, in which he said Sagan’s property was “seized, sold, given away or acquired in dubious ways”. The draft had been so heavily photocopied that the outline of some of the letters were unclear, Westhoff said. In the preface, he reveals he brought the text to Sagan’s editor, who did not want to publish it. Westhoff decided to work on the book himself, adding missing words and sometimes whole passages where he said corrections seemed necessary, taking care not to change the novel’s style or tone. Four Corners of the Heart ends on a cliffhanger, as Sagan’s text trails off.