Some weeks ago on Twitter, I added pasta to my ever lengthening list of things that are better when cheap than when posh, alongside body lotion, crisps, chocolate, kitchen toasters and many more. In the enthusiastic debate that followed, what struck me was how many women felt the same about mascara. When it comes to buying a no-nonsense, no-budging, lash-lengthening, curling or thickening workhorse, the commonly held belief was that a tenner’s worth delivers more than a luxury brand’s offering for three times as much. I was conflicted, since I rarely find that budget mascaras stay on without smudging (they are usually of the fibre-filled variety, rather than my preferred tubing variety). But it prompted me to put a few dozen bargain wands through their paces. I must confess: I found some seriously impressive contenders. My best-performing brand overall is L’Oréal Paris. There are few duds in its vast mascara portfolio, but my favourite wasn’t one of its most talked-about (catchily named things such as Bambi, Miss Manga, Miss Hippie), but the exceptionally good False Lash X Fiber Xtreme Resist Waterproof (£11.99). It is unlike me to want to wear waterproof mascara, but this defied all my prejudices by neither drying out my lashes nor taking three weeks to remove (an oily cleansing balm worked easily). Most importantly, the two-step process (the thickening primer end of the wand first, followed immediately by the lengthening fibre end) gave me the sort of massive, bovine lashes that normally come in a box with a sachet of glue. My natural lashes are extremely puny, though; those who are naturally well-endowed may feel this one is a bit much outside of a drag club. Altogether more modest, but with the staying power of dried muesli on a china bowl, is Isehan Heroine Make Long And Curl Waterproof (£9.57). This gives separation (zero clumps here) and darkest black definition more than it adds length, but it stays put so long that it hung on for dear life through four cleanses and two showers before finally releasing its grip. I suspect you could attend a bootcamp or swim the channel in it without emerging panda-like. My happiest surprise was the cheapest of the lot. Collection, the cruelty-free British brand, sell the outstanding Lash Surge Waterproof for a mere £4.99. It goes on beautifully, unstickily and gives a big, fat, inky flutter that sticks around until you alone call time.  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.