The floodlit cityscape of Singapore will host Formula One again this weekend, a race the sport positively revels in promoting. The street circuit set amid the skyscrapers at night enjoys a backdrop like no other. The speed, spectacle and drama is accentuated by the walls that loom over the track, unforgiving of error. Singapore, a visual feast, is perhaps the most cinematic in its presentation of any race on the calendar. F1 knows how good Singapore looks and in its drive to encourage new, younger fans, the race that bears the closest resemblance to a video game is of no little import. It is a shop window but in terms of really selling the sport, the bigger picture of how F1 ensures it can still reach a wide audience remains one of its most imperative and complex concerns. With live broadcasts of F1 in the UK exclusive to Sky, fans without subscriptions must wait until Channel Four host their highlights package from Marina Bay on Sunday night. Free-to-air F1 coverage is increasingly disappearing, so a new deal between Channel Four and Sky announced earlier this week was welcomed. The multi-year arrangement means Channel Four will continue to show highlights of every race next season, as well as the British Grand Prix live. Competing demands for attention are huge, especially among younger viewers, so maintaining a presence on terrestrial TV was vital. Last year F1 signed an exclusive deal with Sky Italia that removed its previous shared coverage from free-to-air Rai. F1’s chief executive, Chase Carey, admitted later in the year that a 5% decrease in viewing figures – a massive loss of potential future fans in one of F1’s strongest markets – was largely because of the Italian deal. As cricket has discovered, it is a dangerous game to chase the money at the expense of exposure. Yet for F1 it is no longer simply a binary choice. The sport has three main revenue streams. Hosting fees from circuits, sponsorship and TV rights. Of these, the sums of money Sky and other broadcasters are paying are now surely the single strongest pillar supporting F1. Recent new deals with circuits such as Spa, Monza and Silverstone are all understood to have been for fees lower than previously charged under Bernie Ecclestone’s stewardship of the sport. Next season’s new race in Vietnam is believed to be in F1 terms almost a loss leader, with organisers paying as little as $6m to host the meeting. In contrast, Sky’s exclusive UK deal has been reported as being worth £200m a year. These are numbers that cannot be ignored and in the short term will define how F1 is consumed. When Liberty Media took over in 2017, its intent was to transform the sport but it inherited Ecclestone’s deals. A central tenet of the company’s plan was to bring the sport to a new audience that Ecclestone had either ignored or dismissed. To that end Liberty was looking immediately at over-the-top streaming to sell F1 direct to the fans and in a format far more suited to how content is now being consumed. But it has not been an overwhelming success. F1TV began streaming last year but has struggled with a variety of technical problems. So much so that Ellie Norman, the marketing and communications director, recently admitted the platform had been launched too soon. Not a great start but one fans in the UK were spared since the deal with Sky means that live race coverage on F1TV cannot be purchased and that will remain the case until that contract is complete in 2024. Which direction F1 will be going in terms of broadcasting by then may be demonstrated in the next two years. This year, broadcasting contracts with Austria, Canada and the United States conclude and the large markets of France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Brazil all require new deals at the end of next season. How F1 approaches them will define what the UK might expect to be offered come 2024. A general return to free-to-air looks highly unlikely, however. Carey recently admitted that Liberty Media would continue its move towards pay platforms “because that is where the world is going”. Given the need for the sport to maintain revenue from broadcasting this is not just a global media trend but simply inescapable for F1. What will shape the future is likely to be how deals are structured between traditional broadcasters and the ability for fans to access F1TV live. The latter is likely to be more attractive to the new breed of fans, consuming sport away from the television set. The fundamental dichotomy inherent in this is that broadcasters will not pay vast sums if F1 is selling its own product to the same market. There is a tightrope to be walked here and it will not be easy. In the USA this year ESPN allowed F1TV streaming of races live in return for not paying for its rights. Not a model F1 can sustain globally. Singapore this weekend is the glamorous showpiece of complex and convoluted backstage machinations that F1 must solve successfully to survive.