Christopher Hampton has been a consistent champion of Ödön von Horváth. He wrote a fine play, Tales from Hollywood, speculating about what might have happened if Horváth had not died in a freak accident in Paris in 1938. Now, he has adapted Horváth’s novel of the previous year, which deals with the dilemmas faced by anti-Nazis. The result is an incisive, disturbing text that gets a far from ideal production. The hero, simply known as the Teacher, is a mild-mannered figure who tries to instil a knowledge of history and geography into a group of brutish 15-year-olds. The crisis comes when he is severely reprimanded for objecting to a racist remark by a pupil. Left to supervise this gang of young Nazis on an Easter holiday camp, the Teacher finds himself becoming a voyeuristic observer of their sexual intrigues and internal rivalries – which culminate in a murder. At its simplest, the play asks, “What good can one man do?” in a world of escalating evil. But it goes further to suggest that not only the Teacher, but representatives of the church and the law, implicitly condone the new barbarism with their toe-the-line conformism. As the Teacher himself says: “better fed than dead”. Combining Horváth’s firsthand experience of Nazism with obvious application to today, the play demands fierce clarity. But here it gets a fussily arty production from Stephanie Mohr – who has had a distinguished continental career – in her UK debut. The stage is dominated, in Justin Nardella’s design, by a ring of blackboards that does little to match the play’s shifting locales. For practical purposes, the pupils are played by adults, but it would have been fascinating to see them cast from plausible adolescents. One or two actors are also obliged to play far too many roles. The one successful piece of casting is Alex Waldmann as the Teacher: he brings a caustic intelligence to the role, while conveying the moral impotence of the guilt-ridden liberal. It’s a good play that deserves crisper execution. At the Coronet theatre, London, until 19 October.