Swansea squandered the chance to move top of the Championship after being held to a draw in a scrappy game at high-flying Bristol City. The Welsh side were reduced to 10 men late on when Jake Bidwell was sent off for a cynical challenge on the substitute Niclas Eliasson but, in truth, neither team truly stamped their authority on a game short of clear-cut chances. Among those in the stands to witness it unfold was Jack Leach, the Somerset spin bowler, whose heroics for England at Headingley will live long in the memory. This game may not have such a lasting effect. Leach, whose infamous spectacles were fitted at an optician in Cotham Hill, three miles from here, was presented with a shirt which read ‘1 Not Out’ and said Marcus Trescothick, the honorary Bristol City vice president, gave him the bug. This was a nervy game that took an age to get going. Matt Grimes’ sweetly struck free-kick from 25 yards on the brink of the interval was the only notable shot on target in the first half, with Dan Bentley, the Bristol City goalkeeper, scrambling to his left to make a strong save. Famara Diédhiou came close to an opener for the hosts, flashing inches wide of Freddie Woodman’s left post after latching on to an electric cross by Callum O’Dowda, who switched on the afterburners to speed beyond Kyle Naughton before firing across goal. In truth, it was not until Lee Johnson decided to introduce the Senegalese striker Diédhiou in place of the defender Nathan Baker approaching the half-hour that his side truly began to click. Before then, Bristol City had struggled to assert themselves, with Sammie Szmodics ineffective as a false nine on his league debut. They lacked a focal point in attack, the kind of presence that Benik Afobe, who is expected to miss the rest of the season after suffering an anterior cruciate ligament tear in training, had provided. After the warm-up, each Bristol City player went over to embrace Afobe, the Stoke City loanee watching on from the stands with those also resigned to the treatment room, including Jay Dasilva, Tomas Kalas and Adam Nagy. Diédhiou’s arrival was welcomed and it is not the first time Johnson has been bold in his substitutions, sacrificing Taylor Moore 18 minutes into victory last weekend after Stoke were reduced to 10 men and hooking a yellow-carded Jack Hunt 26 minutes into beating West Brom here in April. Baker, this time, was withdrawn as Bristol City reverted to a more familiar 3-4-3, with Ashley Williams, the former Swansea captain, at the heart of the hosts’ defence. Few players know this fixture better, with Williams on the winning side the last time Swansea yielded victory at Ashton Gate in February 2011, when Johnson and his assistant coach, Jamie McAllister, were on the opposing team. Johnson said there were “no red flags” with Williams, 35, a free agent this summer. Kasey Palmer and Eliasson entered, charged with adding the absent spark in the final third but Swansea also lacked punch, Jay Fulton prodding over and André Ayew, given a new lease of life under Steve Cooper, nodding Grimes’s corner on to the roof of Bentley’s goal. Cooper, too, sought to inject some vim and Sam Surridge, the Bournemouth loanee, made an immediate impact with his first touch, flicking a cute ball through for Ayew, only for Bentley to block his shot. From the resulting Grimes corner, Mike van der Hoorn headed over as both sides went in search of a winner, with Woodman repelling a powerful Diédhiou effort. There was still time for the referee Tony Harrington to give Bidwell a straight red for scything down Eliasson with stoppage time looming but the sides ended with a point apiece.