In the photo, the lounging mountain lion looks almost shocked, as if caught mid-exclamation while yelling, “Get out!” Given the setting – a bathroom in a northern California home – no one could blame the big cat for wanting some privacy. But in this case, it was the lion that was the unwanted guest. On Monday night it wandered into a family home in the Sierra Nevada foothills, about 50 miles outside of Yosemite National Park. The mountain lion banged through the front screen door of the home in Sonora, breezing past both the home’s residents before fully comprehending what it had done, said Andrea Benson, a sergeant with the Tuolumne County Sheriff’s office. The lion ran deeper into the house once it spotted the residents, ending up in a bathroom, and the residents quickly shut the door behind it, Benson said. They went into the basement and called for help, while the mountain lion appeared to take the opportunity to knock around toiletries. The sheriff’s department and the state department of fish and wildlife responded, using a ladder to get a peek – and a photo – of the mountain lion in the second-story bathroom. With the residents’ permission, the sheriff’s deputies broke the window and worked with the wildlife department to coax the animal out. “The officers were pounding on the wall to get his attention, and shining the light on the window area to show that there was a path to escape,” Benson said. “He finally was able to jump out the window.” The mountain lion took off into the wilderness after making its escape from the bathroom, said Patrick Foy, a captain with the wildlife service’s law enforcement division. “He did get a stern warning about the break-in before being released,” the sheriff’s office wrote on Facebook. More than half of California is mountain lion habitat, and Sonora is in the heart of mountain lion country, Foy said. However, human and mountain lion interactions are rare. “Most lions stay away from people,” Foy said. “The lions, they’re always looking for food, but not in someone’s house. There’s just no way to surmise why the lion actually ran into the person’s house.” Foy can recall just two other times in his more than two decades of experience of mountain lions running into homes. In 2017, a mountain lion snuck into a home in the hills of San Mateo county, just south of San Francisco, and snatched a dog off a sleeping woman’s bed. A few months later, a mountain lion crashed through an apartment window and on to a woman’s bed in Colusa, north of Sacramento. Though mountain lions are always looking for prey, they rarely harm humans. The last mountain lion fatality in California was in 2004.