Notice of the 48-hour walkout by British Airways pilots was delivered just when the airline was about to celebrate its 100th anniversary, measured from when a distant corporate ancestor first operated a flight to Paris. Impolite, but then BA’s centenary celebrations could have a lot to answer for. Celebrity endorsements and recollections of BA’s history and past grandeur might easily rub up those pilots who think things are neither what they were, or what they believed they would be. Ostensibly this strike is about pay; so why should a decent-sounding 11.9% settlement over three years be so roundly rejected? There are several forces at work here, and differing generational perspectives, neither of them great for BA. Older pilots – some of whom earn the £167,000-plus allowances that BA has talked up – were here 10 years ago, when they took a hit for a lossmaking airline and accepted an adjusted reality of lower pay and greater productivity. Budget airlines, and the financial crisis, had irretrievably changed airline economics. Except that it seems BA is churning out billions in profits, including a pretax profit of nearly £2.5bn last year. And captains, used to a position of ultimate authority on the flight deck in their working life, are little inclined to defer to the chief executive, Álex Cruz, whom they see as overpaid, and Spanish to boot. In the words of one, a “here today, gone tomorrow management” whose cost-cutting may not be in the long-term interest of an airline where pilots might spend an entire career. The division of cabin crew at BA in 2009-10 was more entrenched and brutal, with a long-running, bitter strike and the establishment of a two-tier crew system. But BA’s recalibration of the pilot payscale and the closure of the final-salary pension scheme also created something of an us-and-them feeling. Many pilots in a “squeezed middle” earn way below the top tier, and don’t yet have the rostering privileges to spend weekends or holidays with young families. Salaries for entrants can be £27,000 for cadets or £57,000 for a first officer. These recruits may also have paid for their own training, and be repaying the £100,000 costs. Some short-haul pilots who have joined from the likes of easyJet have found little to recommend it, beyond a declining prestige. The eroding distinction between BA and the rest for passengers, whether in chopping out food or charging for bags, has chipped away at pilots’ sense of status and professional pride – a feeling compounded by the carrier’s series of reputational disasters such as IT outages and data breaches. Now, the pilots are collectively asserting their self-worth at the centre of the airline. Notably, both the pilots’ union and Cruz referred to the BA brand in interviews on Monday. Balpa said BA had “dumbed down the brand”; Cruz said pilots were “punishing our brand”. With no other signs of agreement between them, and another strike due, that brand could take a further battering yet.