Ever wondered why it has taken me so long to create a choux pastry recipe for the column? Well, choux pastry and I have had a love/hate relationship over the years, but I can assure you this recipe is banging. A classic combination of puffy, crisp profiteroles, milk chocolate and honey ganache, with some raspberry compote, in one bite. OK, maybe two, but you get my point. Messy, yes, but you will love it. For a more uniform look, use a piping bag to pipe medium-sized circles on to the trays (instead of using a spoon). Dab the tip with a wet finger to make sure you have a crisp, smooth top. Prep 30 min, plus cooling Cook 50 minMakes 10-14 For the choux pastry50g unsalted butter125ml water100g plain flour3 large eggs For the chocolate honey filling70g runny honey 230ml double cream225g dark chocolate, chopped 1 tsp vanilla extract or bean paste For the raspberry sauce250g raspberries 2 tbsp caster sugar 1 tbsp lemon juice 3 tbsp water To finishIcing sugar Heat the oven to 230C (210C fan)/450F/ gas 8, and line a large baking sheet with greaseproof paper. Melt the butter in a large pan with the water on a medium-low heat. When it begins to boil, add the flour and reduce the heat. Beat with a wooden spoon until it comes away from the sides of the pan and forms a ball. Keep the pan on the heat until the pastry is dry enough to form an even but thin film on the bottom of the pan. Take off the heat and transfer the dough to a stand mixer fitted with a beater attachment. Beat on a low speed until most of the steam has evaporated, then beat in two eggs, one at a time, until the mixture is smooth and falls in a gentle “V” shape when lifted with a spoon. Beat in the last egg little by little, to the rightconsistency – you may not need it all. Spoon/pipe medium-sized blobs in lines on the baking tray, then gently dab the top of each ball with a wet finger. Turn the oven down to 170C (150C fan)/335f/gas 3. Sprinkle the buns with a little water, bake for 20 minutes, . After 20 minutes, open the oven door to let out the steam, then close it straightaway and bake for 10–15 minutes more, until they are a light golden brown. Remove the baking tray, and transfer the buns to a wire rack, then turn off the oven, but close the door to keep it warm. When cool enough to handle, split each bun in half, then put them back on the baking tray and in the oven, with the door closed. Leave to dry for 10-15 minutes while you crack on with the fillings . For the ganache, gently stir the honey into the double cream in a large saucepan on a medium heat. As it reaches a simmer, turn off the heat, add the chocolate and leave to sit for a minute. Whisk until smooth, adding the vanilla, until it becomes thick and glossy, and set aside. Add all the raspberry sauce ingredients to a saucepan andbring to a boil. Leave to boil for five minutes, stirring now and then. Reduce the heat to low, gently simmer for 10 minutes, then leave to cool and thicken. To assemble, put a generousgood spoonful of the ganache on the bottom halves of the buns, drizzle with raspberry sauce, top each with a lid, sprinkle with a little icing sugar, and serve.