My partner of 16 years considers me unreasonable for questioning him over a £100 gift to his son from our joint account. The money was to get his son’s pension started and is the latest in a long line of financial contributions to both his sons. My partner and I are in our 60s; his sons in their 30s. He has a kind and generous nature, but his finances haven’t always supported this characteristic. He won’t discuss it. I paid off his mortgage recently and had already given him a lump sum towards it. I have also paid tax bills and credit cards – but he hasn’t changed his spending habits. Although there were no conditions attached to these payments, they were made on the mutual understanding that they were in both our interests and towards our better future together. I have contributed to large maintenance projects on his house (which we live in) and towards daily living costs. We have never discussed how “equal” this arrangement is, just that things “seem to work out”. Over the course of the relationship, I have supported both his sons in various ways, which has enabled my partner to give money away more freely and without consideration of how it affects me. I have felt unsettled by this for some time, but finally feel very aggrieved. I don’t have children of my own, but I understand a parent’s desire to help their offspring. I would have no – or at least less – objection if these “gifts” were discussed and decided on in a way that didn’t detract from our own needs, lifestyle and plans. It’s not really about the £100, is it? Because that’s a tiny sum compared with how enormously generous you have been (I took the exact sums out to protect your identity, but they were very large). Seemingly small upsets like this in relationships remind me of the game Jenga, where you remove wooden blocks from a tower one at a time until it collapses: the critical thing that finally brings everything down is just a small piece, but when the whole structure has become unstable, that is all it takes. I wonder if you and your partner have ever talked openly about finances and agreed on these things which matter so much to you? You say that you have a “mutual understanding” but go on to say you have never really discussed things. You need to. You need to give him a chance to air his feelings and put things right, where needed. Try to use “I” statements when you talk to him rather than “You do this” or “You do that”. If he won’t talk to you, you need to think carefully about what to do next. You can’t have a relationship without communication and you are not a bank. There was no mention of your partner’s sons’ mother in all this, and I wonder if their father suffers a certain amount of guilt: it’s almost as if he hasn’t let them launch into adulthood and keeps trying to put things right with them – why? You told me in your longer letter that he still pays some of their bills. This goes well beyond what a parent does for a child, and I speak as an Italian mamma. This isn’t about you not having children, and therefore not understanding, but about feeling taken for granted and not being considered. Because, on paper, that is exactly what is happening. You say you are about to embark on a big building project, which you seem to be largely funding. I would press pause on this for now. If you do go ahead, make sure you get proper documentation drawn up showing who owns what and who has paid for what. It’s not romantic, but neither is being taken to the cleaners. For your part, you may want to think about what money means to you and why you have felt the need to be generous to a point where the relationship is so fiscally unbalanced. For some couples it wouldn’t matter; for you it does, and that is important. I also wondered why your partner needed to take the £100 out of your joint account. It’s a small sum; surely he could afford to do this through his own account? It seems at best thoughtless, at worst totally disregarding of you. Your partner can, of course, help his sons if he wants to, but with his money, not yours. And not to your detriment. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.