One of the brightest talents in jump racing has been ruled out of the approaching season with the news that Topofthegame has sustained a leg injury that will keep him on the sidelines until next autumn. The lanky chestnut’s trainer, Paul Nicholls, broke the news through his Betfair blog on Monday night. “While the problem is not serious, it is enough to make us stop with him at this stage and give him plenty of time to recover,” Nicholls reported. “It’s frustrating because he’d done so well over the summer and has been cantering away nicely at home. Hopefully, he will be back in training again next season.” Topofthegame’s biggest moment so far came at the last Cheltenham Festival, when he prevailed by a neck over Santini in a hotly contested RSA Chase, with Delta Work a close third. He immediately became a leading fancy for the next Cheltenham Gold Cup in March and was a 10-1 shot when the bad news came. He had also figured prominently in betting on the Ladbrokes Trophy (formerly the Hennessy) and the King George. It is, of course, the time of year for bad news about star hurdlers and steeplechasers, whose work is being stepped up in preparation for the core season that starts next month. It is at this stage that trainers often discover problems and the words “out for the season” are quite likely to be pressed into service again in the next six weeks. As a big and talented horse, Topofthegame is arguably the type of chaser most likely to meet with a setback of some kind. Denman, Sprinter Sacre and Douvan were all big horses who ran into problems eventually and it could be argued that their bulk was a factor, subjecting the vulnerable bits of their bodies to a greater strain than smaller types like Delta Work do. “Why is it always the good ones?” I once said to a trainer who had shared some bad news. “Because the others don’t go fast enough to hurt themselves,” was his gruff reply. The ground was on the fast side at Warwick on Monday but there has been plenty of overnight rain, continuing until lunch, and I’m hoping it will have a significant effect for the sake of Ballymalin (3.50). He’s on a really good rating when things fall right and this might be the time to side with Nigel Twiston-Davies’s chaser, who won on his reappearance runs in 2016 and 2017, albeit in novice contests. The nine-year-old has been rated a stone higher than he is now and was good enough to be third in last year’s Midlands National. He started last term with a couple of stinkers but was a good second to Le Reve in the Surrey National when last seen. The mere fact that Twiston-Davies has him ready to go in September this time bodes well. He needs this to become a thorough test of stamina but there’s enough runners to ensure Dr Robin doesn’t have an easy time up front. Ballymalin is attracting interest at 5-1, down from the opening 7s. • More tips will follow shortly. Lingfield 1.50 Pytilia 2.20 Inca Man 2.55 Augustus Caesar 3.25 Molly Blake 4.00 Giving Back 4.30 Good Tidings 5.05 Stormbomber Beverley 2.00 Capla Spirit 2.30 Zegalo 3.05 Twin Appeal 3.35 Kyllang Rock 4.10 Hackle Setter 4.40 Cathedral Street 5.15 The Rutland Rebel 5.45 Burguillos Warwick 2.10 Armandihan 2.45 Wenceslaus 3.15 The Crafty Touch 3.50 Ballymalin (nap) 4.20 Our Uncle Pat 4.55 Adicci Chelmsford 4.50 Magical Moment (nb) 5.25 Belle Anglaise 6.00 Locked N' Loaded 6.30 Masai Spirit 7.00 Merdon Castle 7.30 Jaleel 8.00 Grisons 8.30 Spice War