If you had told my teen self I’d be a beauty journalist and that I would write a book on beauty, particularly one geared towards women of colour, I’d have called you a false prophet. “You can’t be what you can’t see” is a hackneyed phrase, but in my case rang true. I loved magazines, but I always skipped the beauty pages. The voices behind them didn’t speak to me. The faces on the pages didn’t look like me. The products weren’t geared towards me. I had no place there. Growing up, I had always heard my Nigerian parents and their friends say: “This is not our country.” And so, despite being British, I parked any expectation to be included in the beauty industry. It never occurred to me that I could be a part of this world, let alone driving change from within. When I started writing about beauty, almost 15 years ago, it was nothing to do with race. My reasons were pragmatic. I was a freelance fashion writer, work had dried up, so I turned my hand to writing everything and anything because at that time, in the timeless words of Gwen Guthrie, Ain’t Nothing Going on But the Rent. And I was irked by the way beauty was written – fluffy and asinine, as if for one-dimensional airheads. I made a conscious decision to go against that. Unconsciously, however, my foray into the beauty world was driven by my blackness and the industry’s rejection of it. My route to realising that was surprising, even to me. In February 2017, to coincide with Black History Month in the US, CNN launched a project inspired by WEB DuBois’s The Souls of Black Folks, a literary classic that talks about race and ethnicity in America. Du Bois wrote about the first time his skin colour made him realise he was different. CNN chronicled a number of high profile people of colour revealing their own personal “moment”. It was called “The First Time I Realised I Was Black.” I pondered this, wondering what my answer would be. I was born in St Thomas’ Hospital, London, and grew up by the Albert Embankment. We weren’t posh. We lived in a council house that happened to be in Zone 1. In the early 80s, when I was five, we moved to Lagos, Nigeria. I don’t recall a single conversation there where anyone discussed being black. There were conversations about politics, which we studied in school. There were conversations about class, a residue of colonialism. And there were conversations about skin tone. (Centuries of being brainwashed to believe the fairer-skinned are superior and should, therefore, be more favoured – particularly if their facial features mimic Eurocentric ideals of beauty – has had a rippling effect. Ever wondered why the bestselling black female artists are Rhianna and Beyoncé?) But this was the closest we came to discussing “blackness”. Which was why, when I returned to London five years later, I still did not consider myself “black”. But goodness, I soon found out just how “other” I was. At school, a mixed comprehensive, I was the “African”. Children spat out the word in repulsion. Teachers would speak to me slowly as if English wasn’t my first language. Someone once called me “Black Attack” because of my dark skin. I had short hair (I needed a hairstyle with minimal upkeep because I’d attended a boarding school in Nigeria.) My TWA (Teeny Weeny Afro) became a taking point. I remember someone sniggering that I looked like Kunta Kinte, the central character in Alex Haley’s Roots, viciously taken from his African village and sold into slavery. At swimming classes, I was the girl who “didn’t need arm bands because her rubber lips would help her float”. I am strangely sadder about those words now than I was then. I now see the depth and layers of hate from which this ignorance stems. As a young girl, I couldn’t articulate my feelings beyond thinking: “This white boy is really horrible to me and thinks he is really funny.” Even so, these experiences made me feel “different”, but they were not signifiers of my blackness. I discovered that in something much more pedestrian: a trip to the chemist. When I hit adolescence, I begun to get interested in beauty, not as a potential vocation, but to attract boys and to tackle my confidence-crippling acne. I’d surreptitiously take from my mother’s stash of lipsticks – coloured bullets she’d pick up from random stalls and stores in Brixton. The quality stretched from OK to diabolical. But I didn’t care. I would swipe it across my lips and head into school convinced I epitomised sophistication. One day, I walked into the local pharmacy with my Caucasian friends to scope the beauty offering. While my friends giggled excitedly about their finds, everything I tried either left an ashy finish or just didn’t show up – the pigments weren’t strong enough. Still I persevered, because at that age, aren’t we all desperate to be part of the collective? I moved towards the foundations and chose the darkest shade. It was called “Biscuit”. I looked like I had white chalk on my skin. I laughed to hide my embarrassment but, at that moment, everything changed. Suddenly colour mattered, in more ways than one. This is when I realised I was black. It was like I had turned up to a party to which I was not invited. I felt irrelevant, excluded and ashamed. The message from the beauty industry was loud and clear: I was not valuable enough to be part of the conversation. In the years that followed, there were a few lights in the tunnel. I remember the first time I saw Naomi Campbell in Vogue. I was mesmerised. She looked like me – as far as skin colour went at least. In truth, she fitted into what the industry see as the acceptable face of black. But she was black and that was enough for me. It gave me hope. There were other key moments. After years of accepting and wearing foundations that were not made for my skin, I discovered MAC in the 90s. Their Studio Fix Foundation was a game changer. This mainstream brand was arguably the first to create foundations covering a wide spectrum of hues. I would go as far as saying it changed the lives of beauty-loving black women. It was the first foundation I wore that made me feel beautiful. The rise of Pat McGrath, the world’s most influential makeup artist, also had an impact on how I viewed beauty. Even now, watching this British-born black woman navigate a very white space and reach the top of the game blows my mind. Still, the culture of silence around the lack of products available to darker skin types remained. There are those who may think: “It’s just beauty, what’s the big deal?” Makeup and skincare are powerful tools that have helped me cope with difficult moments in my life. In my youth, acne plagued my skin and carried on long after I grew out of my teens. It killed my confidence. The discovery of a decent facial (Eve Lom was my first love – one of the few brands that knew how to treat darker skin), an incredible mask from Dr Sebagh, and moisturisers from Institut Esthederm restored it. Years later, when my premature son was seriously ill in intensive care, my daily hint of blush, slick of lip colour and touch of mascara provided a sense of normality when everything around me felt scarily precarious. So, no, it isn’t just beauty. It holds a power that is not always tangible but, trust me, it’s there. Fast forward. It’s 2019. There are moments when I sense an exciting shift taking place in the beauty industry. Along with sustainability, diversity and inclusivity seem to be at the top of every agenda. Whether this will extend beyond a trend or box-ticking exercise remains to be seen, but for now it’s welcome. Foundation ranges suitable for all shades are omnipresent. In fact, thanks to the incredibly successful product launch of Rihanna’s Fenty Beauty, which addressed the whitewashing of the beauty industry, any brands now launching with fewer than 40 shades of foundation are seen to be slacking. I believe the boldness in calling out a lack of inclusivity stems from cultural icons in powerful positions speaking out. From Naomi Campbell to Beyoncé to Oprah Winfrey to Rihanna to Edward Enninful… Hearing them addressing issues of race has given so many people a voice. There still exists, of course, the tone-deaf brands that don’t believe darker-skinned women are their “audience” and have purposely limited their foundation colours. Thankfully, there are other foundations to cater for everyone. Preferences may vary based on texture, finish and skincare benefits, but the market is now so vast, “the one” is lurking out there somewhere. The issue is not really about foundations. It is about representation and equality That said, the issue is not really about foundations. It is about representation and equality. I have had countless women of colour approach me via social media, at dinner parties, on the streets, to ask me for product recommendations. Their ages span from 16 to 80. They cover the spectrum of class. They come from all walks of life – school-gate mothers, students, high-flying executives, fashion stylists. If all of these women are struggling to find products and beauty “professionals” still don’t know what to do with darker skin and Afro hair, then the beauty industry, retailers, brands, marketers and, yes, even editors, are failing them. When I told a friend that I planned to write a book on widely available and easily accessible products and brands women of colour should have on their radar, she was flummoxed: “How are you going to fill that book? There’s nothing out there.” Ah, but there is. It’s not perfect, but a mindshift in marketing and media could make a significant difference. Most beauty journalism still assumes readers are white. Cosmetic brands are making an effort in their marketing, but most skincare brands are not – by only featuring white women in their campaigns, they also assume their audience and consumer is white. At the majority of the big beauty companies, all the key decision-makers are white, which invariably informs what ends up on advertising material. I have to ignore that homogeneity in order to discover gems. Black women not in my position don’t have that advantage and assume “it’s not for us”. This seems like a commercial misstep. A few years ago, a Nielsen report in the US found that black women spend nearly nine times more than their Caucasian counterparts on hair and beauty – mainly on niche brands targeting this demographic; brands that are generally sold in beauty supply stores in “ethnic” areas. If this survey were conducted on this side of the Atlantic, I’m convinced the results would be no different. A significant amount of this spend goes on black-hair products, yet the mainstream hair industry remains the least inclusive part of the beauty industry. The mainstream hair industry remains the least inclusive part of the beauty industry At a recent beauty industry dinner, I complimented a fellow editor on her hair. She told me she’d just had it done at a high profile salon loved, lauded and frequented by every beauty editor I know. I had never been, I admitted. Another editor overheard and was aghast. “What! You’ve never been?” she said. In my head, I responded: “I can barely find suitable hair products from mainstream hair brands, let alone finding ‘white’ salons or stylists to cater for my hair. Most approach my coily texture with trepidation, as if a pet alien has just sprouted from my scalp. Or they view it as an unruly beast that requires bashing into submission. Or, I’m simply turned away. And so for the sake of my self and hair preservation, I now stick to black-hair stylists, or those situated in so-called ethnic areas, who don’t find my hair such a terrifying aberration.” But I didn’t say that, because I didn’t have the energy. I have had these conversations many times before. They are exhausting. So instead I simply shrugged and said: “I don’t go because they don’t do Afro hair.” “Oh,” she mused, “I never thought about that.” Of course she hadn’t. This is an advantage afforded by white privilege. It is a small privilege, but a privilege nonetheless. It is a privilege I don’t have. So, despite the current talk of diversity and inclusivity, I am constantly reminded we are not there yet. While it’s wonderful that I can now find a base that won’t turn me deathly grey or cantaloupe orange, in order to really move forward, the beauty industry needs to start having conversations that go deeper than the shades of foundation. Palette: The Beauty Bible for Women of Colour by Funmi Fetto (Hodder & Stoughton, £25), is out on 3 October. Buy it for £22 at guardianbookshop.com. Funmi Fetto is in conversation with Sali Hughes at a Guardian event on 30 September. To book tickets and for more information go to membership.theguardian.com Funmi Fetto selects her top beauty, hair and skincare products from her new book Palette: The Beauty Bible for Women of Colour IGK Hot Girls Hydrating Shampoo, £22, spacenk.com I was first attracted to the word “hydrating”, and this shampoo is now a core of my hair repertoire. It is an exquisite hydrator, one of the few hair products that claims to be “suitable for all hair textures” and actually delivers on Afro hair. It smells really coconutty, though I’m not even sure it has coconut in it. But it does contain vitamin E, UV protection, and lychee extract  to protect hair. Becca Shimmering Skin Perfector Liquid Highlighter, £30, johnlewis.co.uk A magnificent highlighter. It comes in different textures – the liquid version has been described as soft focus in a bottle. I use Topaz on a daily basis because it fools people into thinking you have the best skin in the world. It’s glossy. And it has no glitter in it, which can look ridiculous. Sunday Riley Ceramic Slip, £28, spacenk.com Nearly everyone who gave a five-star review of this cleanser was white, so for a long time I didn’t try it. Also, if I hear something is “gentle”, what I really hear is: “Hey guys, I don’t do very much.” But this is phenomenal – a silky gel that gives a deep clean without drying the skin. Stila Huge Extreme Lash Mascara, £19, stila.co.uk As you age, your lashes will go from being a fan of feathers to pitiful stumps of nothing. What’s scary is that you’ll have no idea when it’ll happen. If you don’t want to spend your life buried under false lashes, what’s the alternative? Well, this. The clue is in the word – huge. With this mascara, you see an immediate lift with one coat. It won’t clump your lashes. And, thanks to conditioners, it doesn’t crisp. Always a good thing. Lime Crime Liquid Lipstick, £18, boots.com Not all liquids lipsticks are made equal. Some are so thick and unyielding they drag across your lips; others are so flimsy that you would struggle to get a consistent colour pay-off, and many leave you with a cracked dryness that feels like a sprinkling of pencil shavings. Lime Crime joins a coterie of brands I feel have perfected the liquid lipstick; the texture is a velvety matte that glides on effortlessly. It feels so light and conditioning, and the pigment packs a punch. NARS Blush, £25, narscosmetics.co.uk Nars calls itself “the ultimate authority in blush”, and I get it. There is no colour, finish or texture that you can’t find under its wing. “Orgasm” is probably its most famous product, a pinky-gold shimmery powder with a silky finish. On dark skins, you’d struggle to get a true representation of colour. Taj Mahal (a shimmering burnt-orange) might fare better, especially if you were going to wear foundation. Zelens Brightening Serum, £135, net-a-porter.com I had a conversation recently with a fellow journalist as to how much is too much for a beauty product. Some people are addicted to expensive products. I think most are placebos, that with advanced formulations it is possible to find cheaper alternatives. But there are exceptions. This is one. Yes, there’s only 30ml in a bottle. But it is above and beyond the many brightening serums I’ve used. Neogen Peeling Pads, £27, net-a-porter.com Exfoliating pads soaked in wine. Not the drinking kind, but the kind that revolutionises your skin. The star ingredient is resveratrol, an antioxidant derivative of red wine that sloughs off dead skin cells, protects your skin from pigmentation and premature ageing, declogs pores and gives you a brighter complexion. If you asked for more, it would be greedy. Plus, the smell! Nostalgically sweet, fruity and juicy. Glossier Invisible Shield, £20, glossier.com I love Glossier. But do I use all the range? Embarrassingly, no. I love the idea of Glossier. I love the ethos. I love the authentic sense of community the brand has created. And I love the clever, forward-thinking way they operate. There is one product in the Glossier line-up that I use more than anything else: the sunscreen. It’s superb, and, as the name states, invisible. Not only does it protect skin from the sun, the ingredient list – vitamin E, broccoli and aloe leaf – reads like an ode to antioxidants. Paula’s Choice Liquid Exfoliant, £28, cultbeauty.co.uk This liquid exfoliator is possibly the product I’ve recommended the most. It removes dead skin, gets rid of debris in the pores and refines skin, making it smoother, more balanced and with a healthy glow. Funmi Fetto is the Observer’s beauty columnist and also the executive editor and beauty director at Glamour