Born in Belgium, Bradley Wiggins, 39, grew up in London. He became a junior world champion in 1998 and won Olympic bronze in 2000. In 2012, he was the first Briton to win the Tour de France and took his fourth Olympic gold medal in the time trial in London. He was knighted the following year. In 2016, he won gold in Rio, becoming Britain’s most decorated Olympian, and announced retirement. He is touring the UK with his show, Bradley Wiggins: An Evening With, until 6 October. When were you happiest? When my second child Bella was born in 2006. I missed my son Ben being born because I was racing, so seeing it for the first time was quite an experience. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? One I’ve tried to change: burying my head in the sand. What is the trait you most deplore in others? Condescension. What was your most embarrassing moment? Living out most of my adult life in the public eye. Post 2012, I had a few hissy fits, throwing my bike on the floor, things like that, and they are all now on YouTube. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? I bought a pink leader’s jersey from the 1953 Tour of Italy which belonged to Swiss rider Hugo Koblet. I spent £45,000. What is your most treasured possession? When I was 14, I bunked off school to watch my hero, a British rider called Sean Yates, take the yellow jersey in the Tour de France. I have that jersey. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I am completely happy in my own skin, other than a bit of weight round the middle which I am trying to get rid of. Who would play you in the film of your life?Michael Fassbender. What is your most unappealing habit?Farting in public. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you? When I met my dad again when I was 18 [they had been estranged], I didn’t really like the person I was confronted with. He said, “I want to make up for 17 years of not being there.” I was scared of him and I didn’t know what to say. I chose to become estranged from him again. What does love feel like? Loss of control. What is the worst job you’ve done? I’ve never had a job. What has been your biggest disappointment? Never going back to the Tour de France and trying to win again. What is the closest you’ve come to death? I had quite a chequered childhood. I had a knife put to my throat once when I was a kid, which was very scary. What single thing would improve the quality of your life? This isn’t a complaint, but obscurity would be nice. You can’t have a bad day in public because everyone’s got phones. How would you like to be remembered? As an honest person who did his best. Tell us a joke My girlfriend said she’d only marry me if I overcame my ambulance obsession. I can’t wait to go down on one knee-nor-knee-nor-knee-nor.