Call it a jeremiad: Newsnight’s former attack dog opens by ripping strips off prominent targets Boris Johnson, Jeremy Corbyn and Nigel Farage. But after that initial barrage, Paxo seems genuinely aggrieved while grilling a rogues’ gallery – including Jonathan Aitken, Alastair Campbell and Ann Widdecombe – to work out how UK politics became so pestilent. His glum thesis is followed by a debate hosted by Jeremy Vine entitled Are Our Politicians Up to the Job? The answer seems fairly flipping obvious. Graeme Virtue Eggy and Shouty usher in a new cohort of celebs, starting with Neil Ruddock, Zandra Rhodes, Joey Essex, Oti Mabuse and Andy Grant. First they encounter a sausage-making machine (“I didn’t even know you could do that,” says Essex). But no one’s laughing when the pressure of working in a restaurant kicks in. Hannah Verdier After all the blurry cuttings jobs hurried out to mark the D-day celebrations, it is refreshing to watch a focused, full-colour docudrama that offers a forensic analysis of the rise of the Nazi party. It begins with the four years from 1930 when Germany’s liberal democracy died a terrible death under Adolf Hitler. Mike Bradley Martin Freeman plays DS Steve Fulcher in Jeff Pope’s fact-based crime thriller about the disappearance of Sian O’Callaghan, aged 22, in March 2011. An intelligently chosen cast full of character actors means you quickly lose sight of the fact that this a true story and settle into a compelling missing-persons drama. MB With Love Island set to be broadcast twice a year, you might have thought that ITV2 would give the dating show shtick a well-earned rest. Apparently not – this new series, hosted by Emily Atack and Joel Dommett, sees couples take an enforced break to explore the single life (oo-er). Continues all week. Hannah J Davies Will Rokos and Tom Fortuna’s 1860s US police procedural romp bears comparisons with Gangs of New York. Tom Weston-Jones assumes the mantle of civil war hero turned detective “Corky” Corcoran in a show that sets out its bloody stall with child prostitution, armed robbery and steamy sex – and that’s just the first five minutes. MB The Descent 9pm, Horror Channel The first half is a claustrophobic story of six women trying to scrabble out of a deep, dark cave in the Appalachians … then the mutant cannibals show up. The tension ratchets up unbearably, and there’s little of the black humour that Neil Marshall brought to his werewolf fest Dog Soldiers – it’s really scary down there. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: West Indies v India 3.30pm, Sky Sports Main EventFourth day of the second Test.Major League Baseball: New York Yankees v Texas Rangers 6pm, BT Sport ESPNYankee Stadium hosts an American League game.Speedway: Wolves v King’s Lynn 7.30pm, BT Sport 1Coverage of the mid-table clash from Wolverhampton’s Monmore Green track.