Why are pilots earning six-figure salaries going on strike? On the face of it, I do a highly respected and sought-after job and I am paid handsomely for it. Yet this week I am going to strike, and I feel hugely conflicted. My heart feels that I do not want to inflict a strike on British Airways, to which I have given the lion’s share of my working life; or on my passengers, for whom I make safety and commercial decisions every working day. Pilots tend to work until retirement for the better airline employers, so we have a deep practical and emotional connection to our airline’s wellbeing. Passenger safety, along with our own and the other crew members’ safety, affects every decision, action and thought while we are at work; so to decide to destroy the plans of travellers – which we know include highly important life and business events – goes against every fibre of my working soul. So why? One of my colleagues has summed it up as a question of respect. I would also add an element of fear. In the past 10 or 20 years, pilot workloads have significantly increased – as is the case across much of the economy – and at the same time our pay and pensions have been significantly reduced. As the industry has reinvented its former state-run companies into private enterprises we’ve faced below-market pay rises and a hollowing out of pension provision. During all of this process we’ve been told the increased productivity was necessary to ensure our future and create sufficient profit to be able to reinvest. We accepted these sacrifices with the promise that, when they bore fruit, and profit was available, we would then share in that success. My head knows the need to act together is unavoidable – it’s a course of action supported by 93% of my colleagues The investment in new aircraft, seats and service levels have all had much publicity. The share buybacks and shareholder dividends, not so much – but they have been substantial, as have the eye-watering increases in senior management remuneration. So the reason for the dispute is that we feel the potentially below-inflation pay offer, as the company makes record profits, does not respect our previous loyalty and “investment” in BA’s success. However, there is also an underlying fear because other airlines have stripped away respect for our profession in fundamental ways. After having invested maybe £130,000 in gaining their professional pilot’s licence, many pilots now don’t work as employees of their airline – some are even forced to create service companies, for which they are both owner/director and sole asset. These companies provide their pilot “service” to the airline through an employment agency. This denies the pilot basic employment protections such as sick pay, paid holidays and security of employment. If we don’t demand respect now, we are heading towards a very different style of work, with fundamental damage to our lifestyle and job satisfaction joining the threat to flight safety, which must surely follow subcontracted pilots. Other professionals use industrial action differently – moving to a different employer or market when they don’t feel respected. The structure of our industry does not afford us that ability, so unfortunately we must act in concert. My head knows the need to act together is unavoidable – it’s a course of action supported by 93% of my colleagues. My heart would prefer my employer to have understood that I only ask for a return on my lifelong investment. I would absolutely prefer to be taking care of my passengers’ safety while flying them to their destinations. • The author is a British Airways pilot