The glorious, unexpected summer of Daniil Medvedev continued as he marched to his first grand slam final with a 7-6, 6-4, 6-3 victory over Grigor Dimitrov at Flushing Meadows, making him the first Russian male grand-slam finalist since Marat Safin in 2005. Medvedev, who had never previously passed the fourth round of a grand slam, entered the match having won 19 of his past 21 matches across six weeks. The strain of the effort was reflected in the strips of tape lining his body throughout his run, addressing injuries to his shoulder, adductor and quadriceps. But winning only breeds more winning, and throughout the first set, it became clear how much the lanky Russian trusts himself in these big moments, how fearless he now is when the moment demands it of him. Throughout the first set Dimitrov dictated rallies as his opponent struggled to deal with his low, skidding backhand slice. Dimitrov won more points, hit more winners and fewer errors, but Medvedev edged out the first-set tiebreak 7-5. “I think the confidence means a lot in this case because I do think he was the better player in first set. I do think I was kind of lucky to win it,” said Medvedev afterwards. “At this moment in my game, there is something strong that makes me win these crazy sets and crazy matches, which maybe two months ago I would have lost.” After ample breaks and unforced errors from both players, the second set was settled in a long game at 4-4 on Medvedev’s serve, where Dimitrov provided the highlights with dropshots and flashy forehand winners. But each time it mattered, Medvedev dug deep and refused to miss. Predictably, the Russian then broke serve in the following game to take a two-set lead. By the third set, Medvedev was relaxed and he landed the definitive break at 3-1, speeding through his service games to continue his sparkling summer. As Medvedev reckoned with his first grand slam final, he thought back to his youth when he would “go crazy” on the court. The drama during his third-round match against Feliciano López and the boos that followed were a reminder of the past, but today he sees a mental coach and he has learnt how to “burn down” his emotions and play calmly. He is proud of how far he has come from a time when even an opposition coach seemingly clapping his double faults would set him off. “I would scream on them. They would scream on me. Many of these people would say, ‘OK the guy is completely crazy, he’s never be a good tennis player.’ Which is maybe what happened to some of the tennis players. I’m glad I proved them wrong.” Medvedev will rise to world No 4 after this tournament and he is only the third player in history, after Ivan Lendl and Andre Agassi, to reach finals in Washington, Canada, Cincinnati and the US Open in the same year. He will face now Rafael Nadal in Sunday’s final. “This summer’s been so fast and long at the same time,” he said. “Long because I’ve played so many matches. At the same time so fast because I didn’t have any moment to just sit down and look back and say, ‘OK, I’ve done amazing things.’ Hopefully I will have some time after Sunday.’ Medvedev celebrated his win with a calm look towards his coach, a celebration he plans to adopt for all future victories. He says that he finds it amusing, but the 23-year-old surely also understands that this is only the beginning. There should be many more reasons to celebrate in the future. “Also one more thing,” he said, reflecting on the greatest six weeks of his career. “I don’t want to stop. I will always work to be better. I will try to do my best every day.”