You know your career has taken off when you become – as Romesh Ranganathan has – other comedians’ byword for ubiquity. The Crawley man is everywhere these days, an across-the-channels TV fixture less than a decade after turning professional. But far from abandoning standup, he’s now embarking on a UK tour of new show The Cynic’s Mixtape that will keep him even busier than usual until Christmas. As its name suggests, the show is a miscellany of Ranganathan’s latest grouches, which range from Piers Morgan to Fireman Sam, from superficial environmentalism to racism on the football terraces – but which settle on his midlife domestic arrangements most of all. The persona he adopts – beleaguered dad and husband, failing to impose himself on his wife or kids, his body or his world – is a familiar one, given a new spin by the 41-year-old’s chortling misanthropy, and a certain phlegmatic stance in the face of his own enfeeblement. It’s a likable brew, notwithstanding Ranganathan’s pretence to unlikability – even if, on this occasion, it doesn’t quite take us to the highest comic peaks. But it’s consistently entertaining, right from his opening anecdote about losing one of his kids (“easily the shittest of the three”) on a recent trip to Brighton beach. It’s a choice scene-setter, this one, showcasing our host’s dessicated lack of sentiment, as – while his wife hunts frantically for the errant child – Romesh daydreams new uses for the vacated bedroom. Neither is there much love lost for Mrs Ranganathan, who makes snide remarks about Romesh’s keep-fit efforts, and whose blunt refusal of sex make her husband pine for the days when she at least bothered to justify her indifference with an elaborate excuse. This routine – on the mismatch between Ranganathan and his wife’s sex drives – forms the lion’s share of act two, and pitches us squarely in old-school standup’s most well-trodden territory. But if randy hubby and resisting wife feels cliched, Ranganathan fashions it into vivacious comedy, with an eye-catching scene involving ’er-indoors abandoned at dinner, Romesh between the sheets, and a blindfolded son singing Isn’t She Lovely next door. All this flamboyant self-satire cheerfully offsets the cynicism – which in any case Ranganathan pointedly pulls back from at the end of each routine. It’s just for fun, he tells us, all this grumpiness about his kids, or his defeatism about the climate crisis, which we’re all too selfish to meaningfully combat. These disclaimers, alongside heartfelt sections on LGBT teaching in schools, Ranganathan’s ethical diet (cue tart roleplay of the condescension to which vegans are exposed at dinner parties), or one about the stigma attached to dads kissing their children, all advertise the fundamentally decent chap displacing his misanthropy safely into comedy. Occasionally, he treads water. His take on Liam Neeson’s vigilantism is distinguished from everyone else’s by a droll act-out of Ranganathan fleeing the Irishman in a public park. There’s more neat physical comedy at the end of a Michael Jackson routine that otherwise has little new to say, and takes a while to say it. A late riff tying up the show’s loose ends, and the comic hip-hop number that follows it, both feel dutiful and undercooked. You could forgive him for that: he’s had his hands full. And for the most part, The Cynic’s Mixtape – adroitly balancing Ranganathan’s mordancy with self-mockery and a sense of fun – proves his success is built on solid comic foundations. At Royal Concert Hall, Nottingham, until 22 September. Then touring.