Today marks the final day for horse-trading around Europe’s major leagues outside the Premier League, what with La Liga, Serie A, the Bundesliga and Ligue 1 all having transfer deadlines at varying times. Having come off the bench to replace Alexandre Lacazette in the north London derby draw with Spurs, Henrikh Mkhitaryan may well have played his final game for Arsenal. The Armenian is on his way to Roma on loan, with a view to making the move permanent come season’s end. Having been the subject of far more than his fair share of transfer speculation this summer, it looks like Neymar is actually going nowhere, with his mooted return to Barcelona now reported to be well and truly off. Paris Saint-Germain are unwilling to sign off on a decidedly complicated deal, which seems to have hit the skids due in no small part to the refusal of Barça striker Ousmane Dembélé to countenance a loan move to the French champions. The word in Spain is that Real Madrid remain cautiously optimistic that they might still be able to get a last-minute deal for Neymar over the line. Despite having a squad so bloated they cannot possibly hope to keep all their big name players happy, Juventus are still hoping to make a couple of further signings and Arsenal’s Shkodran Mustafi and Bayern’s Jérome Boateng are both understood to be the subject of interest in Turin. Previously mentioned as a potential makeweight in the aborted deal for Neymar, Ivan Rakitic is also wanted by Juve, who are offering Emre Can to Barcelona in return. The former Liverpool midfielder also has admirers at Bayern Munich and is expected to move to one of the two clubs today. Despite reports that Tottenham and Club Bruges had agreed a £13m deal for Victor Wanyama, the move appears to have stalled and now the Daily Record is reporting that the midfielder may go to Celtic on loan instead. Bobby Duncan is reported to be on the verge of signing for Fiorentina, after his agent made headlines last week by accusing Liverpool of forcing the 18-year-old to stay at the club against his will. Liverpool immediately reacted with a statement strongly denying the accusations, while Duncan posted a tweet saying “I just want to play football!”. Unwanted by Inter, Mauro Icardi could be off to PSG on loan, while one-time Manchester United and Tottenham target Bruno Fernandes may be on his way from Sporting to Real Madrid. And finally, despite having just got a deal over the line for Fernando Llorente, Napoli manager Carlo Ancelotti has said he’d be open to giving LA Galaxy striker Zlatan Ibrahimovic a game once the MLS season draws to a close.