Warren Gatland has handed rookie flanker Aaron Wainwright and prop Wyn Jones their World Cup bows for Wales’ tournament opener with Georgia on Monday. The build-up to the game in Toyota has been dominated by the departure from the Welsh camp of attack coach Rob Howley for a suspected breach of World Rugby’s betting laws. It has provided far from ideal preparation from a Welsh perspective, but head coach Gatland – who is in his last campaign with the team – still has a game to prepare for. He has named a strong side to face the Georgians with Wainwright, 21, continuing his meteoric rise to start on the flank. Jones, the 27-year-old Scarlet, will begin the game at loosehead. Georgia’s main strength is their set-piece and especially the scrum. Jones has been picked to ensure Wales have parity in that area and he is described by Gatland as Wales’ best scrummager. In 2017, a second string Wales only edged past Georgia in Cardiff as they struggled at scrum time and Gatland will hope his team have learned the lessons from that game. “Now we’re just looking forward to playing Georgia,” said Dragons flanker Wainwright, who only made his Wales debut last summer and was playing his rugby with Cardiff Metropolitan University two seasons ago. “It’s going to be really important for us. Since I started playing rugby the biggest goal I could have aimed for would be to get selected for the World Cup. As things intensify at the moment, I haven’t really had a chance to think about that (his rise from nowhere). Everything’s focused on that first game against Georgia and progressing on from there. It will be a tough pool.” Wales captain Alun Wyn Jones will lead his team once again in Toyota and will equal the record of most Test appearances for his country when he draws level with Gethin Jenkins on 129 Welsh caps. Jones will pack down in the second row alongside Jake Ball with Wainwright, Justin Tipuric and Josh Navidi named in the back-row. Jones, Ken Owens and Tomas Francis comprise the front-row. Of Wales’ starting XV, 10 have previous World Cup experience and that includes the half-backs where Gareth Davies will line-up alongside Dan Biggar. In total the Welsh XV has 753 caps worth of international experience and Gatland’s side for Georgia is the oldest Wales team to have played at a World Cup with an average age of 28 years and 331 days. Hadleigh Parkes and Jonathan Davies are named as the centre pairing with Josh Adams, George North and Liam Williams named in the back-three for Wales’ opening test. On the bench Elliot Dee, Nicky Smith and Dillon Lewis are named as the front row replacements with Aaron Shingler and Ross Moriarty completing the forward cover. Moriarty - the only specialist No 8 in the Wales squad - is on the bench with the second round meeting with Australia in mind. Tomos Williams, Rhys Patchell and Leigh Halfpenny complete the Wales match day 23 for Georgia. Wales XV to face Georgia: L Williams; North, J Davies, Parkes, Adams; Biggar, G Davies; W Jones, Owens, Francis, Ball, AW Jones (capt), Wainwright, Tipuric, Navidi Replacements: Dee, Smith, Lewis, Shingler, Moriarty, T Williams, Patchell, Halfpenny 