Tyrone Mings has said he holds no grudges against Southampton for releasing him as a teenager but would consider it fitting to make his England debut at St Mary’s Stadium next week. The Aston Villa defender hopes to celebrate his rise from non-league football to a first international call‑up with an appearance in England’s Euro 2020 qualifier against Bulgaria at Wembley on Saturday. His family will be present and, if an England debut does not materialise at the national stadium, his next opportunity will come against Kosovo at St Mary’s on Tuesday. Mings was released from Southampton’s academy as a 16-year-old because of concerns over his height. That setback led to a career in non-league football with Yate Town and Chippenham Town but the 26‑year‑old, now an imposing 6ft 5in tall, insists there is no resentment over Southampton’s decision. “I don’t hold any grudges against Southampton for the decision they made,” he said. “It was fully justified at the time. I wasn’t big enough at the time and not physically developed as I needed to be to go into the under‑18s professional set-up. I respect their decision fully. There were people probably better equipped to go in at that moment. Southampton weren’t doing too well with their first-team and with their budgets and were probably fully justified. “It would be fitting if I made my England debut at St Mary’s Stadium but it wouldn’t make it more or less special than making it at any other stadium.” The former Ipswich and Bournemouth defender worked as a mortgage adviser for London & Country in Bath, earning £15,000 a year, while playing non-league. He admits time outside the professional game, including a childhood that involved time living in a homeless shelter with his family, has given him greater appreciation for the call-up to Gareth Southgate’s squad. “Back then I couldn’t imagine playing for England at all,” Mings said. “I had other goals at the time I was a mortgage adviser and different goals when I was playing non-league football. Playing for England seemed a world away and I just needed to get back into the professional game at that point. “I can’t say that while I was sat at my desk cold-calling or trying to help people remortgage that playing for England was a real achievable goal. But I’ve worked with great coaches and have been able to play for some great clubs and everything has culminated together to get me to this point. “At times I’ve had to reassess my goals, going through injuries, but it makes this all the more sweet.”