Steve Smith was seeing it like a beachball once more as a day of excellence from Australia’s premier batsman and strong winds scotched the notion of momentum in this Ashes series. Smith will resume day two of the fourth Test unbeaten on 60 and the tourists 170 for three from 44 overs, showing little signs of the concussion that led to him sitting out England’s epic Headingley win. Having passed 50 for a record eighth Ashes innings in a row, the headache that is this gifted right-hander has returned for Joe Root’s side. Stuart Broad did continue his stranglehold over David Warner and knocked over Marcus Harris cheaply in the morning and there was a wicket for the returning Craig Overton when he bowled Marnus Labuschagne for 67 and broke a stand of 116 with Smith. But overall it was a tough day for the bowlers after Tim Paine won the toss, with 40mph crosswinds sending crisp packets and inflatables flying across the outfield, forcing a period of play without bails on the stumps and forcing run-ups to be aborted regularly. Jofra Archer experienced his first subdued outing as an England player. Overton said: “Smith is obviously a world-class player and he’s back as the Test No 1. He’s always going to be difficult but we’ve got our plans and we’ll try to keep going to them. Hopefully we get him out tomorrow. Conditions really didn’t suit running into bowl. It’s just the rhythm of the run-up – you feel like you’re getting to the crease and all of a sudden the wind hits you and it pushes you forward. “We all tended to struggle with the wind today. I wouldn’t look too much into [Archer being down on pace]. He’ll be raring to go again, firing in and bowling as quick as he can. Hopefully taking a few wickets as well.” Overton’s first Test wicket on home soil mirrored the one that opened his account on debut in Adelaide in late 2017, the only difference being it was Labuschagne – fresh from his fourth successive half-century – rather than the more prized Smith. The 6ft 5in right-armer followed a string of outswingers with one that ducked in and clattered the top of off stump. The groundstaff at Old Trafford had earlier hammered nails into the bails for additional weight to prevent them being blown off by the gusts but they fell to the ground regardless. Explaining the words he offered Labuschagne after the breakthrough, Overton said: “The over before he cut me for four thinking it was the inswinger but I told him it wasn’t. Then I bowled him the inswinger and it worked out quite well. It wasn’t a send-off, it was just saying: ‘That one was the inswinger; make sure you keep an eye on it.’” This was a strong comeback from Australia after the galling nature of their one-wicket defeat in Leeds. Labuschagne, speaking after play, explained how the tourists have not bought into the idea of England coming into this Test with any additional edge. The newly promoted No 3 said: “We’ve talked about that not being an issue for us at all. We’re just focused on the process of winning a Test match and not necessarily the overall series. “We haven’t been getting too far ahead when we’ve been doing well and we haven’t been getting too far down when we’ve been doing poorly. I think that’s probably the key to not letting momentum take its course.” On batting in a Test with Smith, the man he replaced at Lord’s as a concussion substitute, Labuschagne said: “It was good fun to sort of spend some time with him. I’d never batted with him before and it was an experience to learn from him. “We were constantly talking out there. You can see when different bowlers come on he changes, with different guards or movements. That’s what makes him the best in the world. He’s always kind of one step ahead, not being reactive but proactive.”