The bonus of making these yourself is that you get to write your own custom fortunes. Then you can pretend you’re Jackson Pollock while adding abstract designs in coloured chocolate. Makes: 20-24Prep time: 10 minsBake time: 4-7 mins per batch (7-12 batches in total)Plus shaping and decorating time Ingredients:2 large egg whites (about 100g)80g caster sugar¼ tsp almond extract55ml vegetable oil2 tbsp water80g plain flour200g white chocolate (or use candy melts/compound chocolate)Cocoa-butter- or oil-based food dyes (not water-based, or the chocolate will seize) Plus: Paper to write your fortunes on Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/350F/gas mark 4. Line a baking tray with baking paper or a silicone mat (preferable). Write 24 fortunes on slips of paper. Put the egg whites and sugar in a mixing bowl and whisk until frothy. Add the almond extract, oil and water, and whisk again until just combined. Sieve in the flour, and whisk a final time to combine into a smooth paste. Put 1-1½ teaspoons of the mixture on the prepared baking tray and use the back of the spoon to spread the mixture into a thin 8-9cm circle. Repeat to create two to three circles (it’s best to bake a small amount at a time because you will need to shape the cookies while they’re hot), then bake for between four and seven minutes. Keep a close eye on the batter and take it out of the oven when the edges have just turned brown (a few seconds can make a big difference). Once baked, use a spatula or knife to peel a disc off the paper/silicone mat, then flip it over. Carefully fold it in half over a fortune paper, then use the edge of a mug to guide you as you pull the corners down to form the classic fortune cookie shape. Place in a muffin tin or similar, to help it hold its shape while cooling. Repeat until you have used up all the batter. Melt your white chocolate (or candy melts) in 10-15-second bursts in the microwave, stirring well in between, then divide it and colour it with the food dyes. Decorate the fortune cookies by dipping into different colours. Once set, add further details by either painting on chocolate with a brush or using a brush to randomly splatter the chocolate. Just have fun!