A former potato farmer turned Brexit-backing Tory MP, Andrew Bridgen is nicknamed Spud-U-Hate by his foes. It fell to him to explain, in Tories at War (Channel 4), how he and his fellow uber tubers in the Conservative party elect their leader. First the candidates form a circle. Then they take up their weapons. The circular firing squad ends when the candidates are eliminated – leaving, Bridgen fancifully imagined, “a nun from the Outer Hebrides to become leader”. If only. The problem, in retrospect, was that only 11 Conservatives stood this summer to lead their party. If only all of them had stood, and been eliminated, we wouldn’t be in such a mess. Given that the Na h-Eileanan an Iar constituency that includes the Outer Hebrides elected a Scottish Nationalist last time round, most likely that nun would not have prorogued parliament but revoked article 50, thus wiping the insufferable smile I had to endure watching this show from the face of the par-boiled spudleiter of the Brexit party. The point of this hour was to bear witness to how, since Theresa May’s election, the most successful democratic party in the world (or so ex-minister Alan Duncan called it) got blighted by potato politicians. The civil war would have been fun to watch were it not for the fact that the rest of us are in its crossfire. Tories at War showed that Britons in 2019 are not so much lions led by donkeys as couch potatoes ruled by red-skinned, elite potatoes bred in top vegetable academies in the Thames valley. Duncan, who started the programme in January as minister for Europe, ended it wondering if the lettuce in his sandwich was the last greenery he would consume as a consequence of no-deal Brexit. A little over the top, Alan: just as there are academies for producing potato politicians, so there will be lettuce farms in Brexit Britain. The problem of the programme is that the war isn’t over and the collateral damage has scarcely started. The pleasure of the programme was watching Tory grandees get it wrong in hindsight. Nicholas Soames began the year airily scotching the ludicrous possibility of Boris Johnson as leader; he ended here chucked out of the Conservative party by PM Johnson for defying the whip to prevent a no-deal Brexit. Even Bridgen thought removing the whip from rebel Tories was bonkers: Johnson, the “Midlands Machiavelli” reckoned, had left the “rats nowhere to run”. There was an absence at the heart of the show. It was David Cameron, who, we can now see, was to the Tory party what Marshal Tito was to the Balkans. Say what you want about the authoritarian leader, but at least, as civil war ravaged Yugoslavia, he was dead and so not around to flog his self-justifying memoir and offload his responsibility for the debacle on to his successors. There were other voids too. The other two calamitous organ grinders – May and Johnson – were also unavailable, so we got various monkeys – Rees-Mogg, Soames, Soubry, Spudleiter, Spud-U-Hate, Duncan. As the last of these sobbed over May’s Downing Street farewell, I felt like Oscar Wilde reading the death of Little Nell: it would have taken a heart of stone not to laugh. Spud-U-Hate was good on the calamity if not its corollary. He argued that, because the Tories’ poll ratings are scarcely in double figures, it is imperative to ally with the Brexit party. Johnson is not party to this mooted alliance, partly because the Brexit party’s leader, perma-gurning Nigel Farage, has his number. There are people who enter politics to do something, others to be something, Farage explained. Johnson’s problem is that he wants to be something. Farage didn’t realise his problem is that he wants to do something. It was a coup (but in a good way) to get the hedge fund billionaire and Johnson backer Crispin Odey on film. I’m not saying Odey is another red-skinned potato raised in elite vegetable academies in the Thames Valley, just that he attended Harrow and Oxford before becoming a hedge fund billionaire who makes money from shorting Britain. What Odey said here would chill anyone with lingering hopes for British democracy. The man who gave £10,000 to Johnson in June argued for prorogation thus: “Parliament has got to be minimised in this instance. But in a new parliament [after a general election] in which hopefully he [Johnson] has a 100 majority, parliament comes back into being what it should be. But in the process you may have destroyed a lot of the political class. But the political class long ago forgot who their masters are.” Talk about constructive ambiguity. Odey may have meant to suggest that politicians’ masters are the people, or that they are plutocrats like him and that our democracy risks becoming as oxymoronic as its US counterpart. Odey’s presence reminded us that there is money to be made from Brexit, just not by the likes of you and me. He won millions betting against the pound after the 2016 referendum and now, according to the Sunday Times, has made a £300m bet against British businesses and stands to profit from the woes of the UK economy, of which there will be plenty should Brexit happen without an EU deal in October. No-deal Brexit, the remain campaigner Gina Miller told us, suits his financial agenda. The programme concluded, fittingly given we are in the middle of the shambles, with an unanswered question: “Will Brexit devour Boris Johnson just as it did Theresa May and David Cameron?” But, really, who cares about the fates of the uber tubers? The real question is what Brexit will do to us.