‘It’s easy for people to say, ‘We should all care for our loved ones’,” says Kristof Bilsen “But what happens when you can’t?” For his new documentary, Mother, the 39-year-old Belgian travelled to northern Thailand to film at Baan Kamlangchay, a centre for westerners with Alzheimer’s whose families have left them in the hands of Thai caregivers. The political was very personal for Bilsen. During the three years he made the film, his own mother Rosemarijn was in decline with dementia. “My dad tried to give her home care but he’s 78, so it proved overwhelming,” Bilsen says. “So he visited her a lot in an old persons’ home. The subject of the film is very close to me – the frustration of not being able to care for our most beloved.” In his novel Everyman, Philip Roth wrote: “Old age is not a battle. Old age is a massacre.” Especially, it might be added, for those who have dementia, and those who care for us. And yet we keep returning to the massacre and how we variously deal with it. In Still Alice (2014), Julianne Moore plays a professor who finds the linguistic skills that have defined her identity falling away with her early-onset Alzheimer’s, living with a family reeling from her diagnosis. James Keach’s documentary of the same year, Glenn Campbell: I’ll Be Me, depicted the late country star on his last tour, struggling to remember lyrics and losing his dexterity but still bent on showing the truth of his Alzheimer’s. No wonder some attempt find something more heartening. Hence the BBC’s recent Our Dementia Choir With Vicky McClure, in which the Line of Duty star assembled a group of 20 people in the hope that lyrics learned long ago can be embedded too deep for for dementia to erase and that performing together can uplift rather than annihilate. Bilsen cites Erick Stoll and Chase Whiteside’s recent documentary América, which showed three Mexican brothers looking after their eponymous 93-year-old grandmother after she injured herself falling out of bed and subsequently struggled with forgetfulness. The trio of street entertainers turned carers sing her songs, shower her with kisses and at one point tenderly assist her with an enema. “It’s a lovely, rather romantic film,” says Bilsen. “But very different from mine.” More to Bilsen’s temper is Michael Haneke’s Palme d’Or-winning film Amour (2012), in which Georges and Anne, retired music teachers played by Jean-Louis Trintignant and Emmanuelle Riva live happily in Paris. When Anne has two strokes and begins to experience dementia, she makes Georges promise never to put her in a hospital or home. And so, as her condition deteriorates and despite his own frailties, he cares for her until the very end. That harrowing resolution, Haneke suggests, is better than any treacly Hollywood ending that denies the disease’s ravages. Bilsen’s documentary comes at a time when how we care – or don’t care – for people with dementia is becoming an increasing concern. In May, the Alzheimer’s Society estimated that the number of people with dementia facing isolation and loneliness is expected to double to 240,000 in the next 20 years by 2039. Too many people with dementia end up feeling “abandoned and isolated, with nowhere to turn”, said Jeremy Hughes, the charity’s chief executive. A YouGov poll found that 40% of respondents would not feel confident communicating with people with dementia. Last month, Alzheimer’s and dementia was found to be the leading cause of death in England and Wales, the proportion increasing for the fourth consecutive year. In such a context, I suggest to Bilsen, Mother might be taken as showing the latest instance of a callous west offloading its problems: we export our rubbish to Thailand. We send them our sex tourists. And now, incapable of caring for our loved ones, we export vulnerable people who are losing their minds. Bilsen nods, but disagrees that his film simply contrasts western callousness with eastern compassion. “It’s more complicated than that. My task was to shift that perspective from the western gaze. It’s tricky, because clearly it’s the west that has the funding to tell the story. Also my political preconceptions are behind the film and I am a white man from Europe, but I want to challenge the judgments that flow from that. My film does not indict or judge.” One way he attempted to subvert the western gaze was to give a camera to Chutimon Sonsirichai, AKA Pomm, one of the Thai caregivers at Baan Kamlangchay, so she could tell her story. “Initially, my film was going to be about different kinds of care.” He had been much influenced by reading Being Mortal: Medicine and What Matters in the End by American surgeon Atul Gawande. “We’ve been wrong about what our job is in medicine. We think our job is to ensure health and survival. But really it is larger than that. It is to enable wellbeing.” Gawande’s radical thought is that while death is the enemy, it is unbeatable, and so what one needs is not a Custer, but a Robert E Lee: “Someone who understands that the damage is greatest if all you do is battle to the bitter end.” Early in the film, we see Pomm tenderly massaging the hands of her most beloved patient, Elisabeth Röhner, a Swiss woman near the end of her life. This isn’t healthcare as battle but as kindness and warmth. “When she was with Elisabeth, it was as if she was looking after her mother. I fell in love with Pomm,” says Bilsen. “She’s totally opposite to the western concept of a petite Thai woman. She’s very independent, strong, self-reliant woman. She has agency.” When Pomm started sending Bilsen her video diaries, his approach to the film completely changed. “We’re in a time where many documentaries are scripted in advance. That’s completely the opposite to the way I think about film-making. I like to spend a lot of time observing.” When he studied at the National Film School in Beaconsfield, he says, the mantra was “learn to trust the process”. “And I did. I knew when she sent me these videos that I had found the character who would drive the film.” His film lets Pomm speak for herself. “Every day when I see patients in this condition, I think to my self ‘How lucky they are,’” she says in voiceover. “They are lucky to have three caregivers when they are in this condition. They’ve got money to pay for all this. If one day I get like this what will I do? Who will take care of me? I don’t want to live a life that is a burden to other people.” Pomm had two children while she was a teenager and a third with her ex-husband. Her two older children live with her mother, several hours from her work. “I take care of other people but I don’t take care of my mum,” she tells us. Her third child, Nadia, is looked after by her estranged husband a long way away. We see her make trips on her days off to visit. “If you don’t stop crying Daddy won’t let me see you any more, OK?” There is no resolution: just the pain of being a mother who can’t care for her children as she wants. “I have been wondering,” Pomm says, “why I have been working for so many years but I still can’t give my mum and children a better life.” Bilsen realised when he heard Pomm reflect on her predicament that the film wasn’t only going to be about how we care for people with dementia but about the contradictions and frustrations of being a mother. “Life is messy and I hate it when films aren’t, when they are dishonest about human tragedy.” Bilsen’s film becomes especially poignant when it juxtaposes Pomm’s agonies with those of the Gloors, a Swiss family who decide to send their mother, 57-year-old Maya, to Thailand because her early-onset Alzheimer’s has become too much for them. In one powerful scene, Maya outstrips her daughter as they walk in the Alpine mountains, but scarcely joins conversation: her body is strong, but her mind weakening. Later we see the family packing to take their beloved wife and mother on what we must assume is a one-way trip to Thailand. Is there a risk that the Gloor family will be judged for leaving Maya in Baan Kamlangchay? “Of course,” says Bilsen. “I know that public opinion can be so cruel, but I want to protect them from that. I want to show sympathetically what they did. I think what they did was filled with kindness and compassion. Maya’s husband was convinced that she would get better care there.” In the film, we see Maya’s husband, Walter, and two daughters at a Christmas party in Thailand shortly before they leave her for what may well be the last time. After Maya is left, the film takes several painful turns. We see home videos of Maya and Walter from the outset of the marriage – kissing, showing off babies. And then we watch the parted couple on Skype now, he in Switzerland, she in Thailand. He asks her how she’s doing, but she doesn’t recognise him. Heartbreakingly, she wanders off in the middle of the call, leaving Walter to realise he’s become a stranger to the woman he loves. Now, Bilsen is planning a documentary set in Japan, though he won’t say anything about it: “I will get there and trust the process.”