It’s been a week since I got back from Minneapolis, where we were visiting my daughter and her husband, and the holiday already feels like something of a distant memory. I arrived back at Heathrow late in the morning and by the afternoon I was sketching Boris Johnson’s press conference at the G7 summit. Since then, politics has become progressively more mad: so much so it’s even affecting my sleep. Last night I had a dream that I was crossing and recrossing the Irish border, petrified I was going to be stopped by guards. I don’t think that’s one I need to take to my shrink for interpretation. But the holiday was wonderful – the first time we had all been together as a family since last Christmas – with plenty of lazing around beside lakes as well as more energetic activities. The one downside, apart from the expense – the government’s efforts to drive the pound towards parity with the dollar to simplify a US-UK trade deal did us no favours – was that we got to learn more about the workings of the American healthcare system than we anticipated after my wife broke her thumb playing softball. Just as well she had taken out insurance – though we never managed to reclaim the unused tokens at the baseball centre that another family stole from us while we were tending to my wife – as her treatment came to just short of $8,000 (£6,500). Needless to say, on our return home, the doctors here said they would never have repaired the break with pins that large. It was like listening to one builder inspecting another’s work. An extraordinary day in Westminster, which began with Johnson giving a statement on the G7, prorogation and the general election he said he didn’t want but was clearly desperate for, and continued with Michael Gove giving a statement in which he refused to discuss the no-deal preparations outlined in Operation Yellowhammer on the grounds that they were top secret. Despite them having been leaked to the Sunday Times two weeks previously. Then came the emergency debate to prevent a no-deal Brexit, in which Jacob Rees-Mogg threw a temper tantrum, lay down on the front bench and demanded nanny bring him his bottle, and ended with Johnson losing his first vote in the House of Commons as prime minister. As a result of which, 21 senior Tory MPs, including Ken Clarke, Philip Hammond, Justine Greening and Nicholas Soames were deselected. The man who considers himself a latter-day Churchill had just kicked Churchill’s grandson out of the Conservative party. All the while, Johnson’s key special adviser, Dominic “Dom and Dommer” Cummings, was lurking in the background, Kool-Aid in hand and shouting at his shadow while trying to pretend everything was working out exactly as Classic Dom had planned. To cap it all, I received a press release saying David Icke was publishing a new book on the real truth behind September 11. Sometimes it’s hard to distinguish between satire and reality. I’m often asked if it’s easier to be a sketch writer now that the absurd has become the norm. I actually find it increasingly difficult to see the funny side of anything. Rather I feel like I have become a stenographer failing to keep pace with events. Boris Johnson’s first prime minister’s questions proved to be his second car crash in as many days. Most Tory MPs had assumed his hopeless performance at the dispatch box the previous day had just been an aberration and the man who had sold himself to them as the “Great Entertainer” would live up to his reputation. If anything, he was even more hopeless. Too much more of this and Tories will be sending letters to the 1922 Committee demanding the return of Theresa May. At least she used to make an attempt at engaging with questions, even if she seldom provided any direct answers. Johnson merely alternated between mumbling and shouting, while insisting his Brexit negotiations would be going swimmingly once he actually got round to starting them and just making facts up to suit himself. He even insisted the Andrew Marr interview in which Gove admitted some food prices could go up – yippee, it’s dog biscuits all round from November onwards – had never taken place. You’d have thought someone with a long history of lying to his family and friends would be rather better at lying to parliament. Long before the end, you could see the desperation on the Conservative benches. Not even his fellow cabinet members could summon up much enthusiasm. One Tory MP sent me a simple text that read, “He is appalling”. It was reported this week that Johnson’s election slogan is likely to be “Trust the people”. A hard sell when not even his own MPs trust him. One of the other great pleasures of going on holiday is the chance to sit down and read a book – The Great Romantic, Duncan Hamilton’s biography of the Guardian cricket and music writer Neville Cardus, was an utter joy. I also love wandering around bookshops in the US to check out how different their bestseller charts are from ours in the UK. Apart from the usual rash of How to Get On in Business and Make a Fortune books, what struck me from going to Barnes & Noble was the number of titles about heroic dogs that were in its top 20. I counted at least three. There was The Art of Racing in the Rain: Meet the Dog who will Show the World how to be Human, the story of how a pooch brought a family together and turned a bloke into a racing driver. There was also A Dog’s Journeyabout a pit bull mix who gets lost, wanders round a bit and then comes home, and A Dog’s Purpose about a dog that teaches people to be nicer to each other. I wondered if it might catch on over here and if I might be able to cash in with a book about my own dog, Herbert Hound. Though it might have to be quite short. I can’t see much film tie-in potential in the story of how he had such a good time staying with our friends Kim and Sarah while we were away – they were happy to throw him a ball for hours on end, even though his retrieval success rate is only one in three – that he sulked for a week when he got back home. It also appears to be sod’s law that I managed to miss one of England’s greatest finishes to a Test match since 1981 and have come home to find the cricket team has reverted to playing as badly as it did before I left. Nor are Spurs doing much for my mental wellbeing. Last Sunday’s north London Derby against Arsenal was more pain. Surrendering a two-goal lead and hanging on like grim death for a draw, only to miss a golden chance to steal the win right at the end, was 90 minutes of pure misery. Made worse by being hit on the shoulder by a plastic bottle that had been thrown by an Arsenal fan sitting above the away end. I complained to a steward but he just shrugged and said he hadn’t seen anything. My observation that preventing these kinds of incidents was the whole reason he was there was met with a blank stare. Not so long ago I looked forward to sport as a release – time out from myself – but now the bit I increasingly enjoy the most is the anticipation before the game has started, and I’m beginning to wonder if it’s every bit as bad for my mental health as Brexit. I read a report recently that pessimists have a much shorter life expectancy than optimists. In which case, I suspect I am already on borrowed time. Digested week digested: Once, twice, three times a loser