Before October 2018, the Netherlands had not kicked a ball in anger against Germany for six years. When the teams walk out for the Group C qualifier in Hamburg, it will be the fourth time the fierce rivals have faced each other in 11 months. Not that neutrals should be complaining. There have been 12 goals in the two Nations League matches and one Euro 2020 qualifier that have been played since – and some scintillating football. Nico Schulz’s 90th-minute strike for Germany sealed a 3-2 victory in a pulsating qualifier at the Johan Cruyff Arena in March that left the Dutch on three points from two matches and facing a tricky game of catch-up to ensure automatic qualification. Northern Ireland’s flawless start has powered them to the top of Group C on 12 points and piled pressure on Ronald Koeman’s side, who will have to go on the attack at the Volksparkstadion. Expect another entertaining open game from two vibrant young sides. Gregg Bakowski • Germany v Netherlands, 7.45pm (all times BST), Friday Football has rarely been able to dent ice hockey’s primacy in Finland but Markku Kanerva’s team are on the verge of changing that. Over the next week they face two of the most important games in their history and, if at least one of Greece and Italy can be seen off in Tampere, a place at Euro 2020 should be within touching distance. They sit second in Group J, three points clear of Armenia and five in front of Greece and Bosnia-Herzegovina. It is a golden opportunity for a country that has only once come close to reaching a major tournament, when they fell just short of Euro 2008. Finland are formidable at home, they have not conceded in their last eight games, and in Norwich City’s Teemu Pukki they have one of Europe’s hottest centre-forwards. They may fancy their chances of toppling the injury-hit Italians, who will miss Lorenzo Insigne and Giorgio Chiellini and could be caught at the top when they meet on Sunday if all goes to plan. And if it unravels spectacularly? Finland would have the fallback of entering the play-offs, in that case, having been one of the winners in Nations League C. The opportunity that lies ahead could hardly be greater. Nick Ames Finland v Greece, 7.45pm, Thursday Romania had their most exciting footballing summer since 1994 thanks to the entertaining under-21 side that reached the semi-finals at the European Championships. Ianis Hagi, son of the legendary Gheorghe, was the star , earning a move to Genk, although Ajax were also linked to the playmaker. He is joined in Cosmin Contra’s squad to face Spain and Malta by six teammates from that under-21 squad, who became known for their attacking football as they defeated England and Croatia, and they will be given the chance to prove themselves at full international level against Spain in Bucharest. Whether Hagi can follow in his famous father’s footsteps is unknown but he can be as influential for this generation and their first test could be telling, not that they will be afraid. Will Unwin • Romania v Spain, 7.45pm, Thursday Three wins and a draw from their first four matches have taken the Republic of Ireland top of Group D on 10 points and given them a big psychological advantage over third-placed Switzerland as they prepare to meet in Dublin. Vladimir Petkovic’s side are similarly unbeaten but have played only two games, a win over Georgia and a hugely deflating 3-3 draw with Denmark in which they let a three-goal lead slip in the final six minutes. This means Mick McCarthy’s side can open up a nine-point advantage over the only other realistic contenders for automatic qualification. McCarthy’s preparations have not been entirely smooth, however, with James McCarthy, Kieren Westwood, Matt Doherty and Sean Maguire withdrawing through injury. GB • Rep of Ireland v Switzerland, 7.45pm, Thursday With Lionel Messi suspended from international football for his corruption comments during the Copa América, the Argentina manager, Lionel Scaloni, has drafted in seven upcapped players for the friendlies against Chile and Mexico, one of who is Alexis Mac Allister. The son of the former international Carlos Mac Allister – whose unusual name originates from his family roots in Fife, Scotland – signed for Brighton last year, but work permit issues led to him being loaned to Boca Juniors this season. The 20-year-old plays alongside his older brother, Kevin Mac Allister, and scored this worldie winner in the Copa Libertadores on his first start for the club. Alexis’ international call-up is good news for Brighton – the diminutive central midfielder could secure a British work permit next season if he continues to be involved with Argentina. It will be interesting to see if he makes his debut on Friday against Chile, who are missing their own Alexis, with Sánchez still in Italy after completing his loan move to Inter. Michael Butler • Chile v Argentina, 3am, Friday Scotland are in a curious position under Steve Clarke; the scars from that embarrassing defeat in Astana are yet to heal, but two paths remain open to qualify for Euro 2020, where they would be among the host nations. Clarke needs his squad to gel quickly, and said at his unveiling that his players need to be “100% committed”. In that context, Oli McBurnie’s gaffe this week was particularly unfortunate, with the Sheffield United striker caught on camera sounding less than thrilled at the prospect of an international break. It was a snippet taken from a light-hearted exchange and McBurnie has dealt with it maturely, addressing his teammates in private. Outside of his Twitter mentions, all is forgiven. Now would be a good time for the Yorkshireman to do his talking on the pitch and find a first international goal. Scotland welcome Russia and Belgium to Hampden in this round of fixtures – matches that will surely shape the group. Niall McVeigh • Scotland v Russia, 7.45pm, Friday. This is an important time for Japan, who start their qualification campaign for the World Cup this month in Myanmar, but whose priority is to prepare for the Olympic Games at home next summer. With just three players aged over 23 permitted at Tokyo 2020, the head coach, Hajime Moriyasu, has opted for a young squad for the friendly against Paraguay, dropping Shinji Kagawa and Shinji Okazaki, both of whom this summer signed for clubs in the Spanish second tier. While Kagawa has impressed for Real Zaragoza, scoring against Ponferradina, Okazaki left Málaga on Tuesday after 34 days, without making an appearance. Japan’s investment in youth means much is expected of Takefusa Kubo, who impressed in pre-season at Real Madrid and has joined Mallorca on loan. Without Kagawa, the 18-year-old is, perhaps unfairly, the headline name in this burgeoning team. MB • Japan v Paraguay, 11.20pm, Thursday Since the return of Senol Gunes for his second spell as Turkey head coach there has been an increasing focus on youth. Twenty of the players called up to face Andorra and Moldova are under the age of 25, including hot prospects Abdulkadir Omur of Trabzonspor and Besiktas striker Guven Yalcin. Despite this new focus, Gunes knows the importance of experience and the most capped player in the squad, captain Emre Belozoglu, will earn his 100th a few days shy of his 39th birthday. He is required to influence those flair players alongside him to give Turkey momentum from two supposedly simple qualifiers. Even if they fail to qualify this time around, there is greater hope for the Turkish national team than there has been for a while. WU • Turkey v Andorra, 7.45pm, Saturday Kosovo’s success story is well told by now and they will bounce into St Mary’s next Tuesday on the back of a 14-game unbeaten run, which included an eyecatching win in Bulgaria last time out. They are Europe’s youngest international team and, these days, a deadly serious one; anyone expecting an England walkover should think again but it is a shame they travel without their two biggest threats. Milot Rashica and Arber Zeneli are two of the most exciting wingers around but both are injured. Their absence dilutes a realistic chance of reaching Euro 2020 and Benjamin Kololli and Hekuran Kryeziu will miss out too. But Kosovo have other threats, such as the in-form Fenerbahce striker Vedat Muriqi and Swansea’s Bersant Celina, so if they can emerge from Saturday’s home tie with the Czech Republic unscathed then perhaps a shock in Southampton will be on. NA Kosovo v Czech Republic, 2pm, Saturday How many matches do you think Chad’s senior team have contested since their last tilt at World Cup qualifying, which ended with a 4-0 defeat to Egypt in November 2015? One, is the answer, and that fixture has since been expunged from the records. They have not taken to the field since losing to Tanzania the following March, after which they withdrew from the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations qualifying competition on financial grounds, and were banned from the 2019 edition as a result. A squad of players based in France, Belgium, Niger, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea, Portugal, Indonesia and the local league will have had some catching up to do before facing Sudan in Thursday’s first-round, first leg qualifier for Qatar 2022 in N’Djamena. The Frenchman Emmanuel Trégoat has returned as coach in the hope of leading them into a new era. Chad is far from the only country that has had sustained issues putting a football team out but it goes to show that international football is not something anyone should take for granted. NA • Chad v Sudan, 3.30pm, Thursday