The slow-churning remnants of Tropical Storm Imelda flooded parts of Texas on Thursday, leaving at least two people dead and rescue crews with boats scrambling to reach stranded drivers and families trapped in their homes during a relentless downpour that drew comparisons to Hurricane Harvey two years ago. Officials in Harris county, which includes Houston, said there had been a combination of at least 1,000 high-water rescues and evacuations to get people to shelter. The storm also flooded parts of south-western Louisiana. More than 900 flights were canceled or delayed in Houston. Further along the Texas Gulf Coast, authorities at one point warned that a levee could break near Beaumont in Jefferson county, as the longevity and intensity of the rain quickly came to surprise even those who had been bracing for floods. WATCH: Video shows extent of severe flooding in Beaumont as Texas Game Wardens conduct water rescues in the area. 34 inches of rain have fallen in Beaumont in the past 24 hours. Latest: https://t.co/UEdy4orpLC pic.twitter.com/TgYziUOpd7 A 19-year-old man drowned and was electrocuted while trying to move his horse to safety, according to a message from his family shared by the Jefferson county Sheriff’s office. Crystal Holmes, a spokeswoman for the department, said the death occurred during a lightning storm. A man in his 40s or 50s drowned when he tried to drive a van through eight-foot-deep floodwaters near Bush intercontinental airport in Houston during the Thursday afternoon rush hour, the Harris county judge Ed Gonzalez said. The National Weather Service said preliminary estimates suggested that Jefferson county was deluged with more than 40in of rain in a span of just 72 hours, which would make it the seventh-wettest tropical cyclone in US history. THIS IS CRAZY: Normally a 4-lane highway. Not today.Everyone going southbound on 59 forced to form a single file line - the left shoulder is the only part that isn’t flooded!Traffic crawling! AVOID 59S NEAR NEW CANEY!!#Imelda #Texas #flooding https://t.co/UD7dvMlA5A pic.twitter.com/xoHdGkZg0w Even when Houston was finally rid of the worst, downtown highways remained littered with abandoned cars submerged in water. Thousands of other drivers were at a practical standstill on narrowed lanes near flooded banks. “The water kept rising. It kept rising. I couldn’t believe it,” said Ruby Trahan Robinson, 63. She uses a wheelchair and had a portable oxygen tank while getting settled into a shelter at city hall in the small town of China, just outside Beaumont. Houston’s mayor, Sylvester Turner, evoked the memory of Harvey, which dumped more than 50in of rain on the nation’s fourth-largest city in 2017 while pleading with residents to stay put. Before the evening rush hour, Houston officials urged commuters to stay in their offices rather than embark on flooded and already jammed highways. Turner made a similar appeal to parents of schoolchildren as the Houston independent school district, Texas’ largest, with more than 200,000 students, did not cancel classes or shorten the day, unlike neighboring districts in the path of the storm. “GOTTA MAKE THE BEST OF IT”: @@KatherineMABC13 got this video of a man using a pool noodle to float down the 59 South feeder road. Please stay safe! https://t.co/NrPtNWjEVP pic.twitter.com/EwdlBPbS7b Imelda is the first named storm to affect the Houston area since Harvey hovered for days and inundated the flood-prone Gulf Coast. That storm dumped more than 5ft (1.5 meters) of water near the Louisiana border, and two years later, it looked in some places like Harvey was playing out all over again. A huge Houston furniture store became a shelter for evacuees. Live television footage showed firefighters rescuing stranded truckers on major highways. On social media, people posted that water was quickly seeping into their home and asked for help. Even as the intensity of the storm weakened, Harris county officials warned that some of their 4.7 million residents might not see high waters recede in their neighborhoods until the weekend. Following Harvey, the Texas governor, Greg Abbott, ordered a report warning that punishing storms would become more frequent because of a changing climate. Scientists say the climate crisis is responsible for more intense and more frequent extreme weather such as storms, droughts, floods and fires, but without extensive study they cannot directly link a single weather event to the changing climate. Incredible. These cars and SUVs look like toys, tossed around. This is just awful. #abc13 #Winnie https://t.co/wMfRfIa3w7 pic.twitter.com/UCwbs8xCHm Climate skepticism runs deep among Republican leaders in Texas, and Abbott has said it’s “impossible” for him to say whether he believes manmade global warming is causing the kind of disasters the state is telling residents to get used to. Earlier this year, Abbott approved billions of new dollars to fortify the Texas coast and reduce catastrophic flooding. The flooding from Imelda came as Hurricane Humberto blew off rooftops and toppled trees in the British Atlantic island of Bermuda, and Hurricane Jerry was expected to move to the northern Leeward Islands on Friday and north of Puerto Rico on Saturday.