The woman whose statement at the trial of a former college swimmer highlighted sexual assaults on US campuses has identified herself. Chanel Miller was known by the pseudonym Emily Doe at the trial of Brock Turner, who was sentenced to six months in county jail for the assault. The sentence caused widespread anger given that Turner could have been jailed for up to 14 years for the crime. Many believed Turner had been given a lenient sentence because he was a white athlete from a prominent university, Stanford. Turner repeatedly claimed alcohol was to blame and that the encounter was consensual, while his father called the attack “20 minutes of action”. Miller is now releasing a memoir, Know My Name, which her publisher says will “change the way we think about sexual assault forever”. Miller’s 7,000-word statement at the trial garnered millions of views around the world when it was published online in 2016. She will also appear on CBS’s 60 Minutes later this month and extracts from the interview, including Miller reading the statement, have been released this week. She has been known to the world as “Emily Doe,” the sexual assault victim of Stanford swimmer Brock Turner. Now she’s revealing her name and face. Chanel Miller, here reading her victim impact statement, gives her first interview to "60 Minutes" https://t.co/U4GDOofVj6 pic.twitter.com/cpVMwCZ4Sk Miller was assaulted while she was unconscious and Turner was stopped when two students intervened. In her statement, Miller said she only learned the full details of the attack from a news article. “At the bottom of the article, after I learned about the graphic details of my own sexual assault, the article listed his swimming times,” said Miller. “She was found breathing, unresponsive with her underwear six inches away from her bare stomach curled in foetal position. By the way, he’s really good at swimming.” Viking, the publisher of Miller’s book, called it “a singular journey that will change the way we talk about sexual assault forever. [Miller] will reclaim the story of her sexual assault, expose the arduous nature of the legal system, and emerge as a bold, unifying voice.” After the case, California’s sexual assault laws were changed to make it mandatory for rapists to serve time in state, not county, prison and to allow victims to use the word “rape” in court even if their attack did not meet the technical definition under state law. In 2018, the judge in the case, Aaron Persky, was recalled by voters, making him the first judge to be removed from office in California in 80 years.