The day’s Brexit chaos provided rich fodder for the front of today’s papers, many of which produced late editions to take in all the action from a long and eventful day in parliament. The Daily Mail was particularly angry with the outgoing Speaker, John Bercow, who will not stand for re-election: “End of the Bercow Show, the partisan pipsqueak who disgraced his office,” is its headline, quoting columnist, Richard Littlejohn. Tuesday's @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/Pdj56dF1R8 Littlejohn writes: “Yesterday’s vomit-inducing self-tribute was precisely what we have come to expect” from Bercow, who has “brought disgrace on one of the great offices of state” . The Guardian carries a large picture of Bercow, but reserves its headline for Boris Johnson: “Six votes, six defeats as PM loses bid for snap election”. Published before the early morning prorogation, the paper says the latest parliamentary vote defeat is a “fresh setback” for the PM. It also carries the Lib Dem leader’s vow to revoke article 50, as the party positions itself as the most pro-EU ahead of possible election. The Guardian's front page 10/9/19: "Six votes, six defeat as PM loses bid for snap election" pic.twitter.com/wYoH0WLhGz The Telegraph’s headline is: “Speaker aims to have last word on his successor”, with the paper saying Bercow will go on 31 October “but not before trying to ensure Remainer Commons chooses his replacement”. The front page of tomorrow's Daily Telegraph: 'Speaker aims to have last word on his successor' #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/AxumtZ5bYp The early edition of the FT also carries a picture of Bercow: “Speaking out: Bercow stands up for Commons as he moves to step down”. The Times carries a picture of Bercow under the headline: “MPs stop Johnson for calling October election”. Also published before the parliament was prorogued, the paper says the five-week suspension means an election cannot be held until the second half of November at the earliest, as MPs won’t sit again until 14 October. The Times' front page 10/9/19 pic.twitter.com/OS7WDNfZa1 The paper also reserves a front page column for “May honours ‘terrible twins’ blamed for Tory failure”, about the CBEs given to her former joint chiefs of staff Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill, “despite being forced to quit after the Conservatives lost their majority in 2017”. The Mirror also focusses on May, with the headline “No shame”, saying “as parliament is suspended over the Brexit crisis, Theresa May has the audacity to reward the bungling advisers who got us in this mess”. It says she has awarded titles to 41 allies, including those who have led the parliament to being suspended. Today's front page: No shame#TomorrowsPapersToday https://t.co/zP0OEkL5Qt pic.twitter.com/5FOXkhuGnX The Express admires Johnson’s stance on Brexit: “Boris blasts Brexit ‘Yellow Bellies’”, adding “MPs savaged for ‘outrageous’ excuses over stalling election. It also got on its front page the PM’s claim that “defiance of referendum is costing country €250m a week”. On its page 4-5 spread, it says the “frustrated PM” will not ask for another Brexit delay, while carrying a picture of Nigel Farage with the headline: “Farage insists party won’t stand against no-deal Tory candidates”. Daily Express front page 10/9/19 pic.twitter.com/8AV7e4bN1X The Sun does not splash Brexit, instead reserving its lead for the “shock rise in pill addicts as docs prescribe to 11.5m”, while running a smaller Brexit headline: “End of the Berc show”.