As the rain poured down without mercy outside the supreme court, the placard-wielding remainer faithful finally had something to cheer as news filtered through that the government’s prorogation of parliament had been ruled unlawful. After months of a seemingly unstoppable drift towards Brexit, there were tears and, in the words of one person, “a sense of deliriousness” as the momentousness of the decision sank in. “I wonder if we can’t just elect Lady Hale as Queen,” said Natasha Ward, a Londoner carrying a placard adorned with the slogan “Boris Bust’, who was effusive about the president of the court and the face of the ruling. “It is important, once again, to emphasise that these cases are not about when and on what terms the United Kingdom is to leave the European Union. They are only about whether the advice given by the prime minister to Her Majesty the Queen on 27 or 28 August, that parliament should be prorogued from a date between 9 and 12 September until 14 October, was lawful and the legal consequences if it was not.” “The first question is whether the lawfulness of the prime minister’s advice to Her Majesty is justiciable. This court holds that it is. The courts have exercised a supervisory jurisdiction over the lawfulness of acts of the government for centuries.“ “It prevented parliament from carrying out its constitutional role for five out of the possible eight weeks between the end of the summer recess and exit day on 31 October. Proroguing parliament is quite different from parliament going into recess. While parliament is prorogued, neither house can meet, debate or pass legislation. Neither house can debate government policy. Nor may members ask written or oral questions of ministers or meet and take evidence in committees…This prolonged suspension of parliamentary democracy took place in quite exceptional circumstances: the fundamental change which was due to take place in the vonstitution of the United Kingdom on 31 October. Parliament, and in particular the House of Commons as the elected representatives of the people, has a right to a voice in how that change comes about. The effect upon the fundamentals of our democracy was extreme.” “The court is bound to conclude, therefore, that the decision to advise Her Majesty to prorogue parliament was unlawful because it had the effect of frustrating or preventing the ability of parliament to carry out its constitutional functions without reasonable justification.“ “This court has already concluded that the prime minister’s advice to Her Majesty was unlawful, void and of no effect. This means that the order in council to which it led was also unlawful, void and of no effect and should be quashed. This means that when the royal commissioners walked into the House of Lords it was as if they walked in with a blank sheet of paper. The prorogation was also void and of no effect. Parliament has not been prorogued. This is the unanimous judgment of all 11 Justices.” “It is for parliament, and in particular the Speaker and the Lord Speaker, to decide what to do next. Unless there is some parliamentary rule of which we are unaware, they can take immediate steps to enable each house to meet as soon as possible. It is not clear to us that any step is needed from the prime minister, but if it is, the court is pleased that his counsel have told the court that he will take all necessary steps to comply with the terms of any declaration made by this court.” The full judgment and the summary judgment can be downloaded from the Supreme court website. “For the moment my feet are just not touching the ground. I know that all that has happened for the moment is that we have righted a wrong, but it gives hope.” The SNP’s Joanna Cherry, the barrister turned MP who led the legal challenge against prorogation in Scotland, emerged to state that Boris Johnson “should have the guts to resign”. Arms over shoulders like a cup-winning football team, Cherry was followed by her party’s parliamentary leader Ian Blackford, Independent Group MP Anna Soubry, Plaid Cymru’s Liz Saville Roberts and Caroline Lucas. But there was only one person many of the protesters and photographers wanted to see. As chants of “Gina, Gina” rang out from the sidelines, Gina Miller, the businesswoman who appealed against the English high court’s decision that the prorogation was “purely political”, hailed the moment as a significant win. As has become par for the course with set-piece Brexit events in the Westminster area, opposing voices were also present. Brexit supporters ranging from self-identifying non-aligned members of the public through to a handful of more extreme activists shouted “traitor” as Blackford attempted to give interviews. “We love you Boris, we do, oh Boris we love you,” sang flag-waving supporters from the tiny far-right For Britain party. Nearby, a figure in black-and-white prison pinstripes, wearing a large papier-mache Johnson mask, posed for surrounding photographers. The action briefly shifted a few streets away, where John Bercow, the outgoing speaker of the House of Commons, strode across College Green in Westminster at noon in front of a hastily summoned phalanx of cameras. “I think I can cope without this for a moment,” Bercow said, discarding his umbrella. The rain couldn’t dampen the sense of relish in his voice as he welcomed the supreme court’s ruling, to cheers from a small group of onlookers. “In the light of that explicit judgement, I have instructed the house authorities to prepare not for the recall – the prorogation was unlawful and is void – but to prepare for the resumption of the business of the House of Commons,” he said, rolling his Rs like a man warming up before an unexpectedly early encore of “Order!”.