The beloved and impressively fast-selling Switch console is Nintendo’s cleverest idea in some years: a compact games machine that can be played handheld or on a TV, letting you fit in video games wherever you have the time and space for them. The convenience of multiplayer, especially – of being able to snap off a controller and hand it over to a new friend you’ve made in the pub or at a party – is quietly revolutionary in a gaming era dominated by impersonal online play. But let’s be honest: you’re not spending much time in the pub or at parties these days, are you? Perhaps your gaming time is mostly stolen, on train journeys or commutes, in bed before passing out while the kids are sleeping. Perhaps you, like me, are currently trying to sneak in a bit of Link’s Awakening while breastfeeding a week-old baby. I know so many parents, myself included, for whom the Switch was a godsend – it gave us our games back, at a time in life when it’s increasingly difficult to find time for them. It might seem strange to bring out a version of the console that lacks its flagship feature: the Switch Lite can’t output to a TV. But it’s a response to how people actually use it. The Switch’s home-or-on-the-go functionality and Joy-Con features might be supremely cool, but quite a lot of players don’t end up using them much. It is for those players that the Switch Lite exists. The Lite looks like what I imagined a futuristic Game Boy might look like as a kid: understated pastel colours, a large screen (5.5in, a shade smaller than the standard model’s 6.2in) sandwiched between tastefully grey face buttons and sticks, a dinky D-pad that feels nicer to use than the directional buttons of the original Switch model. It is light enough to hold up for an hour or two without getting numb pinkies or tired hands, which makes up for the fact that there’s no kickstand to prop it comfortably on a plane tray-table while you play. It is a simple, purpose-built, attractive-looking games machine, and of course it comes with one of the more exciting and varied selections of games around. Nintendo consoles are never the place to look for slick shooters or cutting-edge visuals, but nothing rivals their games for style, fun and creativity, and the Switch’s 2,500-strong game library includes Overwatch, Fortnite and Doom alongside the company’s own and a huge variety of indie games. Some games won’t work with the Lite, such as mad cardboard invention laboratory Nintendo Labo and party grab-bag 1-2-Switch. Basically, anything that requires you to detach the controllers is out. And for multiplayer, each person would need their own Switch Lite to play, as you can’t detach the controllers to hunt Pokémon together or face off in Mario Kart. But that still leaves you with the great majority of Switch games that are worth playing by yourself, including this year’s new Pokémon (Sword and Shield), Zelda: Link’s Awakening, Luigi’s Mansion 3, Astral Chain and Fire Emblem – not to mention all of the marvellous multi-platform independent games (Hollow Knight, Into the Breach and Undertale, to name but three). If you already own a Switch, it’s easy to set up all your games and data on the Switch Lite – though the secondary console will need an internet connection to verify your downloaded purchases. You can get around this by using game carts rather than downloads, but you still need to transfer saves if you want to use both consoles, a process that is hardly seamless. Having two Nintendo Switches is definitely an indulgence, anyway. The Lite is more appealing as a replacement, if you can live without detachable Joy-Cons and TV output, or as a cheaper way to introduce your kids to the many joys of the Switch. As a purpose-built portable games machine, it’s the finest (and prettiest) option around. • Nintendo Switch Lite is out now, priced £199.99