Amsterdam is billed as an “audacious thriller” and the mystery at its heart has all the makings of one: a pregnant Israeli violinist living in the Dutch city finds an envelope under the door of her apartment. Inside is an unpaid gas bill from 1944. As she begins her search for its meaning, the play unravels back to a history of Nazi occupation and the persecution of Dutch Jews. But while all the ingredients should conjure noir-ish intrigue, the Brechtian mechanism by which the story is told hampers the build-up of tension or high stakes required of a thriller. The co-production, directed by Matthew Xia for Actors Touring Company, the Orange Tree and Plymouth’s Drum, begins as meta-theatre. A cast of four actors (Daniel Abelson, Fiston Barek, Michal Horowicz and Hara Yannas) squabble about how to start the story and then narrate by turns. This initial whimsy may seem like a prelude to the drama but is used to deliver it in fullness. The stage is bare but for the tools of its storytelling: a microphone, a desk with a typewriter, a chair. The point is clear but heavy-handed: that we all construct narratives by which to understand ourselves. The flip tone and comic games come to feel tiresome, for example the bell which when struck triggers an actor to run to the mic and explain an obscure word or history. It is a shame because the issues here are important, from how history intersects with the present to inherited trauma, the legacy of place – what past terrors a building might contain within its walls – and the idea of foreignness. The latter is dealt with particularly well in a supermarket scene in which the protagonist sees herself as the unwelcome immigrant that others may perceive her to be, which bears echoes of an increasingly isolationist Europe today and is sharply comic. The historical facts behind this play are startling: 75% of the Jewish population in the Netherlands was murdered by the Nazis and once the war was over, those returning home were forced to pay the utility bills of their wartime occupiers. Maya Arad Yasur’s script is complex and layered, bringing a contemporary resonance to this history, but it becomes hard work to follow: there are references not only to Nazi genocide but Hamas, Israeli militarism, Gaza and Isis, while the switch in voices causes some confusion. This feels like an over-conceptualised play packed with serious points which are obscured by the dramatic game it plays too fast and loosely to have the powerful effect its themes deserve. At the Orange Tree, London, until 12 October. Then touring.