Marks & Spencer had plenty of retail peers when it became a founding member of the FTSE 100 in 1984. Today, only a handful remain in the top tier of listed companies, including Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Primark owner Associated British Foods. MFI and BHS no longer exist, while Sears, Burton and GUS, which once owned Argos, Burberry and the Kays catalogue, have been restructured and largely taken private. Boots is now part of an international conglomerate that includes US pharmacy chain Walgreens. The UK’s biggest retailer is still firmly in the FTSE 100 but came close to the brink in 2014 after the discovery of a £250m accounting black hole wiped £2bn off its market value overnight. That came after ambitious overseas expansion – particularly in the US, Japan and China – led to falling sales and profits at home. Since then, Dave Lewis, Tesco’s chief executive, has overhauled the business, involving more than 10,000 job cuts, the closure of at least 43 stores and the end of non-food online store Tesco Direct. Tesco’s shares have risen more than 50% since they hit a low of 145p in December 2015 and the company has rebuilt its reputation by more than doubling profits. The £3.7bn acquisition of wholesaler Booker in 2017 has brought new growth prospects, particularly in supplying small local stores. The past 35 years have been a rollercoaster ride for Sainsbury’s, which was the UK’s biggest supermarket in 1984 but is now almost half the size of rival Tesco. After losing its top spot in 1993, Sainsbury’s was nearly brought to its knees by botched investment in automated warehouses, which led to stock shortages. The former Asda and Marks & Spencer executive Justin King arrived as chief executive in 2004 to lead a revival. He revamped the warehouses and expanded into convenience stores and clothing. King oversaw nine years of growth before handing over to Mike Coupe, the current boss. Coupe has since bought Argos, helping build the group’s online presence, but also increased exposure to a tough non-food market. An even more ambitious deal to buy rival Asda, creating a group that could overtake Tesco, was foiled by competition regulators in April. Once again Sainsbury’s is facing questions over how it will find growth. The department store group has struggled under a series of overseas owners before being bought by Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct last year. In 1985 House of Fraser, which then included Harrods, was taken over by the Egyptian entrepreneur Mohamed Al Fayed, who held on to the Knightsbridge flagship and relisted the rest of the group in 1995. Icelandic investor Baugur led a takeover in 2006 but went bust in 2009. The group fell into the hands of Icelandic banks before being bought by China’s Sanpower in 2014. Four years later it fell into administration after the collapse of a rescue deal involving another Chinese company, former Hamleys owner C.banner. Sports Direct bought the group for £90m, pledging to turn it into “the Harrods of the high street”. But Ashley recently said House of Fraser’s problems could be terminal, as the chain was losing more than £1m a week. Topshop boss Sir Philip Green made a big chunk of his fortune with the buyout and break-up of Sears, which once owned the Freemans catalogue, and fashion chains including Miss Selfridge and Wallis. He sold some of those brands to the then-listed Arcadia – a group born when the Burton Group split its chains, including Topshop, from Debenhams. Today Arcadia, bought by Green in 2002, is closing stores as part of a rescue plan agreed in June. Debenhams remained listed until April when it fell into administration, having shunned attempts by shareholder Sports Direct to take control. The department store is now in the hands of its lenders and its future is unsure. A rescue plan, involving the closure of at least 22 stores, is being challenged in court by a landlord in a case funded by Sports Direct. The department store has endured a horror story since becoming a founder member of the index. There was hope in the 80s when Sir Terence Conran tried to refresh it as Bhs, merging it with Mothercare to create the Storehouse group. The two were split again in 2000, when Green bought ailing Bhs. His family paid themselves £422m in dividends between 2002 and 2004 but BHS struggled as Green’s attention turned to Arcadia. He eventually sold BHS for £1 in 2015 to the former bankrupt Dominic Chappell’s Retail Acquisitions. About a year later it was in administration with a £571m pension deficit, leading to a national scandal and the closure of all 164 stores.