It was one of the most consequential debates in parliamentary history. Indeed, the grave subject of whether or not to hand control of the Brexit process to those seeking to avoid no deal appeared to weigh particularly heavily on the shoulders of Jacob Rees-Mogg, who spent a significant portion of the time slouched on the government front bench. The leader of the House of Commons was heavily criticised by fellow MPs, who accused him of showing contempt for parliament as he reclined on the green benches. “Now, there’s been a lot of talk about democracy tonight and the Leader of the House, who – I have to say – with his body language throughout this evening has been so contemptuous of this house and of the people,” said the Green party MP, Caroline Lucas, as other MPs shouted at him to sit up. She added, for the benefit of parliament’s written record, that Rees-Mogg had been “spread across three seats, lying out as if that was something very boring to listen to tonight”. The Labour MP, Anna Turley, called Rees-Mogg’s slouching the “physical embodiment of arrogance, entitlement, disrespect and contempt for our parliament”. Jacob Rees-Mogg is almost lying down on the Tory front benches, l am half expecting his nanny to march into the chamber with a blanket, pillow and a hot cup of Horlicks for the poor man! 😳 A lesser man might have jumped up, suitably admonished. Not Rees-Mogg, who remained in repose, grinning and shaking his head as he adjusted his glasses. He was sitting bolt upright, however, when the tellers returned soon afterwards to deliver the result: MPs had handed his government a crushing defeat in its very first Commons vote. “Mr Speaker, tonight’s vote made even the Leader of the House sit up,” quipped the former Tory MP, Anna Soubry. Has @Jacob_Rees_Mogg lost the ability to sit up or is draping himself horizontally across the front bench pretentious or just bad manners? As well as anger and dismay inside parliament, Rees-Mogg’s deportment prompted a slew of parodies on Twitter. pic.twitter.com/uRoLwalAho I know I'm late with this. pic.twitter.com/S3rsnddfee Alas, poor Ophelia pic.twitter.com/mO3jqh39sm