In the queue waiting on the Enough’s Enough, You’ve All Had Your Fun But This Is Getting Beyond A Joke Now rank, there are quite a few big clubs ahead of Manchester United. Nasty Leeds, for example, who have been out of the top division for 15 years. Or Nottingham Forest, two-time European champions who haven’t seen the sunny uplands since the turn of the millennium. Or Newcastle United, without a domestic trophy since the Harold Macmillan years. Or seventies European powerhouses Borussia Mönchengladbach, who have just lost 4-0 at home in Big Vase to a team called RZ Pellets, named after a company that produces industrial quantities of pellets, though not as many as Borussia Mönchengladbach did on Thursday night by the looks of it. Still, United’s woes have been well documented, so that must count for something. Right? And great news! Because it appears the biggest behemoth in English football is finally rising from its slumber after a whopping 849 days without a major trophy. Admittedly this time last week, everyone was sharpening the knives for poor old Ole, who would have been under some serious pressure had Leicester done a number on them at Old Trafford, at least that’s what everyone was blethering on about. But after a shaky 1-0 win, followed by another uncertain 1-0 victory over Astana, the mood music is markedly less funereal. Not least because 17-year-old prodigy Mason Greenwood became the club’s youngest ever scorer in Europe, no small feat given United haven’t been too shabby in promoting their kids in the past. He’s ahead of Marcus Rashford and George Best, for goodness sake. Georgie Best! Greenwood’s strike has of course caused the folk in United’s boardroom to completely lose the run of themselves, and they’ve already slapped a bumper new contract on the table for the young man. It’s another example of the club’s considered approach to business, long admired ever since the calm negotiations to land Marouane Fellani, all the way through to the ice-cool haggling over Harry Maguire, and everything in between. To be fair, Greenwood is extremely highly rated by his manager, who knows a thing or two about scoring goals, so a pay hike looks like money well spent and a no-brainer for the club. In any case, Ed Woodward can’t faff about over details, he’s got to start making enquiries about James Maddison and Europe’s newest scoring sensation Erling Braut Haaland, a player modelled by Ole at Molde no less. Oh dear, Ed’s going to get over-excited, isn’t he. Join Rob Smyth from 8pm for hot MBM coverage of Southampton 0-0 Bournemouth. “I signed just in time. But I arrived here with the thought that if I sign, I could go back to get my stuff I needed. But the gaffer really wanted me to stay for the first game. I had no boots, so I did two training sessions and the first game with somebody else’s. I don’t even know whose they were” – Dennis Praet on being pitched straight into action at Leicester as he gets his chat on with Stuart James. “The Fiver passing judgment on the sartorial choices of style icon Zinedine Zidane (yesterday’s Fiver) strikes me as quite rich. Admittedly, the skinniest of trousers have not the same homely appeal as Tin-stained joggers, but if the aim is to score points with Big Paper’s fashion department, Weird Uncle Fiver may be holding his breath for some time” – Matt Richman. “Re: contacting managers (Fiver letters passim). Years ago when I was a love-struck teenager, the nephews of the girl I was dating were massive Queen’s Celtic fans. Knowing where Jock Stein lived (I told you it was years ago), I thought I would get bonus points if I got his autograph. Boldly, I knocked on his door, which was answered by his wife, only to be told he was away doing managerial things, but if I called at the same time the following day, he would be available. Sure enough he was there, couldn’t have been more friendly and signed a personalised message to the boys. He was such a pleasant person, nothing was too much trouble and he even took it well when he asked if I wanted an autograph and I told him I was a Pope’s O’Rangers fan” – Grahame Wilkinson. “Reece Neale’s tumbleweed (yesterday’s Fiver letters) definitely had a hairy panic on, talking of which … the tumbleweed to end all tumbleweed” – Peter Fosse. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Grahame Wilkinson. World players’ union Fifpro says it is time to stop matches being played in extreme heat, urging Fifa to set a temperature limit before postponing them. “It’s crazy to give employees this kind of bad environment because they cannot perform to their optimal level and this is also not fair on the spectators who want to see the players at their best,” said medical officer Vincent Gouttebarge. Big Dan Levy may be getting Spurs to refinance £637m of their stadium’s debt, but he isn’t about to go wild in the aisles any time soon. “We could have easily spent more money on players,” he cheered. “Who knows if that would have bought us more success or not. The right approach is to build from the bottom up. There is no quick fix to becoming a much more significant global club.” After Arsenal won another game which was low on jeopardy, albeit impressively at Eintracht Frankfurt, Bukayo Saka has been talking up coach Freddie Ljungberg. “He was teaching me some tactics but I can’t quite remember what he was saying because he does give me a lot of information,” tooted Saka. “He’s been a big part in my progress.” Spanish football suits have wasted little time in Ansu Fati going big with Barcelona to dish him out a passport. And Newcastle boss Bernard Cribbins is planning to unleash Andy Carroll against Brighton on Saturday. “Certainly of his type, I don’t think there’s been anybody better in the last eight, 10 years when he’s been playing,” he honked. “A fit Andy Carroll is going to be huge going forward, that’s for sure.” Someone else getting their chat on: it’s QPR’s Mark Warburton with Ewan Murray. Watford haven’t beaten Manchester City since Thatcher’s reign. Barry Glendenning chews on that and the existence of bogey teams in general. This weekend’s Premier League action: 10 things to look out for. This weekend’s Premier League inaction: Ben Fisher on forgotten men. Is the title already Liverpool’s to lose? Have a word with yourself, retorts Paul Wilson. We’ve got some Premier League match previews, currently with Leicester v Tottenham, Burnley v Norwich and Man City v Watford. Others will show up here. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!