I am sitting in the live audience at a TV studio, being taught how to feel my feelings. “What do we do when something’s funny?” the charming young man on set asks us, bursting into laughter for us to imitate. “What do we do when something’s sad or moving?” he continues, launching into a big, gooey “Awwww!” that we all repeat. “And what do we do when something’s important and needs to be said?” he adds, before clapping vigorously. Finally, after making the largely female room squeal with laughter about how he might work here but he’s only ever been with men and wouldn’t know what to do with it, love, he announces: “Think of yourselves as the fifth Loose Woman.” At which point the other four Loose Women appear to whoops and cheers, an autocue starts rolling with something for the anchor to read about learning to love your cellulite, and the live broadcast of television’s guiltiest, stealthiest pleasure begins. Two hours earlier I was in the dressing room with Coleen Nolan, Brenda Edwards, Nadia Sawalha and Andrea McLean – actually, I was in the corridor when Nadia rushed past, pointing at her face saying, “Don’t worry, it gets better,” which turned out to mean she was about to be plastered in just enough glamorous makeup and hair products to still look relatable, this being the key concept of a daytime talk show that needs viewers at home to feel these women could be their best friends. It’s a concept that clearly works, because Loose Women, with its rotating cast of female presenters who discuss funny and painful issues from their personal lives as well as debating what’s in the news, is about to celebrate its 20th anniversary. It might be a noisy show, but it has quietly become one of TV’s greatest success stories. So why, I asked them, does nobody admit to watching it? Coleen, the former Nolan sister, who has been on the programme for 18 of its 20 years, replies, while a makeup artist teases her long hair into rollers. “It’ll be a bloke who says to you, ‘Ugh, my God, Loose Women? Oh I never watch that. Never. That day when you said that thing to Nadia – I mean I just had it on ’cos the wife watches it.” Brenda Edwards, a stalwart of West End musicals after finding fame on X Factor, applies her own lipstick and agrees. “A lot of my male friends are like, ‘No, no, I’ll never watch it… but I loved that thing you said last week.’” Andrea McLean, who recently published a book about the menopause, says the weirdest is when pop stars tune in from their tour bus, at which point Coleen remembers Noel Gallagher introducing himself to her at Euston station, saying his mum bloody loved her and the show so much that she’d never forgive him for not saying hello – which sounds like a fine excuse. But it’s not just the men who are in denial, apparently. “Oh no, I had this smartly dressed woman ambush me in a toilet – you always get ambushed in toilets – to tell me she didn’t watch my dreadful programme, but that she had been surprised to discover I was actually quite good,” says Andrea, tilting her head back for her mascara to be applied. “I’d have flushed her head down the loo,” Coleen replies. In addition to the four panellists, there are celebrity guests – some of their favourites have been Whoopi Goldberg (who presents a similar American show called The View), Goldie Hawn and Eva Longoria. Nadia points out they have male guests, too. “Every so often we let a couple of them on,” she says. “We do a little Loose Men.” Do people ask that, though – where’s the panel show for loose men? And do you feel tempted to answer… “Every other fucking show,” they all reply. What I love about Loose Women is what seems to go unnoticed: its mundane presentation of completely bonkers surrealism; its chatty, mainstream wails of existential angst. In 2016, Peter Andre agreed to try to find out what childbirth was like, so Loose Women dressed him up in a fatsuit to make him feel pregnant, then sent him to a medical laboratory where he was hooked up to an electrical impulse machine to induce labour pains. He writhed around in agony, begging for it to stop. In 2017, Janet Street-Porter decided to marry herself, with the footballer Frank Lampard conducting the ceremony for some reason. “Do you, Janet, take you, Janet, to be your lawfully wedded Janet?” he asked. “Yeah,” replied Janet nonchalantly, from behind a bridal veil, clutching a bouquet. “Why not?” I once told an editor from Vice, the edgy online magazine famed for its hipster antics, about these episodes, and he was wide-eyed, saying that Vice could only dream of pulling off such stunts. The whole thing is its honesty, the public spots it when it’s not honest Last month, the panel discussed the lunar landings. It began innocuously enough: “Can you believe it’s been 50 years since Neil Armstrong walked on the moon? Although some of us don’t believe it, do we?” That day, two panellists revealed they track the International Space Station on their phones, but not Nadia, who admitted that looking into the night sky brings such a terrible awakening of her own mortality that she has to turn away – when she looks closely, she sees death. “Death?” asked the others. “Death,” confirmed Nadia, nodding sombrely. The same week, an audience member went to such lengths to hide from the cameras that she ended up with her face plastered all over the internet – which was awkward, as it transpired the woman had told her boss she was going to a funeral. Marginally less awkward was recent guest Nicola Sturgeon, who was clearly uncomfortable when asked about women in leadership and seemed keen to point out that it was a bit like men in leadership – some of them are crap. The show then revealed a photo of her aged 18, looking awful. “I should walk off the set,” the leader of the SNP muttered, taking a sip of tea from her Loose Women-branded mug. And then, “I wish this was gin.” In the dressing room, I ask Coleen why it all works. She says it’s chemistry, vulnerability, and that the women are not too well media-trained, “because that wouldn’t work – the whole thing about Loose Women, for me, is its honesty. The public are good at spotting when it’s not.” If there is one word I hear a lot behind the scenes at the show, it is “relatability” – but how does that really work, when these women have all been famous and well-paid for years? How long can you keep up the auntie-next- door act when you get invited to celebrity parties? “Oh God that never happens to me,” insists Coleen, who lives in Manchester, “because I never go out, I never get invited to these things. We live our party lives through Janet Street-Porter. I think the public like that as well, because you’re letting them into that world that they might not usually have an insight into. So when Janet comes on and goes, ‘I was round at Elton’s last night,’ I always go to her, ‘Dear God, [and at this Andrea joins Coleen and they chant in unison] have you got any normal friends?’” While there are younger hosts, such as Stacey Solomon and a couple of potential new girls from Love Island, Loose Women is a rare celebration of older women, with more over-50s on it than probably any other telly programme. Today’s hosts are all middle-aged mothers, but Janet is 72, with no children, while Gloria Hunniford is nearly 80. One rule is that you have to be prepared to air your dirty laundry in public, something that partners and offspring are not always happy about. Coleen, who began on the show after her divorce from Shane Richie, had to tell her second husband Ray Fensome “that it’s what I do and it’s what the show’s about, and if you can’t handle it, then off you pop. So he did.” The show has outlived many of their marriages. Two weeks after I meet them, Nadia discusses, live on air, her stormy relationship with sister Julia Sawalha (who played Saffy in Absolutely Fabulous) and Julia retaliates on Twitter, saying she is sick of Nadia “destroying our family” by discussing them on Loose Women. We break open the subjects people tend to keep to themselves Brenda tells me she doesn’t like discussing politics. She did once manage to say on air that she supports bringing back the death penalty, but she got into more trouble for saying she leaves her cat alone for five days when she goes on holiday. She has trouble reining in her swearing, but always manages, “because my children are watching and it’s not right.” “She talks about her children as if they’re five and six,” Coleen interjects. Why, how old are they, Brenda? Brenda looks a bit sheepish now: “28 and 25. But I don’t swear in front of them! I always say you’ve got to lead by example.” One thing the women all agree on is that the work they do is important. They claim it is “a big deal to sit in those seats”, because they help people at home feel less alone. For example, on today’s show, they discuss the loneliness of raising a teenager, the time where, as Nadia put it, “Your child doesn’t fancy you any more,” and they get such a big response in the hour after it airs that they decide to develop the topic further tomorrow. Nadia remembers a similar response when she revealed she had put her miscarriage in the freezer. Wait, what? “Oh, they were laughing at me in the meeting room, where we discuss all the things we want to talk about, but when I had a miscarriage I didn’t know what to do with it. And loads of people have since told me that they felt really bad about it, but they secretly put theirs in the freezer, too. We get people literally sobbing with relief and gratitude that someone has said the unsayable. And that’s what you can normally count on us to do – being an older woman with life experience is a plus on this show. It’s just breaking open those subjects that people are keeping to themselves. I think that’s a really important part of what we do. We’re not TV presenters, we’re not like…” she pretends to be a purring cat and does a sexy voice, “‘Heeere I am, licking myself.’” I ask if there is an assumption that a show with four women sitting in a row has to be trivial. They say yes. “One of our pet hates,” says Andrea, “is that four feisty, intelligent women having different and contrary, very strong opinions – that somehow that is a slagging match, or a catfight.” Nadia wonders if men coming off a debating show such as Newsnight would ever be asked if the argument was going to carry on afterwards. “And that’s what we really want to change. I swear to you on the lives of my children, we come off and go, ‘Ooh that was a bit… wasn’t it?’ and then we go, ‘Have you ordered the lentil soup, don’t forget to ask for the yogurt on the top.’ Does anyone ever say to Piers [Morgan], ‘Oh are you upset after you’ve done this and done that?’ Nobody would think of it.” I take their point, but a recent discussion with Carol McGiffin, who is not here today, must have stung. McGiffin is white, has repeatedly defended Donald Trump, and told fellow panellists Nadia Sawalha and Saira Khan, who are of Jordanian and Pakistani descent respectively, that the US president telling four American congresswomen of colour to “go back home” was fine. Surely they were sitting there looking at her and thinking: “You’ve never been told to go home like that, you don’t know what racism is.” Sawalha says she did talk more about that one with her husband when she got home. “It was such a strong view that she came out with. But I think the world is just so fragile at the moment, because we are all scared of our opinions. There are not many people who would sit on the television and say what Carol said in the way that she said it. So I was excited about that show.” Is that because McGiffin brought to light what a lot of people were thinking but not saying? “Yes. And if we pander to the keyboard warriors, then we’ve got a really scary world and it’s not right. You have to talk it out, you can’t keep avoiding it because you’re scared of the response.” After the episode is broadcast I go backstage and wait for the panellists to return from a meeting. It takes longer than expected, so by the time they walk in I’ve got a bit too comfortable and am peering at my bum in the mirror, trying to work out if I’ve got cellulite, after the women themselves showed their squidgy bums on the show. Nadia and Andrea walk in on me and gasp – not because my skirt is hitched up over my knickers, which seems perfectly normal round here, but because I didn’t already know if I had cellulite or not. Hadn’t I checked before? I have to confess I hadn’t, explaining that I don’t really worry about body stuff at all, but feel a bit weird admitting it. At this, Nadia grabs a passing producer in the corridor and yanks her into the room. “We could do this on the show! Sophie here is ashamed of not being ashamed! She doesn’t have any body positivity issues, but she feels she should!” It gets jotted down as a possible subject for a future show – the untapped area of women secretly feeling embarrassed about not feeling embarrassed – and I realise my work here is done: I’ve followed that nice man’s instructions and accidentally become the fifth Loose Woman. Loose Women is on weekdays at 12.30pm on ITV