I had forgotten how smooth he is. Literally – anyone looking for a haggard face bespeaking untold sleepless nights at the national hell he unleashed will go away disappointed – and figuratively. Everything he says is still carefully measured. He becomes impassioned, when called for, to the precise degree warranted. The voice may rise in pitch, but never in volume. His entire mien reminds you of the Gertrude Stein comment on her by-then-demolished childhood home – there is no “there” there. In short, it turns out there is even less to miss about David Cameron than you thought. Nevertheless, he has a book to sell (by many accounts, the 752-page tome sure ain’t shifting on its own) and we are a nation of masochists, so the BBC has served up The Cameron Years (BBC One). This first of two parts covered just the last years of his premiership. But, y’know, they were busy ones. The basic story was largely told in captions you could still read as your head sank ever lower in despair. “Cameron leads the Conservatives to their first outright victory since 1992.” Renegotiations with the EU “are complicated by a growing migrant crisis”. “Cameron gathers allies for the fight ahead” in 2016 … Ah, those allies. “Allies”. You can probably start sprinkling quotation marks with a fairly liberal hand from hereon out. Michael Gove turns up to tell us that “in my heart [‘heart’], I was one of those who thought it was wrong to enter the EU in the first place”, and how this led him to put the boot into his friend, leader and – you could say – country. Iain Duncan Smith, whose head-tilt is in its fathomless arrogance such a potent inducer of rage-strokes that it amounts to a public health issue, is on hand to assure us that he told Cameron four months before the referendum that the prime minister had made a mistake. “I told him … ‘Things will never be the same again,’ I said.” That bookending of his oracular self, man – that’s a character note to end all character notes. (The whole hour was a linguist’s dream, by the way. Whoever was speaking, the slippage of pronouns, often in the same sentence, from “I” to “we” to “you” – as either truth or the desire to escape it crept closer – was remarkable, and the passive voice got a workout from which it will be recovering for months.) It was at this point that the programme’s fatal flaw began to make itself impossible to ignore. Which was: the politicians were being allowed to speak. What, really, is the point of that? We are still in the middle of the events whose origins, and the parts they played in those origins, they are describing. There is no distance or detachment here; no honest or clear-eyed analysis; nothing recollected in equanimity. Everyone still has much to lose. Everyone is still as engaged as they ever were in the game of self-serving multidimensional chess that is domestic politics. For anyone not already minutely informed about the events, personal relationships and professional powerplays at work, such a programme’s main effect is simply to allow a different layer of dishonesty to be overlaid on what has gone before. We are all just watching a palimpsest of lies grow. His interviewer asked: 'Remorse as well?' A pause. 'I feel regret about what happened.' If the aim of The Cameron Years is education and illumination, it would have been better to stick with footage from the time and examine the lies (or truths, should they occur) the players told then rather than give airtime to fresh lies or reinterpretations of their actions and utterances back in the day. If that’s not the aim – if it is, as it seems to be, one of those shows given to people in Cameron’s position almost as of right, granting the viewer the thrill of seeing a slightly different version of the man we knew as prime minister, in return for him getting to try to mould his legacy into something more palatable – then it is time for a rethink. In an age of “fake news”, shifting sands and vanishing facts, we need to revisit the natural-seeming ways of many things. Former leaders burnishing their book sales via BBC showcases may need to be one thing that goes. In the closing minutes, Cameron was pressed, slightly. He said he was “sorry” about “some of the things that have happened” and that he does “feel regret for some of the decisions and choices that I made”. His interviewer asked: “Remorse as well?” A pause. “I feel regret about what happened, and there are things that, if you had your time again, you’d do differently.” And that’s the best we’re going to get, I’m afraid, in this crazy, mixed-up, pronoun-shifting world that we? We? “We” – have made.