There was something about Ben Stokes’s miraculous match-winning performance in the third Ashes Test that felt like a coming of age. Not for him, you understand, but for me. For me and anyone else too embryonic to have been around for Headingley 81. Like all England fans, I maintain a suitable awe of Ian Botham, all-round genius and charity walker. But Beefy has always belonged to the baby boomers. His mustachioed, cigar-smoking swagger was theirs. Stokes has plenty in common with his predecessor, not least a bad-boy reputation and the superhuman ability to reverse the inevitable. His single-handed Headingley heroics were no TV repeat, however. They also came after he had done something Botham never managed – won England the World Cup. Rob Smyth described England fans who grew up during the 90s as Generation FFS. Now Stokes has birthed Generation OMG For the first time in our lives, cricket fans brought up in the belief that the golden age of their game had been and gone can finally move on. Sportswriter Rob Smyth memorably described England fans who grew up during the disastrous 90s as Generation FFS. Now Stokes has birthed Generation OMG. Test cricket has always been obsessed with its own legends. (Why else does the mention of Bodyline still get Australians so wound up?) Having come to the game in the middle of an Ashes summer, Headingley 81 was one of the first cricket tales I ever learned: the Peter and Jane of my sporting education. It was 1993. A curious kid, I had strayed too close to the edge of the sport, snagged my foot and was about to tumble into a helpless and endless devotion. England were two-nil down and the series was still technically alive when they arrived in Yorkshire. No one gave them much of a chance, but my mum, my only guide in this strange world of men in whites, told me that miracles were known to happen at this ground. Not that year: England lost by an innings and their captain resigned. I can’t remember if that was the first time I saw highlights of Headingley 81 – the BBC was prone to whack them on whenever there was a sudden hole in programming, as there would have been that Monday afternoon. I do know that by the end of that season, I’d been imprinted with the mythology of Botham’s Ashes as surely as if I’d stumbled into a cult. That was also the summer of the big man’s retirement. And so I grew up with a secondhand saga, knowing I’d missed cricket’s greatest comeback and possibly the finest piece of individual heroism in my team’s history. It didn’t help that the years that followed were some of the most unremittingly bleak in English cricket or that Ashes defeats were all I knew. It was galling to listen to older fans relive the glory days, warming themselves by the fire of memories I couldn’t share, through the long cold winter of Steve Waugh. My generation adopted the Botham folklore as our own, but it was hard to hero-worship a man who was, for us, just a chunky, cheerful presence opposite Bill Beaumont on A Question of Sport. We looked wistfully at images of peak Beefy. The handsome smile, the he-man arms, the effortless swing of the ball into the stands – they were never truly ours. The Botham we knew brought us despairing and sometimes peevish commentary on our own flawed heroes, and was almost impossible to square with the joyous paragon of youth that flashed up during rain delays. And yes, we had our own summer of love in 2005, when winning the Ashes felt as improbable as the moon landings. We even had our own swashbucklers in Andrew Flintoff and Kevin Pietersen. But it didn’t heal the part of our sporting psyche that had always felt a little left out. Stokes’s gift to us is that, finally, we have our own Headingley. It might get better still. The Headingley Test in 81 was followed by an almost equally dramatic England victory at Edgbaston. With Jofra Archer and Steve Smith already trading verbals, it’s easy to imagine another spectacle at Old Trafford this week and an all-to-play-for finale at the Oval. If not, we’ve witnessed the greatest ever World Cup final and England’s greatest ever Test run-chase in the past seven weeks. Even if this doesn’t go down in history as Stokes’s Ashes, it’s already Stokes’s Super Summer. And ours, too. Emma John presents the Guardian’s cricket podcast, The Spin