The Arsenal midfielder Jordan Nobbs has returned to the England fold for the first time in nearly a year, after her recent return from serious knee injury was capped by her being named in Phil Neville’s 20-strong squad for next month’s friendlies against Brazil and Portugal. Neville has reduced his squad side from the 25 that he has previously favoured as he begins preparations for next year’s Olympic Games, for which he will be limited to 18 players – plus four reserves – selected from across Britain. Atlético Madrid’s Toni Duggan, who was a key member of the England team at the World Cup in France but has struggled with injury since, is the most high-profile absentee. “It’s still early doors,” Neville said. “We’re going through the selection process now. The process will be open and honest, and we’ll make sure every player has the best opportunity to go to the Olympics.” A longlist – precisely how long has not been revealed – has been drawn up, and the players on it notified that they are under consideration for the Games in Tokyo. England have not won in four games since their 3-0 victory over Norway in the World Cup quarter-finals, a run they hope to end in Middlesbrough, where they play Brazil on 5 October. They then travel to Setúbal where they face Portugal three days later. Nobbs’s return from a cruciate ligament injury sustained last November will strengthen the England midfield as they look to improve that recent record. “We’ve been in constant contact with Jordan and her attitude has been phenomenal,” said Neville. “We have discussed with Arsenal the need to take our time, to make sure we have Jordan for the next 10 years, not the next 10 months. But her enthusiasm, her performances so far this season and her enthusiasm to make an impact have been clear. That player we missed in the World Cup has got back up to speed incredibly.” Duggan is the most eye-catching victim of Neville’s Olympic-inspired paring exercise, having paid the price for a lack of first-team football in Madrid. “I’ve left out four or five really experienced, really good players,” Neville said. “It sends a message that competition for places is tough, and the margins mean that you sometimes might not make the squad. We’ve had to cut the numbers to make sure we’ve got the right competition for places.” Manchester City’s Aoife Mannion is the only uncapped player in the squad, though the defender, who moved from Birmingham in the summer, was also called up for the friendlies against Belgium and Norway in August and September. The squad will be joined by three “training players”: Everton’s Chloe Kelly and Liverpool’s Mel Lawley, both previously capped, and Alana Cook, who was born and raised in America and has represented them at Under-17 and Under-20 level. The 22-year-old Paris Saint-Germain defender, whose father is English, has been in contact with the FA for more than six months. “When you see a player of that age playing Champions League football for one of the best teams in Europe, it shows her quality,” Neville said. “We made her wait longer than she probably wanted, but I had to be convinced that this girl was good enough, and that she was committed. I can’t wait to get her into the camp, to see her and watch her train with the other players. I’m sure she’ll do well.” More than 23,000 tickets have been sold for the game against Brazil, and with Germany playing at Wembley in November more than 100,000 people are expected to watch England next two home fixtures. “I keep hearing the World Cup inspired the next generation,” said Neville. “I think it inspired the older generation more. The younger generation were already with us. I think we’ve inspired that generation we thought we couldn’t crack, the generation not brought up with women’s football, not appreciating the quality. It used to be just the mums coming with their kids; now it’s the dads and the grandads, and I think that’s more special than the kids coming.”