An evening which began with Scottish promise concluded in familiar, grisly fashion. Russia’s success at Hampden Park means Steve Clarke faces a significant challenge in retaining interest – from players and public alike – in Group I. Russia are now the overwhelming favourites to claim runners-up spot in the section; Scotland’s two wins from five leaves them fourth. A trouncing in Kazakhstan, key to Clarke being called upon to succeed Alex McLeish, meant Scotland’s best hope of qualification for Euro 2020 was through the Nations League long before a switch in management. Nonetheless, there has not really been a bounce factor to Clarke’s appointment at all. A weakened Scottish defence was duly picked apart by Russia. Long before the final whistle, those in front were doing little to provide assistance. Belgium must be rubbing their hands at the prospect of a visit to Glasgow on Monday. “We have lots of things to work on and ultimately this was a disappointing night,” Clarke said. “If you’re going to qualify from the group, you have to turn up on the big nights in the big games. This was a night where we had to turn up.” Clarke did not need to add the obvious. It seemed true to form that no sooner could Scotland call upon a striker purchased for £20m than controversy engulfed him. That a video emerged which appeared to show Oli McBurnie being derogatory about the Scotland setup prompted a full explanation from the forward to his international teammates. Clarke used pre-match media duties to insist there was no lingering issue with McBurnie, whom he duly afforded his eighth cap from the outset. As if McBurnie was not already under sufficient pressure as he chased a first Scotland goal, this international support has been holding out for an attacking hero for years. In emphasising a bright Scottish opening, McBurnie nodded a ninth minute header the way of Stephen O’Donnell. The Kilmarnock right-back did not seem to appreciate the opportunity presented to him in blissful isolation as he flicked a shot off a Russian post. The hosts, though, did not have to wait much longer for a deserved opener. McBurnie was again involved as Guilherme in the Russia goal seemed to panic when under pressure from the striker. From Ryan Fraser’s cross, Guilherme could only parry the way of John McGinn; the Aston Villa man displayed composure to control and pass into an unguarded net. The euphoria which met McGinn’s goal somehow felt long overdue. Russia’s inevitable reply came via Artem Dzyuba, who forced David Marshall into a fine fingertip save. And yet, Charlie Mulgrew should have doubled Scotland’s lead on the half hour after a Fraser free-kick bounded its way through to him just six yards out. On the balance of play alone, it was apparent Scotland would do well to get to the interval when ahead. They were denied that leeway by the prolific man mountain that is Dzyuba. More surprising was the generosity of Andy Robertson as Russia equalised. The Liverpool full-back’s lame tackle on Aleksandr Golovin resulted in the ball falling straight at Dzyuba’s feet. The 31-year-old pivoted perfectly before leaving Marshall helpless. A despairing but highly effective Mulgrew block prevented the outstanding Golovin from sending Russia in front within 90 seconds of the restart. This proved an indicator of things to come; Stanislav Cherchesov’s men were utterly dominant for the second half’s early exchanges. This spell brought the tangible reward it merited. Golovin scampered down the right, with his perfect cross bundled home via O’Donnell after Yuri Zhirkov connected at the back post. The crossbar prevented Mário Fernandes from adding a third, with Scotland grasping desperately for air after just 63 minutes. The woodwork saved the Scots again, this time from a deflected Magomed Ozdoev shot. Mulgrew whipped a free-kick narrowly wide after Clarke had rejigged his anonymous midfield by way of substitutions. Set pieces resembled Scotland’s finest hope of clawing their way back into proceedings. In the bigger picture, there was perhaps a quiet acknowledgement in the stands that even a point was not really much use to Clarke. He was denied even that; an outcome that few could reasonably argue.