Apple has launched a new version of its popular smartwatch, the Apple Watch Series 5, with an always-on display. Unveiled on stage at Apple’s headquarters in Cupertino, California, on Thursday, the new version features a similar design to the Apple Watch Series 4 launched this time last year but with a new screen that can remain on all the time. To enable the always-on display, which many other smartwatches have had for several generations, Apple said it is using the first LTPO display, which it claims allows the screen to refresh dynamically from as high as 60Hz to 1Hz, alongside a new display controller and ambient light sensor. Apple said the Series 5 still has 18-hour battery life with the screen continuously on. The watch again comes in 44mm and 42mm sizes, with options for 4G connected versions, and Apple’s ECG heart monitor. There are also a series of new colours, straps and case options, including titanium and ceramic ones. The new watchOS 6, announced in June, will also enable more functionality independent of the iPhone. Apple is also continuing its health focus for the watch, which now includes menstrual cycle tracking as part of watchOS 6. It has also launched a research app, with three health research studies – hearing, women’s health, and heart and movement. The app will allow anyone to enrol and will roll out in the US later this year. Apple said it cannot access information that directly identifies you through the app. The Apple Watch has become a sleeper hit, capturing the lion’s share of the small but increasingly important smartwatch market almost immediately on launch in 2015. Since then the line has increased sales year by year, providing an extra revenue stream alongside the firm’s AirPods wireless earbuds, as people continue to hold on to their smartphones for longer and longer. Apple sold 43m Apple Watches over the last two years, according to data from IDC, accounting for nearly 50% of the global smartwatch market. The new Apple Watch Series 5 will start at $399 or $499 with the 4G version shipping on 20 September. Apple is also keeping the older Series 3 available and dropping its price to $199.