My partner and I have a five-year-old son, who seems to be happy and thriving. We live far away from any other family members. I am estranged from my family (my parents divorced when I was young and neither was a very interested parent). We’ve had various ensuing issues, therefore he has never known them. My grandfather died when I was 14. I was very close to him and missed him a lot. Around that time I started experiencing anxiety and sadness. I have mentioned my grandfather a few times to my son, nothing in too much detail. But periodically he becomes very upset, sobbing because he “misses Grampy”. I find it worrying as his tears are real, as if he is experiencing loss or loneliness. I was quite lonely as a child and I’m desperately trying not to project my loneliness on to him. But I would like to get to the bottom of where his sadness is coming from. I can’t quite understand how he can miss someone he has never known. You sound very sensitive and appear to be trying to approach mothering in a very different way from the way you were parented yourself, which is to be applauded. Your son has reached an age where he is starting to understand that people die, and he may be getting upset about someone he doesn’t know as a way of better understanding the process. I discussed your problem with Adele Braun, a child and adolescent psychotherapist (childpsychotherapy.org.uk). She was interested in the fact that you were living away from all family members. “Parents can (despite their best efforts) still subtly communicate their grief and loneliness to their children. I wonder if your son is expressing some feelings that belong to you and your husband, and confusing them with his own. “There is evidently a painful family history for both you and his dad. Your estrangement from your own parents just before your son’s birth left little opportunity to process that loss. There may also be ongoing feelings of isolation if you do not have the support network you need as parents.” What have you said to your son about his grandparents? He may be wondering about them. Braun wondered if “perhaps Grampy is a way for your son to express your and his feelings about the past. He may be wondering more about the family history and not know how to ask, particularly if he detects this is a painful subject for you.” Grampy represents more than a beloved grandad to you and your son. Would you consider therapy yourself? It would probably benefit you as a person and as a mother. I would not be the mother I am had I not dealt with difficult feelings from my own childhood. Braun was also keen that you “get the support you need to work through the anxiety and sadness you referred to feeling in adolescence, as childhood experiences can be easily stirred up while parenting”. It’s very easy to project how we feel on to our children if we haven’t unpacked and worked on our own issues. Unless your son also doesn’t mix with other children, he will have seen that his peers have grandparents, aunts and uncles. If he doesn’t have these people in his life, he is probably wondering why; but if he senses that this is an upsetting subject for you, he won’t know how to bring it up. Braun suggests that if your son becomes sad about Grampy, you can help him to sort out his feelings from yours by saying something like, “I feel sad about missing family sometimes, too. Maybe it feels sad for you that you never met Grampy or your grandparents?” Open up a wider conversation about family. A family tree will enable your son to visualise his place in the world and allow him to ask questions. Children who can freely ask questions of their parents and know they will be listened to, and answered, may get upset; but if they know their parents can help them process these feelings they will build resilience. It’s OK for your son to be upset – negative feelings shouldn’t be avoided. Children tend to ask only what they want to know and can handle, and so a question isn’t a request for your life history. Try to answer directly and factually: don’t overelaborate. Practise this, as it can help keep you on course when things get tricky or tap into something emotional. This also helps you listen – never a bad thing where children are concerned. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.