On paper, unless you wish to resemble a crate of alcopops, a pink and orange makeup combo sounds unwise. Yet the reality, as seen at Antonio Marras AW19, can work. But it’s a fine line. Get heavy handed and you’ll date instantly. The trick is to pretend you’re an artist – this look was inspired by Modigliani after all. Use a damp brush and a teeny bit of colour, and blend it out. Give the ethereal finish some edge by adding a darker shade to the lips. Result? Alcopop-free zone. 1. MAC Pro Lip Palette in Editorial Oranges £30, maccosmetics.co.uk2. MAC Matte Lipstick in Double Fudge £17.50, maccosmetics.co.uk3. BareMinerals Bounce and Blur Blush in Pink Sky £23, bareminerals.co.uk 4. Nars Single Eyeshadow in Persia £17, narscosmetics.co.uk 5. Fenty Ultra Fine Brow Pencil £17, boots.com Slip pillowcase £85, slipsilkpillowcase.co.uk Every night, I sleep on a silk pillow. I know. It sounds like spoilt princess behaviour, but in fact it’s for pragmatic reasons. A silk pillowcase is one of the best beauty investments you can make. Cotton, regardless of thread count, will suck life from your hair, which can lead to breakage (particularly around the hairline). It also pulls moisture from your skin. Also, pretty much half of all those lovely expensive creams and serums you’ve spent time slathering on in your nightly skincare regime, will be gobbled up by your greedy cotton offering. So I love a silk pillowcase. It’s a basic concept that Slip has been clever enough to build a business around. Yes, you could get a bog standard silk pillowcase, but the quality does made a difference. This one is made from a high-grade mulberry silk, which is special but not so special you can’t throw it in the washing machine. Which is just as well because who on earth dry cleans their pillowcases? It reduces friction and stretching around the face and eye area, and minimises those embarrassing sleep creases. (Yes you could argue the creases disappear but apparently they are gradually ‘ironed in’ over the years. Yikes.) Beyond that, I get less breakouts, less dryness , less hair breakage, which means less products. So for me, a silk pillowcase is actually the most practical thing in the world. Time to glow His client list – Gigi, Bella, Kardashians – proves Patrick Ta is one of the biggest makeup artists right now. His line has just landed. It’s a big deal. Just saying. Patrick Ta Major Glow Collection, from £19, cultbeauty.co.uk Defensive action Post-summer skin, when your sunspots are suddenly more pronounced, is real. The solution? A potent serum proven to reduce hyperpigmentation in two weeks. Discoloration Defence, £85, skinceuticals.co.uk All new Avon Forget everything you think you know about Avon as a door-to-door old schooler. These days it’s setting the sustainability bar high with this forward-thinking, high-performance, waterless and vegan beauty line. Distillery, from £15, avon.uk.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.