Layton Roche and Natalie Wells are due to get married on Friday in Kos, Greece, in a wedding they have been planning for years. But they and almost 50 guests booked through Thomas Cook. Roche and Wells, who have been together for seven years, engaged for five and have two children together, spent “months and months” researching “to find the perfect place that caters for everyone”. On Monday morning they were up early, getting ready to catch a taxi they had booked for 3am to take them to Manchester airport in time for their 6am flight, when they heard the devastating news: Thomas Cook had gone under, and their flights and those of their guests were cancelled. “A couple of years of planning and a whole lot of money has gone down the drain,” said Roche, a civil engineer. “Dreams have been crushed.” Some of their family members, including Roche’s dad and one of their children, were already in Kos waiting for them, and so the couple scrambled to find tickets for other flights bound for the island. They will make it to Greece and their wedding can go ahead, but they estimate only 15 of their nearly 50 guests will be able to make it, due to the expense of last-minute tickets from Manchester to Kos, which are selling for more than £1,000 each. Wells and Roche paid £4,000 for last-minute plane tickets for themselves, Wells’ mother and their other child and have to travel to Birmingham for the flight. Their return flight will bring them home via Leeds. The Guardian was contacted by another man who had to cancel his wedding in Cyprus this week, booked through Thomas Cook, while Roche said he was in a wedding-related Facebook group and at least two couples had posted that they had been forced to cancel their weddings due to the Thomas Cook collapse. Roche and Wells estimate their guests spent £50,000 between them on Thomas Cook flights they will never catch and accommodation they will never use. Many will get this money back, but Roche fears that it could take a long time before they are refunded. In the meantime, most of the guests will miss the wedding. “We’ve got 47 people due to attend this wedding and it looks like they can’t come now,” he said. “We’re going to have to pay for the whole thing again just to get there. I’m in the lucky position that I can do that, I have to get there, because I’ve already got family there, but we’ll have a wedding that’ll have minimal guests, no bridesmaids, no best men can make it. “Not only that, my granddad is 80-odd years’ old, and my grandma died a couple of years ago and it was his dream holiday to have the whole family together again and the poor man can’t get a flight now. “It’s cruel. They shouldn’t be allowed to do this, all the years of preparation and absolute fortune of money and hard work and effort that’s gone into it.” The hotel that Roche and Wells are booked to stay in is also a Thomas Cook hotel, and they have no idea whether their party will be allowed to stay – and, if so, if they’ll be charged again for the booking. “We’ll just have to find out when we get there. We’re going in blind, that’s the adventure that we’re on at the moment.” Roche said he had raised concerns about the company’s financial situation with Thomas Cook travel agents over the last few months, only to be told: “‘Oh it’s hearsay, it’s nothing to worry about, it’s business as usual.’ “The last time I was there [at the local travel agent] was Sunday, we brought up our concerns: is there a contingency plan? Are holidays going to go ahead for people who have already paid? And we more or less got a guarantee off them: ‘there’s nothing to worry about, you will go 100%.’ We were living on false promises.” Despite the disappointment, stress and huge additional cost, Roche is still looking on the bright side: he gets to marry Wells on Friday. “Even if I make it and there’s five of us, as long as my parents and my kids are there, I’ll be happy.”