Vanessa Engle’s new film The $50m Art Swindle (BBC Two) had a great intro. In voiceover we heard the people who best knew the man who defrauded them of millions of dollars nearly 20 years ago and then disappeared guess what happened to Michel Cohen. He went into hiding in Mexico. No, he had been living the life of Riley in south America. But there were rumours of contracts being taken out on him – he was almost certainly dead. And then he was there. After 18 years of invisibility, he slipped in to sit behind a plain white desk in a plain white room – the now 53-year-old Cohen; hale though possibly too hesitant to be described as hearty. But he was there. Engle succeeded where his many detractors, Interpol and possibly hitmen had failed and found the man responsible for one of the largest thefts in art world history. And he was ready – in his own way – to talk. His contributions came amid innumerable testimonies from dealers up and down the east and west coasts of America. Some counted themselves friends of Cohen as well as colleagues. Some were shocked when the thefts took place. Some reckoned the man who came from poverty in France and worked himself so far up the ladder so fast always had it in him to pull as audacious a stunt as he did. Others – particularly his oldest, and for a long time closest, friend Richard Roy, who came from France to the US with him to try their luck together – thought the lure of the stock market took over. Having established himself – by dint of a prodigious memory and a talent for salesmanship proved since his first stop selling Encyclopedia Britannicas door to Gallic door – as a successful (if not terribly classy, we were told, especially by the east-coast dealers) purveyor of paintings, Cohen began to feel that the business was not lucrative or fast-moving enough for him. Fortunately, by now we were in the 90s, and the time and technology were ripe for amateurs with a gambler’s instinct to get involved with the biggest casino of them all: the stock market. Like many before him and since, Cohen won until he lost, then he kept losing. Unlike many, however, he had access to multiple priceless artworks with which to try to make good his debts. Until that failed too and he lit out for Rio, before being captured, escaping and perilously crossing the Amazon to French Guiana. Eventually, he made his way back to his native France and his wife and children came to join him. In precis, it sounds like a gloriously dynamic, Thomas Crown-on-steroids affair. But, at 90 minutes, with the heists, flight, prison and escape compressed into the last 10, it was a very different experience. The bulk of it was devoted to repetitive accounts of how trustworthy Cohen had been until the moment he wasn’t. The people around him gave their best guesses about his motivation: fear of returning to poverty? Envy of his wealthy clients? But these were no more perceptive than those of a stranger given the bare bones of the case. None of the cons were described in detail – possibly because there was so little to them, as Cohen seems simply to have exploited the trust he built up then vanished with the spoils – so you were left with the essentially uncompelling story of a man with a gambling debt who stole money from people well able to afford it. The scale is unusual, the substance is not. Cohen himself, a softly spoken man who seemed to have the nervous system of a clam, offered equally little insight. He always intended to return the missing money, the missing artworks, make everything right – things just got away from him. The only time Engle managed to shake him out of his quietude was when she told him that one of the dealers he stole from left the business because he couldn’t handle “the betrayal”. “Really?” says Cohen. “I am sorry.” Unless you are automatically enamoured of scam stories, no matter how uninventive, it was a film – as soundly made as all Engle’s work – with little to draw you in. The interviews she has given about the process of tracking down the man who disappeared without trace for all those years suggest this would have been the more fascinating story, but this is glossed over in the opening seconds. The film has been much lauded elsewhere – but this viewer at least was left feeling cheated.