An Iranian judo athlete could seek asylum in Germany after he ignored orders from his national federation to pull out of the world championships to avoid a potential final against an Israeli. The International Judo Federation (IJF) said that Saeid Mollaei, the defending champion, was pressurised by Iranian authorities to drop out before his quarter-final at the world judo championships in Tokyo last week to avoid the prospect of fighting Israel’s Sagi Muki in the final. Mollaei said in an IJF statement: “Even if the authorities of my country told me that I can go back without any problems, I am afraid. I am afraid of what might happen to my family and to myself. Since its Islamic Revolution in 1979, Iran has refused to recognise Israel and the two have been enemies for decades. The IJF has said Iranians have thrown matches and used “questionable injuries” to avoid competing against Israelis. The IJF said Mollaei had been repeatedly ordered by the country’s national Olympic committee and the government to withdraw from fights and that security personnel had been sent to his home in Iran. “A few minutes prior to the (quarter-final) contest, the Iranian coach received a call from his country,” the IJF said on its website. “The Iranian first deputy minister of sport, Davar Zani, gave him the order to withdraw Mollaei from the competition to avoid a potential contest between Iran and Israel.” After winning the quarter-final, Mollaei was contacted by the president of the Olympic committee contacted Mollaei to tell him to pull out of the semi. He defied the call but lost the bout so did not make it to a final against Muki, who won gold and later called Mollaei an “inspiration’”. Mollaei said he had been told to drop out an earlier stage so it did not appear to be a boycott of Israel. IJF president Marius Vizer wrote on Twitter that Mollaei was now in Germany and was “following the respective procedures” regarding asylum. The Iranian team manager, Majid Zareian, criticised the IJF, saying: “Everything was set in advance to put Mollaei against a participant from (Israel).” He denied Iranian authorities had put pressure on Mollaei. The IJF said it would help Mollaei prepare for next year’s Olympics, also in Tokyo. If Iran refuses to enter him, he could be given a place in the International Olympic Committee-backed team of refugee athletes. “I am a fighter. I want to compete wherever I can,” Mollaei said. “I live in a country whose law does not permit me to. We have no choice, all athletes must comply with it. All I did today was for my life, for a new life.” The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report