Sofie Hagen’s last three shows – including her award-winning debut Bubblewrap – mined personal trauma for comedy. Which wasn’t quite as therapeutic as she’d hoped. So The Bumswing heralds a course correction: it’s “a fun show, a light show”, Hagen promises, about a “sex weekend” in south Wales. There certainly is fun on offer, and lightness too, even if the Danish comic’s opening manifesto is not to be taken entirely on trust. The fun is top-loaded: The Bumswing starts with tongue-in-cheek boasting about the relative virtues of the Danish and British queens. Hagen then tees up a running gag about decorous UK email etiquette, which yields reliable laughs throughout the show. The anecdote we’ve been promised – about her dirty Welsh weekend with an older man – never really gets going, partly because Hagen suffers from a patchy memory of that event and others. This imperfect recall – how it works, and why – emerges as theshow’s true subject. It’s tricksy territory for autobiographical performance and the 60-minute set folds in and out of what Sofie remembers and what actually happened. The ground is unsteady beneath our feet – and hers – as the facts behind her phantom strawberry allergy are revealed and a heckler picks at obvious holes in the story of her Swansea sex tour. Where does it leave comedy audiences when our narrator is this unreliable – even to herself? It leaves us laughing, sometimes – and extram conscious of doing so, because Hagen is recording the gig, and the soundwave image (high peaks for laughter flatline for silences) is displayed downstage. Suffice to say it remains horizontal when a closing revelation upends what we thought we were getting from The Bumswing. It packs a punch, this climax – particularly in light of Hagen’s earlier comments about performing her trauma. And it’s capped by a fine visual gag. But it did leave me wondering what the show’s getting at, and about the wisdom of deploying this kind of information as dramatic twist in the tail. It’s a knotty show, which asks: whither autobiographical comedy when the autobiography is riddled with holes that may be neither light nor fun to look into? At Soho Theatre, London, until 14 September. Then touring.