Police were attacked with petrol bombs and missiles as they carried out searches targeting dissident republicans in Derry. Officers were targeted after finding what they described as a suspicious object while carrying out searches for New IRA bomb-making equipment. The occupants of 15 homes were advised to evacuate to ensure the safety of the community, the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) said. Young people engaged in the disorder in Derry’s Creggan estate sustained burn injuries during the violence on Monday night, according to PSNI. Several petrol bombs were thrown at police vehicles. The SDLP leader, Colum Eastwood, said that those responsible for the disorder in Creggan were “inflicting damage on their own community”. Petrol bombs thrown at police during rioting in Creggan Heights #Derry. Footage via @DerryFootage pic.twitter.com/EKSTtlubXK The police searches were launched after a dissident republican mortar bomb was recovered in Strabane, Co Tyrone on Saturday. The mortar, which was positioned close to a family home, was aimed at the town’s police station. It was the seventh attempted murder bid against the security forces in Northern Ireland this year. The journalist Lyra McKee, 29, was murdered by the New IRA in the same area in April as she observed dissident rioting. Mark Hamilton, the PSNI assistant chief constable, described the operation around the suspicious object as “complex” as he condemned those participating in disorder. “This is a complex operation which is expected to continue throughout the night and we have advised those residents who have left their homes to make alternative arrangements,” he said. “We recognise the upheaval this has caused and we are grateful for their co-operation and understanding. “The focus of this operation is ensuring the people of Creggan are safe however it is concerning to see significant numbers of young people on the streets, late into the night, throwing petrol bombs and other missiles at officers in the area. “The reality is this type of disorder contributes to the complexity of the policing operation and presents a real risk of injury to those involved. “Already we have seen two incidents this evening where young people have sustained burn injuries as result of engaging in disorder. “I would reiterate our appeal for those young people to return home and remove themselves from the situation. With Press Association