In June I bought a 16-25 railcard for my daughter, in readiness for her to start travelling by train to sixth form college in September. The £30 card offered a third off her fares. However, at some point in August the rail operators introduced a new 16-17 Saver card which again costs £30 but comes with 50% off all fares. Clearly this is a better offer, but there is absolutely no mechanism to switch across to the new one, and I’ve been told that no refunds are possible. It means I’ve had to spend £60 on two cards. Various other parents have had the same issue, so I assume those behind the railcard are making a fortune.  DL, by email The new 16-17 card is very welcome and long overdue, not least as it helps end the crazy situation that led to under-18s having to pay full-price, peak-time fares to get to school/college. However, whoever designed the new card appears to have done it in the most user-unfriendly way possible. Frankly, it’s a complete dog’s dinner, that only the UK rail industry/civil servants could devise. Firstly there are all those who, like you, bought the old young person’s railcard, only to discover that the new one is much better and the old one is non-refundable. The Rail Delivery Group (RDG), which is behind the cards, offered a £5 discount or vouchers for those in your shoes – but only to those who bought the 16-25 card in July or August. Those who bought one in June, or before that, just have to suck it up and pay out twice. The extra discount will probably make it worth buying the new card, but it will still leave a sour taste. Secondly, the even more bonkers aspect of the new card is the fact that it discriminates against those who turn 18 early in the academic year. It can be used for four months after the student’s 18th birthday – but only if you buy a season ticket. So if your son or daughter is unlucky enough to turn 18 today, they can only get the discounted season ticket until 21 January. After that, it’s back to paying full fares for the rest of the year, or buying the old railcard again – for another £30. Many students at college only have lessons for three days a week, so a season ticket won’t be worth it. The RDG blamed the 18 age limit on the Department for Transport, which sets the rules. In any sane world, the railcard would simply be offered to all those aged 16-18 at school or sixth form college – until they leave. People will end up being driven because of this which, given the climate emergency, is madness. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to terms and conditions