Jeremy Corbyn has called for Boris Johnson to apologise to the Queen and the country for unlawfully suspending parliament to stop scrutiny of his Brexit strategy. The Labour leader said the prime minister had abused the powers he has of the use of the royal prerogative and this was a very, very serious matter. Speaking on the BBC Today programme, Corbyn said it should have been obvious that it was a “pretty risky” decision to suspend parliament and reiterated his call for Johnson to resign. “I think he should apologise to her [the Queen] for the advice he gave her and more importantly he should apologise to the British people for what he has done in trying to shut down our democracy at a crucial time when people are worried about what will happen on 31 October,” he said. “Thanks to the supreme court, we now have parliament meeting again today and we will once again be able to question the government in what it is actually doing in taking us out of the EU without a deal, with all the damage that will do to people’s jobs and livelihoods,” he added. Despite his calls for Johnson to resign, Corbyn said he would only move to a vote of no confidence in the prime minister when it was clear that a no-deal Brexit was off the table. “Quite simply our first priority is to prevent a no-deal Brexit on 31 October,” he said. Michael Gove, the minister responsible for no-deal planning, took a defiant tone on the judgment on Tuesday morning, saying he respected the supreme court ruling but did not agree with it. Asked whether the government had been wrong to prorogue parliament, Gove said: “I don’t think so.” “I don’t think the government should apologise for having a strong domestic agenda or seeking to ring about or exit from the European Union,” he added. Gove also denied widespread reports that Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the House of Commons, had in cabinet criticised the judgment as a “constitutional coup”, saying he did not recognise that language. Elsewhere, the government was sending mixed messages on its response to the judgment, with a senior No 10 source briefing the view that judges had made a mistake, while Robert Buckland, the justice secretary, called for the independence of the judges to be respected. Parliament will reconvene at 11.30am on Wednesday, with all parties whipping their MPs to be there. Opposition parties are likely to start making moves to hold the government to account through motions that would seek to gain control of the Commons order paper and possibly a motion or humble address to get publication of the attorney general’s legal advice on prorogation. The government will shortly want to table a motion to secure a short recess for the Tory party conference but the vote may be lost by the government as Johnson no longer has a majority. Corbyn said Labour would vote against parliament breaking up again at such a crucial time for Brexit. 