Peaky Blinders is among the most-watched dramas on television and has grown into a cultural phenomenon around the world thanks to Netflix viewers. Now the Birmingham-based gangsters are going about conquering the festival world. The two-day Legitimate Peaky Blinders festival took place this weekend in Digbeth, the area of the city centre closely associated with the historical gang, with performances from Primal Scream, Frank Carter and the Rattlesnakes, Anna Calvi and Liam Gallagher. Billed by organisers as an “immersive re-creation of the Peaky Blinders world”, other activities included staged bare-knuckle fights, a Gypsy enclosure with painted caravans, swing bands, a cast Q&A featuring Sam Neill (Major Campbell), Paul Anderson (Arthur Shelby) and Kate Phillips (Linda Shelby), a fashion show for the official Peaky Blinders tailoring line, Garrison Tailors, free haircuts and a company of actors walking around in character. A majority of those in attendance wore newsboy caps, some going the extra few miles with an entire outfit of period-correct attire. There were hundreds of flappers and women in cocktail dresses, while other women opted for a more androgynous look, nodding to the Shelby clan’s queen, Polly (Helen McCrory). Sitting about 50 yards from the site of the first recorded Peaky Blinders crime – an assault of March 1890, some 30 years before the events depicted in the series – the show’s creator, Steven Knight, said it was like a “bizarre dream” to see fans sporting severe French crops and flat caps, starched collars and braces inspired by his series. “It’s very humbling,” he said. “These are intelligent human beings who have decided to use their free time to show their love for the series. I see lots of people with tattoos, or decorating their cars and vans. It’s working-class people, it’s middle-class people, and they have responded on an extraordinary level.” It is the latest development for the brand that is credited with fuelling a surge in tourism to Birmingham and the rest of the West Midlands. Having boosted visitor numbers to the city to a record 43 million last year – a 26% increase since 2013 when the series was first broadcast – Peaky Blinders prompts much pride in the region. “It really shows off the area and it can only be a good thing that so many people are visiting,” says Ellie Bloomfield, who has travelled from nearby Wolverhampton to attend – in full 1920s outfit – with her partner, Joel Tett. “We know the names of the places and have heard about the events,” says Tett. “My grandad used to drink in the real-life Garrison [the pub owned by the Shelby family in the series]. He loves the show and can really relate to it. He recognises a lot of what was going on at the time.” Wayne Morris and Jenny Gill were another local couple attending in full Peaky get-up. “The local association is really important for us,” said Morris. “It feels like it’s part of our heritage. We didn’t know anything about that era before the series started. As for the outfits, we only wear these clothes for special occasions, but I’d dress like this every day if it was more acceptable.” “We toyed with doing this in London,” says promoter John Empson, who worked with Knight, the immersive theatre group Dank Parish and Martin Coat, the creative mind behind Boomtown festival, to stage the Peaky weekender. “That felt like a diss to Birmingham. Peaky Blinders has been a massive boost for the city and people here hold it close to their hearts. It had to be here.” In light of the pilgrimage, there is a certain irony to the fact much of the series is filmed in Manchester and Liverpool, but that isn’t going to deter either the organisers or the devoted Peaky fans. The festival was some way off selling out of its 20,000 tickets, perhaps understandable given the short lead time – it was only announced in late July. “Ultimately, this is a new way of staging a festival, with these immersive aspects,” says Empson. “Boomtown is the best at this kind of thing, they do it so well, and we can learn. It took longer for people to connect with this idea than I thought it would, to be honest. I thought this weekend was going to sell out overnight, but no festival sells out its first year. We will be back next year – we have a long-term plan for more festivals, and in different locations.”