In therapy psychologists have often asked me to picture what my ideal life would be, or to think of times in my life where things felt good. I think it might have been before I wondered if God was real, when I simply knew he was. I have been listening to a podcast lately about Christian pop culture and the music they discuss is the only thing that can take me back there in an instant. I have become obsessed with a song I used to listen to as a child. It’s called Shout to the Lord, and we used to sing it at church most Sundays. Shout to the Lord was written by a woman named Darlene Zschech, from the Hillsong church. Darlene and this song are enduring symbols of my own deep hypocrisy – so just bear with me. If you grew up in evangelical Australian churches you will know this song but, for the uninitiated, the chorus goes: Shout to the Lord, all the Earth, let us singPower and majesty, praise to the KingMountains bow down and the seas will roarAt the sound of your name Very dramatic, no? Imagine you’re five years old and you hear it for the first time sung by a woman with one of the best voices Australia has heard, Australian Christianity’s Tina Arena, perhaps. I am 30 now and have spent a lot of time grappling with this music, this church, this King. One night after an all-Christian, all-family dinner at the Sofia pizza and pasta restaurant in Burwood, I search Darlene’s name while sitting in the car park of a Thirsty Camel, where I had just bought the bottle of wine I was not allowed to drink at the all-Christian all-family dinner. I wanted to know what Darlene is doing now. Her home page reads: I pray that as you find yourself within the pages of this site that you are forever pointed towards our beautiful saviour, Jesus … Be blessed, know that you are loved and together let’s keep loving Him and loving those in our world. Love Darls x Darls! She calls herself Darls! Of course she does! Darls now has a blog and a tour dates page and an online shop. In her online shop you can buy her many CDs and there are also T-shirts with the word HOPE written largely and distinctively in a graphic design style I can only describe as Cool Christian Youth Pastor. There is a book titled The Golden Thread. There is a CD called Extravagant Worship and one called Rwanda: Speak! I’m listening. I Google her book. Ostensibly about her battle with cancer, the Amazon.com blurb reads: Do you feel like you are barely holding on? (Darlene, yes!) Let the golden thread of God’s presence be the calm on the other side of chaos. It could be that he is weaving a brilliant new beginning in the middle of your mess. Join beloved worship leader and songwriter of “Shout to the Lord” Darlene Zschech as she traces God’s goodness through her recent transitions. I have a big mess, and I love that song. I click on the songs Spotify suggests I might like, the songs below Shout to the Lord. I see a band named Delirious, sometimes spelled Deliriou5, indicating that they aren’t like other Christian bands – they’re cool. This speaks to me as I’m not like other Christians – I, too, am cool. I play their track Did You Feel the Mountains Tremble? and Deeper to my friend who I grew up in church with as we shriek along across her dinner table, our heathen partners sitting baffled at our reaction to a song they’ve never heard. I listen to DC Talk’s post-Nirvana rebrand album Jesus Freak and search my bookshelf for the accompanying branded Bible study journal my Dad bought me when the album came out. Keith Green’s Asleep in the Light comes on and I add it to my new Shout to the Lord playlist and cry because I used to think Keith Green was a perfect person and now I suspect he may have been slightly unhinged. His songs though, like Darlene’s, problematic as they may be, are still perfect. I once admitted in therapy, through tears, that I thought it would be very nice to have everyone be impressed by me and how clever and beautiful and perfect I was. No one is perfect at anything, my therapist said. Perhaps my relationship with religion has warped my sense of self, she suggested, but I think she’s wrong. When I read the writing of some of my peers, I think, “Well, that was perfect.” When I hear Darlene sing Shout to the Lord, I think, “Also perfect.” I listen to my Shout to the Lord playlist on my commute to my desk job and well up as I pull into my train station, unsure if it’s Darlene, or God, or the fact that I’m about to start work for the day. I log in to my desktop to the sounds of Michael W Smith, Amy Grant and Keith Green and wonder if this is the week I’ll finally find the Golden Thread. • Rebecca Varcoe is a writer from Melbourne