Forty-nine weeks on from an Arc day that left the organisers falling over themselves to apologise for horrendous queues and shortages of basics like sandwiches and beer, Longchamp was a much more agreeable place on Sunday afternoon as the track staged its annual card of trials for the big race. The sun was beating down – a peak of 27 degrees, no less – and a decent(ish) crowd was able to move about freely and enjoy some excellent racing, including Frankie Dettori’s 16th Group One win of the season and a masterclass in how not to ride Longchamp by Cristian Demuro, on Sottsass in the Prix Niel. But even this modest audience was still queueing for ice cream, crepes and candy floss and there is still a lot to be done before this year’s Arc on 6 October when, at a rough guess, around 10 times as many hungry and thirsty punters will be pouring through the gates. For the moment, there are just a lot of big, empty spaces where all the temporary food and drink outlets that have been promised are presumably going to go. So while the racegoers pore over the form in the next three weeks, Longchamp will be – hopefully – a hive of activity as everything possible is done to ensure no repeat of last year’s unpleasantness for the travelling fans. As for the race itself, the question after Trials day is still the same – can anything beat Enable? And the answer, of course, is an empirical yes, because she is 4-5 to win her third Arc, not 1-20. And while there is quite a lot of apparent deadwood in the betting, the huge prize fund and the prestige of having a runner is still likely to ensure a big field, increasing that possibility that Enable will need to cope with a wide draw. She was fortunate with the draw last year – as she was at Chantilly in 2017 – when Sea Of Class was marooned on the wide outside and got within a short-nose of the favourite. And though her preparation has been much more straightforward this year, which might have taken an edge off 12 months ago, there are at least three runners that are still either young, unexposed or both and could conceivably bridge the gap to Enable next month. The French Derby winner Sottsass, who overcame all sorts of trouble to win the Niel on Sunday, is an obvious danger, and so too Japan, the best three-year-old in the Aidan O’Brien stable. But if there is a bet to be had at this stage – bearing in mind the potential vagaries of the draw – the most obvious candidate at the prices is surely Charlie Appleby’s Ghaiyyath at 12-1. He has winning form at Longchamp and blew his field away by 14 lengths in a Group One in Germany on his first try at 12 furlongs. That performance persuaded Timeform to rate him 1lb ahead of Enable, and though she will get a 3lb allowance on 6 October, there is not as much between them as the gap in the market might suggest. A long-range bet on Ghaiyyath makes more appeal than the bulk of Monday’s action, though Big Time Maybe (4.40) is worth waiting for in the last at Brighton. Cieren Fallon keeps the ride on Michael Attwater’s gelding having won on him over course and distance at the first attempt last time out and a 3lb rise looks manageable. Harrogate (1.40) should also go well at the other end of the card, while Wots The Wifi Code (2.00) will take plenty of beating in the first division of the nursery at Thirsk. Harvest Day (4.30) is another to consider there along with Comvida (4.55) at Kempton Park. Brighton 1.40 Harrogate 2.10 Annie Quickstep 2.40 Dawn Treader 3.10 It’s How We Roll  3.40 Juanito Chico 4.10 Joyful Dream  4.40 Big Time Maybe (nap) Worcester 1.50 Beni Light 2.20 Mellow Ben 2.50 Adrrastos 3.20 Eva’s Diva 3.50 Tea Time Fred 4.20 The Blues Master Thirsk 2.00 Wots The Wifi Code (nb) 2.30 Prissy Missy 3.00 Hartswood 3.30 Brockey Rise 4.00 Ahorsewithnoname 4.30 Harvest Day 5.00 Uncle Charlie 5.35 Brutalab Kempton Park 4.55 Comvida 5.30 Progressive Rating 6.00 Kentucky Hardboot 6.30 Master Milliner 7.00 Alma Linda 7.30 Celtic Classic 8.00 Sea Shack 8.30 Brigand -