For tonight we’ll merry merry be, For tonight we’ll merry merry be, For tonight we’ll merry merry be... Tomorrow we’ll be sober. (old drinking song) And now tomorrow is almost upon us. (Wednesday this time, cricket likes to keep its followers guessing). New game; fresh start; all square. England have momentum which indeed proved decisive in 1981 and 2005 when England also hit back spectacularly. On the other hand, as Mike Tyson almost said, everyone has momentum until they get a punch in the mouth. And England have already had one hefty blow: the news that Jimmy Anderson is out of the series and, perhaps, gone from Test cricket. That seems one portent of ill-omen, like a black cat mewing at midnight. Meanwhile, Australia will welcome back Steve Smith, the overwhelmingly dominant figure of the series until he himself got whacked. It is imprudent to erase the despair that engulfed England less than 10 days ago. They produced a one-day performance with the bat on the Friday at Headingley and then another one on the Sunday. The first was disgraceful; the second was (insert adulatory adjective of choice from Roget). The first, reproduced again, is likely to get the same result. The second might not: Ben Stokes was (insert different adulatory adjective). But he had to get lucky every hit and did; the Aussies only had to get lucky once and didn’t. England’s response is to choose a squad with no unforced changes, and probably the same team, Jason Roy and all. Not that they had much choice. The main purpose of playing county cricket over four days not three (since 1994) and in two divisions (2000) was to elevate quality over quantity and provide an efficient flow of talent into the England team. So that’s gone well. There has been one single round of Championship matches since 13 July, 18 days before the Ashes began, and there will not be another until 10 September, two days before the final Test. Dominic Sibley of Warwickshire, considered a front‑runner as a possible next opener, scored 0 and nine in his one match during that break, which happens. This is clearly insane and will get even more insane next year when the Horrible Hundred starts. Earlier this decade, there were three Ashes series in two years, the purpose being to realign the schedule and yank the premier Test series away from the World Cup in the quadrennial cycle. This summer the two were separated by just over a fortnight, a period dominated by Twenty20 matches. The upshot was that England’s home advantage was negated, and they arrived at Edgbaston both underdone and overdone, like a badly barbecued steak. In spite of Headingley, they remain the team under most pressure. Australia, as the team in possession, can lose at Old Trafford and stay alive; England can’t. Still, momentum does have a good record in the Ashes. There has not been a drawn series in the last 24, going back to 1972, which is either a statistical quirk or an indication of the extent to which the losing team gets deflated. The good news is that England have not actually lost the Ashes at the Oval (if they held out that long) since 1934. The bad news is the same cannot be said of Old Trafford. It would be terrific for cricket if England can get out of Manchester alive. Why, the TV audience for the decider would be ... oh dear. Sky reported a Test match record of more than two million viewers for the closing stages of Headingley. Which is a bit like me claiming a record for the 1500 metres. It would be more accurate to refer to a personal best. That figure means just over 3% of the population aged four and up watched the most compelling sports event of the year (except perhaps for the previous cricket thriller). There were a peak of eight million for that one, the World Cup final, thanks to the one‑off broadcast on Channel 4, whose last Test, the Oval in 2005, peaked at 10 million. As ye sow, England and Wales Cricket Board, so shall ye reap. As ever, there will be fascinating subplots. For both sides, the captaincy is now an issue. Joe Root, the conventional wisdom now goes: fine bat, nice chap, not one of God’s captains. This drumbeat will get more urgent if England succumb. But if not Root, who else? The screwed-up system is causing problems here too. Playing for England cuts off the chance to get captaincy experience. Rory Burns ticks that box, but has no settled place; Jos Buttler is also now just clinging on. As for Stokes, the lesson of the dire Botham and Flintoff reigns is that the soldier leading the charge should not also be field marshal. Root’s opposite number, Tim Paine, was only ever a stopgap and Australia will have a different captain soon enough. The theme of the series so far has above all been of redemption, first for Smith then for Stokes. There is a growing sense that the captaincy will pass back to Smith. Even illicit sandpaper users deserve a second chance in life. The halfwits will doubtless keep booing Smith, in keeping with Britain’s coarse mood. Decent people should salute a brave and brilliant cricketer.