Film nights in the Donald Trump household must be trippy and disorienting events for the unwary. Unless briefed fully in advance you might find that you are backing all the wrong horses. Tonight it’s The Sound of Music and there you are getting ready to cheer on the Von Trapps and join in with Do-Re-Mi and Edelweiss, handkerchiefs at the ready. Quickly though, you have to readjust your moral compass. The Trumps have seen something you had previously overlooked. Now you think about it, this film is obviously about the challenges faced by a benign political regime intent on Making Austria Great Again as it seeks to locate and destroy a nest of dangerous rebels, led by a rogue naval commander who ruthlessly toys with the affections of women while brain-washing his dysfunctional family and their gullible acolytes. They are communists and represent the eternal and implacable enemy within. The 1973 classic Westworld is not a dystopian nightmare warning us of the dangers of a world that has sacrificed itself on the altars of mass consumption and depraved excess. In Trump’s mind, it enjoys a psychological makeover where the setting is the ultimate theme park of the new American evangelism, in which you get to kill people for sport and women are provided as part of the package. The robot cowboys who turn on their human high rollers could easily be a metaphor for ungrateful Mexicans and Islamists if you don’t keep a close eye on them. Other dark masterpieces must also be observed at different angles. In 1984, a morally rigorous regime is fighting endless and just wars against the commies, the Iraqis and the sinister Danes who have opted to throw in their lot with the axis of evil. This regime also finds itself in a race against time to seek the enemy within led by the crazed socialist rebel Winston Smith before he can undermine the fabric of the state. In Apocalypse Now, Martin Sheen is on a murderous trip upriver to kill the benevolent and kindly Colonel Kurtz and strangle his new, moral society at birth. Kurtz is the deeply misunderstood US leader seeking to Make America Great Again, who has established a missionary station in a heathen land, bringing homespun values of law and order. Here the minorities know their place; there are no girly protests about the death penalty; and everyone is a member of the National Rifle Association. Kurtz fights manfully to keep his noble jungle kingdom from falling into the hands of hippies, commies and east coast liberals. (Nobody was surprised that Sheen went on to portray America’s first Marxist president in The West Wing.) If Trump were ever to construct a model village that slaked all of his prejudices and caprices, it might look like this. Perhaps the residents of the north-east of Scotland last week experienced a chill when it was announced that Trump’s family firm has won permission to build a luxury housing estate beside his Aberdeenshire golf course. This was granted in the face of more than 3,000 objections from residents and anti-Trump protesters – a record for the region. It was also achieved despite the golf course destroying protected habitat, including some of the world-famous sand dunes on this part of the Scottish coast. Trump, though, seems to exert a mesmeric hold on politicians in this neighbourhood. The decision was made two days after councillors approved plans for a second 18-hole golf course close to his housing estate. “Luxury housing estate”? Aye, right. Perhaps Trump has already gamed that when the Brexit balloon goes up, the UK will be so desperate for any kind of trade deal and injection of foreign capital it will make Scotland’s great wildernesses specially designated enterprise zones where all building restrictions and protections will be waived to attract inward investment. Trumpland villages could offer luxury facilities for visiting fascists keen to set up training camps His Trumpland village on this stretch of the north-east coast could be a template for similar ventures all over the free world, where the vision imagined by Trump and his global ambassador, Steve Bannon, can be fulfilled. Each village would possess its very own Playboy-mansion-themed superhotel. In these gated paradises, which would be lit up 24/7 so that golf can be played at any time, illegal arms dealers can descend to transact their business free from socialist scrutiny. In much the same way as London grants safe conduct licences for Saudi princes eager to take a wee holiday from the rigours of their faith, Trumpland villages could offer luxury facilities for visiting fascists keen to set up training camps. This would achieve Bannon’s dream of an international community run by political knuckle-draggers like Italy’s Matteo Salvini and Hungary’s Victor Orbán who are pledged to Make the World Great Again. In Trumpland they can plot their stratagems to eternally prorogue the parliaments of their country, just as his good friend Boris did before the sinister spider woman Lady Hale intervened. At weekends in and around the hills of Aberdeenshire, they could have special Deliverance-style reality experiences where liberal types are caught upstream and hunted to a virtual death by the good folks in the denim overalls. As revealed by the investigative journalist Martyn McLaughlin, Trump’s Scottish hotels are spectacularly loss-making operations that have recently come to be uniquely favoured by assorted US military and state department personnel, who obviously like the branded towels and the secure wifi provision. There would be no reason to believe though, that Aberdeenshire’s Trumpland couldn’t be made profitable. And certainly not after some calls are made to the Ukrainian president and other desperado heads of state seeking to spin favour with the Pennywise of Pennsylvania Avenue. • Kevin McKenna is an Observer columnist