Ahead of World Mental Health Day on 10 October, James Doyle has spoken about the pressures that jockeys face and the importance of trying to keep a level head. While his own career has flourished in recent years, he can still remember how tough times were for him before a link with Roger Charlton and Cityscape catapulted him into the big time in 2012. “I wouldn’t say I was definitely depressed,” Doyle reflected, “but I was certainly very low at a period in my career when I was doing all the hard yards, putting in all the hours in the car and sweating and not really getting anywhere.” Charlton recently described the jockey as having been “a bit depressed” before joining his yard. Doyle discussed the issue of mental health with the British sprinter Adam Gemili in a video made by Great British Racing in which the pair reflect on the different pressures created by their sports. Doyle noted that, while horse racing brings almost constant scrutiny, it at least affords a quick chance to atone. “We might be racing 10 times a day and one race might not go so well but the next one might go super-well and suddenly you’ve gone from villain to hero in half an hour. Adam’s races are obviously a lot more spread out.” In conversation with Gemili, Doyle remembered the Falmouth Stakes, in which he was a close second on One Master, as being the trigger for some especially harsh criticism directed at him through Twitter. But he has never considered ditching his social media accounts. “I enjoy it. I think I was one of the early people to go on it and, whilst you do get a lot of abuse on there, I find it’s a pretty even spread, with abuse and praise. “Everyone’s different. I find it entertaining sometimes, especially when the comments are completely unjust. You just have to laugh at it and move on. I wouldn’t be one to start retaliating in any way.” Gemili told Doyle that a sports psychologist has helped him. The jockey has no plans to try anything similar but says: “I have friends that probably fit that role without actually being psychologists. I’ve got a good group of friends around me that I can speak to after racing and I find that very helpful. Some are in racing, some aren’t. “For instance, Royal Ascot, a place where we all want to ride winners but it’s very difficult to do so. Say you’re going there with a good book of rides and things don’t go to plan, it’s always nice to have someone you can call and reflect on it, maybe not even talk about the races, talk about something completely different altogether.” Doyle concedes that depression is still rarely discussed in the weighing room, though this week’s news that William Carson has been talking about it could change that. Help is available for jockeys who find themselves struggling. “The Professional Jockeys Association is very good,” Doyle adds. “We have helplines we can call and they work very closely with the jockeys and know them well.” • QIPCO British Champions Day takes place at Ascot Racecourse on Saturday 19 October. For tickets go to britishchampionsday.com Which Benbatl will show up at Newmarket, when the Godolphin runner has his first race of the year? Will it be International Benbatl, a Group One winner on three continents, or British Benbatl, who has a low strike-rate and finishes behind horses like Thundering Blue and Century Dream? I’m betting the latter, though it’s interesting to see some market support for him overnight. That shores up the price about King Of Comedy (3.35), the 5-4 favourite for the Joel Stakes, who should appreciate this return to a mile after not quite getting home in the Juddmonte International. That effort behind Japan and Crystal Ocean still counts as really excellent form. This season has yet to work out for Mount Everest (4.45), who was favourite to beat Japan at the end of last year but got short-headed by that rival and stablemate. But there was a lot of promise in his belated return to action and he is napped at 10-11 for the Godolphin Stakes, in which the drop in distance surely makes Weekender beatable. I toyed with Cloak Of Spirits, who still has a big reputation, in the Rockfel but Daahyeh’s form is really solid. Away from Newmarket, the best option might be the 4-1 shot Duke Street (3.45) at Worcester. He’s been absent a long time but Dr Newland has no problem getting them fit and this is a step down in class from the handicap hurdles he formerly contested. Newmarket 1.50 She's Got You 2.25 Promissory 3.00 Daahyeh 3.35 King Of Comedy 4.10 Society Lion 4.45 Mount Everest (nap) 5.20 DestroyerWorcester 2.00 Royal Plaza 2.35 Follow The Bear 3.10 Stream Lady 3.45 Duke Street (nb) 4.20 Ballyellis 4.55 The Vollan 5.30 Ventura DragonHaydock 2.15 Casting Spells 2.50 Whatabird 3.25 Gifted Ruler 4.00 Ainsdale 4.35 Landa Beach 5.10 Lord Of The Rock 5.40 Earl Of HarrowNewcastle 5.25 Sulafaat 6.00 Gorgeous General 6.30 Crash Helmet 7.00 Home Before Dusk 7.30 Fard 8.00 Magic J 8.30 Epeius