Dusk was fast closing in when Andy Carroll finally rose from the bench and made his second coming as a Newcastle United player but there was still time for Steve Bruce’s very own divine ponytail to offer a tantalising glimpse of what may be possible if he can stay fit. Carroll did not score and Bruce’s side were booed off, yet his disruptive presence proved sufficient to spread doubt and uncertainty through a previously assured Brighton side, who had earlier threatened to win at a canter. “The first half was very, very difficult,” conceded Newcastle’s manager, after his team recorded only 21% possession. “Ironically we had the better chances but we didn’t take them.” Graham Potter’s players were initially so dominant they barely permitted their hosts a first-half touch of the ball. Small wonder Bruce ordered Carroll to warm up. Given that the striker has only just been pronounced fit after ankle surgery it was far too early for his introduction. No matter; as a diversionary tactic it worked a treat, prompting applause to finally echo around a stadium containing only 43,316 spectators, its lowest Premier League crowd for eight years. Bruce’s problem was he could not keep his talisman jogging up and down the touchline indefinitely but that restless audience were temporarily pacified as, very much against the run of play, Newcastle conjured the evening’s best chance. When a counterattacking Joelinton put Miguel Almirón through, the Paraguayan playmaker’s shot, left footed from 15 yards, was aimed too close to Mat Ryan, enabling the goalkeeper to save with his chest. Although Joelinton headed another inviting chance wide, Steven Alzate had a header disallowed for offside for Brighton following a gloriously free-flowing passing interchange. All overlapping centre-halves – Sheffield United have clearly sparked a trend – and fluid movement, Brighton were extremely easy on the eye. Not that Bruce can have remotely enjoyed watching them out-think and out-manoeuvre his team on an evening when Newcastle’s salvation hinged on the visitors’ persistently anti-climatic final delivery. Yet if Martin Dubravka was rarely tested, further forward his teammates were in such disarray – Jonjo Shelvey and Jetro Willems in particular – that, after 30 minutes, Bruce shifted formation from 3-4-3 to a back four. A tactical switch had been flicked but, still, the lights refused to come on for the team in black and white. Instead only Fabian Schär’s clearance off the line prevented Aaron Connolly scoring but the power balance tilted as Bruce liberated Allan Saint-Maximin’s destabilising pace from the bench. When Carroll also entered the fray to make his first appearance in a Newcastle shirt since December 2010, those overlapping centre-backs became a thing of the past. The narrative had flipped, leaving Brighton clinging on for a point and Potter ruing their earlier failure to translate possession into goals.