Benjamin Netanyahu could inform Israel’s president that he is unable to form a government as early as this week after unity talks with rival politicians broke down at the weekend, his Likud party said. Israel has entered a period of political paralysis after an inconclusive election on 17 September. Neither Likud nor the opposition Blue and White party, led by ex-military general Benny Gantz, won a clear lead. President Reuven Rivlin asked Netanyahu on Wednesday to try to forge a coalition, hoping he could make a power-sharing deal with Gantz as together they have enough seats in the Knesset for a majority. One suggestion had been that the pair rotate the role of prime minister. Netanyahu had potentially up to six weeks, but negotiations on Sunday abruptly stalled and both sides publicly blamed the other. If Netanyahu hands back the mandate, the president might ask Gantz to try, although he also does not command a majority in the Israeli parliament. With no apparent route out of the crisis, and after two unclear elections this year, there is the possibility that a third national poll could be called. Likud did not say why the prime minister might give up early, although Blue and White accused Netanyahu of wanting a third election to give himself another chance at securing a majority. The opposition party complained on Sunday that Likud had made impossible demands, including promising religious and far-right political allies that they would be part of any unity government. Netanyahu also announced he should serve first as prime minister. Blue and White said those unacceptable preconditions had “the sole aim of generating support in preparation for dragging Israel into another round of elections at the behest of Netanyahu”. Likud, meanwhile, said negotiations had been a big disappointment, adding its rivals “made the strategic decision to slam the door shut on a unity government and drag the country into elections”. It said Netanyahu would “put in a last effort to find a possibility for forming a government at this stage, before returning the mandate to the president”. Gantz and Netanyahu are expected to meet again on Wednesday, after the two-day Jewish new year holiday, Rosh Hashanah. The vote this month cast doubt on Netanyahu’s ability to continue his reign as Israel’s longest-serving leader. His freedom may also be at stake. This Wednesday, Israel’s attorney general is due to hold a pre-trial hearing for the prime minister on fraud and bribery charges in three corruption cases. Netanyahu has denied all allegations and described proceedings as a media-led witch hunt.