Readers may be surprised to learn that bans imposed on people by one horsey sport are not automatically reciprocated by others. Whether this situation should be allowed to continue has become a pressing one for the British Horseracing Authority, following the news that Ismail Mohammed, a trainer based in Newmarket, has been suspended from endurance racing for two years over a doping offence involving testosterone. In a decision reached last month by the International Equestrian Federation (FEI), Mohammed was disciplined, along with one other, for a positive test taken from the horse Shaddad at an event in Suffolk last year. The test found 35 nanograms of the anabolic steroid per millilitre of urine taken from the horse, compared to the FEI’s threshold of 20ng. The FEI described testosterone as “one of the most old-school anabolic steroids, which was known to be used in the build-up period for competitions in Endurance”. On behalf of Mohammed, it was argued that the test resulted from human contamination, as Shaddad’s groom was subsequently found to have been using a cream containing testosterone for pain relief on his own shoulders. But an expert witness for the FEI said this was a “highly implausible” explanation for the positive test. It was further argued in the trainer’s defence that, as Mohammed was the registered trainer for more than 300 endurance horses at the MRM Stables in Dubai, “he did not and could not make decisions for each and every of these horses. In particular, he could not be held accountable for the mistakes of the groom.” But the FEI countered: “In the UAE in particular, the trainer actually has the main responsibility and control over the horse” and noted that Mohammed had previously been found in breach of the anti-doping rules, although the trainer contended that those cases arose from contaminated feed. The end result was that Mohammed was suspended from endurance racing for two years. He still has the right to appeal and declined to comment on the verdict when I phoned him but does not expect to face any consequences from the BHA, saying: “It’s a separate sport”. The BHA were tight-lipped when I asked if they would open a disciplinary inquiry into the matter. It was pointed out to me that the FEI verdict can be taken into account when Mohammed’s licence next comes up for renewal but this strikes me as a weak response to such a significant sanction. Given the importance of anti-doping, the BHA cannot just let the matter slide when its licensees are disciplined by other sporting bodies. Mohammed might be best known in racing for the exploits of Educate, winner of the John Smith’s Cup three years ago and the Cambridgeshire three years before that. He is due to run Sydney Express at Haydock today. I was writing encouragingly about Jonjo O’Neill the other day and the Gloucestershire trainer would be on a run of four winners if Tidal Watch had managed to clear the last at Newton Abbot recently. I like 6-1 about his Allelu Alleluia (4.00) at Sedgefield, when the horse returns to hurdles. Thanks to a win at the end of May, his chase rating has gone up to 140, so of course O’Neill is tempted to try him again over hurdles, in which sphere he’s 124. He’s not as good over the smaller obstacles, of course, but he might be good enough to win this and it’s worth noting that he’s had a wind operation since his handful of previous handicap hurdle attempts. The market prefers Hepijeu but his recent wins have also been over fences and he’s a stone higher than his last hurdles success. Panic Room (2.50) might be the pick of the Haydock card, with cheekpieces on to help Tom Dascombe’s charge in this novice contest that follows two promising efforts. He’s been supported but 9-4 is still available. You can get 4s about Jessie Harrington’s Millisle (3.40), trying to plunder the Dick Poole at Salisbury. The way she finished to win over five furlongs last time suggests this six is what she needs. Sedgefield 1.30 Akkapenko 2.00 Bannixtown Glory 2.30 Isaac Wonder 3.00 Nayati  3.30 My Renaissance 4.00 Allelu Alleluia (nap) 4.30 Dounyapour Haydock 1.50 Arabist 2.20 Oakenshield (nb)  2.50 Panic Room 3.20 Illumined 3.50 Mizaah  4.20 Sinjaari 4.55 Mauricio Salisbury 2.10 Flying Dragon 2.40 Sea Trout Reach 3.10 Tadreej 3.40 Millisle 4.10 Betsey Trotter 4.40 Light Up Our Stars Lingfield 4.15 Muhallab 4.45 Fighting Temeraire 5.20 Illusionist 5.50 Crime Of Passion 6.20 Cotton Club 6.50 Lady Mascara 7.20 High Commissioner Chelmsford 5.40 Pettinger 6.10 Inflamed  6.40 Keep On Laughing 7.10 Muhaarar’s Nephew 7.40 Junooh 8.10 Cosmic Landscape  8.40 Swell Song