In the end, even by Richmond standards, it was all rather ridiculous. They won it in a canter. In doing so, they stamped themselves as one of the great sides of the modern era, with an 89-point demolition job of GWS. It was their 12th win on the trot. It was their 12th Premiership in the VFL/AFL. It was a masterclass of sustained pressure, of miserly defending and of exquisite forward craft. They won it the way they’ve been winning for months… for three years really. On the counter-attack, they were like a team of rampaging bulls. They bowled the Giants over, kept the ball alive, thumped the ball forward and ran in waves. They won it despite not registering their first goal until time-on in the opening term. Indeed, it was a marvellous mess of a first quarter. The Tigers’ tackling was ferocious but they were nervy and a little sloppy by foot. Dustin Martin eventually found himself isolated on Heath Shaw and duly converted, followed quickly by Daniel Rioli’s long range goal right on the buzzer. They then nixed the deal with a five goal to zip second term. The Giants were too handball-happy, a little overawed and seemingly bereft of answers. By the halfway point of the term, they were a bedraggled, demoralised bunch and the Tigers had one hand on the cup. They won it with Dustin Martin, who was in murderous touch. You may have heard of him. He burnished his reputation with yet another commanding Grand Final performance. To begin with, he had Matt De Boer for company. De Boer has taken down Marcus Bontempelli, Lachie Neale and Scott Pendelbury this September. But the tagger was quickly sent to Dion Prestia, who’d been a nuisance early. This freed up Martin, who alternated between the midfield and the goal-square. The likes of Heath Shaw and Sam Taylor - as honest as they are - didn’t have a prayer. He joined Gary Ayres, Andrew McLeod and Luke Hodge to become a dual Norm Smith Medalist, but he could have raffled it with about half a dozen teammates. They won it with Bachar Houli, who was as impenetrable as ever across half back. Houli couldn’t get a game with Essendon in 2010. The Tigers got him for nothing. He probably should have won the Norm Smith Medal in 2017 and was stiff again today. Sweeping and sling-shotting off half back, the Giants simply couldn’t work the Houli locks. They won it, incredibly, with a first gamer. Marlion Pickett was in the slammer seven years ago. He has his surname tattooed on his neck. Now he has a premiership medallion and, astonishingly, a life membership. He looked every inch a league footballer this afternoon, with eleven disposals in the first half when the heat was on. They won it with Jack Riewoldt, the heart and soul of the place who’s had a patchy finals series, with just a dozen possessions heading into today’s game. Playing on a clearly hobbled GWS captain, he imposed himself on the game with three-second term goals and five overall. They won it with Shane Edwards - as understated and damaging as ever. Edwards didn’t receive a single Brownlow vote this year. Even Dawson Simpson snagged one. But the 250-gamer now has two premiership medallions. There’s a Swiss precision to his game. He was the architect of countless forward thrusts. And his tackling and physicality unnerved the much-vaunted Giants midfield. They won it with a trio of former Gold Coast players – Tom Lynch, Dion Prestia and Josh Caddy. They couldn’t get out of the place quick enough. And they couldn’t have picked a better club to hitch their wagon to. In their own way, they all had a significant impact on this Grand Final. Lynch has played every game this year. They looked for him at every opportunity and he roamed far and wide for his seven marks. Meanwhile, Caddy celebrated his 27th birthday with 16 kicks, while Prestia shook off De Boer to register 22 possessions of his own. They won it by pacifying and asphyxiating a team renowned for their brashness and their desire to play on the edge. The Giants have been admirable throughout this finals series. But it was quickly obvious they’d fired all their bullets. And as Phil Davis underwent a dramatic 11th hour fitness test, he was always going to be a line ball proposition. All week we’ve been hearing about the big, big sound from the west. But let’s not tiptoe around this – the Giants barely gave a yelp today. They won it without the man many believe is the best defender of the modern era. When Alex Rance’s knee buckled back in Round 1, the Tigers looked gone. But Dylan Grimes went and became an All Australian. David Astbury took his game to a new level. Together with the likes of Nathan Broad and Nick Vlastuin, they are a criminally underrated backline. They restricted a Giants forward line laden with talent to a solitary goal in the opening half. They won it the Richmond way. For so many years, there was a glassy fragility to Richmond sides. But this is not the Tigers of old. This lot don’t get spooked by tardy starts. They back their system. They back their talent. They trust one another. They’re strong and they’re bold. In the end, they didn’t just win it. They romped it in. It was a rout. Batten down the hatches and brace yourselves for many more years of this. It’s Tiger Time.