Lyndsey D’Arcangelo The Mystics had some slow starts against the Las Vegas Aces in the semi-finals, and they can’t afford to do that against the Sun. But they also need to play at their own pace, keep the Sun out of their transition game, play better defensively and pour on the points. Lindsay Gibbs Obviously they must protect home court, move the ball, push the pace, and minimize turnovers. But while both teams have superstar frontcourt players, I think this series comes down to who wins the chess match between some of the best defensive guards in the WNBA. For the Mystics, Natasha Cloud, Ariel Atkins, and Kristi Toliver need to keep Jasmine Thomas, Courtney Williams, and Shekinna Stricklen in check offensively, and all three have to find ways to score themselves. Bryan Armen Graham More of the same. Washington are favorites on merit after dominating the regular season, coasting to the No 1 seed with a 17-2 record down the stretch behind the best offense in league history and landslide MVP winner Elena Delle Donne. What’s worked all season will be the recipe against Connecticut: a crowd-pleasing attack predicated on spacing, quick ball movement and three-point shooting that ensures plenty of opportunities for Emma Meesseman, Kristi Toliver, Aerial Powers and Ariel Atkins. Best-of-five series. All times Eastern. Sun 29 Sept Game 1: Connecticut Sun at Washington Mystics 3pm (ESPN) Tue 1 Oct Game 2: Connecticut Sun at Washington Mystics 9pm (ESPN) Sun 6 Oct Game 3: Washington Mystics at Connecticut Sun 3.30pm (ABC) Tue 8 Oct Game 4*: Washington Mystics at Connecticut Sun 8pm (ESPN) Thu 10 Oct Game 5*: Connecticut Sun at Washington Mystics 8pm (ESPN) *If necessary LD The Sun are a quick and confident team that capitalizes on defensive rebounding and turnovers with a strong transition game. That kind of up-tempo game works in their favor against the Mystics. They also need to contain Elena Delle Donne and hit shots consistently from the outside. LG The Mystics can win physical, ugly basketball games, as they proved against the Aces. But that’s still the best equation for beating them. The Sun need to do what they do best, which is crash the boards, disrupt the flow of the game with physicality and generate fast-break points. Thanks primarily to the phenomenal frontcourt play of Jonquel Jones and Alyssa Thomas, they led the league in second-chance points, offensive rebounds and fast-break points during the regular season, and that’s an equation for success against the Mystics, too. BAG The Sun, who have fully embraced the outsider role, ranked fifth in the league in defensive efficiency during the regular season, conceding 96.8 points per 100 possessions. That number has dropped to 81.6 in the playoffs. If Connecticut can create enough problems on the defensive end and leverage their frontcourt size advantage into an edge on the offensive glass (which proved the key to their statement-of-intent sweep of the LA Sparks in the semis), the underdogs could feast. LD Emma Meesseman. The Mystics are a better team with Meesseman on the floor. She’s a 6ft 4in reliable scorer in the post and a deadly three-point threat. She scored 20 points or more in all three of the Mystics wins against the Aces, and she’s nightmare matchup for any opponent. LG For the Mystics, look out for Aerial Powers. She can match the physicality and intensity of Connecticut, and I like her ability to come off the bench in a series like this and provide a spark of energy, force turnovers, fly across the court to steal rebounds, and knock down timely shots. The Sun believe that every player on its roster is unheralded, but I think Bria Holmes will have some special moments on both ends of the floor. BAG LaToya Sanders might not get the shine of her higher-profile teammates, but the lanky 6ft 2in center is Washington’s most reliable defensive option in the post, regularly shutting down far taller assignments. Her matchup with Jonquel Jones, Connecticut’s leading scorer and the WNBA’s top rebounder, will be crucial. LD The Sun will win the first two games at home and put the Mystics down 0-2 in the series. LG Both road teams will get a win. The Mystics (14-3) and the Sun (15-2) are two of the best home teams in the WNBA this year. But I expect the Sun to steal one on the Mystics’ home court early, and the Mystics to return the favor in Connecticut. BAG Connecticut, a sub-.500 road team during the regular season, will steal Sunday’s Game 1 in Washington, where the Mystics dropped only three games all year. LD Elena Delle Donne. She’s having a magical year and the Mystics wouldn’t be in the WNBA Finals without her. I think she averages a double-double in points and rebounds in this series. LG Elena Delle Donne. Emma Meesseman was the MVP of the semi-finals for the Mystics, and she will continue to be effective and aggressive in the finals. But ultimately, I expect this to be Delle Donne’s moment, through and through. Her ability to create her own shot, pass the ball out of trouble and protect the rim is going to be the defining factor. BAG Delle Donne, who became the first player in WNBA history to shoot at least 50% from the floor, 40% from three-point range and 90% from the free-throw line, is at the peak of her powers. It’s hard to imagine it going anywhere else. LG A. Engelbert is approaching the position of commissioner with the right mindset. She is clearly putting time and energy into building on what has already been working while simultaneously coming up with new and innovative ways to improve marketing and promotion. She is also willing to meet and listen to players. LG B-plus. I’m cautiously optimistic about Engelbert. She has been incredibly available to the media since she began just a week before All-Star break, and has already made one bold move by arranging charter flights for the winners of the second-round games in the playoffs. Listening and action are two great steps. But we won’t really know until we see how the offseason – and the collective bargaining agreement negotiation in particular – advance. BAG A. It’s too soon to tell, really, but the early signs are promising. The former Deloitte executive was tabbed as the WNBA’s first ever commissioner in July with the task of transforming the league from a financial perspective. That will mean addressing long-running complaints over player wages, travel and quality of officiating all tied to economics. But Engelbert has appeared to “get it” so far, availing herself to the media during a 12-city tour of the league since taking over, and appears to be on the same page with WNBPA president Nneka Ogwumike ahead of the forthcoming CBA negotiations. LD Washington over Connecticut, three games to two. This matchup has all the makings of a fun, entertaining and competitive series with lots of scoring. But as the highest scoring team in the WNBA, I think the Mystics outshoot the Sun overall and bring home their first championship trophy. LG Washington over Connecticut, three games to two. The Connecticut Sun are a great team that I believe will win a championship in the next couple of years, especially if they keep their core together. But the Mystics have been the best team all season long, and their experience in the WNBA finals is going to be the difference maker when it matters the most. BAG Washington over Connecticut, three games to one. I want to believe in the in-form Sun, a young and awfully fun group whose success despite their lack of star power has drawn comparisons to the 2004 Detroit Pistons. But Washington’s historically efficient offense and experience on this stage will serve them well as they make up for last year’s WNBA finals defeat to Seattle and capture the team’s first ever title.