Benjamin Netanyahu’s bid to secure another term as Israel’s prime minister has grown more desperate and divisive as Tuesday’s elections approach. Bibi, as he is known, has never been afraid to fight dirty. Now he is at it again as his Likud party and its rightwing allies struggle to amass the 61-seat Knesset majority that would further extend his record 13 years as Israeli leader. Familiarity with Netanyahu’s objectionable tactics do not render them more acceptable or less of a stain on Israeli democracy. Last week, a message sent from his official Facebook page warned of “the Arabs who want to destroy us all – women, children and men”. This was a scurrilous reference to Israeli citizens of Arab descent – about 900,000 out of roughly 6 million eligible voters. Netanyahu disowned this hateful post, claiming it was created by a “junior staffer” without his knowledge. Given past form, few will believe him. In the final weeks of the campaign, Netanyahu has largely abandoned attempts to win over more moderate, centrist voters and concentrated instead on rallying his hard-right base. The Facebook message was typical scaremongering. Netanyahu’s critics say he has surpassed himself this time, running the “nastiest, most racist campaign ever”, according to Yossi Verter, a Haaretz columnist. “The plunge to the bottom of the sewer, the dive into the depths of the morass that we’ve seen in the past few weeks – it has all come straight from the top,” he wrote. Others have objected to Netanyahu’s claim that rival parties are stealing votes and the blatant bid to intimidate Arab Israelis by placing cameras inside polling stations. Gutter politics aside, the stance adopted by Netanyahu and Likud on the big issues facing Israel is also deeply concerning. Last week, he enlarged on his vow, first made in last April’s election, to annex large swaths of occupied Palestinian territories. And rather than fulfil his previous pledge to end the blockade of Gaza, Netanyahu has raised the prospect of a new war against Hamas. Either course of action by a man who casts himself as “Mr Security” would jeopardise Israel’s safety. The same is true of his expanding, largely covert military campaign against Iran’s allies and proxy forces in Syria, Iraq and Lebanon. Netanyahu believes he has Donald Trump’s backing for this dangerous escalation. He should think again. Trump cannot be trusted. He is currently considering a “peace summit” with Iran’s president in New York later this month. Trump does not want an unpopular shooting war with Iran as he manoeuvres towards a second presidential term, as he showed in the summer when he cancelled a retaliatory missile strike after Tehran shot down a US drone. Israel cannot count on him if things get hot. Likewise, Trump’s absurdly biased “deal of the century” to resolve the Palestinian conflict, due to be unveiled after the election, is unworkable and Netanyahu should stop disingenuously pretending otherwise. Benny Gantz, leader of the main opposition Blue and White alliance, is not a particularly inspiring alternative to Netanyahu. A former military chief, he holds similarly hawkish views on Gaza and annexation. To form a viable government, he would need the support of smaller, leftwing parties and, possibly, the Arab Joint List. This latter grouping comprises four Palestinian parties and may win around 10 seats, assuming Likud’s intimidatory tactics do not depress turnout again. Avigdor Lieberman, whose secular Yisrael Beiteinu party may hold the balance of power, wants a national unity government. So does Gantz, but only one that excludes the current prime minister. That’s entirely reasonable. Netanyahu’s ugly brand of rightwing politics has done serious damage. He has no good answers for the challenges facing Israel. Others may do better. This is the moment to bid bye-bye to Bibi. Awash in corruption allegations, he needs to spend more time with his lawyers.