British eyes will be on Lizzie Deignan in Saturday’s women’s road race world championship, with hopes high that Deignan can claim the second world title of her career in her home town, at the finish where she won the women’s Tour de Yorkshire in 2017. Deignan is probably the strongest home medal hope of the week, but the race scenario will not be the Yorkshirewoman versus the rest so much as the Dutch versus everyone else, and if recent history is anything to go by, against each other to boot. Headed by the defending champion Anna van der Breggen and the prolific Marianne Vos, the orange train’s strength is also its potential achilles heel. The perennial issue for Deignan has been how many of her teammates will stay in the front long enough to support her when it really counts – that may change on Saturday given the constant progress of the former national champion Hannah Barnes – but behind Vos and Van der Breggen the Dutch have immense strength in depth with the top time triallist Annemiek van Vleuten, the 2017 world road champion Chantal Blaak, as well as Amy Pieters, one of the winning mixed relay team on Sunday. Their problem is how to avoid a situation where their riders end up cancelling each other out. There are good sporting and cultural reasons for this dominance. Having refused to host the second women’s world championships in 1959, the Dutch got firmly behind women’s cycle racing during the 1960s, with a well-supported national team and well-funded race calendar. That in turn fed into the nation’s support for cycling in everyday life to work and school, and produced the multiple champion Katie Hage in the 60s and 70s, and the double world and Olympic champion Leontien van Moorsel in the 90s. The philosophy of “total cycling” – multiple leaders capable of winning – is a Dutch concept, pioneered by Peter Post at the TI-Raleigh men’s professional team in the 1970s, but it is one that does not always work out for the national women’s team in major championships. One example came in the European road race championship last year in Glasgow, when Van der Breggen broke away in the final phase of the race only for her own teammates to give chase behind. The plan was apparently to work for Vos in the final sprint, only for that to go awry, with Marta Bastianelli of Italy snatching the win. For Van der Breggen, the critical principle is that even a rider of her stature and record will have to go to the start line on Saturday knowing there is a chance she will have to come to terms with watching a teammate win. “I hope we see it like that. For me, it’s clear. It’s no difficult from in my normal [trade] team, you always need to work together. You know how it works. We know the game plan before the race. If you don’t work together you won’t win a world championship or any road race.” The Dutchwoman pointed out the situation within the national team is remarkably similar to the way her trade team, Boels-Dolman, works. In one sense, the dominant team at women’s world championships in recent years has been Boels, who have taken the title for the last four years with Deignan, Amalie Dideriksen, Blaak and Van der Breggen. Team tactics will be vital, believes Van der Breggen, given the toughness of the course. The women’s race is the longest ever at just shy of 100 miles – including a long neutral section – and heads over the climbs of Norwood Edge and Lofthouse after the start in Bradford, even before it hits its three laps of the Harrogate finishing circuit. Only two other teams have the strength in depth to concern the Dutch, the US squad with Coryn Rivera and Tuesday’s time trial champion Chloe Dygert Owen, and the Italians with Bastianelli and Elisa Longo Borghini. “It will be a day of pain,” said Van der Breggen. “There are lots of metres of climbing and the roads here are so hard, always up-down, left-right. It’s never the kind of road where you can relax for any length of time. You will have to be at the front all day, with those early climbs.” For the Dutch, it will be another day attempting to control yet another major title race, but Van der Breggen knows the score. “Sometimes you need to take, sometimes you need to give.”