A “concerningly high number” of UK businesses are unprepared for a no-deal Brexit, the British Chambers of Commerce has warned, after research showed that more than two-fifths of British companies had not conducted a Brexit risk assessment. Parliament moved closer to obstructing a no-deal Brexit this week after passing a bill aimed at forcing Boris Johnson to seek an extension. The pound reached a five-week high on Thursday as investors reacted to the diminishing likelihood of the UK crashing out of the EU. However, MPs and peers cannot legally block a departure from the EU without a deal, and major companies are warning the political turbulence is harming business confidence ahead of the slated exit date of 31 October. “Businesses do not want to see a messy and disorderly Brexit, but ongoing uncertainty means they must prepare for all possibilities as the October deadline looms,” said the BCC’s director general, Adam Marshall, after the survey of 1,500 firms, mainly small and medium-sized enterprises, was published. Just over a third of businesses conducted a Brexit assessment last year. The BCC welcomed the rise, but cautioned that a large proportion of firms were not prepared for the potential impact of a chaotic exit. “While more firms have taken basic steps to prepare for change than was the case last year, and government has stepped up communication to businesses, ongoing uncertainty makes business planning with confidence next to impossible,” Marshall said. “Companies are told to plan, but are being presented with a moving target. “Low levels of awareness around special customs and trade schemes are of particular concern, as this highlights the potential for disruption at borders in an unwanted no-deal situation. Companies should be automatically enrolled or supported to enrol in these schemes to increase trader readiness. “Our evidence yet again reinforces the importance of averting a chaotic exit on October 31st.” The BCC added that there were many areas without “clear and actionable” information to help businesses mitigate the worst effects of a no-deal Brexit: “While there has been an increase in the guidance available from government on conditions in a no deal, the advice needs to be clearer and more consistent.” A spokesman for the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy told the BBC that supporting businesses to “get ready for Brexit on 31 October, and take advantage of the opportunities of leaving the EU” was the department’s top priority, with an additional £108m in funding support announced recently.