At times like this, when the nation is surrounded by uncharted waters at every turn and everything you thought you knew is tossed up into the air, one obvious question springs to mind: has Christian Eriksen got his mitts on a copy of Football Manager yet? Manchester United certainly hope so, because they’d happily take the great Dane off Spurs’ hands this winter and give his turbulent August all the relevance of a long-deleted save. United need a creative spark; Eriksen thinks he needs to leave Spurs; there’s scant chance Daniel Levy would want to let him leave for free next season. It could just work out: now, any chance he could bring Tonton Zola Moukoko along with him? Not that Tottenham fans should get too glum – it could be happy families at the Lane very soon. Happy Sessegnon families, to be precise: having already signed Ryan this summer they’re going back to Fulham for his younger brother, the highly-rated defender Steven Sessegnon, and hope their persistence gets their man in the winter. “Seen the rumour that I’m being lined up to join my old manager, Maurizio Sarri, at Juventus next summer once my Chelsea contract is up, and that we might start negotiations in January?” Don’t be silly Willian, it was really nothing. It’s thin gruel for those clubs seeking a shot of inspiration now that the transfer window has slammed shut, but what about signing one of the many eager, talented free agents who are just desperate to show their worth? There are some big names still out there and few more so than Hatem Ben Arfa, who is flying solo after leaving Rennes. Fiorentina, Fenerbahce and – surprise surprise – West Ham are all credited with showing interest but there’s a small problem. “No challenge that has been proposed to me has excited me,” he apparently bemoaned on Instagram. “It’s like with a woman, if she does not excite you, let it go.” People in glass houses: it’s fair to say a number of Ben Arfa’s footballing partners have found the end product doesn’t exactly get the fires raging. Those in need of more substance can console themselves that, fortunately, the managerial merry-go-round still carries on a-turning. It might just alight at the gates of Hillsborough for the Lincoln manager Danny Cowley and his brother, Nicky. The Sincil Bank miracle workers didn’t much like what they heard when Huddersfield came sniffing around but Sheffield Wednesday might be a different proposition: talks are ongoing and Lincoln, second in League One, could yet lose their star turns. Puts it all in perspective really.