Frankie Dettori equalled his best ever season at the highest level and did so with a flawless front-running ride as Star Catcher added the Prix Vermeille to her win in the Irish Oaks in July. It was the jockey’s 16th Group One winner of 2019 but as a trial for the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe it proved less significant, as Star Catcher is most unlikely to make the trip back across the Channel for the big one in three weeks’ time. Instead Star Catcher could head to Champions Day and the Breeders’ Cup in America while Enable, her stable companion at the John Gosden yard, attempts to win the Arc for the third year running. There could be no better moment for Dettori to register his 17th Group One win, though he is in such outstanding form at present, with four wins from his last five Group One starts, that his personal record may well be history already by 6 October. “Frankie loves this track and I always say it’s probably the most difficult course in Europe to ride,” Gosden said afterwards. “He was able to set a proper tempo, then go through the gears and do what he does so well. He’s a genius like [American legend] Bill Shoemaker for keeping a little bit up his sleeve.” There was compelling evidence to back up Gosden’s opinion of Longchamp just half an hour later, when Cristian Demuro, riding the hot favourite Sottsass in the Prix Niel, somehow managed to get himself boxed in by the other four runners in the race, one of which was running as his pacemaker. There are probably runways at major airports that are narrower than the final straight at Longchamp, but it was clear that Demuro was going to struggle for space even before the small posse of runners turned for home. Having been boxed for well over a furlong in the straight, Demuro then compounded his problems by going for a gap against the far rail that existed only in his imagination. It is to Sottsass’s immense credit that, despite being stopped in his tracks with a furlong to run, the three-year-oldhe then managed to quicken impressively and dig his rider out of a very deep hole. Brighton 1.40 Harrogate 2.10 Annie Quickstep 2.40 Dawn Treader 3.10 It’s How We Roll  3.40 Juanito Chico 4.10 Joyful Dream  4.40 Big Time Maybe (nap) Worcester 1.50 Beni Light 2.20 Mellow Ben 2.50 Adrrastos 3.20 Eva’s Diva 3.50 Tea Time Fred 4.20 The Blues Master Thirsk 2.00 Wots The Wifi Code (nb) 2.30 Prissy Missy 3.00 Hartswood 3.30 Brockey Rise 4.00 Ahorsewithnoname 4.30 Harvest Day 5.00 Uncle Charlie 5.35 Brutalab Kempton Park 4.55 Comvida 5.30 Progressive Rating 6.00 Kentucky Hardboot 6.30 Master Milliner 7.00 Alma Linda 7.30 Celtic Classic 8.00 Sea Shack 8.30 Brigand - Sottsass, the French Derby winner, had a typical French preparation for the Arc and looks like a more realistic contender for the home team than Waldgeist, who took the Prix Foyon the same card. Jean-Claude Rouget’s colt is now top-priced at around 7-1, in a market headed by Enable at 4-5. At The Curragh, Pinatubo ran away with the Group One National Stakes, bursting clear with just under two furlongs to run before eventually crossing the line nine lengths in front of Armory. It was a remarkable performance by Charlie Appleby’s colt, who is now nudging odds-on for next year’s 2,000 Guineas with some bookmakers but, is top-priced at 6-4. He started at 1-3 on Sunday, having already registered impressive wins at Royal Ascot and Glorious Goodwood. “He’s a trainer’s dream once you get to know him, because he doesn’t excite you in the morning, to say the least,” Appleby said. “We started his career off at Wolverhampton for a reason, as we didn’t really know he was in the yard. He’s the best horse I’ve ever had as a two-year-old, there’s no doubt about it. “As soon as William [Buick] gave him a squeeze, he soon came back on the bridle and from two down I couldn’t see him getting beat. It’s not often you can say that at this level.” Tony McCoy, National Hunt’s most successful jockey, returned to the saddle on the same card to win the Pat Smullen Champions Race For Cancer Trials Ireland. McCoy made all the running on Sheila Lavery’s Quizical to beat the recently-retired Ruby Walsh, on Aussie Valentine, with former Derby winner Johnny Murtagh third on Red Striker. The race was inspired by Dermot Weld’s former stable jockey, Pat Smullen, who was forced into retirement after being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and is currently undergoing a second round of treatment for the condition. “I’m very proud to be here today racing for a great cause,” McCoy said. “We can be very proud of horse racing in general in Ireland. The stable staff, racegoers, owners, trainers, jockeys. Everyone has given so much support to the amazing man that Pat Smullen is. “Pat is a special person and a great friend to us all. Unfortunately it’s tough and sad circumstances what we’re doing today, but it just shows you what a brilliant sport this is. “I said I would never ride in a horse race ever again and I meant it, but I’m glad I did today. You want to compete against the best and that is what has made this special. I got on the best horse and that’s what counts.” Smullen’s popularity helped create the star-studded cast for the race. Dermot Weld’s former stable jockey was forced into retirement after being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer - and as he is undergoing a second round of treatment, he was unable to ride in it himself. Smullen, clearly moved by the occasion, said: “I’m overcome. This is not about me. This is about people who are in this situation and we are out to raise a lot of money and make a huge difference going forward and give people confidence, as it does me. “What a privilege to be involved in what is a great industry.”