Every four years, with more than 100 million people watching, a big bloke hoists a golden trophy called the Webb Ellis Cup. Casual viewers might assume this guy Webb Ellis to be legit, what with his name etched across the most valuable stretch of metal in his sport. A quick Google would reveal him to be the man whose audacious intervention in a 19th-century game of football is supposed to have invented the very sport. As the profile of the World Cup grows, so the boy in that field all those years ago bestrides the rugby world ever more surely as the hero who created it. The only trouble is, he didn’t. Doubt over the William Webb Ellis myth is not new. The Guardian can reveal, however, new evidence to prove Ellis was not the first to run with the ball, which is laid out more fully in the recently published book on rugby in the 21st century, Unholy Union: When Rugby Collided with the Modern World. Ellis is supposed to have called a mark in a football match at Rugby School in 1823, but – instead of retreating 10 yards to consider his options, as was the custom – he ran with the ball. More than 50 years later, someone wrote of this for the first time. Matthew Bloxam was an antiquarian of Rugby. He was a contemporary of Ellis, albeit a year and a half younger. In a letter to the Standard in 1876, he wrote of his belief that the practice of running with the ball had developed during the headmastership of Thomas Arnold, between 1828 and 1842. A few months later, though, after he had made further enquiries, he presented the story of William Webb Ellis for the first time. He first dated it in 1824. Four years later, he wrote an article saying 1823; four years later again, he said in a speech 1825, which was actually after Ellis had left. Posterity has gone for 1823, but no one knows. In the interim, the Football Association (1863) and the Rugby Football Union (1871) had been formed – and Ellis had, irritatingly, died (1872). Entire tomes had been written about the history of both sports. Nobody anywhere had mentioned Ellis’s name. Even after Bloxam introduced it into proceedings, there was silence. Until, suddenly, in 1895 the sport of rugby found itself in turmoil. The public schools were losing control as the working men of the north prepared to break away and form a new code. A month before the great split, a committee of Old Rugbeians finally decided to get to the bottom of just whose game this was. They knew it had evolved on their field, but what about the vague rumour someone remembered reading nearly 20 years earlier about a boy another 50 or so earlier than that? Alas, Bloxam, who had spent much of his life living literally across the road from the school, was also dead by then. He had lived for 12 years since his first mention of Ellis, ample time to field enquiries had anyone been genuinely interested in the origins of his story. Instead, our committee left it until that calamitous year for rugby before mobilising. They set about contacting as many old boys from the era as they could. All but one of them had played in the 1830s and agreed on one point. They had never heard of Ellis. But one of the respondents did remember him. Thomas Harris had been five years Ellis’s junior. He confirmed that Ellis had, indeed, been considered a bit of a cheat. “I should not quote him in any way as an authority,” he wrote. Harris was adamant that, by the time he himself had left, in 1828, running with the ball was still “distinctly forbidden”. So, even if Ellis had been the first to try it, his intervention did not create a new sport. But was he even the first? Harris went on to write: “I may add that in the matches played by boys in the lower part of the School, while I was myself a junior, the cry of ‘Hack him over’ was always raised against any player who was seen to be running with the ball in his hands.” He now seems to be suggesting that boys did run with the ball in the 1820s, even if it was not allowed. When exactly? According to the archives of Rugby School, Harris entered the Upper School in 1822, three years after he had joined. Which means there had been boys running with the ball at Rugby School for more than a year before Ellis is supposed to have invented the practice, quite probably as many as four. The myth-makers of Rugby School – and everyone else since – conveniently overlooked this detail. They needed a character, a story, through which to say, this game is ours. It was a naked attempt by the public school to reassert ownership of the sport in the face of a working‑class revolution. Thus, the William Webb Ellis myth is a distillation of all the elitist energies rugby in the 21st century is so desperately trying to undo. Which begs the question, who ever thought it was a good idea to name the sport’s highest prize after him? Now that rugby has shaken off the blazers of empire, it is time to retire Ellis. Let New Zealand keep the Webb Ellis Cup, so that rugby can mint a new standard, bearing the name of someone more appropriate. The Jonah Lomu Cup, for example. Now there is someone who very definitely ran with the ball. There is someone who changed the sport for ever. Unholy Union: When Rugby Collided with the Modern World by Michael Aylwin with Mark Evans is out now.