Israel Folau’s proposed return to rugby league to play for Tonga later this year is shrouded in confusion after international officials denied his registration had been approved. A Tongan National Rugby League statement on Monday stated that Folau and his brother John will feature in Tests against the Kangaroos and Great Britain. “I’m so grateful to have the opportunity to represent God, my family, my heritage and the people of Tonga,” Folau said, according to the New Zealand Herald. The 30-year-old was sacked by Rugby Australia after he refused to remove a social media post that stated “drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists and idolaters” would go to hell unless they repented. Folau has taken Rugby Australia to court claiming he was unfairly dismissed and discriminated against on religious grounds. He seeking $10m in damages and wants his multimillion-dollar contract reinstated. “I am thankful that the RLIF have accepted my availability to play,” Folau said of his attempted 13-a-side comeback for Tonga, who face Britain in Hamilton on 26 October and Australia in Auckland on 2 November. “I don’t want to bring any of my personal matters into this and I am grateful that the RLIF have endorsed my availability. “What I will do now is focus on playing great rugby league and do my talking on the field.” However, the Rugby League International Federation (RLIF), later released its own statement, in which it said: “The Rugby League International Federation is aware of a media release issued by Tonga National Rugby League stating that Israel Folau has been ‘approved’ by the RLIF to represent Tonga in international matches. That statement is incorrect, the RLIF has not been formally asked to consider this matter.” Tonga coach, Frank Endacott, who was only appointed coach of the national team two weeks ago, welcomed Folau’s return to the game. “This is great news,” Endacott said. “These guys are great footballers and bring size, pace and skill to the team. They will make a huge impact in the team and provide exciting attack options all over the park.” “This will be great boost to the internationals, and I can’t wait to see the crowd support that this will generate from our famous Mate Ma’a Tonga supporters. “And it is good to see the RLIF approving these players for internationals. This is great for the game.” It is unclear, however, if the Rugby League International Federation has officially given the green light to the registration. The Australian Rugby League Commission chairman, Peter Beattie, has previously shut the door on any attempt by Folau to return to the NRL. Beattie is also the deputy chairman of the RLIF. “Our position on Israel Folau remains the same,” Beattie said in June. “We are an inclusive game with respect for all. Israel has social media posts online that go against what our game stands for. “As it stands, he will not be considered for registration. What Israel chooses to do in relation to his social media posts and his faith is a matter for him.” The report also claims neither Folau brother is eligible to play in the inaugural nines tournament in Sydney because it is considered an NRL event.