On my second night in the mountains of Andorra, in a well-hidden hut where the bunk beds are stacked three tall, my dinner was a plate of cheesy pasta. It was plonked without fanfare on to the old wooden table in front of me. The wine was decanted from a battered carafe by a French hiker who had just woken up. But I wolfed the pasta down before you could say “independent principality”, and did the same with the second helping. I bear no shame in saying it was a meal fit for the gods. The food was, aptly enough, delivered from above. Andorra’s four refugis guardats – staffed mountain refuges, each with around 50 dorm beds – are remote enough to require helicopter supplies. Everything from tinned peaches to wine is choppered in a couple of times a season. I was tackling the circular Coronallacs Trail, a new, furiously undulating 58-mile walking route, devised to link Andorra’s only four manned refuges and be the first long-distance loop that stays within its borders. All five stages involve between six and 10 hours of walking a day. To say I was working up an appetite would be fair. The landlocked, Catalan-speaking nation is a 180-square-mile pouch of the Pyrenees, with an average elevation of 1,996 metres, sandwiched between France and Spain. Say Andorra and people think skiing and tax-free shopping. But there’s more. As well as winter-sports crowds, the mountains and valleys also attract summer hikers. The landscape is fortress-like, full of craggy cols and high-perched lakes. Looked at on an altitude chart, the Coronallacs trail resembles a hospital pulse monitor. Possibly mine. We’d been walking for perhaps a minute when my guide, Spaska, told me she’d attempted the trail once before in a group of nine, finishing with only six. “One got too tired, one sprained an ankle, one fell over,” she told me, smiling. The route involves 6,858 metres of ascent, the equivalent of climbing Aconcagua, the highest peak in the Andes, from sea level. You carry your own bag throughout. Two pieces of advice: book refuges ahead and bring good boots. The circuit begins and ends at Escaldes-Engordany, above the capital Andorra la Vella. Our first day was one long climb, an uphill through pine woods of fern fronds, hopping blackbirds and blue butterflies no bigger than a thumbnail. Above the treeline we found temperatures pushing 30C and a confetti of wildflowers. Snow-pocked peaks peered down on us. After six hours we reached the first refuge, Illa, a metal-wrapped modern sanctuary with Elton John playing on the stereo and ice-cold, ¤3 beers. It gets tough, the wilderness. I had a shower (limited to one minute – but what a minute) and rested. “These mountain paths are hundreds of years old,” said one of the refuge staff. “Our ancestors have kept animals up here for centuries. Goats, sheep, cattle, horses. You’re walking in the herders’ footsteps.” By morning a dozen fudge-coloured horses had appeared in the grassy bowl of land next to the refuge. The themes of the first day – sweaty ascents, rangy scenery, nature at play – continued over the following stages. Up, down, water, up, down, energy bar. Waterfalls tumbled from cliffs. Vultures swept overhead. I was expecting the other hikers I’d meet would be walking the same route. Nope. All four refuges stand on a crossroads of other long-distance Pyrenean trails. People straggled over high passes from all compass points, tiny stick figures astir in the uplands. The days were long. Spaska stayed for the first two, reeling off Latin plant names and generally bringing the hills to life, then had to descend, setting me loose in the high pastures for the last three. I yomped across ridges and zigzagged up summits, my calves burning. The panoramas were green-grey, savage and relentlessly big. No other refuge was as box-fresh as Illa – and quite right too, traditionalists would probably argue – but all arrived as promised lands. The second, Juclà, had a hippyish vibe and a hammock (and that great cheesy pasta). The third, Borda de Sorteny, had vichyssoise soup and wifi. I reached Comapedrosa, the fourth, just before a thunderstorm did, done in and dog-tired. It had wine. I remember that much. Every day the route rose and plunged, swirling around tight contour-bends. A mixture of my own stupidity and some gnomic signage meant I had to backtrack at least three times. The trail crossed ski pistes, where chairlifts hung static above orchid-strewn slopes, then climbed again to higher ground. “We need the mountains,” a local hiker told me one evening. “For Andorrans, the Pyrenees is our gym.” As varied as the walking itself were the characters at the huts. Grizzled trail veterans on 55-day hikes. Local families on overnight trips. Septuagenarians crossing from France to Spain. As the sun was setting over the blue ridges and the cook was catering for the ravenous, maps and conversation would unfold over the dinner table. I’ll skirt over the snoring. Day five was a lengthy descent back to town, with its crisp bedsheets, supermarkets and unrationed hot water. It took about an hour before I wished I was back on the trail. This little pocket of the Pyrenees may be half the size of London – but it packs a mighty punch. • The trip was provided by Visit Andorra (visitandorra.com). All four huts can be booked in one go, from £148.80pp for a dorm bed in each, including meals, at coronallacs.com. Macs Adventure’s self-guided Lakes and Mountains of Andorra trip costs from £535pp, including huts, meals and a hotel before and after the hike. Local trekking guides can be hired for €210 a day at experienciamuntanya.com