Before the tournament Scotland slicked their balls with shampoo to help them get ready for just the sort of the muggy conditions they found here in the insufferably humid Kobe Misaki Stadium. Turned out it worked. They were head and shoulders above Samoa, anyway, in game that felt, for long stretches, like watching 30 blokes fight over the last bar of soap in bathhouse. Neither side could hold on to the ball, at all, and the game was littered with handling errors, knock-ons, and turnovers. Scotland coped far better with it than Samoa did and in the end it was an impressive victory, 34-0, with the crucial bonus-point they needed to stay in contention for the quarter-finals. It didn’t have to be this way, but World Rugby has made the bizarre decision to keep the stadium roof shut all through the World Cup. By the second half the place was steamier than the dog-eared bits of a Jilly Cooper classic. There was a red mist too, as Scotland were awarded two penalty tries, and the Samoa wing Ed Fidow was sent off after being shown two yellow cards. It was Finn Russell who cracked the match open after half an hour. He had the wit to see that Samoa had gathered ever so narrow in midfield, and whistled a cross-field kick over to Sean Maitland on the left wing. Maitland had all the time and space he needed to take the catch, then squirmed out of Tusi Pisi’s last-ditch tackle, and strolled over unopposed. Sensing the moment, Scotland poured it on after that. They came right back down field after the restart, Russell stepped around one tackle, and passed to Jamie Ritchie who fed the ball on again to Greig Laidlaw. Laidlaw, out on his own, turned mid-stride to see who was behind him, and, as he did it, managed to somehow bump off Tim Nanai-Williams who had been rushing in to tackle him. Laidlaw set off again and hauled Fidow along with him as he crossed the tryline. All of a sudden, then, the Scots were 17-0 up. Hogg made it 20-0 when he walloped over a drop-goal off the back of a quick lineout just inside the halfway line. The Scots tried to maul their way over for a third try before half-time, but Samoa shut them out. Scotland tried it again midway through the second half. This time they were awarded a penalty try, after Fidow was penalised for coming in from the side. It wasn’t Fidow’s night. Eight minutes after he came back on, he was sent off for a second yellow-card offence. This time he slid in feet first on Maitland as he dived for the tryline. Maitland spilled the ball in the collision, but Pascal Gaüzère awarded Scotland a second penalty try. With it, Scotland had the bonus point they so desperately needed.