With his firebrand speeches and inimitable aesthetic, it is no wonder that Winston Churchill has been the subject of countless Hollywood films. What is less known is his own career as a screenwriter for the British film magnate Alexander Korda. This feature-length doc is packed with incredible archive material and tells the story of how the two men fashioned a movie campaign centred on British values to rival the pre-war efforts of Germany and Russia. A fascinating niche. Ammar Kalia Set against the magisterial backdrop of the Cairngorms, this new series follows rural midwives who have the lives of mother and child in their hands as they deliver babies hundreds of miles from the nearest hospital. Tonight: a 40-hour labour and a close call on the way to the hospital. AK The tour continues, moving from megacity Tokyo into the scenic landscapes of Kyoto and the troubling history of Hiroshima. Perkins examines the uncertain future of working geishas and the proliferation of government-subsidised speed-dating for the growing population of young singles. AK The last dispatch from the Royal Derby hospital, where young volunteers are trying to ease the lack of care caused by staff shortages, is the most vivid demonstration yet of the series’ core message: spending time with patients prompts intimate and intensely emotional human connections. Jack Seale Dr Martin Ellingham’s career hangs by a thread at the start of a new series for Martin Clunes’ irascible Cornish medic. Which is not altogether surprising, given his phobia of blood and awful bedside manner. Elsewhere, Al accidentally proposes and Mrs Tishell’s date with Donald goes horribly wrong. Ali Catterall The return of the now-cancelled Superman prequel, which managed to stretch out the story of Clark Kent’s ancestors to an impressive degree but which – sadly for its many fans – did not enjoy such a long run itself. As it continues for a final season, Seg-El finds himself on Brainiac’s home planet of Colu. Hannah J Davies The Sessions (Ben Lewin, 2013) 1.05am, Channel 4 Lewin’s thoughtful drama is based on the true story of Mark O’Brien (John Hawkes), a California poet mostly confined by childhood polio to an iron lung. Nearing 40, he decides it is time to lose his virginity, which leads him to sex therapist Cheryl (Helen Hunt). It is well acted, funny and sweetly moving. Paul Howlett Rugby World Cup: Fiji v Uruguay 6.15am, ITV4. First rugby world cup clash for both teams. Carabao Cup football: Milton Keynes Dons v Liverpool 7.45pm, Sky Sports Football. Third-round clash with potential for a giant-killing. Premier League cricket: St Lucia v Guyana 10.30pm, Sky Sports Cricket. Coverage from the Caribbean.