Making plays out of films is a tricky business but Hanif Kureishi has successfully adapted his landmark 1985 movie for the stage with the aid of linking music from Tennant/Lowe of the Pet Shop Boys. The production still pins down the pervasive impact of entrepreneurial Thatcherite values while charting the growth of a gay relationship. But what is fascinating is how deftly Kureishi has heightened the story’s racial and gender politics. We see a young British Pakistani man, Omar, turning a run-down laundrette into a thriving business aided by his chum, Johnny, on whom he dotes. But the muddled fascism of Johnny’s hangers-on is much clearer than in the movie, with one of them spouting toxic anti-immigrant rhetoric and another brandishing a banner proclaiming: “British jobs for British workers.” Tania, the cousin to whom Omar is briefly engaged, also launches a fierce attack on the passivity of her mother’s generation and a culture in which marriages are seen as business mergers. Significantly, her bid for freedom is now supported by her father’s ex-mistress, Rachel, who in this version is no longer a white trophy girlfriend but a victimised woman of colour. The piece retains its 80s ethos while speaking to today’s world. But at the heart of the story is Omar’s longing for Johnny, which is vividly realised: the real eroticism lies less in that love’s consummation than in the pre-sexual banter between Omar Malik and Jonny Fines who capture perfectly the hesitancy of two young men unsure where their passion will lead them. It is also touching to see Gordon Warnecke, the original movie Omar, now skilfully playing his drink-stained socialist dad. Nikolai Foster’s bustling production boasts fine performances from Cathy Tyson as the exploited Rachel, Nicole Jebeli as the defiant Tania, Kammy Darweish as her profit-hungry father and Hareet Deol as Salim who sees selling drugs to white kids as a form of “reverse colonialism”. That line typifies the way an iconic movie has not simply been replicated but sharply reimagined. • At Curve, Leicester, until 5 October. Then touring.