Behind the decorative window mouldings of Robert Storey’s three-bedroom, top-floor Victorian terrace flat in Dalston, east London, is an unequivocally stylish yet unpretentious home, one that showcases his signature modernist tastes. This is no surprise, since Storey – a sought-after spatial designer who works with leading fashion brands – lives and breathes design. Storey was instantly enamoured of the property, despite its neglected interior. He bought it in April 2018, following his father’s death. For him, it was a blank canvas in need of character and a stamp of individuality. “I loved the place immediately,” he says, “and I knew I wanted to renovate it, but not so it felt too design-heavy,” he explains. “My father always wanted me to buy a place and do it up in my own way, and I feel really fortunate that my inheritance allowed me to do that. I see it as his legacy. My home is a lovely memory of him.” Storey reconfigured the layout, demolishing internal walls and adding bespoke elements in a new bathroom and kitchen. He also restored period features in the all-white design scheme, including original pine four-panel doors and replica ornate egg-and-dart ceiling cornicing. “The place hadn’t been touched since the mid-80s and it was a mess,” he says. “There were electric heaters on the magnolia walls, woodchip wallpaper and many of the original features had been ripped out. The double glazing in the sash windows was rotting away, but I loved the old details, so I had them handmade again, and I stripped back the carpets to reveal the floorboards underneath, and also the wooden staircase, which was caked in layers of white gloss.” What stands now is a considered remodel with a sense of modernity that complements and embraces its past, achieved with the vision of Storey’s own architects, and work carried out by builders James Matthew Solutions and carpenter Otis Evans, with whom Storey often collaborates on set-building. “I wanted to retain the feeling of a Victorian house, keeping the beautiful architectural bones of it, but implementing a more modern ‘me’ aesthetic,” he says. Entry into the split-level property is on the first floor, where an abundance of house plants creeps into the open-plan kitchen and living space. On one side, there is recessed ceiling lighting and sleek custom-built wooden units in a dark teal green, with hi-tech heat- and scratch-resistant laminate worktops by Fenix. Clever design tricks, including hidden appliance cupboards and concealed cabinetry inside an old chimney breast, provide storage, but also maximise space. The adjoining living area favours rich fabrics and textiles, quirky furniture, and bold bright colours, such as the modular sofa by Paustian (designed by Erik Rasmussen in 1969), upholstered in a striking blue (Haakon 2 by Raf Simons for Kvadrat), which stands opposite two teak midcentury Finn Juhl “Japan” chairs by France & Søn with lemon yellow cushions. They were a housewarming gift from Storey’s mother. “I like to bring in colour through furniture, it makes it more soulful,” explains Storey. A clear-glass 70s-style coffee table with curved chrome legs by Richard Young for Merrow Associates sits on a vibrant patterned rug from Galerie Jama in Morocco. Storey found it in a house sale in Norfolk. He is also a regular browser of internet antique and auction sites. “I like finding vintage furniture. Everybody can own new stuff, but it’s more interesting when you don’t know where it’s from,” he says. Standouts include a 1950s oval opaline glass chandelier with pendant lights that float like satellites in the open hallway space, found on eBay and originally from an old building in Amsterdam. New purchases include a trio of three-legged 1950s Hans Wegner “Heart” chairs for Fritz Hansen in the dining area and a pastel-pink abstract oil painting by Albert Riera Galceran. It hangs above the kaleidoscopic palette of Dutch designer Dirk Vander Kooij’s “Melting Pot” table, uniquely made from recycled plastics. “I had to buy that table,” says Storey, “it’s a piece of sculpture.” Other design touches are artful and discreet. Appliqué à Volet Pivotant dimmer lights by Charlotte Perriand are strategically stationed along the wall of the bright and airy upper floor where a rooflight punctuates the raised ceiling, bringing in daylight and making the place feel bigger and airier. A concealed wall entrance reveals a handy elevated loft-cum-laundry space that leads to a small guest room with a cast-iron fireplace Storey found on eBay. Next is his bedroom, where a shelf in between the neatly bespoke wooden wardrobes and bed is lined with books and collected mementos, such as pine cones from Cyprus (“I always like to bring something back from my travels to remind me of the place”), and a cubic white ceramic ashtray left behind in the property by previous tenants. “I kept it as I just love the unusual design,” he says. Bare timber beams inside the pitched roof are revealed to soften the space: “That area is usually plasterboarded up in these old Victorian houses, but I opened it all up to bring more warmth into the room. I stayed at a hotel in Lake Garda in Italy that had exposed beams, and it looked so beautiful.” Downstairs on the lower level is housemate and photographer Jeff Hahn’s bedroom, and a dark burgundy-hued bathroom with mirrored wall cupboards and a handmade sink by Lusso Stone, electrified by floor-to-ceiling terrazzo shower tiles by Diespeker & Co. Odd flecks of the marble meticulously match the wall palette, as does the coloured silicone sealant. Detail is everything to Storey. There is a restrained mix of interesting curios and decorative memories everywhere, from imperfect pottery vases to a hexagonal stoneware incense burner by ceramicist Ben Medansky and an oak prototype of Storey’s own Formative floor lamp. This is his first foray into product design for Kalmar, created by his late father, a carpenter and hobbyist. “He wanted to make it for me, and it’s one of my most precious possessions,” says Storey. The disordered lines of an azurite malachite gemstone bought from a crystal shop while on a road trip in Marfa, Texas, also add a spiritual spin. Storey’s emotional connection to where he lives has resulted in a serene space with tactile surfaces and immersive tones. It is designed to be harmonious and provides a calm environment in which Storey can do the odd headstand or downward-facing dog. “I’m obsessed with yoga, and having a studio near me was really important when I was looking. The one I’ve been going to for four years was right at the end of this street, so it turned out to be the perfect place to live.” storeystudio.com