Back in the 1960s Avis launched an audacious advertising campaign that broke the mould. Embracing their second-placed status in the car hire market behind Hertz, the American company told the world: “When you’re only No 2, you try harder. Or else.” That line perfectly encapsulates Katarina Johnson-Thompson’s mindset as she prepares for the World Athletics Championships in Doha, which begin this Friday. The 26-year-old has won World and European Indoor gold medals as well as Commonwealth gold over the past 17 months yet remains the second-best heptathlete in the world, behind the brilliant Belgian Nafi Thiam. But in recent months the Liverpudlian has driven herself harder than ever and she believes she is in the best shape of her life. “I don’t like to say that, obviously, because you have to deliver,” she says, chuckling to herself. “But I have had the best run-in ever in terms of preparation and now I just want to get out there and compete. “As long as I am making progress in each of my events, with my personal bests, I feel I can score those scores to put me in those positions to win a gold medal. And I don’t think I have ever had one where everything comes together at once and that is what I am working towards.” Typically the world championships take place in August in Europe or east Asia. But for the first time they are being held in the Middle East, in temperatures loitering around 38C (100F), and in a country with a questionable human rights record. However, Sebastian Coe, the president of the International Association of Athletics Federations, has defended the decision to go to Qatar, saying it is important athletics heads to new territories in order to grow. “I’ve never known a situation where sport going into a fresh and new type of territory hasn’t actually flicked the dial both socially, culturally and politically in a very positive way,” Lord Coe said. If Great Britain do hit the seven-to-nine medals target set by UK Sport for these championships, it will surely be because a trident of brilliant women athletes – Dina Asher-Smith in the 100m, 200m and 4x100m relay, Laura Muir in the 1500m and Johnson-Thompson – have led the way and the relays have once again come good. If Johnson-Thompson were to succeed, there would surely not be a more popular winner in the GB team, given her tear-soaked disappointments at the 2015 and 2017 worlds. In 2015 in Beijing she was favourite for gold going into the second day, only to foul three times in the long jump. Two years later in London she bombed out in the high jump, dashing any hopes of a medal. In 2016 there was more pain at the Rio Olympics when injury robbed her of a legitimate chance of gold. But there is a growing sense that those disappointments are now firmly behind her after a move to Montpellier in 2017, which has toughened her up mentally and physically. “At the last worlds I was only a summer into my move to France and, while I knew the training was going well, I wasn’t settled in the slightest,” she says. “I also didn’t have any belief in myself because I was still recovering from the 2015 and 2016 seasons, but it seems like a lifetime ago now. I feel I am growing each year as a person. It is coming into a world championships and Olympics next year and I am happy with the place I am in.” Yet Johnson-Thompson knows she faces a formidable six-foot high barrier in her quest for gold in Doha in the form of Thiam, the 25-year-old who is arguably the best athlete across any sport. After all Thiam is not only good enough to have cleared 2.02m in the high jump (putting her second best in the world in 2019) but also to have a 6.86m personal best in the long jump (the ninth best of any woman this year). Her javelin best would put her in the world’s top 50 and she is no slouch in the 100m hurdles, shot put, 200m or 800m either. “She is very strong in a lot of events now,” Johnson-Thompson says. “We have seen her jump 2.02m and throw 59m with the javelin. She is definitely pushing me but I am not sure about the other way around.” With two of Johnson-Thompson’s big rivals for the podium, Carolin Schäfer of Germany and Latvia’s Laura Ikauniece-Admidina, absent through injury it looks a straight shoot-out between Britain and Belgium for gold. Thiam is favourite but there is a question mark over an elbow that was injured earlier this summer and that gives Johnson‑Thompson legitimate hope. Whatever happens in Doha, she is determined to compete with a smile on her face. “It has been a long season but I am coming into shape at the right time,” she says. “I think I will enjoy every second of it.”