Donald Trump was at greater risk of impeachment than at any time in his presidency on Tuesday, after reports that he apparently sought to blackmail a foreign government by withholding military aid unless it helped investigate a political opponent. Even as the president took centre stage at the United Nations in New York to venerate his nationalist ideology, Democrats met behind closed doors on Capitol Hill in Washington to decide whether the time had come to seek his removal from office. Trump ordered White House staff to withhold nearly $400m in aid to Ukraine days before he pressured its president to investigate Joe Biden, the former vice-president and frontrunner for the Democratic nomination in 2020, according to the Washington Post. The scandal appeared to cut through with greater force and clarity than the drawn out saga of his alleged collusion with Russia during the 2016 election. There was a sense of gathering and possibly unstoppable momentum as more Democrats came out in favour of impeachment. “I truly believe the time to begin impeachment proceedings against this president has come,” John Lewis, a hero of the civil rights movement and moral authority in the party, told the House of Representatives. “To delay or to do otherwise would betray the foundation of our democracy.” There was also support from an influential group of seven first-term members of Congress with military or national security backgrounds, who said that “if true”, the president’s actions would “represent an impeachable offense”. Article 1 of the United States constitution gives the House of Representatives the sole power to initiate impeachment and the Senate the sole power to try impeachments of the president. A president can be impeached if they are judged to have committed "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors" – although the constitution does not specify what “high crimes and misdemeanors” are. The process starts with the House of Representatives passing articles of impeachment. A simple majority of members need to vote in favour of impeachment for it to pass to the next stage. With a full house, that requires 218 of the 435 representatives to vote. Democrats currently control the house, with 235 representatives. The chief justice of the United States then presides over the proceedings in the Senate, where the president is tried, with senators acting as the jury. For the president to be found guilty two-thirds of senators must vote against them. Republicans currently control the Senate, with 53 of the 100 senators. Three presidents have previously been impeached, Bill Clinton in 1998, and Andrew Johnson in 1868, though neither were removed from office. Richard Nixon was also impeached, but resigned in 1974 before there was a formal vote. Martin Belam Dick Durbin, the second-ranking Democrat in the Senate, who forced the White House to eventually release the aid to Ukraine, told reporters the time to act is now. Connecticut senators Richard Blumenthal and Chris Murphy backed impeachment. Media reports said Biden himself would announce his support for impeaching Trump if the White House does not cooperate with Congress’s whistleblower investigation. After months of procrastination among Democratic leaders, some believe that impeachment is now inevitable, setting the stage for a vicious partisan fight ahead of the 2020 election. Geoff Garin, a pollster for House Democrats, tweeted on Monday night: “The horse is out of the barn. Saddle up.” All eyes were on Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, who has repeatedly said an impeachment inquiry should be bipartisan and supported by the American people. Pelosi still has support from neither Republicans nor a majority of the people. She was due to hold meetings with key committee chairs. It was reported that she would then announce a formal impeachment inquiry. I truly believe the time to begin impeachment proceedings against this president has come Trump scorned the idea of impeachment as it overshadowed his typically bellicose “America first” UN address. He told reporters: “I think it’s ridiculous. It’s a witch hunt. I’m leading in the polls. They have no idea how they stop me, the only way they can try is through impeachment … It’s nonsense, and when you see the call, when you see the readout of the call, which I assume you’ll see at some point, you’ll understand. That call was perfect.” He later said that he would release the “fully declassified and unredacted transcript” of the call on Wednesday. Impeachment has only been enforced against two previous presidents, most recently Bill Clinton. Like Clinton, Trump would almost certainly not be convicted by the Senate, which is controlled by his party, and so would remain in power. Richard Nixon resigned before impeachment could be carried out. In the 1860s, Andrew Johnson survived a Senate trial. The Ukraine scandal came to light last week when an intelligence community whistleblower filed a report after becoming alarmed at Trump’s behaviour. The White House is refusing to release the substance of the complaint. According to the Post, Trump ordered acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney to suspend a near $400m payment “at least a week” before a 25 July call with Volodymyr Zelenskiy in which Trump reportedly asked the Ukrainian leader to investigate Biden and his son, Hunter, who was once on the board of a Ukrainian gas company. On 25 July the US president, Donald Trump, called Ukraine's president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. During the course of the call he reportedly asked the Ukrainian leader eight times to investigate former vice-president Joe Biden and Biden’s son Hunter for corruption. It is additionally reported that Trump ordered his staff to withhold nearly $400m in aid to Ukraine days before the call took place. Biden is one of the frontrunners to win the Democratic nomination and take on Trump in the 2020 presidential election. Trump confirmed he discussed the Bidens with Zelenskiy, and accused the pair – without offering any evidence – of corruption. A US intelligence community whistleblower filed a report after becoming alarmed at Trump’s behaviour in the matter. The White House is refusing to release the substance of the whistleblower complaint, setting up a confrontation with Congress over the release of information. Complaints of this nature are usually reported to Congress within seven days. Trump’s personal lawyer, former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani, has admitted asking the Ukrainians to investigate the Bidens. It is illegal for a political campaign to accept a “thing of value” from a foreign government. Democrats say an investigation into a political opponent – for which Trump appears to have been pushing – would amount to a thing of value. The company was investigated for corruption. As vice-president, Biden was part of successful international efforts to have Ukraine’s chief prosecutor dismissed. There is no evidence of corruption in the Ukraine by either Joe or Hunter Biden. On Tuesday, Trump confirmed that he withheld military aid – but claimed he did so over concerns the US was contributing more than its fair share. “I want other countries to put up money,” he told reporters. “I think it’s unfair that we put up the money. Then people called me and said, ‘Oh let it go,’ and I let it go. “Those funds were paid. They were fully paid but my complaint has always been – and I’ll withhold again and I’ll continue to withhold until such time as Europe and other nations contribute to Ukraine, because they’re not doing it.” Joe Biden and his son are corrupt, but the fake news doesn’t want to report it because they’re Democrats A day earlier, he attempted to turn the tables and say the true corruption lies with Biden and the media. “Joe Biden and his son are corrupt, but the fake news doesn’t want to report it because they’re Democrats,” Trump said. “If a Republican ever did what Joe Biden did, if a Republican ever said what Joe Biden said, they’d be getting the electric chair by right. Look at the double standards … You’ve got a lot of crooked journalists. You’re crooked as hell.” He also insisted that, in his call with the Ukrainians, “I put no pressure on them whatsoever,” and “I did not make a statement that you have to do this or I won’t give you aid”. With pressure building, a handful of Republicans in the Senate have indicated they want the president to be more transparent. But most congressional Republicans have either defended the president or remained silent. On Tuesday, the Democratic committee chairs of three House committees demanded the White House turn over all documents related to “efforts to influence a foreign country to interfere with our upcoming election”. In a letter to White House counsel Pat Cipollone, Adam Schiff, head of the intelligence committee, Elijah Cummings, head of the oversight committee, and Eliot Engel, head of the foreign affairs committee, wrote: “If the recent reports are accurate, it means the President raised with a foreign leader pursuing investigations related to a political opponent in an upcoming US election. That is the very definition of corrupt abuse of power. “The corruption exists whether or not the President mentioned or threatened – explicitly or implicitly – that a lack of cooperation could result in the president withholding US security assistance or other forms of assistance.” Trump is due to meet Zelenskiy at the UN on Wednesday. The administration official who blocked congressional review of the whistleblower document, acting director of national intelligence Joseph Maguire, is due testify publicly before the House intelligence committee on Thursday.