A hastily arranged trip to Town Moor added £56,710 to John Gosden’s prize money total for the season here -yesterday as his outstanding stayer Stradivarius, sent off favourite at 1-9 in the absence of serious opposition, took the Doncaster Cup for the first time. Gosden is now nearly £450,000 clear of Aidan O’Brien in the trainers’ title race and will take another step towards retaining the crown if -Logician, the hot favourite, takes the St Leger here this afternoon. Stradavarius’s 10th win in a row was achieved by what is, by his standards, the unusually wide margin of one-and-three-quarter lengths, victory having been all but assured when Dee Ex Bee, his closest pursuer several times this season, was scratched a couple of hours before the race. Stradivarius is the first horse to win the Cup races at Royal Ascot, Goodwood and -Doncaster in the same season since Double -Trigger in 1995, having opened his campaign with a win in the Yorkshire Cup for good measure. “I’d no intention of coming here,” Gosden said, “and then suddenly he’s rearing up and bouncing about [at home] and he loves to shout and play, and I thought we’d better put him in the Doncaster Cup. “It hadn’t been the plan but if you wait for Champions Day [at Ascot in October] and it’s heavy, he won’t be running there. Winning the three Cups at Goodwood, Ascot and here, Le Moss did it [in 1979 and 1980] and it puts him in that sort of department, so what a great horse.” Stradivarius has now won all five of the British Champions Series races in the long distance category this year and he is odds-on to win the seventh and final event, the Long Distance Cup on Champions Day. He is not qualified for the sixth race in the series, Saturday’s St Leger, but his stable companion Logician will start an even-money chance for the final Classic of the season, despite concerns – for his trainer, at least – that an extended 14-furlongs takes him into unknown territory. “I think the big question always with the Leger is whether he will get the trip,” Gosden said. “He’s by -Frankel, who never went beyond a mile-and-a-quarter, out of a Daylami mare. Daylami was a good miler though he did go up to a mile-and-a-half. “From our point of view, it’s that last 185 yards that often catches them out, so I’d be confident up to the mile and six and after that, you’re in no man’s land.” Crystal Ocean, whose career has been ended by a leg injury, will not be remembered as one of the greats but anyone who cares about horse racing should pray every night for more horses like him, excellent, top-class animals who are not quite the best around. If you’re not persuaded, let’s consider how much less interesting recent Flat racing in Britain would have been without him. We’d have lost a thrilling duel for this year’s King George and would instead have watched Enable come home two lengths ahead of Waldgeist, possibly the most “meh” result of all time. We’d also have lost a thrilling duel in last year’s King George, for which the 1-2-3 would become: Poet’s Word, Coronet, Salouen. Thanks to Crystal Ocean, last month’s Juddmonte International was also a hugely exciting battle to the wire. He lent a veteran’s grandeur to proceedings and helped prove that his conqueror, Japan, is as good as many of us hoped. He sent Cracksman off into retirement on a tremendous high simply by trailing six lengths after him in last year’s Champion Stakes. Every Red Rum looks better with a Crisp in the race and Crystal Ocean performed that vital function as well and as often as any horse I can think of. He played his part and, while he rarely got top billing, you always need a good Horatio, or else Hamlet spends far too much time talking to himself. CC Chester 1.50 Cognac 2.25 Powertrain 3.00 Trinity Lake 3.30 Sir Maximilian 4.05 Mayne 4.40 Hereby 5.15 Salam Zayed (nb)Doncaster 2.10 Servalan 2.40 Saroog 3.10 Stradivarius 3.45 Alligator Alley 4.20 Visinari 4.55 Talap 5.30 Citron Major 6.00 BankseaSandown 2.20 Spreadsheet 2.50 Rewaayat 3.20 Miss Yoda 3.55 Casanova 4.30 Tukhoom 5.05 Gleeful 5.35 SkymanSalisbury 4.35 Red Missile 5.10 Royal Ambition 5.40 Love Powerful 6.10 Grisons (nap) 6.40 King's Advice 7.10 Tonyx