Cristiano Ronaldo has issued Juventus with a six-man list of transfer targets, according to the Mirror, seemingly unaware the main reason Juventus won’t be able to buy those players is because they pay him too much money. At £26m a season Ronaldo earns around five times more than the next best-paid player at the club, but that hasn’t stopped him slapping a piece of paper on Massimiliano Allegri’s desk, scrawled with the names of Real Madrid’s Raphaël Varane and Isco, Benfica’s João Félix, Fiorentina’s Federico Chiesa, Lyon’s Tanguy Ndombélé and Roma’s Kostas Manolas. Marko Grujic, Jürgen Klopp’s first signing at Liverpool, cost only £5.1m in January 2016 and has since failed to break into the first team. A couple of unconvincing loan spells and 20 appearances for Hertha Berlin this season later and Liverpool are demanding £40m from Atlético Madrid for the 23-year-old. Makes perfect sense! In another bizarre story concerning Diego Simeone’s side, Manchester United have been linked with the goalkeeper Jan Oblak, who signed a new Atlético contract only last week, reportedly with an £87m release clause. The Mill can’t see how Ole Gunnar Solskjær is going to convince the best goalkeeper in the world to leave Madrid for the north of England, especially if there is no Champions League football at Old Trafford next season, but we’re just here to tell you the hearsay. Unai Emery has taken one look at Arsenal’s squad and decided what they desperately need is not a replacement for Shkodran Mustafi but a Brazilian 17-year-old winger. Gabriel Martinelli, currently playing in the fourth tier in Brazil at Ituano, is being flaunted around Europe by his Mr 15% and it appears the Gunners have bitten, in the hope Martinelli can become the new Denílson or André Santos at the Emirates. Stoke think Jack Butland is still worth £30m and remarkably, Crystal Palace and Bournemouth are not yet put off. The Mail is reporting Norwich will take a leaf out of Cardiff’s book last summer and spend around only £20m in the close season, should their promotion to the Premier League be confirmed. Their head of recruitment, Kieran Scott, believes the squad is mostly good enough to compete in the top tier, with much of the summer set to be spent on securing new contracts for players such as Max Aarons and Onel Hernández. Elsewhere Wolves are hoping to beat Arsenal and West Ham to the signing of Hoffenheim’s Kerem Demirbay with a £22m offer and Everton are keen on Chelsea’s Tammy Abraham, currently on loan at Aston Villa, but will have to wait to see the extent of the London club’s transfer embargo before making a move.