Leicester needed to win to confirm their top-flight status after their first flirtation with relegation, but safety is at least another week away after they blew a second-half lead with the wind at their backs as Bristol recorded their first victory here in the Premiership era. Such was Newcastle’s plight at the bottom that there was not the sense of nervousness among the crowd there had been during the last Premiership match here against Exeter, but Leicester need two points from their final two matches to put themselves out of the Falcons’ reach. Leicester are at Harlequins next weekend when Newcastle visit Gloucester. The battle for the drop looks all but over with the Falcons needing at least one bonus point victory in their final two matches, but a third successive home league defeat for the Tigers means survival will be greeted its relief rather than rapture. It was another unexceptional performance by Leicester. A club used to parading in designer houses now frequents Marks & Spencer, looking back rather than forward. It was all set up for them here when they turned round to use the strong wind with the scores tied, but they were again undone by their defence, which is the worst in the Premiership. There were a few touches from George Ford and Matt Toomua, Ellis Genge tried to get the crowd going with a few rumbles and Jonny May had his dancing shoes on, but it was a disjointed performance overall. The desire was there, but not the composure or, often enough at least, the skill while Bristol waited for their moment. Leicester did not fall behind until six minutes from time. George Ford exchanged two penalties with Callum Sheedy in the first half before slick hands from May and Guy Thompson gave Jordan Olowofela space on the left. It had been four years since Leicester last kept their try line intact in a Premiership match. Bristol lacked menace, apart from a move that saw Nick Haining over-elaborate with a pass to Alapati Leiua and waste an overlap, but five minutes from the interval, Leiua’s inside run ruffled the defence and Sheedy evaded three tacklers after receiving the ball on the home 22. Two Ford penalties gave Leicester a six-point lead, but Bristol scored their second try when Matt Toomua was in the sin-bin for killing the ball. Tom Pincus somehow managed to remain out of touch on the right and when Bristol quickly moved the ball left, Dan Thomas scored with three men outside him. It was not an afternoon for goal-kicking but Thomas, in his jubilation, did not remember to narrow the angle for the conversion and Sheedy pulled it from the left to leave Bristol a point behind. The Bears play a high-risk game and after two moves broke down, they conceded a scrum penalty that Ford converted from 40 metres. Leicester could not hold on. When Ford was forced to concede a scrum five metres out, Bristol drove a lineout and then another after a penalty. At the back of the maul was Harry Thacker, the hooker who left Leicester last summer and scored two tries against them in December. He added a third and while the Tigers were left thinking about survival, Bristol put themselves in contention for a place in the Champions Cup.