They still look far from rock solid, but Exeter mark time before the home semi-final they have already secured with another win. It will be lost on no one, though, that a Harlequins team, who looked from the start as if the recent troubles of their own remain profound, were able to grow into the game. This may be their fifth defeat in a row, but had they inflicted on Exeter a second consecutive defeat at home it would have been perfectly deserved. As it is, the bonus point keeps Quins well in the hunt for the top four. Joe Marler and his mates gave Exeter a good working-over at scrum time, coaxing from that set piece nearly half the 15 penalties they were awarded. On the back of it, they were just a missed conversion and/or penalty away from something more than the solitary bonus point they took. Rob Baxter, Exeter’s coach, did not mince his words. He knows his players know that the aim for the regular season has long ago been achieved, but he does not want their current drift to set in, such that they cannot rouse themselves come the big day at the end of May. “I don’t mind telling you,” he said, “I’ve just given it to the forwards in the changing room. I said, it feels like you’ve been pushed around a bit as a pack of forwards. At this stage of the season we’ve won the big prize, and it’s created this interesting kind of emotion vacuum. I’ve challenged them to snap out of it. I said, if the focus of your anger needs to be me, I don’t mind, I’ll give it to you. That’s not good enough.” Maybe Baxter had words for his boys at the start, too, because they certainly started as if they meant business. Defeat at home rarely goes down well here, a spur to prick the sides. After last round’s defeat here to Wasps, Exeter burst into the game as if they had more than a niggle to work through their system. The first purge was administered after only 85 seconds. Dave Ewers had already loosened Quins bones with one meaty carry, when he ran clean through their midfield to find Ollie Devoto on his shoulder. After 10 minutes the Chiefs had their second, a sustained exhibition of decision-making and precision, working through 27 phases, which culminated in Nic White’s dart from the base of a ruck, this one from one metre out, where the first had started 60 out. Sandy Park settled down for a bit more of what they are used to after that rude interruption to it last round. Quins looked at that point as far removed from even a losing bonus point as could be imagined, but they played their way in. Alex Dombrandt’s boot brushed the touchline, then Mike Brown dummied and stepped his way to within a foot of the try, only for Joe Simmonds to intercept off the next phase. But one area Quins were enjoying the upper hand was on that penalty count, particularly at the scrum. On the stroke of half-time, Joe Marler, Kyle Sinckler et al squeezed a third penalty from that set piece, and Marcus Smith pulled the visitors back to 12-3 at the break. Devoto did not make it out for the second half, suffering from a dead leg, but no matter. His replacement, Sam Hill, broke from deep, White scampered to within a metre, and Harry Williams, suffering so much at the set piece, completed the job from close range. But those scrum issues just would not go away, soon becoming critical. On the hour, at the seventh such penalty, Ben Moon was sent to the bin. Quins pummelled into the heart of Exeter’s midfield, and Sam Hidalgo-Clyne grounded against the base of the post. Five minutes later, they had their second, Charlie Walker sent over on the right. Smith had the chance then to level, but he pushed the conversion wide. With less than five minutes to go, he had another opportunity, this one to win. Ollie Atkins slid up a maul to concede that 15th penalty, but from a good 40 metres on the angle, Smith pushed that kick too. Exeter were able to play out the last three minutes in comfort. But, if Quins were to find themselves here again in a month, it will not be in fear.