The One Nation Australian senate candidate Steve Dickson has resigned after footage emerged of him groping dancers and making disparaging comments about a woman in a Washington DC strip club. Dickson said he was “deeply remorseful for my disrespectful comments towards women” and his wife was standing by him. “I found the footage difficult to watch as my words and actions under intoxication and in that environment, are not a true reflection of myself,” he said in a statement. Dickson had been Queensland state president of the anti-Muslim One Nation Party and a Senate candidate in elections on 18 May. He was also caught saying on the footage recorded by al-Jazeera during an undercover investigation that “I’ve done more Asian than I know what to do with” and that strip clubs were better in the Philippines because women danced on top of the bars and “then take everything off”. Speaking at an early morning media conference, the One Nation party leader Pauline Hanson said the footage “cannot be ignored or condoned” and she had accepted Dickson’s offer to resign. She said she would not tolerate her children behaving that way towards women, and would not condone her candidate’s “dealing with women in this fashion” either. “Steve’s language and behaviour was unacceptable and does not meet my expectations nor the greater public’s expectation of a person who is standing for public office,” Hanson said. Dickson, who is married with two adult sons, is “a family man”, she said, and “deeply upset about this”. .@PaulineHansonOZ says she's 'deeply upset' over One Nation candidate Steve Dickson's strip club visit and has accepted his resignation. #auspol pic.twitter.com/5DSFP0hJ3U Dickson was second on One Nation’s Senate ticket in Queensland, behind Malcolm Roberts, and will remain on the ballot papers now that nominations have closed and the papers have been printed. The recording was captured by an undercover journalist and was leaked to Nine’s A Current Affair, which broadcast the footage on Monday night. Last month al-Jazeera released footage from a meeting between Dickson, Hanson’s chief of staff, James Ashby, and the National Rifle Association in Washington in September as part of an investigation into One Nation’s attempts to secure donations from the NRA. At a press conference held after the investigation was broadcast, Ashby said the two men had been “on the sauce” at the time, while Dickson said “we were three men talking together and having scotches for about three or four hours”. Hanson accused al-Jazeera of sitting on the footage until just before the election then releasing it to the Nine network. Al-Jazeera said in a statement overnight it had not run the strip club footage in its report and condemned the “unauthorised use of its material”. Australian Associated Press contributed to this report