While few, if any Fulham players have covered themselves in anything approaching glory during their disastrous return to the Premier League, Ryan Sessegnon is one of several who are unlikely to be with the club when they return begin their Championship campaign next season. Assorted tabloids are reporting the left-sided 18-year-old is likely to be in big demand this summer, with Manchester United, Paris Saint-Germain and Tottenham all believed to be interested in luring him away from Craven Cottage. It is the club from the new White Hart Lane who are believed to have the whip-hand and with just one year left on his contract, Sessegnon would almost certainly be available for considerably less than the £50m he was valued at a year ago. Bild say Liverpool have enquired about the availability of Bayer Leverkusen winger Julian Brandt, but will have to duke it out with Juventus and Real Madrid to secure the 22-year-old’s services. The German newspaper claims the release clause on Brandt’s contract will drop to around £21m this summer; something of a steal for a player who would probably be quite cheap at twice the price. On loan at Monaco since January, Leicester’s 30-year-old midfielder, Adrien Silva, will make his move permanent come season’s end, according to the good people at France Football. Arsenal and Manchester United are prepared to go toe-to-toe in a battle to win the heart, mind and urgently required defensive talents of Barcelona central defender Samuel Umtiti. An unused substitute spectating from the bench as his side ripped Manchester United a new one at the Camp Nou last night, the 25-year-old Frenchman is believed to have his eye on a move to Juventus, whose Champions League exit at the hands of scintillating, irrepressible Ajax suggests they too are in dire need of a man of his talents. Wherever Umtiti ends up going, his departure will free up a dressing room peg for Ajax star Matthijs De Ligt at Barça. Meanwhile in Germany, Borussia Dortmund midfielder Julian Weigl is being courted by Manchester City and PSG. Resigned to losing Eden Hazard to Real Madrid this summer, Chelsea have identified in-demand Lille winger Nicolas Pépé as a potential replacement for their diminutive Belgian superstar, but will have to get their pesky transfer ban overturned and come up with the thick end of £70m to have any chance of landing their man. Further north, the future of Rafael Benítez as Newcastle manager remains up in the air, but the Star say he has presented his employer Mike Ashley with a summer shopping list bearing the names of Bournemouth midfield duo Ryan Fraser and David Brooks, as well as that of break-out Burnley star Dwight McNeil. If true, the Rumour Mill applauds his optimism. Having been confined to the periphery of first-team proceedings with a recurring groin injury since arriving on loan at Arsenal in January, Barcelona midfielder Denis Suárez could be headed for pastures new and Neapolitan this summer, according to his agent. Rather than take up their £20m option on Suárez, Arsenal may take a punt on PSG’s Christopher Nkunku instead. And finally, Wolves like the cut of teenage Liverpool winger Rafael Camacho‘s jib and may try to make him a card-carrying member of their Portuguese enclave ahead of next season.