Raheem Sterling has been voted the 2019 Footballer of the Year by the Football Writers’ Association, less than a day after his peers voted him the PFA young player of the year. The Manchester City and England forward topped the poll of the 400-strong FWA membership as a clear winner, with 62% of the votes. He was more than 100 ahead of Liverpool’s Virgil van Dijk. Sterling’s teammate Sergio Agüero was in third place. Manchester City’s England forward Nikita Parris won the FWA Women’s Footballer of the Year award by the narrowest of margins from the Arsenal and Netherlands striker Vivianne Miedema. Sterling and Parris will be presented with their trophies on Thursday 9 May. Other players to receive votes from FWA members were Harry Kane (Spurs), Eden Hazard (Chelsea), Alexandre Lacazette (Arsenal), Bernardo Silva and David Silva (Manchester City). As well as being a key man in Pep Guardiola’s side as they battle with Liverpool for the Premier League title, Sterling has also received praise for the stance he has taken against racism, having himself been subjected to verbal abuse. Sterling has scored 29 goals for club and country this season, including a hat-trick for England in the opening Euro 2020 qualifier against the Czech Republic, while also helping Gareth Southgate’s squad reach this summer’s Nations League finals in Portugal. The newly-elected FWA chair, Carrie Brown, said: “Raheem Sterling is a player of style and a man of substance. More than 70 years ago Charles Buchan, one of the founding fathers of the Football Writers’ Association, suggested there be an award presented to the player who by ‘precept and example’ is considered the footballer of the year. Raheem Sterling is an exemplar of the talent and values our founding fathers sought to reward when they established the FWA in 1947.”. To have been voted the 2019 Footballer of the Year by our members, and with such an overwhelming majority, clearly acknowledges the contribution from a player over one season. “But it also recognises the huge impact of Raheem’s courage to challenge preconceptions and fight racism, which will leave a legacy not just for future generations in football but society as a whole. Eyes have been opened, voices found, we are listening and will be at the forefront of the continued drive for equality. “On the pitch, Raheem has evolved into one of the most dangerous forwards in the world. A player long admired for his tactical intelligence, link-up play and quick feet has now added a devastating finish to his game. “The Manchester City forward’s Champions League opener against Tottenham at the Etihad Stadium drew comparisons with Lionel Messi’s goal against Manchester United. Are we approaching a time where Barcelona’s maestro will be forced to cast a watchful glance over his dropped shoulder at the rising star of Sterling?” Brown added on the FWA website: “Raheem didn’t set out to be a leader but he is setting examples in society and in the game which the world is following with interest. I look forward to presenting him with the Sir Stanley Matthews Trophy on 9 May 9.” PA