Billy McNeill, the first British player to lift the European Cup as captain of the Celtic side that won the trophy in 1967, has died aged 79. McNeill’s association with Celtic spanned more than 60 years and he managed the club in two spells. He played 486 times for the club from 1957 to 1975 as a defender, most famously for Jock Stein’s “Lisbon Lions” when they defeated Internazionale 2-1 in the final of the European Cup. He then managed the side from 1978 to 1983 and 1987 to 1991. As player and manager he won 31 trophies with Celtic. McNeill also played 29 times for Scotland. Later he managed Clyde, Aberdeen, Manchester City and Hibernian. In a statement released by Celtic his family announced: “It is with great sadness that we announce the death of our father Billy McNeill. He passed away late last night (Monday 22 April) surrounded by his family and loved ones. He suffered from dementia for a number of years and fought bravely to the end, showing the strength and fortitude he always has done throughout his life. “We would also like to note our love and appreciation to our mother, Liz, for the care, devotion and love she gave to our father throughout his illness. No one could have done any more. Whilst this is a very sad time for all the family and we know our privacy will be respected, our father always made time for the supporters so please tell his stories, sing his songs and help us celebrate his life.” As captain of Stein’s all-conquering Celtic side, McNeill won nine league titles in a row, seven Scottish Cups and six League Cups. He retired in 1975 after winning his final trophy, the Scottish Cup, and retained a strong association with the club throughout the rest of his life, becoming an ambassador in 2009. Six years later a statue of McNeill holding aloft the European Cup was erected outside Celtic Park. Rest in peace, Cesar. You’ll Never Walk Alone. pic.twitter.com/FLCdURfuox Celtic’s chief executive Peter Lawwell paid tribute, saying: “This is the saddest of days for the Celtic family, and also for the wider football world. We mourn Billy McNeill’s passing and we send our thoughts and prayers to his family and friends, while we also give thanks for Billy’s life and the incredible joy he brought to so many people as a Celtic player, a Celtic manager and a great Celtic man.” Current Hoops boss Neil Lennon added: “This is such sad news and I want to send thoughts and prayers to Liz and all the family from myself and all the backroom staff here at the club. When you think of Celtic and our incredible history, Billy McNeill is always one of the first names that comes to mind. “He was our greatest ever captain and one of our greatest ever players, and along with his team-mates, achieved historic things for Celtic in the 1960s and 70s. I love Billy’s statue, which is the first thing you see whenever you walk up The Celtic Way. It’s the perfect image of him, holding aloft the European Cup, and it will remind future generations of supporters of what a great Celtic man he was.”