Amir Khan may have been looking for a way out during Saturday night’s frightful beating at the hands of Terence Crawford. With one wayward left hand, Crawford gave it to him. Khan, who was floored in the opening round and systematically broken down over the next four, absorbed a punch well below the beltline early in the sixth round. The punch was ruled an accidental blow by referee David Fields and Khan would have been given five minutes to recover, but the Bolton fighter’s corner instead informed the referee after about 40 seconds that he wouldn’t be able to continue, sparing him the gruesome denouement that appeared more inevitable with each passing minute. Thus Crawford retained his WBO welterweight title by technical knockout at the 0:47 mark of round six, an announcement that prompted a downpour of jeers from the crowd of 14,091 at Madison Square Garden. The unbeaten American led by scores of 50-44, 49-45 and 49-45 on the three official scorecards. It was Nebraskan’s second defense of the title he captured from Jeff Horn last year following an exhaustive cleaning-out of the 140lbs division, where he unified all four major belts. “I could tell I was breaking him down,” Crawford said. “It was just a matter of time. I just took my time. I was disappointed the corner stopped the fight in that manner, but Virgil [Hunter] is a great coach, and he was looking out for his fighter. I know he didn’t want to go out like that.” It was an unsatisfying ending to a fight that proved a mismatch from the opening frame when Crawford, after two minutes of deliberate calculation, detonated a counter right on Khan’s jaw that sent him clattering to the deck. The challenger beat the count but was nearly put down a second time in the final seconds before he was saved by the bell. “We made sure this whole camp that we was going to start fast,” Crawford said. “We made it a point because Khan’s a faster starter. We didn’t want to give him no confidence out the door.” Crawford continued to turn the screw over the next two rounds, alternating orthodox to southpaw stances flawlessly and picking Khan apart with pinpoint accuracy, having timed his opponent to perfection. Then came the fourth when Crawford landed a left hook and a counter right to back Khan up early and then commenced stalking the challenger around the ring, pounding away which vicious shots to the body. The end came less than a minute into the sixth round after Crawford’s left hand landed low. “I seen Amir Khan’s face and he was shaking his head and I was getting disappointed the whole because I knew that he was looking for a way out,” Crawford said. “Not the way that I would have liked to finish the fight. But Virgil is in his corner for a reason and that’s to look out for his fighter. He felt that his fighter didn’t want to fight anymore so he stopped the fight.” More to follow.