“I voted out. Out means out and I’d do it again,” said the old man, as he harrumphed off up Kirkgate on his mobility scooter. Wakefield voted 66% to 34% in favour of leave, so here was the perfect vox pop. Bank it, let it stand for northern working-class leavedom and head back south? But what of the other voices I heard in the windswept West Yorkshire market precinct outside the cathedral? Fed-upness with all politics, indignation at Westminster chaos, resentment at three wasted years of empty argy-bargy. A few people said they wouldn’t vote again in another referendum, they were just too disillusioned. “Bring back Guy Fawkes!” one man joked. Plenty of well-justified grudge; but there were plenty of switchers too. Resentful, not ode-to-joy converts, but weary givers-in to the realities, trade-offs and hard choices that were never revealed during the referendum. Janine worried about her mother and sister working in Tenerife who fear Brexit will be bad for them: “I voted on immigration, but they never said it would harm business. I see its effect already round here and I’d vote against Brexit now.” We were standing outside the shell of a shutdown department store when Jemma stopped to talk. She voted leave for the NHS £350m, “but where’s our market gone? Look, it’s all empty. My mum’s really worried, working in an import-export business. [There are] loads of reasons I voted leave, but I wouldn’t now.” A middle-aged man joined in: “I voted leave. I hate how the EU tells us how to live our lives. But you’ll see how prices go up if trade’s blocked. They lied, all of them.” He’s “fed up to the back teeth with the bloody lot, but we’ve got to stay or we’ll pay for it”. You can cherrypick your vox pops to suit, but Mary Creagh, the local Labour MP, and the local People’s Vote campaigners, say they’ve found a marked change in the past two months. And this isn’t just wishful thinking from remainers. YouGov this month polled 5,000 Labour heartland voters in the north-east, north-west, Midlands, Yorkshire and Humberside. Did these Labour voters back “a new public vote on whether Britain should leave on the deal negotiated or stay in the EU”? Three-quarters supported the idea, and 43% said that if Labour backed a vote they would feel greater affinity for the party. Only 8% said it would make them feel less keen on Labour; only 11% backed Theresa May’s Brexit deal. Labour never was the party of Brexit and it’s become even less so now. Don’t mythologise “northern working-class Labour man” when Brexit is overwhelmingly a Tory disease. Creagh is one of a group of northern Labour MPs hitting back at a crude stereotype “that we are surrounded by shouty people who all voted for Brexit; whose entire lives are dominated by anger that the ‘elites’ are betraying them”. But “the London-based metropolitan media has declared it so. The north is Brexitland.” Together with three other MPs, Creagh has written a thundering article in the Northern Echo and the Yorkshire Post denouncing this patronising nonsense, denying the southern caricature that “we northern Labour MPs live in constant fear of losing our seats” and “unless we repeat that mantra that leave means leave … we are all heading for the political scrapyard”. Nigel Farage says his Brexit party will be rampaging through Labour’s northern heartlands, but he may find less of a welcome from Labour’s voters than he reckons. His damp squib of a Jarrow march might be a warning. As Creagh warns, anybody looking for “angry men who warn a vote means riots on the streets” doesn’t need to look to the north. They exist in the remain lands of Brighton, Cambridge or London, too. Labour supporters voted 2:1 for remain. Brexit was swung by the ageing Tory vote in the shires. Labour’s national executive committee today draws up its manifesto for the European elections: it’s a watershed moment, a make-or-break springboard or rack on which Labour will be judged for years to come. Members and voters need to hear an unequivocal, resounding pledge that any Brexit deal will be put to a confirmatory vote. Some will pretend the risk to northern seats means they must go on “respecting” a three-year-old vote, despite all polls for over a year showing a sizeable swing to remain, which is at least eight percentage points ahead now. Of 203 Labour MPs signing a letter to the NEC calling for a confirmatory ballot, 110 are from majority leave seats and they are not kamikaze pilots: they know their seats and they know where their Labour voters stand. They defy the Brexiteer trope that another vote “betrays” democracy: it’s the Brexiteers themselves who dare not test “the will of the people”. The NEC will be finely balanced: Tom Watson and Momentum founder Jon Lansman for; Unite’s Len McCluskey and his circle embedded around Jeremy Corbyn, strongly against. Corbyn’s thinking is reflected in Rebecca Long-Bailey’s dismally robotic repetition that Labour will only back a vote on “any bad Tory Brexit” – defying most of the party who passionately think any Brexit is a bad Brexit. Alarm shot through the party at her claim that negotiations with Theresa May were going swimmingly, as her slippery wording wriggled out of the confirmatory vote that Labour MPs were whipped to vote for in parliament. Labour and Farage’s Brexit party are level pegging in the European election polls – a shocking fact that should send a thousand volts through the NEC. Only Labour can beat off this wave of nationalist, anti-migrant, exploitative poison dragging the country rightwards. This will be a black-and-white confrontation between all Labour stands for and all Farage threatens. There is no leeway here for one foot in and one foot out of the Brexit camp. As one shadow cabinet member said: “You can’t be a little bit Faragist.” There will soon be a new Farage-inflected prime minister, probably Boris Johnson, from whom most Tory moderates will have fled. Surely this is the politics Corbyn was made for, the right man never to bend to electoral necessity, let alone bogus notions of electability. Chosen as leader for non-equivocating, his Brexit fumbling leaves his supporters profoundly disappointed. Why doesn’t he fight for a vote? If there is a vote, will he at last put his mighty rallying powers to the pro-remain cause? This fight against the Brexiteers is an existential struggle for the left’s core beliefs, for the spirit of internationalism, for cooperation on the climate crisis, for binding democrats together against a hostile world, welcoming diversity and difference. On the other side beckons a nasty little-England dictatorship – the wild free-market world of Farage allies Steve Bannon and Donald Trump. Labour needs to step back from petty calculation and defunct anti-EU ideology to focus on the politics. Unless the NEC takes a stand for a final-say vote, Labour risks shedding an avalanche of votes, north and south. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist