Shoppers of all ages pile on to escalators below a cheery neon sign reading “Hello Brum”. They later head for tills where the lines are long enough to require a member of staff with a sign reading “the queue starts here”. This is Primark’s new store in Birmingham, where it is possible to dine in at least five restaurants, get your hair restyled and your nails painted, or pose for a selfie beneath signs telling you what’s “trending now” on social media. At Debenhams, just around the corner in the Bullring shopping centre, it is a different story. Like Primark, it sells clothing for women, men and children, as well as beauty products and homewares. But there are few shoppers on its womenswear floor, which is dismally dull. It is hardly surprising that no one is queuing for the department store’s in-house fashion brands, some of which are linked to designers that few people under 40 will remember from the catwalk, and others that seem to have had a taste bypass. After a bitter battle for control with Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct group, Debenhams and its 25,000 UK staff are now in the hands of their lenders, including the US hedge funds Silver Point and Golden Tree, as well as Barclays and Bank of Ireland. Their first step will be to downsize the chain via an insolvency process known as a company voluntary arrangement (CVA), which will enable Debenhams to exit about a third of its 165 UK stores and reduce the rent burden in others. Debenhams and its advisers from KPMG are expected to begin talking to landlords this week, with a view to launching the CVA by the end of this month. The process is vital for the survival of the chain. Long leaseholds signed in the early 2000s, when the group’s former private equity owners sold off the freeholds of the stores to raise cash, have squeezed profits and stalled reinvention. Debenhams’ recent cashflow problems have also been fuelled by nervous suppliers demanding payment upfront, fearing that the company could go bust. Being part of the Sports Direct group would have provided more reassurance and helped solve this problem overnight. Instead, it is likely Debenhams’ Danish chain, Magasin du Nord, will be put back on the market in the hope of generating £200m to help reduce the group’s £620m debts. But shoppers and analysts agree that cutting costs will not deliver the turnaround Debenhams’s lenders hope could turn an ugly duckling into a £1bn swan. “They need to start again,” says veteran retail analyst Richard Hyman. He believes that the group’s current strategy – revamping stores with services such as hairdressing and flexible “lab” areas where up-and-coming beauty and fashion brands can be brought in more easily – is unlikely to be enough. Without a decent fashion offering that can draw the crowds, he says, Debenhams will never fill its large stores and pay its rent. “About 25 years ago the company came up with Designers at Debenhams; then they didn’t change it, to the extent that some of the designers are still the same now. For a long time they have failed to apply the general retail principles of innovating and constant change.” Hyman adds that prices have also got out of kilter to protect profits, as a consequence of the constant stream of discount days that have become Debenhams’s key fashion draw. Basic T-shirts, which can be bought in Primark for under £5, are on sale for north of £10 in Debenhams. Amy Dyble, 18, shopping at Primark with her mum and dad, agrees. “People can’t afford it. You get stuff [at Primark] that looks the same but has not got a big brand on it like at Debenhams, and it’s half the price. What’s the point in going to Debenhams?” Outside the Debenhams Bullring store, Harriet Wheeler says she sometimes pops in for beauty products and services at the likes of Too Faced or Urban Decay. But Wheeler, 20, says: “Mostly it’s for the middle-aged upwards; it’s not really for young people. Some brands are out of our range, like Jasper Conran. None of us can afford that.” This is a difficult segment to be in so they have to offer value It’s not just Debenhams’s own-labels that are unattractive: its third-party brands also lack inspiration. Nearby John Lewis has the likes of Mint Velvet and Hush, plus interesting brands aimed at its particular clientele, such as People Tree, alongside its own label, Kin. Debenhams has Arcadia boss Philip Green’s Miss Selfridge, Wallis and Dorothy Perkins. These overpriced and underinvested labels are no longer must-haves. “Debenhams shares clothing shoppers with Marks & Spencer, Primark, Next and Arcadia as well as the supermarkets – so mass-market and value-conscious,” says Maureen Hinton, a retail analyst at GlobalData. “This is a difficult segment to be in so they have to offer value, even if the price is a bit higher. The reason Debenhams shoppers buy Arcadia brands is because there are so many in its stores, rather than because they seek them out elsewhere.” She says that with more options for the consumer, Debenhams needs to create a destination that is more exciting. On the beauty floor, where Debenhams still has a strong slate of top brands, including Chanel, Givenchy and Kat Von D, there seems to be hope for the future. This area has more life thanks to makeover kiosks from Blow, Make Up Forever and Dior Backstage, eyelash specialist Benito and Benefit’s brow bar and waxing room. The rest of the store needs to shift from products shoved on rails or shelves towards something that’s more lively, interactive, fun – and value for money. Or it will find itself left on the shelf.