England have been accused of breaking a promise to stick by Alex Hales after the opener’s 21-day ban for recreational drug use resulted in him being thrown out of the World Cup squad and left him “devastated”. Ashley Giles, the director of England cricket, announced on Monday that Hales – revealed by the Guardian last week to have failed a second drugs test – had been withdrawn from duty in order create “the right environment” for Eoin Morgan’s players and ensure they are “free from any distractions”. But the 366 Group, who represent Hales, claim Giles has reneged on assurances that the 30-year-old would be free to play in the World Cup provided he completed his punishment and various rehabilitation measures stipulated by the England and Wales Cricket Board’s recreational drugs policy. A statement from the agency read: “Nobody is seeking to excuse Alex’s behaviour in this instance. He absolutely acknowledges and recognises he made a huge mistake.” It continued: “Alex fulfilled his obligations and both he and his representatives were given assurances that any suspension could not affect selection for the World Cup. It is unfortunate that a confidential matter made it to the public arena but, even before the publication of the story, Alex had again spoken to key members of the England organisation to express his regret and contrition. At that time, he again took away the message his World Cup place would be judged on playing merit. “The fact all those assurances seem to have been rendered meaningless has understandably left Alex devastated. Until the matter became public, the ECB had fully observed their own process and guidelines and given Alex the support and guidance laid out in those regulations. It is now disappointing to learn these guidelines seem to have been disregarded while, in this instance, player welfare would also appear to be low on their list of priorities.” Hales was told of the decision while attending England’s early summer training camp in Cardiff over the weekend. But despite Giles insisting it does not represent the end of his international career – and support will be offered to help him “fulfil his potential as a professional cricketer” – the right-hander faces a long road back. The news represents a shattering blow for the player, who was already on a final warning for behaviour following the Bristol street fight in September 2017. But the timeline of events also raises serious questions over the leadership at the England and Wales Cricket Board and the attempt to conceal his ban; Hales’s absence from Nottinghamshire’s recent fixtures was explained as “personal reasons” by the county. With Hales expected to have completed the ban before this Friday’s one-off ODI against Ireland in Malahide, it means that he was named in England’s preliminary World Cup squad on 17 April after Giles and Tom Harrison, the ECB chief executive, had first been informed of the sanction, as per the regulations. But with the pair having seemingly decided to forge ahead and not make Hales unavailable immediately – it is understood that Ed Smith, the national selector, and head coach Trevor Bayliss were not told before picking the 15 – they must surely now explain why this was deemed the best course of action. To date the ECB has declined to comment on the precise details of the offence, or offer any background on events, by citing a “duty of confidentiality” to the player. The governing body’s own website states, however, that this only applies after a first violation and players are “liable to public disclosure” should a second one occur. In short, silence was a conscious decision and not mandatory. The ECB’s recreational drugs policy – first introduced in 2013 following the death of Surrey’s Tom Maynard the previous year and designed to balance rehabilitation with deterrent – is now set to come under review by the governing body as a result. Morgan and the England coaching staff meanwhile must focus minds in a squad that is looking to convert its No 1 ranking into a first 50-over global trophy on home soil. After the trip to Ireland, England play a one-off T20 against Pakistan in Cardiff on Sunday followed by five ODIs against Sarfraz Ahmed’s side. With Jason Roy still struggling with back spasms, Ben Duckett and Dawid Malan have been drafted into the squad to face Ireland, while James Vince, already down for that trip, has been added to the 17-man group that takes on Pakistan. Jofra Archer, the uncapped fast bowler who recently became eligible for England after the ECB changed its qualification period, is also expected to make his debut as he bids to seal a place in the final World Cup squad that must be submitted by 23 May.