It is now exactly a year since Amber Rudd resigned as home secretary, and it feels as if the Home Office is as broken as ever, if not more so. There is something of the bleakness of the Arab spring about it all. An unimaginable revolt happened, a despot was overthrown, and for a brief moment it seemed that the time of dystopian oppression was over, before the deep state regrouped and imposed a tyranny redux. Since Windrush, all we have seen is pathetic attempts at compensating victims, and more scandals. Presiding over it all is the new benevolent dictator Sajid Javid, who speaks in the language of a man who knows how to pay lip service to the forces that removed his predecessor, while doubling down on policies that have not changed, but are merely fronted by a new, more media-friendly face. One that does not hesitate to point out – as often as possible – that it is a brown one. What will it take for wholesale reform? What will it take for the Conservative party to understand that its combination of anti-immigration extremism and incompetence is cruel but also bad for the economy, the NHS and the higher education system? Forget sympathy for refugees, asylum seekers and actual citizens who just happen to be paperless, if that’s not your thing. Consider instead the unsullied-by-morality practical benefits of policy-making – presumably the whole point of the Tories. The latest Home Office scandal, one that MPs threatened could be “bigger than Windrush”, involves the deportation of more than 1,000 overseas students after the Home Office accused tens of thousands of them of cheating in English language tests that qualify them for student visas. A Panorama investigation in 2014 highlighted evidence of cheating at two test centres, following which the Home Office, with all its characteristic respect for due process, and the care and subtlety of a cudgel, concluded that out of 58,458 students who had taken the test between 2011 and 2014, 34,000 had “definitely cheated”. Visas were subsequently cancelled and curtailed, and hundreds of international students spent time in detention. These decisions are now under formal investigation by the National Audit Office. The Home Office, ever inert, will according to a spokesman, “consider the findings”. As with all Home Office blunders, the consequences are twofold: devastation for those involved, and the loss of a healthy source of revenue for the British economy. Those students who were not deported exist in a criminalised limbo, unable to continue their studies, travel anywhere outside the UK or seek employment. Nazek Ramadan, director of Migrant Voice, told the Guardian that “stripped of the right to work, study or even access healthcare, many of the students are destitute and suffering from severe mental health problems”. But again, let us not assume that empathy is for everybody, and focus on the deleterious effect this has on funding for British universities. Because of the hostile environment, overseas students are being discouraged from attending UK universities, opting for more welcoming countries. A study from University College London in July 2018 revealed that the UK’s position, second to the United States in terms of international student enrolment, was being ceded to Australia. Overseas students make up one-third of the student bodies of the Russell Group of most selective universities. Spending by overseas students supports more than 200,000 jobs. Universities UK calculates the impact of this on the UK economy at £25.8bn a year, including £1bn in tax revenues. And on top of this comes the now inevitable exacerbating postscript to British economic woe: Brexit. The number of EU students at UK institutions is already falling. In the academic year 2016-17, EU student enrolment had grown 7% on the previous year. In 2018/19, it was down by 3%. Then there are the blunder costs, now an integral part of the Home Office process. Appeals, hasty expensive deportations, compensation for unlawful detentions: they all cost money – taxpayers’ money. Because, much as this might frustrate the Home Office, the UK still does not exist in a total human rights vacuum, and claimants have the right to appeal and to damages when detained unlawfully. Last year, the Home Office paid out £21m after mistakenly detaining 850 people. And those who received damages are the ones who had the resources and knowhow to launch an appeal. My own appeal against a wrong decision (after paying thousands of pounds in overseas student fees, and while I was working and paying taxes) took almost a year, costing both me and the Home Office thousands. It was overturned on a whim – which remains unexplained to this day – before we even went to court. And yet here we still are, with a Home Office that refuses to reform, and sees public scandals as PR affairs to be managed rather than addressed, and which is now hardwired to shoot first and pretend to answer questions later, all the while continuing to be a haemorrhaging sore in the side of the UK economy, bleeding out student fees, taxpayer revenue and the costs of fixing its mistakes. But the UK’s immigration policy is not a bug: it is a feature of contemporary Conservative party policy. Brexit has been clarifying in this respect, shedding light on an immigration system that is sabotaging the country’s economy and higher education system for the sake of the hit of seeing a deportee in shackles or diminishing immigration numbers on a spreadsheet. If they ever were, the Tories are no longer the party of cold reason and the bottom line. They are a party unmoored from the interests of the country, stoking fear and resentment. The cruelty, as Atlantic writer Adam Serwer put it of Trump and his supporters, has no purpose: the cruelty is the point. This is Britain’s ideological deep state, and no change at the top of the Home Office is going to change anything. The whole regime must go. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist