Margaret Thatcher’s greed-is-good ethos left its mark on everyone in the 1980s, from the high-rolling arrivistes of the stock exchange to Harry Enfield’s Loadsamoney. It even found its way to the North Sea, where the creed of individualism was not just unethical, suggests playwright Morna Young, but potentially lethal. Somewhere near the troubled heart of Lost at Sea lies the story of Kevin, a trawlerman, played with angry resolve by Andy Clark, who is brutalised by his quest for money. Where once a crew would stand together, their camaraderie a tool of survival against the elements, now a fisherman would risk going it alone, ever more indifferent to the welfare of his workmates. For Young, this is personal. Her own father was lost at sea in 1989, when she was a child, and the play is a fictionalised attempt at filling the space he left behind. That space is not just the man, played with blue-eyed ruggedness by Ali Craig, but the whole community around him. In Ian Brown’s excellent production, spare and precise in its staging, the fishermen take on mythic form. Statuesque under Katharine Williams’s severe lighting, they’re like the heroic archetypes of a Peter Howson painting, facing the seas in defiance on Karen Tennent’s inky black set. The play is structured as a dreamlike detective story, the scenes crashing into each other as if carried on the tide. Sophia McLean’s Shona represents the author as an earnest young journalist returning from Aberdeen to the Moray coast to research a family story that’s always been out of her grasp. So it must remain, for nothing can bring her father back nor make sense of the accident that killed him. But in a play that buffets between the romantic and the saltily realistic, what Young can do is evoke the life of the place, not only the punishing hours at sea but the long days of waiting back home. She is as funny in her conversational observation as she is wise to the politics of poverty and, in a blend of poetry, song and high-seas drama, she creates a stormy and soulful lament. At Perth theatre until 4 May. Then touring until 24 May.