Labour has demanded “a full leak inquiry” into whoever was responsible for this week’s unauthorised disclosure from the national security council that the Chinese company Huawei will be allowed to supply 5G telecoms equipment in the UK. Asking an urgent question in the Commons, Jo Platt, the shadow minister for the Cabinet Office, said: “If a minister did leak this information they are not fit to serve in the cabinet and they are certainly not fit to be prime minister.” In the debate that followed, Jeremy Wright, the culture secretary, signalled that a criminal investigation under the Official Secrets Act could yet go ahead. He told MPs “I cannot rule it out”, and added it was “a matter for investigating and prosecuting authorities to consider”. Theresa May is under growing pressure to find and sack the minister, aide or official responsible for the leak from the national security council meeting on Tuesday afternoon. Several ministers have written to her to call for a criminal inquiry under the Official Secrets Act, although any decision to prosecute would have to be taken by Geoffrey Cox, the attorney general. The meetings of the body, which is composed of senior cabinet members and intelligence chiefs, are held in secret but news of the controversial Huawei decision leaked shortly afterwards to the Daily Telegraph. It was reported by the newspaper that Gavin Williamson, the defence secretary, Sajid Javid, the home secretary, Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary, Liam Fox, the trade secretary, and Penny Mordaunt, the international development secretary, raised concerns about allowing a Chinese company some “non-core” access to the 5G networks. In the Commons, Platt said: “Critical issues of national security should be handled with utmost care, not used as political ammunition in a Tory party civil war. A full leak inquiry should be undertaken, and if identified, the individual should immediately resign or be removed from their position.” The leak row follows many months of revelations from May’s cabinet meetings, with discipline having almost entirely broken down. However, MPs said the leak of a discussion on intelligence and national security was a different magnitude and seriousness. The Conservative MP Nicholas Soames said the leak was so serious that a “criminal inquiry” was needed and called for whoever was responsible to be sacked. He was backed up by the Labour MP Ben Bradshaw, a former cabinet minister, who said it “demands a criminal inquiry, not just an internal leak inquiry … The Tory party civil war is now threatening our national security.” The Tory MP Johnny Mercer, a former British Army officer, said: “The leak from the national security council is extraordinary. A new and grim low.” Huawei is a Chinese telecoms company founded in 1987. Politicians in the US have alleged that Huawei’s forthcoming 5G mobile phone networks could be hacked by Chinese spies to eavesdrop on sensitive phone calls and gain access to counter-terrorist operations. Allies who allow Huawei technology inside their 5G networks have been told they may be frozen out of US intelligence sharing. Australia, New Zealand and Japan have banned Huawei from their 5G networks. In the UK, BT has excluded Huawei telecoms infrastructure from its own 5G rollout and removed some of its equipment from the 4G network. The University of Oxford has placed an indefinite ban on accepting research grants or donations from the Chinese telecoms firm Huawei. In January 2019 Vodafone said it had decided to 'pause' the use of Huawei equipment in its core networks across Europe. Poland’s internal affairs minister, Joachim Brudziński, has called for the European Union and Nato to work on a joint position over whether to exclude Huawei from their markets, after an Huawei employee was arrested on spying charges. Much of the doubt surrounding Huawei stems from founder Ren Zhengfei’s background in China's People’s Liberation Army between 1974 and 1983, where he was an engineer. His daughter, Huawei’s senior executive Meng Wanzhou, was arrested in Canada in December 2018 over allegations of Iran-sanctions violations, and she awaits extradition to the US. Ren, referring to trade issues between the US and China, says the company is 'like a small sesame seed, stuck in the middle of conflict between two great powers'. Any cabinet minister found to have been responsible would be in breach of the ministerial code and could be sacked. The US has largely banned Huawei from its 5G infrastructure. Rob Joyce, a senior adviser at the US National Security Agency, said the British move could hand Beijing a “loaded gun”. He told the Financial Times: “We have got to understand all the details of that and decide what that means. What we will be insistent on is UK decisions can’t put our information at risk but the good news is that the UK already understands that.” In contrast, GCHQ has repeatedly said Huawei needs to be closely monitored but has not called for a ban. The director, Jeremy Fleming, said concerns about its country of origin were not necessarily the top priority when security was being considered. “We are looking at the risks that arise from their security and engineering processes, as well as the way these technologies are deployed in our national telecom networks,” Fleming said in a rare speech on Wednesday. “The flag of origin of 5G equipment is important but it is a secondary factor.” Huawei says it is independent of the Chinese government. It is owned by a trade union committee representing employees and has supplied equipment in the UK since the middle of the last decade.