How Rugby Australia has dealt with Folau is being keenly watched by at least half of their elite players, who share common ground with Folau as Pacific Islanders, with most, if not all of them, sharing a similar religious upbringing. I’ll wager dollar for doughnuts, the issue of football versus faith and family will arise again, but the way in which RA has dealt with the “Folau question” has poured fuel on the fire. As a proud Tongan I don’t forget that Australia and its football codes has been the “promised land” for so many of my countrymen. So, my advice to RA is sincere – I hope they can take it in this spirit. For RA to dangle Folau’s contract like a drawn-out noose is not only simple and futile, but patronising. Here’s the thing. Elite athletes are not motivated by money, they are motivated by being happy. It’s true, ask them when they’re with loved ones and don’t need to be athletes any more. Their motivation is not pulled from the clouds either. It is grounded and shaped from their lived experiences and the influences around them throughout their whole lives. To betray that, is to betray what made them who they are. Colin Kaepernick was a highly principled athlete who was prepared to fight for his values. Folau’s “cause” might be considered as not legitimate by many, but it’s a cause no less fervently believed by the athlete or his supporters. For Folau, as for Kaepernick, for Muhammad Ali or even the Māori rugby martyrs of the apartheid era, contracts with elaborate sub-clauses or overarching codes to stifle opinions and beliefs beyond the field of competition are as useful as a child gate in a maximum-security prison. Now let’s be clear. The Tongan community is as diverse as any other. There are those that strongly oppose Folau, those that condemn what he says, but others who support or even share his opinions. The Tongan population is about the same as a large Australian suburb. So, as a nation, we are rarely connected just because we are Tongan. But we actually share an array of connection, whether that’s through kinship, village, school, or footy. The rugby league world was astounded by the pandemonium for the Mate Ma’a Tonga team in that famous Test in Auckland last year. The source of that fervour is in the name: “Die for Tonga”. It is a metaphor for unquestioning conviction and loyalty. The majority of those supporters that packed out Eden Park that day – some of them don’t even follow rugby league! But they recognised the “Tongan-ness” of the players choosing the beloved red jersey over the Kangaroos, or the Kiwis respectively. Therefore, the whole of Tonga reciprocated in kind, amplifying every sinew of connection beyond football. I say this from my personal experience of that same outpouring after winning silver at the Atlanta Olympics. When Folau first made outspoken religious comments a year ago the response in our community was mixed. One friend said “I’m sick of this wannabe preacher d**khead”, another lamented, “Remember when he used to just play rugby, hoiii.” Still, a lot more defended him for being brave, and his stoic commitment for faith in the face of what was seen as bullying by authorities. In response to the uproar at the time I posted on social media: “I will watch the games and admire the athlete, but neither one can set my moral compass.” It was a middle-of-the-road statement seemingly capturing the moderation of the majority of the posts on my newsfeed. I think the mood then was something like when hearing the neighbours arguing over the fence, you turn up the TV and pretend to read the paper. Despite how we Tongans felt about that uproar personally, we also felt that it was just Folau’s own business to work out. My stance is still the same, but the halfway point has shifted somewhere else. Those that were fellow moderates are now squarely in Folau’s corner, as if they had suddenly remembered how religious they are – when unsure of something, many Tongans take biblical teaching as a default position. This is the danger – in handling the case so poorly, RA have made Folau, the person, inseparable from the ideas of his that they don’t like. RA could have taken more care to understand the cultural context of where Folau’s first tweet came from, and gone in decisively to remove or alleviate it. If need be done so emphatically, but in a spirit of engagement, not just hoping the problem might go away. Had we seen that kind of action I believe the pendulum may have stayed still or even swung to their favour. Having dragged on for over a year, it now feels that Folau is under a sustained attack, and therefore his and our “Tongan-ness” is being attacked as well. As we counted our connection to Folau, perhaps with each attack our empathy as well as our sympathy grew. Faith means so much to many Tongans – whether that’s Methodist, Apostolic, Catholic or Mormon. With other Tongan players watching on, RA needs to future-proof a solution. People come with complex beliefs and backgrounds, anchored in where they’re from. You don’t just stick your head in the sand, hope this isn’t the case and tighten up muzzling clauses in their contracts. Paea Wolfgramm won Tonga’s first-ever Olympic medal, silver, at Atlanta 1996 in heavyweight boxing. He played rugby union as a schoolboy and now lives in Auckland, where he works for BOS Architects.