When Multistory in West Bromwich commissioned me to make a visual archive of young people’s lives in the Black Country, I knew immediately that I wanted to photograph them in their bedrooms. I wanted to capture the details of their interiors, which would become metaphors for who they were. My assistant and I found candidates in the street, at clubs or in colleges. Maurice was 17 and a student in West Bromwich. He was so theatrical, I asked if I could shoot him at home. When I knocked on the door, this is how he greeted me: in a blue onesie, unbuttoned at the front. He wasn’t laughing; it was as if it were completely normal. Not “Look what I’ve done!” but “Oh, you’ve arrived. Here I am.” It was like he was challenging me, in a comical way – testing me to see how I’d react. He had a very dry sense of humour. And I thought: “What a gift!”. He might have a strong presence, but it’s an adopted persona. He’s not giving much away of who he really is He wasn’t overly talkative, but he was very aware of his own presence, and very funny. When I work, I’m quite funny too. I’m slightly eccentric, I talk a lot. I directed him a bit, mostly on where to pose and whether to have his hood up or down. He had it up when he opened the door: I think it was a rabbit. And I tried shooting him like that, but it felt too obvious. The pose, though, was all him. I love the connection between the “love me” on the bed, and the way he’s presenting himself, with that body. Also, the Hunter box on top of the cupboard: the symbolism that word brings to mind in relation to his stance. It’s all so male. But then you’ve got the fluffy onesie and the soft toys. Those tensions are the strength of the image. I have a feeling that the situation in his home was quite complicated. It was his sister’s house, and I think that was his nephew’s room, I think he stays there sometimes. There weren’t many of his belongings in the space, which makes the image mysterious. He might have a strong presence, but it’s an adopted persona. He’s not giving much away of who he really is. Other young people were much more transparent. Throughout the project, I relished the challenge of making an image work in a space I didn’t know and couldn’t plan for: creating a tableau with whatever I found. I closed the blinds to manage the light better. I liked the fact that there was very little depth behind him, although I didn’t have much control over that: the door was right behind me. The sense of intimacy these spaces created was crucial. The project was about these young people’s fantasies, their projections, their identities. I’ve always been interested in body image and cultural coding – what people wear, how they present themselves. I think of myself as a visual anthropologist, documenting the threshold you cross over from childhood into adulthood. Part of it is also autobiographical, delving into the challenges I experienced growing up. For my latest project, Sixteen, it was all me just walking up to kids on the street in a very poor area of Cornwall and speaking with them. Whether it’s five or 30 minutes long, that interaction, the stories they tell me, the way they communicate with me, I feel so privileged. Those moments of real intimacy were as meaningful as the photographs themselves. Born: Cape Town, South Africa, 1953. Trained: BA fine art, Michaelis School of Fine Art, Cape Town; MA in photography, De Montfort University, Leicester. Influences: David Goldblatt, Stephen Shore, Philip-Lorca diCorcia, Alec Soth, Fellini. High point: “My first book, Becoming, being published in 2006. That’s when I realised the work was getting out into the world and being appreciated.” Low point: “I left South Africa in the late 70s at a high with my work, but I had to put my career on hold for a number of years in order to survive in a new country.” Top tip: “Always be true to yourself. And if you really want something, don’t give up.” 