After losing the PR war against one distance legend during the week, Mo Farah found himself humbled by another as he trudged home in fifth place behind Eliud Kipchoge in a London Marathon for the ages. Kipchoge cemented his claims to be considered the greatest ever over 26.2 miles by winning this race for a fourth time in 2:02:37 – not only a new course record but the second quickest time in history. Only the Kenyan has run faster, of course, with his world record in Berlin last year. Farah, meanwhile, ended a difficult few days by finishing over three minutes back in 2:05.39, after slowing down markedly in the final three miles. He had insisted that he arrived looking for the win. Instead he got a brutal reality check. Kipchoge had told his camp that he was going to attack after halfway – and he was as good as his word, putting in two 4:32 and two 4:34 miles between mile 14 and 18 to burn off Farah, who spent the last third of the race in no man’s land, his grimace becoming more pronounced as the race and a personal best slipped away from him. “I felt great early on,” said Farah. “My aim was to follow the pacemaker and I was OK at halfway but it got away from me. I hoped to reel them back but once the pacemaker dropped back, from 20 miles the wheels came off and I was just hanging there to be honest.” “Kipchoge’s time was incredible,” said Farah. “He is a very special athlete. He’s humble and a nice guy. But I am definitely disappointed. The spat didn’t distract me, I was concentrating on the race. What I said is the truth – I didn’t mean to take any limelight away from the sport.” Understandably Farah refused to commit to what he planned to do at the world championships in the autumn, where he could run either the marathon or the 10,000m. “At the minute my brain is all over the place,” he added. “I am going to have a chat with my coach and my agent and have a step back. I think for me I want to do a marathon. I gave it my all, I was aiming to run a low 2:04 but that is what it was.” Kipchoge, meanwhile, was delighted after securing his 12th victory in his 13 career marathons. “I am happy to make history by winning this race four times,” he said. “And to see this race raise £1bn for charity.” However victory was only secured in the final two miles as he shook off the attentions of the Ethiopian Mosinet Geremew, who was second in 2:02:55, and his compatriot Mule Wasihun, who was third 19 seconds further back. Britain’s Callum Hawkins was 10th in 2:08.14. Meanwhile the women’s race was won by Brigid Kosgei in 2:18.20, beating last year’s winner Vivian Cheruyiot into second. Charlotte Purdue ran a stunning 2:25.38 to finish tenth and become the third fastest British women in history, behind only Paula Radcliffe and Yama Yamauchi . “I am over the moon with that. To come to London and smash my PB – it’s all I can ask for.”