Hello, I’m Warren Murray, and I hope this day finds you well. The global financial system faces an existential threat from climate change and must take urgent steps to reform, the governors of the Bank of England and France’s central bank warn in the Guardian today. “If some companies and industries fail to adjust to this new world, they will fail to exist,” say Mark Carney and Villeroy de Galhau, whose open letter accompanies the launch of a report from the Network for Greening the Financial System. The NGFS was formed to be “the core of the response of central banks and supervisors” to climate change. Threadneedle Street has warned that banks could find themselves entangled with assets that turn out to be worthless because they are reliant on burning fossil fuels. Meanwhile, Extinction Rebellion protests continue. Activists in London plan to disrupt rail and tube lines today. Police say they have made 209 arrests related to demonstrations that have caused delays and diversions around several landmarks. In Scotland more than 1,000 protesters blockaded the North Bridge in Edinburgh on Tuesday. The events are part of an international “climate rebellion”. Extinction Rebellion is calling on the UK government to reduce carbon emissions to zero by 2025 and establish a citizens’ assembly to devise an emergency plan to tackle climate breakdown and biodiversity loss. How to save Notre Dame – “The roof’s completely gone and there is damage to the vaulting, which does concern me, but the rest of it is repairable. There are people who can do it.” The verdict on Notre Dame cathedral from John David, master stonemason at York Minster, which was similarly devastated by fire on 9 July 1984. More than €650m (£562m) was raised in a few hours on Tuesday as French tycoons and global corporations announced they would donate to the restoration campaign launched by the president, Emmanuel Macron. Details have emerged of how the fire started at the base of the 93-metre spire at about 6.40pm on Monday and spread through the cathedral’s ribbed roof, made up of hundreds of oak beams, some dating back to the 13th century. The 500 firefighters at the scene stopped flames reaching the two belfry towers and their enormous bells that could have fallen down, bringing the towers with them. The cathedral’s Great Organ constructed in the 1730s is said to have been water-damaged but unburned, and inspections suggest the three stained glass “rose” windows survived. Relics including the Crown of Thorns and Saint Louis’s tunic are being held at the Hôtel de Ville, while smoke-damaged artworks will be taken to the Louvre for restoration and storage. Sixteen copper statues from the spire of the 12 apostles and four evangelists had been removed for restoration a few days before the fire, but relics at the top of the spire are believed lost after its collapse. Midweek catch-up > Around 193 million people are voting in Indonesia’s biggest ever election to choose a president and more than 20,000 legislators. The main bill is incumbent Joko “Jokowi” Widodo versus ex-general Prabowo Subianto for the top job. > Satellite images show that North Korea’s main nuclear site might be making radioactive material for bombs again, a US thinktank has reported. It underscores the stalling of efforts by Donald Trump to get Kim Jong-un to abandon nuclear weapons. > Criminal records from a person’s youth should not always be available to employers, Sajid Javid, the home secretary, has said. “It could be twice they shoplifted when they were 11 and 12 or something, that record can linger for years and years … I think we need to be sensible and look again at issues like this.” > Light pollution means more than half of people in England struggle to see more than 10 stars in Orion. The Campaign to Protect Rural England (CPRE) says the result of its star count show how the night sky is “lost under a veil of artificial light” for many. Corbyn pessimistic over talks – Jeremy Corbyn has said Brexit negotiations with the government are stalling because influential Tories want to “turn this country into a deregulated, low-tax society which will do a deal with Trump”. Corbyn suggested it would be better to let parliament decide via binding indicative votes. In our series Brexit: How it came to this, political editor Heather Stewart today tells the inside story of key moments where the party’s stance on Brexit has evolved, amid a hard-fought political tug of war between two contending visions: Labour’s customs-union Brexit with protections for workers’ rights and the environment; and a public vote to throw out the 2016 referendum result. Red meat flag – Even sticking to official limits on eating red or processed meats may not reduce risk of bowel cancer. The health department suggests 70g or less a day, but a study has found people eating roughly that amount have a 20% increased risk, compared with those who averaged 21g a day. And shockingly, a cooked breakfast with two “typical British” sausages and two rashers of bacon is worth 130g. Big swipe at Mastercard – Almost every adult in the UK could receive a payout of up to £300 from Mastercard after a court ruling paved the way for a £14bn class action lawsuit. It is claimed 46 million UK consumers were victims of inflated prices caused by excessive Mastercard transaction fees, even if they did not use its credit cards. Mastercard has said it will fight the case all the way to the supreme court. Don’t start spending yours yet. The Guardian’s Nesrine Malik grew up in Sudan and witnessed first-hand the brutality of the country’s president, Omar al-Bashir. Malik reflects on what his ousting, after 30 years, means for Sudan. Plus: Angelique Chrisafis on the Notre Dame Cathedral fire. “The 118 inquiry line connects me to the cinema chain’s recorded phone menu, which refers me to the website for film times and hangs up on me. I ring back and select the booking option. I am connected to a charming woman who seems to have nothing but time … I can’t figure out why she’s being so patient, until I realise she’s assuming I am very old. Otherwise, I would be doing this online. “To get Google out of your life is a big undertaking. Google Maps doesn’t just get you to places; it drives many of the other apps you use, including Uber. Google owns YouTube. Google controls my thermostat. For the purposes of this experiment, I am simply avoiding the maps, the search engine, the browser and YouTube. I am going to keep using email. There are, of course, other browsers, search engines and map apps out there, but I am not trying to find substitutes. I am trying to do without.” A Lionel Messi masterclass has led Barcelona to a Champions League rout of Manchester United, with the midfielder scoring a brace during a 3-0 win at Camp Nou, making the aggregate 4-0 score the Red Devils’ worst ever European knock-out tie result. It prompted Ole Gunnar Sojskjær to admit the club had “a rebuilding job”, with Barney Ronay writing that a creaking backline full of Ferguson-era remnants could be the starting place. Elsewhere Ajax upset Cristiano Ronaldo’s Juventus with young captain Matthijs de Ligt heading home the winner. And in cycling, Belgian Victor Campenaerts has broken Sir Bradley Wiggins’ one-hour record, with the 27-year-old declaring himself “super happy” after 221 laps in the velodrome. Asian share markets have swung higher after Chinese data easily beat expectations. First-quarter economic growth hit 6.4% while industrial output surged 8.5% in March from a year earlier, beating forecasts of 5.9%. Retail sales rose 8.7%. Investors reacted immediately by buying the Australian dollar, closely tied to China’s fortunes. The Aussie pushed up 0.3% to a two-month top at $0.7206. The Nikkei added 0.5% to reach its highest in almost five months, while E-Mini futures for the S&P 500 rose 0.2%. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan gained 0.2% to near its highest since July. Sterling overnight has been trading around $1.306 and €1.155 while the FTSE looks like being lower at the open. Photographs of the interior of Notre Dame feature on many front pages, with some papers leading on the story of the fire. The Guardian says: “After the fire died down, Notre Dame stood defiant”, the i’s splash is: “Notre-Dame rises again” and the Times has “Notre Dame saved just half hour from collapse”. The Daily Telegraph leads on Sajid Javid’s plan to change the law so minor offences don’t have to be disclosed to employers: “Criminals to be handed a clean slate”. The Daily Mail reports that the number of women over 50 working has doubled, which they see as a very negative development: “Women who can’t give up working”. The FT says: “Boeing backlash drives calls for shake-up to rebuild reputation” and the Daily Express has: “Cruel care homes evict elderly”. The Sun’s lead is “Scholes on bets charge” based on reports the former Manchester United footballer has allegedly broken FA betting rules. And the Daily Mirror has another update on the royal baby: “Meghan: I want American nanny for royal baby”, adding a dubious/sexist postscript “… and I’d be happy to have a ‘manny’”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com