Geva Mentor and Caitlin Bassett as a set of invincible bookends. Sharni Layton prowling the transverse line, bellowing praise at Caitlin Thwaites. Nat Medhurst effortlessly lifting the ball into Jhaniele Fowler. Take everything you know about Super Netball and forget it, because 2019 is a whole new ball game. The third instalment of the world’s premier netball league – which begins on Saturday with a double-header in Melbourne – will look distinctly different to previous seasons, thanks to significant player movement, some big-name retirements and a World Cup-enforced split format. In a situation almost unprecedented in world sport, every Super Netball athlete came off contract the day after last year’s grand final, sparking a frenzied trade period. When the dust settled, some of the league’s biggest surnames were on different dresses, most notably Diamonds captain Bassett. The 193cm shooting machine jumped from back-to-back premiers the Sunshine Coast Lightning to the Giants. Fellow Diamonds shooter, 32-year-old Thwaites, moved from Collingwood to the Vixens and Medhurst, dumped by runner-up West Coast Fever, was nabbed by the Pies. Collingwood also poached Lightning stars Mentor and Kelsey Browne – who had more centre pass receives than any other player last season – with the English keeper replacing a retired Layton. Silver Fern shooting star Maria Folau will play for an Australian franchise; the Adelaide Thunderbirds; for the first time, after getting the green light to play here and still represent New Zealand. Her compatriot Laura Langman is back at her old club, the Lightning, and looking fitter than ever. Most of the eight clubs have retained the bulk of their playing groups, mainly in the midcourt, but it is marquee players like Bassett and Mentor who’ll have the biggest say in how the 2019 season – to be split in two to accommodate the World Cup in Liverpool in July – will play out. Adelaide Thunderbirds After not winning a game in 2018, the axe swung in Adelaide. The Thunderbirds have a new coach, former Giants assistant Tania Obst, and four international signings; Folau, who has the capacity to lift any list, emerging Jamaican keeper Shamera Sterling and English defenders Layla Guscoth and Beth Cobden. South Australians, shooters Sasha Glasgow and Cody Lange, midcourters Kelly Altmann and Hannah Petty and defender Kate Shimmin round out the side, along with wing attack Chelsea Pitman. Some pundits think even Folau and a bunch of Roses can’t help the struggling side, but Giants captain Kim Green disagrees. “If any coach is going to be able to turn it around, Tania is.” Giants While the Greater Western Sydney-backed Giants landed a big fish in Bassett – who replaces a retired Susan Pettitt and will partner with England’s Jo Harten – they also lost midcourter Serena Guthrie and defender Bec Bulley. Captain Green, freshly-minted Diamond Jamie-Lee Price and elevated training partner Amy Parmenter look capable of covering the middle, but the relatively inexperienced defence duo of Sam Poolman and Kristiana Manu’a might be an Achilles heel for Julie Fitzgerald’s side. Lightning captain Langman, who’ll play her 200th national league this year, is backing the Giants to be there at the end. “I love how they play. I think without a doubt; they will be in there.” Magpies For two seasons, Collingwood’s had an air of “galácticos” – boasting a roster of world-class stars akin to football’s Real Madrid in the early 2000s – but has spectacularly failed to deliver. That appears destined to change under new coach Rob Wright. The addition of Mentor, Browne and Medhurst, all proven match winners, more than covers the loss of Thwaites, Alice Teague-Neeld to the Fever and the retirements of Layton and Erin Bell. Medhurst, 35, will shoot with ex-Thunderbird, 195cm 20-year-old Jamaican Shimona Nelson, who was last year criticised for poor hands, but looked the goods in pre-season matches. Throw ex- and current Diamonds Ashleigh Brazill, Kim Ravaillion and April Brandley in the mix and the team everyone loves to hate once again look borderline unbeatable. However, co-captain Madison Browne will miss at least the opening round due to a knee injury sustained during pre-season. Melbourne Vixens The Vixens are more Diamond-encrusted than a Kardashian – with up to five of their starting seven; Thwaites, defenders Jo Weston and Emily Mannix and midcourters Liz Watson and Kate Moloney – likely to join Australia’s World Cup campaign. Simone McKinnis’ squad, which just missed finals last year, also boasts likely South African, Jamaican and Malawian representatives Ine-Mari Venter, Kadie-Ann Dehaney and Mwai Kumwenda, if she gets back from a knee reconstruction. This embarrassment of riches is a double-edged sword; making the Vixens one of the favourites for the title, but also susceptible to what happens at and after the Cup when it comes to injury, fatigue and focus. NSW Swifts Swifts coach Briony Akle has one of the youngest, most settled and tightest squads, but it’s a side, sans superstars, which will struggle to win more than a half a dozen games. The Swifts have added versatile English Rose, Natalie Haythornthwaite, 26, who can shoot, as well as play wing attack, but remains otherwise unchanged from the side which finished second-last in 2018. Haythornthwaite joins countrywoman, Commonwealth Games hero Helen Housby, who’ll pair with Trinidadian Sam Wallace or Aussie up-and-comer Sophie Garbin in goals. Captain Maddy Proud says the defensive trio of Sarah Klau, Maddy Turner and Kate Eddy will win the Swifts games. “Having that depth, that dynamic back end, where anyone can play anywhere, is really going to help us.” Queensland Firebirds With the retirement of Laura Geitz, the question for Roselee Jencke’s Firebirds is can the kids step up? Without Geitz, the Firebirds will rely on 27-year-old Laura Clemesha and 20-somethings Kim Jenner and Tara Hinchliffe, who have just 51 national league games between them, in defence. At the other end, Gretel Tippett and Romelda Aiken, who last year shot 575 goals and led the offensive rebound count with 64, will deliver what they always deliver, but getting enough ball to match it with the top sides might be a challenge. Sunshine Coast Lightning Only a coaching Svengali like Noelene Taurua could cover the loss of arguably the best goal shooter and goal keeper in the world, in Bassett and Mentor, as well as classy midcourter Browne, with what appears relative ease. Taurua, also the Silver Ferns coach, has added Ugandan shooter Peace Proscovia, South African defender Phumza Maweni and Lightning alum Langman and voila … the only franchise to have won the Super Netball trophy looks the complete picture again. And that’s without mentioning Lightning’s star defender, South African Karla Pretorius, who led all-comers with 51 intercepts last year. Captain Langman, who’ll be joined in the midcourt by Laura Scherian and Madi McAuliffe, says Proscovia is one to watch. “She’s quite an athlete and you’ll see her grow with every game.” West Coast Fever For Stacey Marinkovich’s Fever, stalwart Medhurst is out and 23-year-old Teague-Neeld is in at goal attack. But the team’s fortunes rest once again on the shoulders of Caribbean colossus Fowler, who last year shot 208 goals more than any other goaler – at 93 per cent accuracy. If Fowler gets the opportunity to fire, Fever wins. If service to her is disrupted, the side may struggle. Fever dropped just four games in 2018 and lost by three to Lightning in the grand final. Captain Courtney Bruce says they can go one better this year, because unlike previous seasons, they “actually have 10 players capable of coming onto the court at any time.”