David de Gea The Spaniard’s howler for Lionel Messi’s second goal on Tuesday was not his first this season but it would still be good business for Manchester United if their No 1 signed a new deal in the summer. Verdict Stay. Sergio Romero The 32-year-old has always been reliable when standing in as deputy goalkeeper. Verdict Stay. Ashley Young The winger-cum-full-back will be 34 in July and is way past his best. Verdict Go. Antonio Valencia His contract expires in the summer and the Ecuadorian will definitely leave Old Trafford then. Verdict Go. Diogo Dalot The 20-year-old can operate on both flanks, in defence as well as midfield, and has looked the part during his first season at the club. Verdict Stay. Chris Smalling The centre-back is not commanding and carries scant goal-threat unlike, say, Liverpool’s Virgil van Dijk. Verdict Go. Phil Jones Regularly looks better at centre-back than Smalling does but the 27-year-old still has a habit of being hapless at critical moments. Verdict Maybe stay. Victor Lindelöf The Sweden international is the smoothest of United’s central defenders. Has impressed this season. Verdict Stay. Eric Bailly The 25-year-old has lost his way since arriving at the club in 2016 but his pace is an asset. Verdict Stay. Marcos Rojo Rarely stays fit for long and never convinces when he plays. Verdict Go. Luke Shaw Has improved markedly this season but still needs to pose a more attacking threat. Verdict Stay. Matteo Darmian The Italian has become a peripheral figure. Rarely features and needs to move on. Verdict Go. Paul Pogba Record signing has had his best season for United: imagine how much better he would be if surrounded by similar talent. Verdict Stay. Nemanja Matic Serb’s ponderous pace of play slows the side down. Verdict Go. Fred Can the Brazilian boss a game like a Kevin De Bruyne? If not then he is a squad player at best. Verdict Maybe stay. Ander Herrera Can he control a game like Fernandinho? No, he cannot. Verdict Go. Scott McTominay The Scotland international has dynamism and poise that belies his tender years. Deserves a squad berth at worst. Verdict Stay. Juan Mata The 30-year-old has been a good servant to United but he is too slow and rarely influences a match these days. Verdict Go. Jesse Lingard Shines in a mediocre team but can go missing during games, especially the bigger ones. Verdict Stay. Andreas Pereira The 23-year-old has talent but make errors every time he plays. Verdict Go. Alexis Sánchez Statement signing who has never shone or turned in a man-of-the-match display for the club. Verdict Go. Romelu Lukaku The Belgian is a useful option to have in the locker – and is usually at his best coming off the bench. Verdict Stay. Marcus Rashford One of United’s few potentially world-class players. Needs to show more desire to shape a match, but has time on his side. Verdict Stay. Anthony Martial Like Rashford, another potentially world-class star who needs to show more desire. Verdict Stay. Stay 12 Go 10 Maybe stay 2