There are few things I love more than tahini. This sweet-savoury sesame seed paste is one of the most used ingredients in my kitchen, from salad dressings to cakes and biscuits. This week, I’m staying sweet with a batch of chocolate chip tahini blondies, which I’m hoping someone will bake for my upcoming birthday; and a quick tahini toast, which I may even eat for breakfast the same day. Too much tahini? Impossible! I’d take a stack of these over a birthday cake any day. I used a dark milk chocolate in this recipe, because dark chocolate with very high cocoa solids won’t melt in the way you want it to. Prep 15 minCook 30 minMakes 16 250g unsalted butter, plus extra for greasing2 large eggs200g light brown sugar 1 tsp vanilla extract 225g plain flour 1 tsp baking powder1 tsp fine sea salt150g dark or milk chocolate (60% cocoa solids works best), roughly chopped100g tahini (about 4 tbsp), plus extra to serveFlaked sea salt, to serve Heat the oven to 160C (140C fan)/325F/gas 3. Grease and line a 23cm square brownie tin with parchment so that it comes up the sides. Melt the butter in a saucepan and leave it to cool slightly. Beat the eggs, sugar and vanilla until the mixture is a little lighter in colour and starting to froth, then beat it into the butter until you have a smooth, glossy batter. In a separate bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder and salt, then fold into the egg mix, along with half the chocolate. Spoon the batter into the tin, smooth the top with a spatula, spoon over the tahini, then run a table knife up and down the surface a few times to swirl the tahini into the batter a little. Gently press the remaining chocolate pieces into the batter, and bake for 25-30 minutes – there should still be a slight wobble in the top of the mixture. Leave the blondies to cool in the tin for 15 minutes, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. Drizzle with extra tahini, sprinkle with sea salt, slice and serve. I have used the last of the season’s blood oranges here, but almost any seasonal fruit would work, from ripe pears to summer peaches. Prep 15 minCook 5 minMakes 4 toasts 4 slices good bread (I use sourdough)100g tahini2 blood oranges, peeled and sliced100g pistachios, toasted and roughly chopped4 tsp honey or honeycomb Toast the bread. While it’s toasting, stir the tahini vigorously to make sure it’s not separated. Spread the hot toasts with the tahini, top with blood-orange slices, pistachios and honey, and serve straight away.