Yes, the BBC is facing up to the climate crisis a decade too late, but this David Attenborough-fronted film is TV’s most comprehensive guide yet – not just to dire scientific warnings of what might happen, but to the presently floods, wildfires and extinctions that tell us ecological catastrophe is already under way. It will change a good few minds, and the existential terror is balanced by a brief but useful section on what we can do, including simply making your political voice heard. Jack Seale Three more people with body-image issues lose their clothes and hopefully their inhibitions. Joan is looking to come to terms with her vitiligo, Danielle hopes to embrace her curves and David wants to stop worrying about his body. Psychologist Keon West and body image expert Natasha Devon help out. Gwilym Mumford Amiable new series marking a decade of animal-themed travels for the Doc Martin actor. Tonight, he meets a Devon man who lives with wolves, a dingo-loving real-life Robinson Crusoe and a renowned horse whisperer. Gentle rather than revelatory, but Clunes’s glee is infectious. Phil Harrison In April 2013, a 10-day killing spree came to an end when 30-year-old Joanna Dennehy was arrested for the murders of three men and the attempted murders of two others. Susanna Reid reviews the eventful investigation with police, witnesses, victims’ relatives and Dennehy’s former friends. Ellen E Jones Following the success of Orange Is the New Black, it was only a matter of time before the UK enjoyed its own revival of female prison dramas. Channel 5’s new 10-parter Clink features a largely younger cast of women, with Bad Girls alumnus Alicya Eyo, but otherwise viewers are sentenced to the same old tropes and few zingers. Lisa Henderson A far-right candidate plans to swing the election with the help of violent “neo-Nazi bad boy” Otto Ganz (Thomas Kretschmann), in the timely opener to a new series of the undemanding espionage drama. Can new CIA chief of staff BB Yates (Ashley Judd) and co prevent a potential attack? Ali Catterall British director David Mackenzie makes an assured transition to Texas with this spare and violent modern western in which brothers and bank robbers Toby and Tanner (Chris Pine, Ben Foster) are hunted by Jeff Bridges’s Texas Ranger, Marcus. The crunchy script is by Taylor “Sicario” Sheridan. Paul Howlett PGA Tour Golf: The RBC Heritage 12.15pm, Sky Sports Golf Opening day at Harbour Town Golf Links in South Carolina. Premier League Darts 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event Cardiff’s Motorpoint Arena hosts the 11th round of the season. Europa League Football: Napoli v Arsenal 7.15pm, BT Sport 2 Chelsea v Slavia Prague airs at 8pm on BT Sport 3.