Look past the naff title and what you have here is the first of an excellent two-part film in which Miriam Margolyes embarks on a mission to confront her fear of ageing and death. She travels to hospices, homes for dementia patients, and laboratories dedicated to prolonging human life, then talks to the Californians making up the “super-longevity movement”. Unimpressed by the latest fads, she remains pragmatic, concluding: “It’s not the length of the life that matters, it’s the quality of every second.” Mike Bradley Steve Backshall starts a series of visits to ultra-remote places by kayaking up a Greenland fjord. The sights are awesome, and the shifting floes bring jeopardy, but Backshall stresses he’d rather this adventure were still impossible: before climate change, the area was healthy, solid ice. Jack Seale In a sleepy Derbyshire village, in a rather nice vicarage garden, lies a mass grave filled with Vikings. Leading the dig is Norwegian archaeologist Cat Jarman, and her team’s glee at discovering this treasure trove, including gaming pieces and the bones of female warriors, is infectious. Ali Catterall Jed Mercurio raises the level of tension still higher in what is currently TV’s most electric drama, taunting us with possible outcomes at every turn as AC-12 struggle to deal with the fallout from events at Eastfield. Was Hargreaves mystery villain H? Can we cope with any more acronyms? Thrill-a-minute. Mike Bradley Capering on from where the 2017 Christmas special left off, this 2018 show recorded at the Hammersmith Apollo begins with Tubbs and Edward duetting in the depths of Papa Lazarou’s “wife mine”, before adding other gems from Royston Vasey, including a bingo sketch you will never forget. Mike Bradley Frank Sinatra lent JFK his Hollywood glamour and, in turn, JFK gave the crooner a veneer of respectability. Their friendship was among the most influential of the 20th century, until it abruptly ended. But what was the real cause of their falling out? This documentary investigates. Ellen E Jones Saving Mr Banks 3.40pm, BBC OneThe origins of the film legend that is Mary Poppins, served with a spoonful of sugar by director John Lee Hancock. Emma Thompson is the crotchety PL Travers, awfully protective author of the book that Tom Hanks’s Walt Disney is desperate to bring to cinematic life: it’s a supercali (etc) double act. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Everton v Manchester United 12.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Cardiff v Liverpool follows. Cycling: Amstel Gold Race 2.15pm, Eurosport 1. Coverage of the annual race in the Netherlands. Champions Cup Rugby Union: Leinster v Toulouse 2.30pm, BT Sport 2. Second semi-final from the Aviva Stadium.