The Australia all-rounder James Faulkner has attracted widespread attention after appearing to come out as gay in social media posts, only for the 29-year-old to later clarify that there had been a “misunderstanding”. Faulkner appeared to announce he was in a same-sex relationship in posts on Twitter and Instagram. In doing so he would have become Australia’s first male professional cricketer to come out as gay. But Cricket Australia confirmed that the posts, which said the player was having “dinner with the boyfriend”, had been “misinterpreted” before Faulkner posted again to Instagram on Tuesday morning to say he is not gay. “There seems to be a misunderstanding about my post from last night, I am not gay, however it has been fantastic to see the support from and for the LBGT community,” Faulkner said. “Let’s never forget love is love, however @robjubbsta is just a great friend. Last night marked five years of being house mates! Good on everyone for being so supportive.” CA later added that it “does not consider the social commentary this morning from James Faulkner to be a joke, nor does James”.“His comment was made as a genuine reflection of his relationship with his business partner, best friend and house mate of five years,” a statement read. “He was not contacted for clarification before some outlets reported his Instagram post as an announcement of a homosexual relationship.“James and CA are supportive of the LGBQTI community and recognises coming out can be an incredibly emotional time. The post was not in any way meant to make light of this and, though the support from the community was overwhelming and positive. “Cricket Australia apologises for any unintended offence.” Faulkner’s original Instagram post was edited afterwards to add “best mate!!!” but the Twitter post, which is cross-posted automatically from Instagram, cannot be edited. Birthday dinner with the boyfriend (best mate!!!) @robjubbsta and my mother @roslyn_carol_faulkner ❤️❤️❤️ #togetherfor5years A post shared by  James Faulkner (@jfaulkner44) on Apr 29, 2019 at 3:10am PDT Birthday dinner with the boyfriend @robjubb and my mother roslyn_carol_faulkner ❤️❤️❤️ #togetherfor5years https://t.co/n9hJYTepX0 Jason Ball, the co-founder of Pride Cup, said “this ‘joke’ makes a mockery” of out the struggle faced by young people wanting to come out, but longtime equality campaigner Rodney Croome said there were some positives to come out of the situation. “Coming out is a difficult time for LGBTI people so role models like elite sportspeople should be careful not to be seen to make fun of it,” Croome wrote. “I welcome the fact the James Faulkner has clarified this was not his intention and that he supports the LGBTI community. “The overwhelmingly positive response to James Faulkner’s ‘coming out’ sends a message to senior players who are actually gay that Australian cricket is well and truly ready for them to be open about who they are.” Faulkner, who was man of the match in the 2015 one-day World Cup final when Australia beat New Zealand, has played 67 one-day internationals for Australia after making his debut against the West Indies in 2013. His original posts had prompted praise from Australia internationals past and present. Glenn Maxwell replied to it saying “great courage”, while Shaun Tait said: “Great courage mate, bet u feel better.” Brett Lee said: “Good on ya mate. Have a lovely birthday.”