During the riot grrrl scene of the early 90s, Bikini Kill singer Kathleen Hanna declared: “Girls to the front!” It was a conscious effort to make women in the audience feel safer – but almost three decades later (so long ago, that Bikini Kill are about to embark on a reunion tour), how much has gig culture changed? Gigs, festivals and nightclubs remain hotbeds of abuse and assault. Groping remains a huge problem at concerts, while one in five UK festival-goers – and two in five of all women under 40 who attended a festival – reported that they had been sexually assaulted or harassed at an event. There are also further questions of inclusivity: often venues, artists and promoters don’t take into account factors such as the mental wellbeing of attendees, wheelchair accessibility, how strobe-lights might affect those who are neuro-divergent, or even affordability. To an extent, artists are still the ones taking the lead: last week, chart-topping singer-songwriter Lewis Capaldi announced that his 2020 arena tour would strive to do better for fans suffering from anxiety. Under his LiveLive initiative, Capaldi’s concerts will include escape rooms for people who feel overwhelmed before or during the shows, a buddy-system for those heading to gigs alone, and trained staff. The move has been widely praised by fans, mental health organisations and the music industry. Jack Williamson of Music & You, the company Capaldi partnered with to bring LiveLive into action, says that many artists and venues have been in touch since the announcement, suggesting there is an appetite for this kind of change across the live sector. “Hopefully this will become a standard offering at venues of any size,” he says. LiveLive isn’t the only initiative looking to make attending music events more inclusive. Rising Northampton rapper Slowthai recently announced a tour where tickets will cost only 99p, allowing those from lower-income backgrounds to enjoy his shows too. Collectives and campaign groups across the UK are pushing for change, but how viable is this in the long-term – and howsafe can a space truly be? Music critic and DJ, Yewande Adeniran, who runs Intervention, a series of DJ workshops aimed at making the dance music scene more inclusive, isn’t convinced these changes are enforceable on a big scale: “I’ve been harassed and groped in places with ‘safe space’ policies, made to feel really uncomfortable when DJing ... I went to see Laura Marling, and white people spat at me – what if a crowd has never had to modify their behaviour before? You can’t police every person, especially at big gigs.” The music industry and, implicitly, concerts, are still intrinsically linked to a white, patriarchal rock’n’roll culture and its sanctioned debauchery, something that the young activist group Girls Against is trying to change. But can behaviour that has become the norm in gig and music culture be unlearned? Dr Nick Maguire, an associate professor in psychology at the University of Southampton, says that ventures such as Capaldi’s are a step in the right direction to make these changes eventually be seen as “normal”. He explains that behaviour alterations tend to be considered under self-determination theory, which suggests that people are more likely to behave in a particular way under three conditions: autonomy (they have decided to do it themselves); relatedness (connection to others); and competence (a positive change is made, attributable to what they have done). He finds the latter most relevant: “In the Lewis Capaldi case, there is some kind of benefit – people dealing with anxiety can benefit from this space.” He adds that “positive change” might come down to financial viability: “That’s not bottom line for everyone, of course, but for some people, being able to profit from change will make them want to do it.” While money can be a positive motivator, it is often all too clear how much big corporations are solely interested in #mentalhealth and #activism when it stands to gain them some cash. These changes need to be enduring and systemic, rather than wedded to trends, as Jess Partridge is all too aware. Partridge is a founding member of Keychange, a PRS-led initiative pushing for festivals to address their gender imbalances and pledge to a 50-50 line-up by 2022. She says that while questions over whose responsibility it is to make change can be slow progress, it is crucial to make sure inclusivity in all its guises is not just an overnight change. “Reactionary change isn’t always long-lasting, and it isn’t always productive, which is why we have to set achievable, more gradual targets to keep this going. One year of equality isn’t equality.” Good Night Out is a campaign that trains staff at venues, bars, pubs and festivals nationwide to deal with sexual harassment and assault. The organisers say all the venues they have worked with reached out to them first, which is a promising insight into conversations within the nightlife industry. Campaign co-director Jen Calleja agrees that expecting an immediate turnaround is not the way to create behavioural changes in these spaces: “You have to remain positive and hold on to a utopian prospect if you want social change, but we live in a society that is patriarchal, and that’s not just in these venues – so it means we have to start looking at taking education in schools on consent and relationships and how we treat people more seriously.” Calleja is pragmatic about the likelihood of ending sexual assault for good in these spaces: “Just because we’ve trained venues, it doesn’t guarantee that harassment and assault won’t take place – what we’re doing is trying to improve the infrastructure around what will happen if you report it.” For Nadine Artois of Pxssy Palace, a London-based night that prioritises queer people of colour, claiming to guarantee “safeness” is a pointless endeavour. “‘Safe space’ has become a buzzword now, but it’s unattainable,” she says. “It always sounds good on paper, and we were guilty of it at the beginning as well – being a safe space was our intention, and I thought that we could strive towards that. But we’ve been doing this for four years now, and I realise you can’t control people.” Still, the live sector is trying: this year’s Lovebox festival is bringing back the Sanctuary, an area for women and LGBTQIA+ people to take a break and, if necessary, feel comfortable reporting discomfort or sexual violence. For Pxssy Palace, the comfort of their guests is the No 1 priority – but they expect an exchange. They circulate a regularly updated list of what you can expect from them (accessibility, a buddy-system, a taxi fund for trans, gender non-conforming or disabled guests), and what they in turn expect from you if you attend one of their parties (drink plenty of water, don’t touch people without their consent, don’t assume pronouns). For somewhere like Pxssy Palace, creating a safer, more inclusive space, then, is about making your intentions clear, acknowledging your shortcomings (“transparency is key – be open if you can’t tick every box”) and adapting as you learn, and inviting people to participate in a respectful way. Inevitably, the backlash to this movement is that making gigs safer runs the risk of making them sterile. Music critic Anna Wood finds the suggestion laughable. “We have this idea that making things OK and fair for everyone makes them sanitised and wholesome, and that’s a lie.” She recalls seeing Le Tigre at the London Astoria in 2004: “I had been going to gigs for over 10 years at that point, but it took me a while to notice why I felt so amazing in there – the whole room was women, and it made me feel deep down relaxed and powerful and joyful. I remember thinking: ‘Is this what men feel like all the time?’” The ideal gig scenario, where everyone can feel safe, remains some way off, but everyone involved in the push agrees that it is worth doing if it makes live music more enjoyable for more people. “Everyone deserves to go out, to disassociate from whatever crap is going on in their life,” says Pxssy Palace’s Artois. “That’s what nightlife and music is all about really – it’s to take you away.”