Not being a paid-up member of the BDSM community myself – my application was rejected because I wanted to be one of those dominatrices who has men round to shout at them while they clean her kitchen – I’ve often wondered how annoyed they are that EL James’s risible Christian Grey and Anastasia Steele are their avatars in pop culture. They might be happier with Bonding, the new short-form series just released on Netflix (its eight episodes are between 15 and 18 minutes long), about semi-estranged high-school friends Tiff and Peter reconnecting in New York. Peter is a waiter by day and a would-be standup comedian by night, if he could only pluck up the courage to actually get on a stage, and behind with his rent 24/7. Tiff is a psychiatry student fending off unwanted advances from a fellow grad and a lecherous professor by day, and one of the city’s most sought-after dominatrices by night. Tiff inveigles Peter, who is gay but has sexual high-school history with her, into becoming her assistant, and the meat of every episode – extended vignette, really – is him learning the tricks of her trade and gradually being liberated by his enforced exposure to other people’s peckers and peccadillos. “You tell your friends about this?” he says in surprise, when a client who likes to be bound and peed on implies that he does. “Yeah,” says the client, equally surprised. “I’m not hurting anybody.” I don’t know if the mood of Bonding is perfect for the length or the length is perfect for the mood, but whichever came first, the overall effect is graceful and charming. Everything is fleet and light, nothing outstays its welcome and the audience is left to be swayed – should they need it – towards the message of tolerance by the joyful insouciance of the whole thing, rather than any heavy-handed lectures or rigid point of view. In Bonding, you are free to decide – as Peter’s roommate-landlord does – to ask your roommate-tenant to stick his finger up your bum in exchange for a free month’s rent, and your tenant is free to decide whether it is worth it or not. And your roommate-landlord’s girlfriend is free to punch someone in the face if she walks in on the pair of you. It is not a series, in short, for people who get het up about what people do to each other’s bums. Formally, this is one of the first major instances of the freedom Netflix offers to play around with running times rather than having to fit an idea, a mood or a season into a predetermined hour, half-hour, or six-eight-10 episode format. This liberation is long overdue – instances of shows that have been shrunk or stretched to fit what are basically advertisers’ needs have abounded throughout televisual history – and I look forward to what it will bring. Bonding is created, written, directed and loosely based on the personal experiences of Rightor Doyle, which may explain why the character of Tiff – as central to everything as Peter – is comparatively underwritten and under-finessed. You do not notice for a while because of such a strong, consistent performance from Zoe Levin. She portrays a young woman with the genuinely deep-rooted confidence that makes her choice of profession seem reasonable rather than far-fetched, and saves us all from having to watch another of those strained Sexy-with-a-capital-S performances that generally bedevil such representations. The sex in Bonding is explicit, non-gratuitous, usually written for laughs and played straight; the man in the penguin suit trying to get a kiss from Peter (also in a penguin suit) is worthy of a bespoke award. But it also occasionally delivers a piercing insight. When, for instance, the brittle Stepford wife Daphne (a fantastic turn from D’Arcy Carden – Janet in The Good Place) reveals that she tried to indulge her husband’s tickling fetish – but he gave “such a weird moan … I didn’t recognise that voice, or know if it was someone I wanted to meet” – while most people may not identify with these specific circumstances, who hasn’t encountered that moment when someone reveals a hidden face to you and you suddenly realise you have a decision to make that you never expected? The first series can be binge-watched in under three hours. More, again, harder please.