Every modern British restaurant these days serves “cultured butter” with its bread. What is it, exactly? And how hard is to make at home?Róisín, Richmond As the name implies, cultured butter is essentially butter to which some form of live culture has been added. That could take the form of anything from buttermilk to yoghurt, and the process really couldn’t be simpler. “It will make you seem, and feel, very accomplished,” says Manchester restaurateur and former Guardian columnist Mary-Ellen McTague, “but it’s actually a piece of cake.” Her first encounter with the stuff came about a decade ago. “I was on a research trip to Copenhagen, and at Kadeau they brought out this really good bread with what looked like a massive dollop of cream alongside. It was rich, sharp and utterly addictive. I couldn’t get enough of it – and still can’t. I’ll happily eat it by the spoonful.” The chef, whose most recent venture is The Creameries in Chorlton, makes hers by adding 10% culture to cold cream, then waiting for the bacteria to do its thing. “Cultured is just posh for ‘Going thick and slightly off’,” laughs Robin Gill of The Dairy and Sorella in south London, where they make the stuff in 40 kilo batches. “The only way to find out if it’s right is to taste, taste and taste again.” At home, he advises you start small, with a standard pot of good double cream (“But check the label: you don’t want one with any additives or thickening agents”). He uses twice the amount of buttermilk as McTague, but, as in all cooking, the ratio is mostly a matter of personal taste: “You want it to go nice and tangy, but not too far, for obvious reasons,” adds Gill, whose new restaurant, Darby’s, opens in Battersea next month. Once the cream has a satisfactory level of sharpness, there’s little more to it than whipping it up until the fat solids suspended in it separate from the whey. Assuming you don’t have a churner or Thermomix, it’s time to channel domestic science classes at school here: pour the cream into a large, spotlessly clean jar and shake like crazy. Then pour off the whey, transfer the solids to a muslin-lined sieve and hang for a day or so, to extract as much extra whey as possible. (Don’t tip the whey down the sink, though: it’s a brilliant vehicle for cooking greens, spinach and chard in particular, or use it in baking – instead of milk in muffin and scone dough, say; McTague even uses it to culture yet more butter.) It’s like riding a bike, Gill says: “Once you get the hang of it, there’s no looking back.” After that, you can wash the butter – McTague dunks hers, sieve and all, in ice-cold water, then squeezes it out again by hand (“You want it as dry as possible”) – but Gill doesn’t see the point. At this stage, whip in 1-2% salt, to taste, and you’re good to go. Chefs, being chefs, often add other flavours, too. “I’m a big fan of dried seaweed, blitzed to a powder,” Gill says, “but if you go down that route, reduce the salt content. We also use everything from roast chicken skin to smoked bone marrow.” Then again, as McTague says: “The whole point of cultured butter is that it has loads of flavour already, so you don’t really need to do anything else. Leave that kind of thing to us flash harry pros. There’s no need to stress about it.” • Do you have a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com