On her new album, Proto, Herndon is hoping to challenge the “pervasive narrative of technology as dehumanising” by using an AI entity of her own creation to aid with composition. “I don’t want to live in a world in which humans are automated off stage,” she said. “I want an AI to be raised to appreciate and interact with that beauty.” Eternal, the first single from the album (out in May), could be the internal monologue of the computer from Kate Bush’s Deeper Understanding. “All my dreaming belongs to you,” Herndon declares, playing the part of the yearning avatar. No simple love song, Eternal is a fractal trip through sampled vocal cries, pummelling drums and sword-sharp textures, and, in her poppiest moment yet, a ratcheting synth riser straight out of the EDM playbook. It’s high of concept and harsh of texture, but, crucially, preserves the forlorn emotion at its core. If you want to experience the murderous energy of the entire final season of Game of Thrones in five and a half minutes, turn to this single from returning Swedish melodic metallers Amon Amarth. It continues the band’s longstanding fascination with Vikings and Norse mythology – previous songs include The Pursuit of Vikings, The Way of Vikings and Destroyer of the Universe – in the form of a quite stupendously rousing battle song. “We stare at death with crimson grins / With Odin’s help we cannot fail!” roars Johan Hegg, as if to a longboat crew off to pillage a Northumberland abbey of its illuminated manuscripts. For her newest single, Mexican singer Sofia Reyes has summoned the talents of Brazilian reggaeton superstar Anitta, who has racked up collaborations with Iggy Azalea, Maluma and is rumoured to be featured on Madonna’s forthcoming record. Rita Ora, who has experience with singing RIP metaphors, adds extra flavour. The trio trade lines in Spanish, English and Portuguese as they pen a death certificate for “the bullshit” over a wavey Latin-pop beat before transitioning to its infectious hook, which appears to be inspired by the Selena classic Bidi Bidi Bom Bom. She scored her first Top 40 hit with the funk-pop of Juice. Now rapper-singer-flautist Lizzo turns to more straightforward rap on her latest offering, with quick-witted lyrics darting atop heavy bass. While the lyrical themes of Tempo don’t stray far from its predecessor (twerking; her status as a “bad bitch”), she’s anything but complacent. It speaks volumes for her charisma that even a cameo from Missy Elliott, trilling like an aroused sparrow, can’t eclipse Lizzo’s rambunctious lyrics. The Italian electronic composer was one of the hits of the inaugural Re-Textured festival in London last month: wrangling titanic works out of her analogue synth setup that take the histrionic melancholy of the cheesiest 1998-era trance and make it weighty enough for a concert hall. One of her biggest tracks is Fantas, featuring shifting arpeggios that never quite resolve alongside a stately melody. Her genius is to arrange these in a way that implies a giant techno kick drum pounding underneath that never materialises. (This track is not available on Apple Music.) Con Altura (Spanish for “with height”) is the second collaboration between Spain’s Rosalía and Colombia’s J Balvin. The disco-fied private jet in the music video seems to suggest a time-honoured double metaphor for getting high and rich. While the familiar dembow rhythm doesn’t distinguish it from other reggaeton songs, Rosalía’s airy, sweetly sinister vocals give Con Altura lift-off. J Balvin, meanwhile, asks you to “put your seatbelt on and a take a seat” in Spanish, making his safety briefing both sexy and useless to any non-native speakers. Luckily for them, the only turbulence here is the dynamic bassline, which loop-the-loops as the pair boast about living fast and dying young. Refugees from Ryan Adams’ earnestly soulful, Americana-inflected songwriting, who have recently chucked all his CDs in the bin, will find much to thrall to in Strand of Oaks. Timothy Showalter’s voice is as warm and softly grainy as a handsome old sideboard, and Eraserland, his strong new album, also features War on Drugs chuggers and My Morning Jacket country-rock barnstormers. The high point is this absolute classic of a man ballad: at 10 minutes long, there is space for a jazz piano solo as well as a traditional guitar-shredder, and Showalter’s uses deceptively simple vocal melodies as he lays a reassuring hand on your shoulder: “Chase the moments of bliss / They’ll outshine the bad.” Kindness (AKA producer Adam Bainbridge) and Robyn are long-term collaborators, though we’ve only heard a few songs from their creative excursions: the fantastic Who Do You Love, from Kindness’s 2014 album Otherness; Send to Robin Immediately, from Robyn’s 2018 album Honey, and this song, billed to Kindness. Cry Everything is more than lustrous enough to tide fans over until the music they made with R&B mavericks Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis finally sees the light of day: enveloping deep house built around a featherlight beat that sounds made from tiny puffs of air, ambience cohering into a sultry groove as the duo turn a confrontation with the source of their sadnesses into a meditation. As a treatise on the healing power of tears, it’s pure Robyn; but the low-slung duskiness augurs beautifully for Kindness’s new material. Manchester-born Shura has returned with her first single in nearly three years, and her first offering under new label Secretly Canadian. BKLYNLDN departs from the buoyant synthpop of 2016 debut Nothing’s Real and arrives at a slower, more assured sound. As the name suggests, the single is a two-parter about transatlantic love. Front-loaded with woozy synths and sensual grooves, the first few minutes are Shura’s yearning ode to her girlfriend visiting her in London. The lazy-morning-sex mood is swept away, though, in a breezy denouement that sees Shura return the favour and visit Brooklyn, pestering her partner for a trip to the beach. Who ever really knows what’s going on in a Cate Le Bon song? In the first taste of her new album, Reward, she sings of confusion, rearranged chairs, “dreams I’ve had and never shared”. But, as keyed in as she is to the absurd, she never sacrifices clarity where it’s needed: “Love you, I love you, I love you / But you’re not here,” she sings with affecting plainness. Daylight Matters is as melodic as her earlier work, but possessed of the captivating looseness of her 2016 album Crab Day and her wiggy collaborations with Tim Presley as Drinks. After she hits the piano keys decisively, she lets the notes sidle away, like a half-cut kitchen drinker sliding across the lino.