Jerry Sterner’s play about Wall Street avarice first opened off-Broadway two years after the stock market crash of 1987 and soon became a film starring Gregory Peck and Danny DeVito. Revived in our age of economic collapse and austerity, it is a timely rumination on the amorality of unfettered free-market capitalism. The plot pits Andrew Jorgenson, the patriarch of a family-run firm on Rhode Island, against Larry the Liquidator, a corporate raider from New York who seeks to make a profit from other people’s failing assets. “There’s an important story that needs to be told,” says William (Mark Rose), an employee at Jorgenson’s wire and cable firm, who is also our narrator. “It’s about loyalty, friendship, tradition and of course, money. Lots of money.” Jorgenson (Michael Brandon) presents ethical ways of business as “the very fabric that binds our society together”. Larry (Rob Locke) is blind to any moral arguments about fair play. The battle between these two kinds of capitalism begins with a boxing match bell at each half of the play. Director Katharine Farmer keeps the scenes light and pacy, switching from Jorgenson’s firm on Rhode Island to Larry’s swankier Manhattan office. Each man’s desk is positioned at opposite ends of a traverse stage. Larry is a demonic creation with a comic edge, rarely seen without a box of doughnuts, he is unapologetically acquisitive and devoid of conscience. He openly, carnivorously, ogles Kate Sullivan (Amy Burke), Jorgenson’s stepdaughter who is a sassy, trouser-suited lawyer with exaggeratedly big 80s hair, fighting to save the firm from Larry’s clutches. Larry’s predatory humour is deeply distasteful. “Let’s talk about your thighs, your legs, your tits,” he says to Kate in one verbal sparring match. The chemistry between them is built on such crude comments and we must believe that she is, at least in part, attracted to him. None of the characters, in fact, create the necessary tension or tenderness between them. The ending shows the defeat of ‘good’ capitalism and the triumph of greed but still seems peculiarly small-scale given the levels of guilt-free excess and dysfunction in banking that have come since. At Southwark Playhouse, London, until 11 May.