“Not in the history of football can another story like Tottenham’s be repeated!” Mauricio Pochettino there, as the 10th-richest club in the world prepare for the semi-finals of Big Cup, a stage of the competition reached in the past by the likes of Hibernian, Young Boys, Rapid Vienna, Standard Liege, Dundee, Zurich, Vasas Gyor, Dukla Prague, Spartak Trnava, Legia Warsaw, Ujpest Dozsa, Derby County, Widzew Lodz, Bordeaux, Nantes, Dundee United and Tottenham. Yes, it’s a singular achievement all right, the like of which we’ll probably never see again. But to be fair, this is virgin terrain for anyone yet to reach pensionable age, which just about includes The Fiver, so you can forgive the hyperbole. Spurs have only once before made it to the last four of Europe’s biggest and most pompous tournament, and that was way back in 1962, when Ipswich Town pipped Burnley to the title, the Beatles were still six months away from releasing Love Me Do, and lists of era-establishing cultural events had yet to become a journalistic cliché. Truly it was a different world. Benfica saw off Danny Blanchflower, Dave Mackay, Jimmy Greaves et al, 4-3 on aggregate, and that was Tottenham’s Big Cup dream jiggered for the rest of the century. Oh two-goal Benfica winger José Augusto! How could you! But to be even fairer, Pochettino was also alluding to Spurs reaching the semis having spent the grand total of nix in the last two transfer windows, as the club were busy sinking all their money, Ted Hastings style, in the fancy fromagerie that never was. Oh Spurs! Ah well, at least they could still scrape together the few bronze centimes they had left to knock up a new stadium. It’s an achievement all right, though in the run-up to Tuesday’s game the cockerels are coming home to roost in a big way, with Son Heung-min suspended, Harry Kane, Harry Winks, Erik Lamela and Serge Aurier knacked, and Moussa Sissoko doubtful with groin-twang. Not ideal, though opponents Ajax may point to the fact their team of semi-finalists has an average age of 12¾ and cost €36.23. Not in the history of football can a story like theirs be repeated. “We may be rivals but we are friends of the same city that holds such unique tradition in the football world. Recognition in the Premier League can only benefit Sheffield and we wish United well” – Wednesday owner Dejphon Chansiri issues a statement on the club website congratulating United on their Premier League promotion. Good luck with that one. Big Train, pigeons and eggy bread get the David Squires treatment. “Bielsa, Nasty Leeds, walking through a side uncontested to score the easiest goal possible (yesterday’s Fiver). Pah, that’s what Huddersfield did last Friday against Liverpool” – Mike Wilner. “I’m always happy to see an uncontested goal in a match but spare a thought for the guys in grey and white on 27 seconds behind the dugout on the video. This was clearly their moment of the season and it was ruined by the spirit of the game” – Phil Jones. “Would it be too much to mention the little matter of Norwich City getting promoted to the Premier League in yesterday’s Fiver apart from a small reference to another article right at the end? Well, obviously, the answer is yes. Or I wouldn’t be writing this” – Caroline Palmer. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Phil Jones. With Laurence Bassini’s takeover still up in the air and players yet to be paid amid the sorry mess at Bolton, there is no rearranged date set for Wanderers’ match against Brentford, which was postponed last weekend. Yes please, on all sorts of levels. Virgil van Dijk is scared of nothing, not even really big spiders, moody teenagers or Lionel Messi in Big Cup. “I think he is the best player in the world,” yawned the Liverpool defender, “but you see how we play and how we defend. We don’t defend one v one, we defend all together. We will be ready.” Meanwhile, Bobby Firmino may recover from muscle-knack in time to face Barça on Wednesday. John O’Pies, 59, will call time on his career at the end of this season with Reading. After a brief hiatus while managing Oldham, Paul Scholes is back to doing what he does best: having a go at Paul Pogba. “He needs a Bryan Robson or a Roy Keane next to him just to give him a little rollicking every now and then,” he tooted. “If he doesn’t get that he just carries on in his own little fantasy world, thinking he’s the best.” PSG boss Thomas Tuchel has had a pop at Neymar for landing what may or may not have been a punch on a fan after losing the French Cup final. “You can’t get into a fight with a spectator. You just can’t do that,” he roared. “It’s not easy to go up the steps after a defeat. It’s very difficult for me, for everybody – but we have to accept it.” And three months after his move to Barcelona, Kevin Prince-Boateng is still as shocked as the rest of us. “[My Mr 15%] called me one day and said: ‘You have to play well against Inter, someone is watching,’” he explained. “But he didn’t tell me who is watching. I was the best man on the pitch and after the game my [Mr 15%] came to me and said: ‘We’re going to Barcelona.’ I thought he meant Espanyol!” Ajax chief suit Edwin van der Sar gets his chat on with Amy Lawrence and explains the strategy that has made his club a big deal in Big Cup. And here’s Spurs’ Jan Vertonghen on what makes his former club so good. Our databods have crunched the numbers to show how the plucky Dutch tyros are punching above their weight. And if that’s just not enough box-fresh content on everyone’s new favourite grand old Dutch team for you, do this quiz in which you have to name these Ajax players from their career histories and then tell your friends how clever/dense you are. Norwich have been brilliant this season but their promotion to the top flight in 1986 takes some beating for drama, writes 1980s aficionado Steven Pye. In the wake of Arsenal’s WSL glory, Suzanne Wrack spares a thought for the potential Invincibles of Manchester City. An exclusive Canadian Premier League is hoping to boost the national team and make the country into a bona fide football powerhouse, whoops Joshua Kloke. And Paul Wilson can’t wait for Barça v Liverpool in Big Cup, because it will pit two generations of whizzy Anfield attackers against each other. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!