Sussex claimed a thrilling last-gasp victory over Essex after last pair Danny Briggs and Mir Hamza got them home with a ball to spare at Chelmsford. Essex had looked comfortably on course for victory when half-centuries from Tom Westley and Dan Lawrence helped them to 283 for seven before Matt Coles’s three wickets reduced Sussex to 94 for six. Will Beer and Laurie Evans took over from there, the former hitting a career-best 75, in a match-changing 121-run stand for the seventh wicket. Beer was dismissed by Peter Siddle with 42 still required off 5.2 overs but Briggs helped finish things off with a quickfire 37 from 26 balls. Lancashire’s Graham Onions denied his home county, Durham, as he produced an unlikely match-winning performance with the bat to snatch a last-over victory in the Royal London One-Day Cup at Gosforth. Onions built his career in the north-east on the back of his exploits with the ball but showed a canny knack with the bat on his return as he blasted a pair of sixes in the 48th over to swing the game the way of his adopted county. Lancashire sealed a three-wicket win with four balls to spare, with Onions unbeaten on 16 from six balls, to claim a fourth successive victory and draw level with second-placed Durham in the North Group. Alex Lees had earlier played a lone hand as he struck 115 in Durham’s 229 all out before Steven Croft fell one run short of his second century of the competition. Yet while the visitors wobbled Onions stood firm to secure the win. Champions Hampshire closed on a play-off place as Liam Dawson’s century set them on course for a 53-run win over Surrey at the Oval. Aiden Markram contributed 88 in a total of 307 before Dawson then claimed two for 39 as Surrey’s hopes of progress were ended. Opener Mark Stoneman made 70 at better than a run a ball but only Rory Burns (38) provided him with any support as the home side were dismissed for 254 in the 47th over. Chris Cooke’s career-best List A score of 161 kept Glamorgan’s slim hopes of progression alive following a 74-run victory over Gloucestershire at Bristol. The 32-year-old shared a fourth-wicket stand of 234 with Billy Root, who contributed 98 to a Glamorgan total of 331 for seven. Marchant de Lange then ripped through the home top order as Gloucestershire slumped to 26 for four. They were unable to threaten the target despite 75 off 70 balls from Jack Taylor in a lower-order rally. Wayne Madsen’s unbeaten 119 steered Derbyshire to a five-wicket win over Warwickshire. Half-centuries from Alex Thomson and Alex Mellor took Warwickshire to 288 for seven before Madsen coolly stroked 119 from 104 balls to leave Derbyshire just outside the play-off places. After Luis Reece and the captain, Billy Godleman, shared a stand of 61 for the first wicket, Tom Lace was dismissed cheaply but Madsen shared a fourth-wicket partnership of 134 with Alex Hughes (68) to steer the home side to the cusp of victory.