With Ole Gunnar Solskjær suggesting afterwards that Paul Pogba may operate deeper at times and Luke Shaw playing like a left‑back-cum-libero against Watford, this first win as the permanent manager suggests his brave new world will continue to feature a brightness of approach. Solskjær wishes to harness Pogba’s all-round ability to give more control of the ball as United are primarily a counter-attack unit. This was how Shaw opened up Javi Gracia’s impressive team with a majestic Matthias Sammer-like pass that put Marcus Rashford in to open the scoring. Before then United were poor as they were after the break until Anthony Martial’s strike proved the winner despite Abdoulaye Doucouré’s late finish. The goals from Rashford and Martial took them to 10 in the league to join Romelu Lukaku and Pogba in double digits: this has not occurred since the 1995‑96 season when Paul Scholes, Eric Cantona, Ryan Giggs and Andrew Cole did the same. Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester United 2-1 Watford This is uncharted territory for Roman Abramovich’s Chelsea. Managers have endured spells of dissent from those in the stands, and open revolt – as much as dreadful results on the pitch – ended up doing for André Villas-Boas and Luiz Felipe Scolari. But no head coach has endured such a prolonged mutiny as Maurizio Sarri. His team may have won at the Cardiff City stadium, leaning on a linesman’s oversight to spark their comeback, to avoid a fifth defeat in six away games, but there are very few signs of progress in their play. It is astonishing they are still so close to the top four. Had they lost this match, Sarri’s position would surely have been untenable. As it is, he limps on into the midweek meeting with Brighton and every slack display will provoke more mutiny. It is hard to see the Sarri project extending into a second season. Even wins as dramatic as this do nothing to safeguard his future. Dominic Fifield • Match report: Cardiff 1-2 Chelsea Awards season approaches and the Liverpool full-backs Andy Robertson and Trent Alexander‑Arnold should be on the shortlists, even if defenders no longer win the individual gongs. The last defender to win the Professional Footballers’ Association prize was John Terry in 2005. For the Football Writers’ Association award it was Steve Nicol in 1989. He might have been caught unawares by the quick free-kick that set up Lucas Moura’s equaliser, but Robertson had echoed fellow Scot and Liverpool predecessor Nicol in supplying the cross from which Roberto Firmino scored. His forays down the left caused problems for Kieran Trippier, Spurs’ right-back, in the first half but the pair’s attacking qualities tempt Jürgen Klopp to field a midfield safety blanket trio of Jordan Henderson, James Milner and Georginio Wijlnaldum in key fixtures. On this occasion, Liverpool surrendered control of midfield and almost the title race. John Brewin • Match report: Liverpool 2-1 Tottenham Fulham were ideal opponents for a side preparing to play eight games in a month. Manchester City did not have to extend themselves against Scott Parker’s team and it pleased Pep Guardiola that Kevin De Bruyne was able to stroll through his first start since 2 March. De Bruyne’s season has been disrupted by injuries but the midfielder’s return from a hamstring problem has come at a good time for Guardiola, who also had the vital Fernandinho available for the first time since the Carabao Cup final on 24 February. City’s squad is looking strong – Leroy Sané did not make it off the bench at Craven Cottage – and that should serve them well as they chase the quadruple, with the FA Cup semi-final against Brighton on Saturday and the looming triple-header against Tottenham bound to stretch them. They will hope to conserve more energy when they host Cardiff on Wednesday. Jacob Steinberg • Match report: Fulham 0-2 Manchester City Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels “I blame myself for this defeat,” said Moussa Sissoko after Liverpool’s late win. There’s no getting away from it, the Frenchman’s miss – through on goal but blazing over from 14 yards after Virgil van Dijk ushered him onto his weaker foot – was a shocker and if Liverpool go on to win the title by a point or two, this will be one of those moments that will define that triumph, in the same way Steven Gerrard’s slip and Demba Ba’s goal at the opposite end of the Anfield pitch came to define Liverpool’s title meltdown in 2014. A Sissoko goal would likely have given Spurs a 2-1 win, but instead it was Tottenham that crumbled. The 27-year-old must share some of the blame for that lack of composure but he is a big reason why Spurs are still sitting third and in the quarter-finals of the Champions League. Whatever positive mental shift he made at the beginning of the season has led to him becoming one of Tottenham’s most important players. It would be a shame to see a miss like this damage his confidence long-term – Spurs will need Sissoko at his rampaging best for the run-in. Michael Butler• Liverpool 2-1 Tottenham Hotspur: player ratings from Anfield There is no doubt Brendan Rodgers is a fine coach – anyone seeking confirmation need only ask him the time, or for directions – so his appointment as Leicester manager was entirely understandable. The squad he found at the King Power Stadium could scarcely complement his strengths and weaknesses more perfectly. He has inherited an excellent defence with an experienced goalkeeper and centre-backs, who will mitigate his organisational deficiencies, while in front of them he has a talented array of young, versatile players to improve who can only benefit from the freedom and confidence he will give them. This win was Leicester’s third in a row and, if Rodgers can refrain from indulging the hubris that saw him tinker with formation and personnel before his first game – which they lost – then he and his club are on to a very good thing. Daniel Harris • Match report: Leicester 2-0 Bournemouth For Alex Pritchard it must have been especially tough to bear. The Huddersfield midfielder was outstanding in the first half against Crystal Palace on Saturday as it looked like his side’s battle to avoid the inevitable may continue for another week at least. But having suffered a relegation at Selhurst Park six years ago as a Peterborough player, the former Tottenham loanee will not have fond memories of his latest trip to south London as the 2-0 defeat and wins for Southampton and Burnley confirmed the Terriers’ fate. Yet, along with the promising striker Karlan Grant, the 25-year-old could flourish in the Championship next season if given the opportunity to play regularly in an attacking role. Huddersfield face a busy summer as they prepare to adjust to life in the second tier but could be well-equipped to mount a promotion challenge if they can hit the ground running. Ed Aarons • Match report: Crystal Palace 2-0 Huddersfield Everton played some scintillating football at West Ham and, while he was not on the scoresheet, Dominic Calvert-Lewin was integral to a free-flowing display full of speed and movement. It was the 22-year-old’s fifth consecutive start and perhaps a young career that has flickered rather than ignited is starting to gather real momentum. “He can achieve what he desires, to be the striker of Everton and score many, many goals in our blue shirt,” Marco Silva said. The Everton manager admitted Calvert-Lewin needs to be more clinical, whether in the finish or the final pass, and the point was proved a couple of times in a game they might have won by a cricket score. But his improvement is clear and that run of starts should be extended against Arsenal on Sunday. “He is enjoying it and is proving to me he deserves to play in our team,” Silva said. Nick Ames • Match report: West Ham 0-2 Everton Stuart Armstrong was withdrawn at half-time in Southampton’s defeat at Arsenal and did not start another game for his club before departing on international duty. With Scotland he suffered humiliation in Kazakhstan and a barely adequate victory in San Marino. But on Saturday he was restored to Southampton’s starting lineup and was instrumental in a precious win over Brighton. Armstrong and Nathan Redmond were Saints’ best attackers, full of elusive movement and nice touches as Ralph Hassenhüttl’s side looked by far the more coherent and enterprising for 70 minutes. They were dynamic, too. Liverpool can expect a serious workout when they travel to St Mary’s on Friday and will need to keep a close eye on Armstrong who, like Virgil van Dijk, is another canny purchase Southampton made from Celtic. Paul Doyle • Match report: Brighton 0-1 Southampton Wolves could perhaps be excused for losing their concentration in this game – a Burnley free-kick routine caught out their defence as early as the second minute at Turf Moor – as they have a big week in prospect. On Tuesday they entertain Manchester United, hoping for a repeat of the victory that put them in the FA Cup semi-final against Watford that takes place on Sunday. Wolves play such a refreshing brand of open and attacking football most neutrals would like to see them lift the trophy, though merely by taking their chances Burnley issued a reminder that possession, pace and passing ability do not always win the day. Wolves could still do with a little more punch up front: their total of 38 league goals is not only the lowest in the top half of the table, it is only a single goal better than Burnley have managed in a season haunted by fears of relegation. Paul Wilson • Match report: Burnley 2-0 Wolves