Good morning briefers. I’m Martin Farrer and this is all the news you can use on this first day of April. British summer time might have arrived but British politics is still stuck in an endless winter of discontent. As the process to decide how – or if – the UK leaves the EU drags on, the cabinet is split between remainers who want to force an option based on a customs union and Brexiters pushing for a no deal. Theresa May, still hoping to pass her deal at the fourth attempt this week, appears helpless to bring them into line with the rival camps threatening mass resignations if they don’t get their way. The action moves back to parliament later today when MPs are due to hold indicative votes on Brexit options. They range from a customs union to no deal on 12 April, to a second referendum to revoking article 50 and postponing Brexit. David Gauke, the justice secretary and leading remainer, warned that it was “not sustainable” for May to ignore the will of the Commons if MPs voted for a customs union. In another twist, Julian Smith, the chief whip, told the BBC that a softer Brexit was “inevitable” after the government lost its majority after the 2017 election. Our political editor, Heather Stewart, picks through the ruins as she looks at what might happen next. She concludes that no one knows the path we will take if May’s deal falls again. Columnist John Harris, meanwhile, despairs that the country has not been angry enough about Brexit, instead falling back on world-weary humour to deal with the crisis. But if you’ve had enough of Brexit, don’t worry: a secret working party drawn from Britain’s leading institutions is developing plans for a “healing tsar” to reunite the divided nation. Based on an idea first floated by Prince Charles, insiders say the role could be filled by Bob Geldof or Chumbawamba singer Alice Nutter or former Dollar vocalist David Van Day. Health duty – Public sector workers such as teachers, nurses and police officers will be required by law to “spot warning signs” of violent crime among young people, under government plans to be announced today. The signs that a young person could be in danger could include presenting at hospital with a suspicious injury, to worrying behaviour at school or issues at home. Staff could be held accountable for failing to act on what the government is calling a “public health duty”. It comes as Sajid Javid granted police new powers to increase stop and search activity following a spate of bloodshed across London and the rest of England since the start of 2019. Election dramas – Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has used every conceivable ruse to shore up his support in Turkey’s local elections, but it looks as though his hardline message has been rejected by voters in the two main cities. Erdoğan claimed overall victory on Sunday night after his ruling AKP took nearly 45% of the votes compared with 30% for the main opposition, with 90% of ballots counted. But recounts seem likely today as the opposition claimed victory in Istanbul and Ankara in what would be the first significant defeat for his party since coming to power in 2002. In Ukraine, an actor and comedian whose only political experience is playing the role of president in a TV drama series, is leading the first ballot in the presidential election. With 11% of the ballots counted, Volodymyr Zelensky has 29% and will likely run off later this month against either incumbent president Petro Poroshenko or former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko. Elsewhere in eastern Europe, Slovakia has elected its first female leader. ‘You can’t mix’ – The row about social segregation in housing developments has deepened as people living in shared ownership apartments complain that they are shut out of facilities such as gyms, car parks and gardens. Segregation is often enforced through the use of electronic keys allocated only to private householders with shared owners obliged to use separate entrances or “poor doors” used in social housing. “You can’t mix with other people and it feels segregated,” said Gautama Payment, 35, who lives with his wife and three children at the Vista development in Battersea, west London. Kim case over – A Vietnamese woman who is the only suspect in custody for the killing of the North Korean leader’s brother has admitted to a lesser charge in a Malaysian court this morning. Doan Thi Huong nodded as a translator read the new charge of voluntarily causing injury in the death of Kim Jong-nam at Kuala Lumpur airport in 2017. She had faced a murder charge but is now expected to be freed next month. It follows the acquittal of another suspect, Indonesian woman Siti Aisyah, last month. Liars and a cheat – A study of 40,000 teenagers claims that North Americans are the biggest liars in the world, while British youngsters rank mid-table in the list of shame. Researchers asked participants how much they understood of mathematical concepts but included three fake topics in the list to flush out the worst fibbers. They may have been inspired by the person a new book calls the Commander in Cheat, which claims that Donald Trump is the “world’s worst golf cheat”. Written by award-winning journalist Rick O’Reilly, who has played with Trump, it quotes examples from professional Brad Faxon, Samuel L Jackson and the musician Alice Cooper. Now all charges have been dropped against the actor Jussie Smollett, who was accused of staging a racist and homophobic attack, we examine the issues surrounding the case. Plus: Lucy Knight on being gay and a Christian. The arrival of spring seems an appropriate moment to look at the places in the UK most beloved by our readers in the latest of our top tips travel guides. Ranging from the remote beauty of the Easdale Islands off Oban to the charm of Hastings old town, and from the solitude of Spurn Point near Hull to the back-to-back terraces of Birmingham, there is something for everyone in this eclectic collection. And now that the days are getting longer, you can start planning your visits. Based on the readers’ selections, the briefing votes for Wasdale Head in the Lake District. Jürgen Klopp says a first league title for 29 years would be reward for Liverpool’s formidable willpower after they staged another dramatic late flourish to beat Tottenham and return to the Premier League summit. Neil Warnock, Cardiff City’s manager, criticised Chelsea’s equalising offside goal and a penalty not given, saying after a 2-1 defeat that he was “sickened” by the officials’ decisions. In the women’s game, Manchester United moved four points clear of Tottenham with a 5-1 win against their title rivals. Lewis Hamilton may have won the Bahrain Grand Prix for Mercedes but it was Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc who captivated in a fascinating drama. And Roger Federer became tennis’s first repeat champion of 2019 when he won his 101st career singles title by beating defending champion John Isner in the Miami Open final. One of Russia’s richest women, Natalia Fileva, has died in a plane crash in Germany. The 55-year-old was a passenger in a light aircraft travelling to Frankfurt when it crashed in a field, killing her, the pilot and another passenger. She was the co-owner of Russian airline S7 and was worth an estimated £460m. Asian markets were boosted by stronger-than-expected economic data from China. The FTSE100 is seen rising 0.5% this morning while the pound will buy you $1.303 and €1.162. Tory leadership woes lead most of the front pages today. The Telegraph has comments from Chris Grayling: “Tories need ‘experience’ at helm”. The Times carries the same comments from Grayling et al, saying: “Soft Brexit will shatter Tory party, May warned” and the FT has “May battles to contain Tory feud as aides push poll idea”. The Guardian’s splash is “Ministers try to force May’s hand as cabinet rift widens” and the i has: “Tories at breaking point on Brexit”. The Mirror focuses on Labour’s election preparations: “We are ready for power”. In other news, the Mail has “PM: knife crime now a disease”, the Express says: “New diabetes patient every three minutes” and the Sun focuses on the love lives of two celebrities. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com