I was saddened to learn that the Department for Education will be introducing one-off testing for four-year-olds on a voluntary trial basis in September at a cost of £10m to the taxpayer (March against plans to test four-year-olds, 26 April). It’s not clear what the point of this is. The DfE won’t share the outcome of the tests with teachers, so it can’t be used to plan the right educational environment for children. They argue that it’s to measure the schools and that the test scores will be held centrally, with each child becoming a unique number on a national database. Baseline assessment poses many challenges and distortions, and risks branding children from an early age. It has a horrible competitive edge so that some parents may start to “tutor” their children to pass the test while other children with less engaged parents will get lower scores and be branded problems from an early age. Small children need time, nurture, play and a broad and balanced curriculum led by engaged capable adults to help them to develop and learn. Rushing them to count, recite the alphabet and write words by three or four years is unhelpful and unnecessary. There is simply no evidence that says this hurry will improve their learning. The government must stop this testing obsession and articulate what kind of education small children need to thrive.June O’SullivanCEO, London Early Years Foundation • Parents are right to question the whole point of the new baseline assessments. The government has been clear that the purpose of these tests is to hold schools to account for the progress children will have made by the time they take key stage Sats at aged 11. According to an evaluation by the British Educational Research Association, however, the tests will not even serve this sole purpose. Because of a range of factors including age and developmental differences, statistically insignificant pupil cohorts, and pupil and staff mobility, the BERA evaluation concluded that “any value-added calculations that will be used to hold schools to account will be highly unreliable”. Neither will the tests provide any feedback to help children’s learning. The same can be said about all the other tests that children are compelled to sit in virtually every year of their primary school lives. The schools minister, Nick Gibb, has even stated that key stage 2 Sats are about “holding schools to account” and that “the results [of Sats] will have no impact on a child’s future education”. Is it not time for the government to launch an open and evidence-based review of the value of statutory national testing in our schools, which parents and teachers can fully and meaningfully contribute to?Chris PrattAuthor, Building a Learning Nation • John Airs is right to identify Kenneth Baker’s introduction of the national curriculum as the beginning of the current malaise in state education (Letters, 26 April). I was a teacher in England then and saw the immediate harm it did. It was the first time a British government had gone beyond its remit of the social and political organisation of education and into the educational aspect. It was as if the minister of health had started telling brain surgeons how to conduct their operations. Nowadays, of course, we are used to ministers of education telling teachers what to teach and how to teach it. We are also, sadly, used to the dire consequences of their pronouncements.Michael BulleyChalon-sur-Saône, France • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition