Akram Khan, one of the greatest dancers of our generation, is waiting tables at an old-school curry house on Brick Lane in east London. Khan grew up above a restaurant just like this, run by his Bangladeshi father on the other side of the city. He worked shifts there as a teenager in the 90s. When the restaurant was empty, he would dance around “trying stuff out with the plates”, which is just one of many lovely images in The Curry House Kid (Channel 4). And yet, decades later, back among the white tablecloths, salmon-coloured napkins, white diners and seven-page menus, Khan feels “really out of place”. More than that, he is traumatised. “I ran like a bolt from the restaurant,” explains the dancer, choreographer and kathak virtuoso at the start of this brave, beautiful documentary. “And I’ve never looked back until now.” The Curry House Kid explores why Khan bolted, and why he came back. Also, why the lifelong, slow and subtle return to his cultural heritage, a journey that will be familiar to most second-generation immigrants (certainly this one), is so painful. So unspeakable. Perhaps this is why his body became his voice. Most of my life I’ve run away from being Bangladeshi,' he says. 'All of my life I’ve been running away from my father.' “I was quite shocked at how angry I was,” he admits at the end of the shift, recalling the racism his family experienced when he was a teenager and the conflict that arose from his dancing. “A bunch of lads would order food and, once they’d eaten [it], the trouble would begin.” He remembers how a beer glass was smashed over his head “once or twice”. How his dad continued to welcome drunk, white racists, feed them, call them “sir”, for decades. “Our job was to serve them and to absorb all the shit,” he says. His dad didn’t want him to dance: he wanted him to take over the restaurant. “If I’m being honest, most of my life I’ve tried to run away from being Bangladeshi,” he says. “All of my life, I’ve been running away from my father.” Threaded through this stirring narrative is the exquisite piece Khan creates in response, performed at the end in a disused Brick Lane warehouse. The choreography is extraordinary: expressive, dynamic and deeply moving. In one section, he hunches over, smudges black paint across his shaved head, and becomes his father. In another, he spins and falls, keeping up imaginary plates in his dad’s restaurant. In the Brick Lane boxing club where British-Bangladeshi boys taught themselves to fight racism in the 70s, he takes to the ring and through a series of rising and falling movements distils the terror and shame of racism into dance. This cleverly choreographed documentary, itself a dance between life and art, the personal and political, is also a meditation on the people who brought curry to Britain. On Brick Lane, where the latest invasion is (invariably white, middle-class) hipsterism, and the number of curry houses has dropped from 65 to 21, he meets Yusuf. A Banglatown onion cutter for more than half a century, Yusuf lost his father within a month of arriving in Britain and, completely alone in a foreign country at the age of 11, started working 12-hour shifts in a restaurant. He meets Brick Lane’s first female owner of an “Indian” restaurant, a fellow curry house kid who is modernising the scene and being rewarded with hostility from the traditional community. “It’s a daily battle,” she admits, following an excruciating scene in which she is employed by the council to advise a local owner and it goes horribly wrong. “There’s no place for me. I’ve felt like this for a long time, which is tragic. Not welcome within my own community.” In south London, Khan returns to the location of his father’s restaurant. He recalls how he used to scratch his skin because he wanted to be white. The terrible rows with his dad. He sees his mother, whom he describes as “the reason I dance”. “When I see Akram dance I feel so happy,” she says, hand on heart and tears in her eyes. Finally, he goes to see his father. “Sometimes I don’t like it,” his dad says when Khan reminds him of how he used to shout when catching his teenage son dancing in the restaurant. “It’s too much for the customer.” Then he gets emotional. “It’s alright, Appa,” Khan says quietly. It is what is not said in this strained encounter that resonates at the end of this deeply touching and, for me, bruising documentary. Which is why we need artists such as Khan to articulate it. As a student at the nearby Mulberry School for Girls, where 90% of the students are British-Bangladeshi, puts it: “Dance does the things that you cannot speak about.”