Warning: this article contains offensive language. At the first game of this season, a fan who sits three people along from me at the Emirates screamed racist abuse at Raheem Sterling. We are not far back and Raheem was right in front of us, so I’m pretty sure he heard. This incident was before what happened at Chelsea. I was horrified, but no one challenged him apart from me. As the only female there, I was very disappointed no one backed me up. I told him it was not acceptable and that no one wants to hear his vile abuse. He responded: “Well he is black and he is a cunt. I’m only speaking facts.” I was lost for words at that response. This is the first time in recent memory I have heard racism at football, certainly the first incident I have heard at the Emirates. I was on a tube with Chelsea fans who had attended a Europa League match at Stamford Bridge when a fan started chanting: “Spurs are going to Auschwitz.” Eventually his friends shut him up, but only after a while. It’s worth noting my grandmother was a prisoner in Auschwitz and, among other things, would clear the gas chambers and bury the dead. I played Saturday League football for a couple of years in Yorkshire and was one of the only black lads in the whole league. During a visit to Mixenden I was called a “black cunt” by passers-by. What’s shocking is that not only did the ref hear it, but all the fans and players too. A few of the rival fans even giggled and openly laughed. At the end of the game, all was forgotten. The ref didn’t have a word with me or ask me if I wanted to speak to the local FA. In hindsight, I was quite numb to it all. I showed the racists I’d won though because, at the end of the season, I won the league’s player of the year award and they probably saw my face in the local paper. At a game between Liverpool and City, a very drunk fan behind me was berating Daniel Sturridge for missing a shot and yelled: “Fucking shit, fucking nigger.” I immediately turned around and shocked myself by aggressively telling him to “shut your dirty, racist mouth”. He backed down immediately, saying he didn’t mean it and apologised repeatedly. I told him to leave before I reported him to the police and he did. To be honest, I was quite shaken by the whole thing. Racist attitudes have been hidden for years but Brexit and the rhetoric of the right and far right, aided by the appalling lack of moderation by social media companies, has created a view among people who hold these views that the gloves are off now with racist abuse. Four years ago we were taking the tube to Arsenal when a West Ham supporter, travelling with his father, sang a song that ended with the words: “And we hate fucking Jews.” We remonstrated with him as we went up to the ticket hall but he refused to apologise or engage, and his father tried to soothe things in hopelessly inappropriate ways – including putting arms around us and telling us he was “a great admirer of the Jewish race”. The son, however, just walked off saying: “They [Jews] are just a bunch of fucking wankers.” We spoke to British Transport Police at the barriers and, to their credit, they acted unequivocally and swiftly; he was arrested on the spot and we spent several hours at Kings Cross station giving witness statements. The case went for hearing several weeks later and the police and court staff were exemplary in their support and professionalism. He maintained a not guilty plea until the day before – presumably hoping we wouldn’t have the courage to give evidence in person – but then changed it to a plea of guilty at the last minute. He was fined, banned from West Ham and banned from travelling on match days. Both Arsenal and West Ham were supportive, but we’ve only been to one game since and have given up our shares in season tickets as it left a bad taste that will never be fully expunged. About three years ago, I heard it again for the first time in years. I was devastated. My wife is black and my kids are mixed race and witnessed it as well. It spoilt football for all of us for a long time. Clubs should be fined, have points deducted and play behind closed doors. Our League Two team had just lost an away game, again, to a late goal. Players came over to applaud the fans and two men – one middle aged, one in his 20s – told a black player to “fuck off, you useless black cunt”. Racism never went away, neither did homophobia. What went away was the expression of it. The question is not why have become people less tolerant; it’s why do people feel much more comfortable in showing it publicly? In my opinion, the answer largely lies with the fact that the only political party in this country that has actually delivered on a promise in the last decade is an ill-disguised bunch of fascists, and, to top that, the most powerful person in the world got his job despite (maybe because of) his systematic abuse of any minority put in front of him. I heard fans at our ground calling opposition players “monkey” and “nignogs” so complained. Next match they called opposition players “darkies” and said: “Oh, better not say that as you’ll be called racists – bunch of pricks round here!” Football is a representation of society. Brexit and the rise of right-wing politics have made it acceptable to express these views. Football cannot and should not be viewed in isolation to the wider political climate. Some fans are good. Some are silent. Some are horrific. I love football and am pleased players such as Sterling, Kean and Deeney are speaking out, but please let us not pretend this hasn’t been bubbling under the surface since the 1980s and 1990s. I’m a Sheffield United support who has travelled extensively watching my team. I can remember some racism in the 1980s when I was a boy, but racism was more or less nipped in the bud by the emergence of Brian Deane, who became a club icon and was quickly taken to our hearts. He broke down a lot barriers permanently at Sheffield United. I’ve not heard anything racist at our club for a long time and, the last time I did, it was several years ago and the perpetrator was swiftly shouted down and self-policed by our supporters. Things have improved immeasurably since the 1980s. At the last match I went to, Liverpool v Bayern Munich, I heard a Bayern player being called a “fucking Nazi” twice. Both times I was too far away to identify the perpetrator, but I’m not sure I would have felt safe challenging them. I was alone and it was only the second time I’ve been. I wish I’d shouted back: “Shut your racist mouth.” It might have made them think twice and maybe given someone else the confidence to speak up. Coulda, woulda, shoulda. I hope there won’t be a next time but, if there is, hopefully I’ll be braver. I didn’t know at the time that there is an app to report racist abuse. The sport needs to step up but so do fans. They have the power to stop the abuse. Travelling as an away fan to White Hart Lane, I am always disgusted by the behaviour of fans around me who think it is funny to hiss – making the sound of gas canisters – in the direction of Tottenham fans. It makes my skin crawl. I was a 17-year-old Sikh boy when I went to see Derby play Portsmouth at Pride Park in 2010. A minibus of Pompey fans drove past, hurling abuse and calling me a “fucking Paki”. It was the first time I’d gone to a game on my own. I was angry but never let it get to me and I still go to games regularly. Earlier this season I was watching Newcastle’s abject surrender to Watford in the FA Cup from the Gallowgate End when one of the Watford players went down injured. From behind me I heard the words: “Get up you black cunt.” I turned and shouted up to the crowd, asking: “Who said that?” One large bloke said: “Me.” I’m a white, British man but can’t stand any kind of racist abuse and have a history of challenging this sort of behaviour. I started – against my better judgment – hurling some colourful language back at this bloke and I told him to get out because that sort of craic does not belong to the ground. He doubled down and shouted back at me. Seeing I was getting nowhere, I attracted the attention of a steward and they, along with the police, did a great job. They found out what happened and asked if I was happy to take this further. I wondered about the inconvenience but thought, if he’s going to carry on like that, of course I would. I went back to my seat and a few minutes later the man was escorted out. A few weeks later I gave a statement to the police and it seems the man is headed for court and presumably a fine and ban if he is found guilty. I saw Manchester City play a friendly in Limerick in 2012. It’s a small city so you don’t usually get Premier League clubs visiting. In the first half, some lowlife threw a banana at Gaël Clichy. You could see his heart sink. It turned my stomach. It was a normal game at the Stadium of Light. I was halfway through my second season as a season-ticket holder. I had been sat next to the same bloke for a while and we’d share the odd glance and laugh, throw a bit of light-hearted abuse towards opposition players and despair at our own. One day he shouted “we’re not in the jungle anymore, are we Nyron?” towards our very own Nyron Nosworthy. I didn’t really know what to say. It’s an experience that has stayed with me. It was my first experience of racist abuse in a football match. Perhaps it was bravado on his side. What surprised me more than anything was that it was a throwaway comment. Towards our own player. My son’s football coach called him a “terrorist” because he is half Algerian, the two Asian boys on the team “Pakis” and the black boy “a monkey”. The coach has been asked to leave but my son says he has still been coaching. I was lucky enough to participate in a PFA golf day about six years ago and was in the same group as a high-profile former footballer. He played golf (poorly) without saying anything untoward, but sat down for dinner that evening and started talking about a very famous former England striker who had also played that day. He proceeded to describe the former England player as an “uppity nigger” several times and quite loudly. This went on for some time without any encouragement. He didn’t know me at all except for four hours on the golf course and he demonstrated absolutely no shame, embarrassment or restraint. It has stuck with me and, when I see this man or his name, I switch channels or turn the page. Very unpleasant character. It was the sheer brazenness of it that shocked me – as if it was absolutely normal to talk like like that. Twice this season I have heard a “fan” shout racist abuse at players of the opposing team. One occasion was blatant use of the “N” word and just last week a man behind me shouted: “You lanky streak of liquorice.” I reported both incidents but am unaware if anything has or will be done. My son has also been involved at grassroots level, where a member of his team was targeted with racial abuse on social media. There has been an appalling lack of support for the club by the governing bodies and a ridiculously lengthy time between the reporting of the incident and any conclusion – 13 weeks on and we still await an outcome. Kick It Out T-shirts are all well and good, but significant funding and lifetime bans are needed. This is not an issue that should be bogged down with pointless, time-consuming bureaucracy. At the Nottingham Forest v Aston Villa match this season, I witnessed a man jeer as our Iranian forward Karim Ansarifard was substituted. The man loudly exclaimed: “You can’t win anything with a Paki up front.” As he looked round for validation from other fans, I am grateful to say he found none. However, he was not challenged by any of us either. I felt myself freeze as I heard the words and then unable to respond out of shock. This was my first experience of such blatant racism as a season-ticket holder of many years. I’ve wrestled with my conscience over my failure to challenge him or at least report it to a steward, and have now resolved to act without hesitating if I ever experience anything like this again. I went to a Chelsea match a few years ago and saw a Chinese fan being racially insulted by a group of middle-aged men in the concourse at half-time. They told him in no uncertain terms to get his scarf off as he was not the right race to be a Chelsea supporter. I would not go to Chelsea again after what I witnessed. I am not a typical West Ham supporter. I’m female, in my sixties and Jewish. I grew up in the East End and inherited a love for West Ham from my father. I subsequently inflicted this love on my children and my young grandson. I am a season-ticket holder and love going to away games as well. The racist song I’ve heard most frequently is the “Tottenham Willy Song”, which describes running around Tottenham with said appendages hanging out and has the refrain: “I’ve got a foreskin, haven’t you, fucking Jew.” I heard this song at the Boleyn Ground more times than I can remember and I’ve heard it at Norwich, Wembley, Wigan, Charlton, the London Stadium and many other grounds. I’ve ranted online and contacted the club, to no avail. I contacted Kick it Out after a large number of people chanted it outside the London Stadium before a game against Chelsea; they were unable to follow up my complaint as there was no hard evidence. I can’t see football becoming fully inclusive any time soon. I have played competitive football for 40 years for many teams. In the last 20 years, I have played in the Southern Amateur League – the largest amateur league in the world – mostly around London and the M25 corridor. I have witnessed all manner of swearing, aggression and fighting, but I don’t think I have come across much (if any) racism. I’ve played with players from all over the world and from all kinds of backgrounds. Maybe I have been sheltered over the 40 years or maybe, because London is diverse, it is generally more tolerant? Having moved from Brazil to the UK in 2002, I decided to join a local Sunday League club in Bishop’s Stortford in 2009. During one match, the referee awarded me a free-kick. My opponent thought it wasn’t a foul, moaned at the referee and then turned to me and called me a “fucking immigrant”. Some of my teammates told the guy that this wasn’t necessary and I questioned the referee, but he simply ignored me. The offender carried on playing until the end of the match. On reflection, I wish I had walked off the pitch there and then. I didn’t and to this day I feel I let myself down. My brother and I used to publish a podcast and website dedicated to a club in the Midlands. We never hid the fact that we are Asian but we didn’t make a point of it either. I don’t think many of our listeners or readers knew but one day we played Leicester and, given the ethnic make-up of the city, there were a few racist tweets from our fans doing the rounds. My brother called them out on this, resulting in a “heated Twitter debate”. After this, we started getting comments on the website referencing our colour and the stuff on Twitter got more and more threatening – eventually resulting in us being told we would be knifed at an upcoming match. We carried on for a few months, but shut down both the site and podcast a bit later. Our hearts were never in it after that. No matter how much we supported the club or dedicated our time to it, we knew it counted for nothing.