Rising numbers of pupils in England are being taught in state schools that have been left to drift for months or even years without established management, according to figures obtained by Labour. It estimated that more than 50,000 pupils are currently attending academies in England that have been unable to join a multi-academy trust or find a sponsor, leading the opposition to claim that the government’s flagship schools improvement policy is in tatters. An academy is a state-funded school that is independently managed outside of local authority control. More than 8,000 schools have become academies since 2010. Labour said the figures it had obtained – via a parliamentary question from the shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner – showed that 93 schools with an estimated 53,000 pupils were waiting to join a new trust, having either been abandoned by or taken away from their previous sponsor. The figures are an increase on the 40,000 pupils trapped in 64 similar “zombie schools” uncovered by a Guardian investigation 16 months ago, suggesting that the Department for Education (DfE) is still struggling to find willing sponsors. “The Tories have created a fragmented school system in which many schools are simply unable to access additional support, and tens of thousands of pupils will suffer the consequences,” Rayner said. “Parents are right to be concerned that their children’s schools cannot make long-term planning decisions or hire new members of staff.” Passing an academy from one chain to another is known as “rebrokering” in the DfE’s terminology, triggered in some cases by trusts voluntarily giving up schools because of financial or management difficulties, and in others by having schools removed by the DfE, often because of failure to improve a struggling school. Four of the schools in the latest data have gone more than a year without being transferred between trusts, while one has gone without effective formal management for just under two years, and a further 31 have been waiting for rebrokering between six and 12 months. For the first time, the group of unwanted academies includes two special schools and one provider of alternative provision, which educates pupils who have been excluded or are otherwise struggling at mainstream schools. The remainder include 42 secondary academies and 48 primary academies across England. “Despite leaving almost 100 schools in limbo the government are taking no direct action to ensure that schools are rebrokered quickly and effectively to ensure that schools and pupils get the support they need,” Rayner said. “The next Labour government will address this, allowing academies to return to their local authority as part of the rebrokering process.” Nadhim Zahawi, the children’s minister, responded: “When transferring an academy from one trust to another, there may be a number of things that can take time to resolve with the incoming trust who has agreed to take on the school, such as private finance initiative contracts – which can be the most problematic – issues relating to land, financial matters or the process of transferring staff from one trust to another.” At an event to celebrate the academy programme last week, the education secretary, Damian Hinds, told an audience of trust leaders and headteachers: “The overwhelming majority of academies – that’s more than 8,000 schools – tell a positive story. “I see and hear about this every day in my job, and we’ve come a long way in the past eight years thanks to the hard work and dedication of teachers and school leaders across the country.” The DfE said that “hundreds of schools each year continue to make the positive choice to become an academy”. But the policy remains controversial among many parents; there is strong opposition to forced academisation over the lack of transparency in how academy sponsors are selected.