Hugo Lloris 8 Shaped the tie with his penalty save – a celebration of his instinct and athleticism. Safe hands throughout. Kieran Trippier 7 Big challenge up against Sterling, he kept his England colleague in check. Toby Alderweireld 8 That there was little to write about from Agüero reflected his understated efforts. Jan Vertonghen 7 Could revel in his part in the defensive collective, which yielded a precious clean sheet. Danny Rose 7 Unlucky to be penalised for the penalty, he risked another one when he shoved Mahrez. Gave his opponent nothing. Moussa Sissoko 8 Scored points for surging runs. Adopted thou shall not pass mentality without the ball. Harry Winks 8 First start in over a month, made light of lack of match fitness. Tidy on ball. Standing ovation when withdrawn. Christian Eriksen 8 Cool on the ball in tight spaces, technique ever easy on the eye. Some nice passes. Assist for the goal. Dele Alli 8 Excellent movement off the ball. Showed his quick feet. Latent menace. Went off with hand injury. Son Heung-min 8 Always willing to run at City, rewarded for never-say-die attitude when shot fizzed underneath Edersen. Harry Kane 6 Frustrated by rough treatment, did he seek retribution on Delph, which led to injury? Missed a decent chance. Subs Lucas 7, Wanyama 6, Llorente n/a Ederson 6 Made good first-half save from Kane but a bad look when Son’s shot went underneath him. Kyle Walker 5 Booed constantly, the ex-Spur looked rattled. Not his usual marauding presence. Made mistakes. Nicolas Otamendi 6 Played on the edge at times, very physical in his dealings with Kane. Aymeric Laporte 6 Not a night for his classy side, rather for rolling up his sleeves. Mucked in on the collective effort. Fabian Delph 4 Had to do better on Son’s goal but stopped when he thought ball had gone out. Fernandinho 6 With VAR in effect, he ran a risk when he left an elbow in on Kane. Brought the midfield snarl. Gundogan 5 Preferred to De Bruyne, neat enough on the ball but not comfortable in physical battle. Riyad Mahrez 5 In for the injured Bernardo Silva, struggled to impose himself. Booked for cynical foul on Lucas Moura. David Silva 6 Difficult to pin down in the spaces between the lines, he probed for killer pass but without joy. Raheem Sterling 6 Worried Spurs with his pace, not least when slicing inside. Could not find the end product. Sergio Agüero 4 So often the scourge of Spurs, he fluffed his lines this time from the penalty spot. Ineffective. Subs: Jesus 5, De Bruyne n/a, Sane n/a