Tens of thousands of NHS workers are struggling to get by on the minimum wage because their private sector employers are failing to match public sector pay rises. The estimated 100,000 low-paid cleaners, porters, security guards and catering staff who work for private contractors in hospitals across England are being treated as “second-class employees”, thanks to a growing pay divide between public and private sector workers, according to the country’s leading health union. Concerns about the pay gap come ahead of tax and benefit changes in the new tax year, starting this weekend, which have fuelled fears of widening inequality, despite claims by the government that the era of austerity is over. In today’s Observer, Torsten Bell, director of the Resolution Foundation, said that “adding up all the new tax and benefit changes for the year equals an average £280 income boost for the richest fifth of households, but a £100 reduction for the poorest fifth. “This year’s income tax cuts are bumper ones for higher earners. If you earn £30,000 you’ll be £73 better off, but make that £327 for those of you on £60,000 – over four times as much. Our lowest 40% of earners will gain precisely zero,” Bell adds. Last year, as part of a three-year deal negotiated by health unions, the lowest-paid workers in the NHS were given a £2,000 pay rise. But the overwhelming majority of health staff employed on private contracts have not received a penny, Unison says. The union has called on the government to end the pay divide, which it claims is causing outsourced staff to leave in search of better-paid jobs. The union wants everyone employed within the NHS to be on at least £9.03 an hour. Currently, Unison says, many staff employed by private contractors are on the minimum wage, which is £8.21, equating to an annual salary of £16,052, or £1,600 a year less than what the lowest-paid worker in the public sector is paid. “All hospital workers are part of the NHS team and should be paid fairly for the important jobs they do,” said Sara Gorton, Unison’s head of health. “The days of treating them as second-class employees must end.” The health minister Stephen Hammond insists the government does not get involved in contracting arrangements between commissioners and non-NHS providers. But Gorton said that ignoring the growing pay gap was storing up problems as the cost of living continues to rise. “With ministers all-consumed by Brexit, the growing crisis in hospitals across the land is being ignored,” she said. “The government found the money to fund the pay rise for health staff, now it must do the same for those on private contracts. A failure to do so risks damaging the health service beyond repair.” Roy (a pseudonym used because, like others, he fears losing his job if he is identified) is a cleaner employed by private contractor Mitie at the Royal Cornwall Hospitals NHS trust. On the minimum wage and earning around £13,000 a year, he finds it hard to support his young family without help from relatives. “I can’t remember the last time I had a holiday,” he said. “Not so long ago our weekly food bill was £80, now it’s £120 but my wages have stayed the same. We’re always overdrawn. A pay rise like the one my NHS colleagues got would make the world of difference.” Rihanna, who also works for Mitie in Cornwall, said the minimum wage rates the company was paying meant that it struggled to hold on to staff: “I’ve not had a pay rise in five years. Staff don’t stay in the job for long, and there are so many vacancies it puts real pressure on everyone. “Morale is at rock bottom and standards are slipping. Training isn’t what it used to be and there’s so few of us, staff don’t have enough time to do everything. Corners are being cut and I worry about the impact on patients.” A spokeswoman for Mitie said: “Our teams provide valuable services every day to support our NHS. We would welcome constructive conversations with any trusts that are keen to support an uplift in pay.”