BBC children’s TV star Mya-Lecia Naylor has died suddenly aged 16, with the broadcaster paying tribute to her “huge talent”. The cause of her death, on 7 April, is not yet known, although her agent, A&J Management, said it happened after she collapsed. Mya-Lecia appeared in shows including Millie Inbetween and Almost Never, and more recently performed as part of the band Angels N’ Bandits. CBBC said she was a “much-loved part of the BBC Children’s family and a hugely talented actress, singer and dancer”.Alice Webb, the director of BBC Children’s, said the news of Mya-Lecia’s death had left her team “distraught and so terribly sad”. “She has shone so brightly on our screens … and it’s unthinkable that she won’t be part of our journey going forward,” she said. “She was hugely popular with our audience, a very talented actress, dancer and singer, and a real role model for her young fans.” In a statement, the BBC added: “We know this news is very upsetting, and it may help to share how you are feeling with friends or a trusted adult. If you are struggling and there is no one you feel you can talk to about it, you can call Childline on 0800 11 11.” A&J Management, said: “It is with the deepest sorrow we have to announce that on Sunday, 7 April, Mya-Lecia Naylor, very sadly, died. Mya-Lecia was hugely talented and a big part of A&J. We will miss her greatly. Our love and thoughts are with all her family and friends at this difficult time.” Mya-Lecia starred alongside Emily Atack, Fleur East and Tess Daly on the CBBC show Almost Never. The programme followed boyband The Wonderland and rival girl group Girls Here First as they competed on a fictional TV talent competition The Spotlight. Screenwriter Simon Underwood told the BBC she was one of the best actors in recent CBBC shows. “She was so good,” he said. “I’ve got a notion of a new children’s drama developing and one of three leads I’d keyed to her.” Mya-Lecia first appeared on screens as a toddler in Absolutely Fabulous as Saffy’s daughter Jane. She also had the title role in ITV series Tati’s Hotel. Her film roles included Miro in Cloud Atlas, alongside Halle Berry and Tom Hanks.