Another dramatic Championship season enters its penultimate weekend with three clubs still jostling for automatic promotion, at least three vying for the last play-off place and three fighting to avoid the final relegation spot. There will be joy, there will be pain. But for whom? The EFL has already taken the precaution of warning fans they could face prosecution if they invade a pitch to celebrate promotion, a message most likely to be of relevance to supporters of table-toppers Norwich City, who need a point at home against Blackburn Rovers to confirm their return to the Premier League after a three-year exile. Sheffield United have been absent for much longer, since 2007, but they, too, look likely to make a comeback, which they can almost guarantee with a home win against bottom-of-the-table Ipswich Town. What an irony it would be if Norwich, who have had a happy habit of scoring late goals through a sensational campaign so far, were to collapse just shy of the finishing line. That is unlikely but, on the other hand, a team that radiated confidence have stuttered in recent weeks, drawing their past four matches. Their manager, Daniel Farke, insists that neither he nor his players are nervous but knows they must be prepared to cope with more unforeseen bumps if they are to progress to the promised land on Saturday. “It would be a perfect fit to win promotion at home but my experience in football say it’s not like a painted picture,” said Farke. “We have to work hard to get this romantic finish. To do it front of our fans would be pretty special. But I would take anywhere to get promoted.” Blackburn, led by the former Ipswich manager Tony Mowbray, have little to play for other than the pleasure of making life uncomfortable for their Norfolk hosts. “There’s a lot on it for Norwich,” said Mowbray. “We’ll make it as difficult as we can for them and look to get a result.” If Norwich overcome their visitors they may even be sure of reaching the Premier League as champions, depending on how Sheffield United do against Ipswich. The Blades’ most pressing concern is to secure second spot above Leeds United and, thanks to their strong goal difference, they would practically do that with a victory on Saturday unless there is an outlandish set of results on the final day. Getting the job done this weekend would be sweet for a side who thought they had blown their chance of automatic promotion when they slipped to consecutive draws two weeks ago, before Leeds suffered a pair of unexpected defeats. The Blades’ manager, Chris Wilder, is taking nothing for granted. “It’s already swung one way, it can easily, if we’re not bang on it, swing all the way back,” he said. He even went so far as to claim that Ipswich, who arrive with four wins from 44 league games this season, are “extremely talented”. A shock result at Bramall Lane would revive Leeds’s hopes of regaining second place but optimism is scarce at Elland Road, where Marcelo Bielsa previewed the weekend’s action by saying he is concentrating on “whatever reality says”. Well, reality and fate. “Obviously, it was not our destiny to finish second and we can’t explain it,” he added before correcting himself and explaining again that the losses in their last two matches, against Wigan and Brentford, were down to his team’s persistently low chance conversion rate. Bielsa made no attempt to play down how hard those two defeats have hit his team. “When you receive a blow, to ignore the consequences is not the right path,” he said. “Pain has a natural process for disappearing and if you want to hide it, it is meaningless.” Morale is not high at Leeds, then, as they prepare for their encounter on Sunday with Aston Villa, whom they could meet again in the play-offs. Villa have already booked a place in those thanks to a club record run of 10 straight wins. With West Bromwich Albion also sure of finishing in the play-offs, the fourth spot is still up for grabs, the most likely takers being one of Middlesbrough, Derby County or Bristol City. That makes the showdown on Saturday at Bristol City, where Derby are the visitors, a potential humdinger. “I think it is very important we catch the emotion of the match because I don’t want to be caught cold,” the Derby manager, Frank Lampard, said. At the other end of the table the Rotherham manager, Paul Warne, is clinging to the hope his “bunch of gladiators” can win at West Brom to increase their chances of taking their survival bid into the last game of the season. For that, Rotherham also need Reading to lose heavily in their last two matches or, slightly more likely, Millwall to flop in their final three, starting with the visit of Stoke on Saturday.