Donald Trump’s postponed state visit to the UK will go ahead in June, it was confirmed on Tuesday, prompting renewed calls for protests against the trip. Buckingham Palace said the three-day trip would start on 3 June. The president is then expected to travel to France to take part in the 75th anniversary of the D-day landings on 6 June. Number 10 said the visit would include discussions with Theresa May in Downing Street. On the last day of his trip Trump will attend an event in Portsmouth to mark the D-day landings. May said: “The UK and United States have a deep and enduring partnership that is rooted in our common history and shared interests. “We do more together than any two nations in the world and we are both safer and more prosperous because of our cooperation. The state visit is an opportunity to strengthen our already close relationship in areas such as trade, investment, security and defence, and to discuss how we can build on these ties in the years ahead.” A White House spokesman said: “This state visit will reaffirm the steadfast and special relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom. In addition to meeting the Queen, the president will participate in a bilateral meeting with prime minister Theresa May. “While in the United Kingdom, the president and first lady will attend a ceremony in Portsmouth to commemorate the 75th anniversary of D-Day, at one of the primary embarkation sites for the Allied operation that led to the liberation of Europe during World War II.” Trump and his wife will then travel to Normandy on 6 June. Confirmation of the trip has renewed controversy over May’s decision to invite Trump for a full state visit when she met the president shortly after he took office. State visits are formal trip for heads of state involving considerable ceremony and time with the Queen. The invitation was extended by May when she became the first overseas leader to visit Trump in the White House after his inauguration. When Trump travelled to the UK on an official but non-state visit in July 2018, tens of thousands of people took to the streets to protest and a four-metre-high orange Trump baby blimp was floated above Parliament Square. The policing operation for the visit cost an estimated £18m. The prospect of Trump being granted the honour of a carriage ride down the Mall appalls many MPs. Anti-Trump campaigners are calling for a protest in London on 4 June. Labour MPs, including David Lammy, Stella Creasy and Stephen Doughty, say Trump’s controversial views and record in office meant he should not be welcomed in the UK. Deluded, dishonest, xenophobic, narcissistic, Donald Trump is no friend of Britain. He is not fit to hold public office, let alone worthy of our country's highest honours and a banquet with the Queen. Theresa May is selling out the UK to a serial liar and a cheat. #TrumpUKVisit https://t.co/2onIyKU8ZO Time to resurrect the https://t.co/TfTK4S4NjL campaign to make sure those targeted by Trump's hate know whose side this country is on.... https://t.co/ZL5XqwlovK And yet Britain getting ready to roll out the red carpet to Trump again.....@TopTrumpTargets allows you to donate to the amazing Abortion Support Network as a reaction to this- don't get angry, get active.... https://t.co/2czGHD0QsK Bonkers. And the Prime Minister thinks this will help with the divisions in our country exactly how? This man is a racist, sexist, extremist who was happy to promote far-right content from Britain First. Not the America I know and love. Not welcome. https://t.co/OTi3azfDTT It is unusual for a state visit to be announced at such short notice, and details of the trip have yet to be finalised with fewer than six weeks to go. It is unclear if Trump will be be invited, or allowed, to address to both houses of parliament. In February 2017, the Commons Speaker said Trump should not be allowed to speak to parliament. John Bercow said: “I feel very strongly that our opposition to racism and to sexism and our support for equality before the law and an independent judiciary are hugely important considerations in the House of Commons.” On Tuesday a spokeswoman for the Speaker’s office said: “Should a request be made to address the Houses of Parliament, it will be considered in the usual way.” It will be only the third state visit by a US president during the Queen’s 67-year reign. Trump’s two immediate predecessors, George W Bush and Barack Obama, were also given the honour. During his visit last year, Trump met the Queen at Windsor Castle. Trump described the Queen as a “tremendous woman” who had “really never made a mistake”. Trump’s last visit was timed to coincide with ceremonies in France to mark the 1918 Armistice. Unlike other world leaders he failed to turn up to some of the planned events because of rain.