Ballroom culture has been merging into the mainstream for a while, but last year it was inescapable. There was voguing in Yorgos Lanthimos’s award-winning The Favourite and the video for Calvin Harris and Sam Smith’s Promises; it even crops up in a recent Boots advert. These glimpses of a displaced New York subculture are cute but Ryan Murphy’s new show on BBC Two, Pose, takes you back to the source. Contrary to popular belief, Madonna did not invent voguing. Her 1990 hit Vogue was a euphoric celebration/appropriation of a dance form that emerged from the Harlem ballroom scene in the 80s. “Balls are part of a broader history of black queer performance and spectacle that stretches back at least to the early days of the 20th century,” says Madison Moore, assistant professor of gender, sexuality and women’s studies at Virginia Commonwealth University. “I’m thinking of the Hamilton Lodge Ball, the so-called Faggots Ball of the early 1900s where up to 1,500 spectators came to see the best black queer performers, drag queens, female and male impersonators. Poet and playwright Langston Hughes described these balls in his 1940 autobiography The Big Sea as, ‘spectacles in colour’.” The world of balls is as complex as it is fabulous. It has its own language: “shade”, “reading” and “kiki” all come from ball culture. Then there are houses. Houses are teams of participants who have come together to form a quasi-family unit. The children (not actual minors) of various houses compete for trophies in runway, realness, face, body and vogue battles, where the objective is to present unclockable simulacra of runway models, kids going to school, street thugs or business execs; to revel in your ripe physical beauty; and, of course, to vogue. The original style of voguing recreated in Pose, now referred to as Old Way, is performed with graceful movements inspired by model poses, old Hollywood, kung fu and Egyptian hieroglyphs, while today’s Vogue Femme presents a frenetic combination of moves – duck walk, floor work, hand work, and spins and dips. “The first time I went to a ball was phenomenal,” recalls Dominique Jackson, the trans actor, model and activist who plays Pose’s formidable house mother Elektra Abundance. “I was like a kid at an amusement park. I saw people just like me. I saw joy.” Jackson won the very first time she walked, snatching the trophy in the face category. The following week she won the runway category. “I just kept winning,” she states matter-of-factly, “until February of 2016 they named me ‘iconic’.” Actor Billy Porter, Pose’s MC Pray Tell, jokes that he’s ballroom adjacent. “When I was in New York in 1991 I was in the original cast of Miss Saigon so I went to balls but I was never a participant – I was doing eight shows a week. I had a job.” Not that Porter is a slouch when it comes to performing. “Oh I know the moves, honey – I don’t death drop or anything but Daddy can vogue.” Glee and American Horror Story showrunner Ryan Murphy has been gifting LGBT viewers with generation-defining TV since his underrated high school show Popular, but Pose goes further: this is a queer show (the majority of its creators, writers, directors, cast and characters are gay and trans) that straight people can, and should, enjoy, not the other way round. It tells the story of two houses, both alike in dignity but one led by a stone-cold cow, Elektra Abundance (Jackson), living out her Alexis Carrington fantasies with a peplum of steel. The other is presided over by up-and-comer Blanca Evangelista (Mj Rodriguez). It’s soapy but classy. You instantly fall for Angel (Indya Moore) the quixotic sex worker but Pray Tell, Porter’s scalpel-tongued MC, is the roaring heart of the show, switching from bravado to tenderness in a blink. While Pose is flashy fun with a wonderful soundtrack, no end of bitchy quips and museum-quality costumes mopped (nicked) from actual museums, it also speaks of prejudice, poverty and the devastation of Aids. While you watch with one finger on Shazam, the rest are reaching for the tissues. Jackson insists Pose is more than a TV show. “It’s groundbreaking, it’s educating those that have been on the outskirts or didn’t understand us, everyone: LGBTQIA, heterosexual and cis gendered should watch it so they know our history.” Someone who is already up to speed with the show is LeBron James. The most successful basketball player in the world celebrated Pose on Instagram, thanking various women of colour for being inspirational, including the cast of Pose. “That was one of the happiest days of my life,” confesses Jackson, “I literally cried because to have someone like LeBron James comment on us – a man who is looked to by communities of colour as a role model – for him to include us, meant to me, the world.” Considering the impact Madonna’s Vogue and 1990’s ballroom documentary Paris Is Burning had at the time, you might wonder why the mainstream hasn’t latched on to ball culture before now. “Part of the reason is that ballroom members have practised and participated in this community in a clandestine manner for the purposes of survival,” explains Marlon Bailey, associate professor of women and gender studies at Arizona State University. He says that there are good reasons to protect the culture. “Becoming mainstream will subject it not only to further surveillance, but also appropriation.” This subject of appropriation is one that’s close to Billy Porter’s heart. “We are a culture that you rape from and get rich from but literally close the door to. Without us Madonna would be nothing, Beyoncé would be nothing, Lady Gaga would be nothing. The culture has been influenced by us since the beginning of time and now we get to reclaim that space.” The fact that ballroom is having a moment is exciting, but Madison Moore insists the scene does not depend on the wider public for vitality. “Pose is a phenomenal breakthrough,” he asserts, “but once the media stops paying attention, ballroom culture will still be popping. It’s not about Madonna, it’s about Kiddy Smile, the French pop star and runway diva. Voguing is about Sinia, the Icon Jack Mizrahi, Vjuan Allure and MikeQ, Lasseindra Ninja and Leiomy, the DJ and vocalist Shaun J Wright, Mother Steffie Mizrahi, Jay Jay Revlon and all the queer and trans people who push the culture forward.” Pose was nominated for best television drama series at the Golden Globes, it won the AFI award for TV show of the year and its second season airs in the US on 9 June. “I’m going to be 50 this year, I came out in 1985, and I’m still gagged every time I think about the fact that this story is being told,” says Porter. “I’m so grateful that I lived long enough to see this. Visibility is essential for growth and understanding and love because you can’t love something you don’t understand. And the only way this world is going to get fixed is if we figure out how to love each other through our differences.” The house of Pose are having ball, and everyone’s invited. Pose is on Thursday 25 April, 9pm, BBC Two