The man accused of murdering 50 people in the New Zealand mosque attacks has appeared via video link in the Christchurch high court, in his second formal court appearance since the shootings. Australian Brenton Tarrant faces a total of 89 charges in the high court, 50 murder charges and 39 attempted murder charges – the most ever laid in New Zealand history. Tarrant will undergo mental health tests before his case proceeds. A silent and largely motionless Tarrant appeared on a large screen in the courtroom, a small cell showing in the background. The courtroom’s public gallery was packed with dozens of friends and families of the victims, some who stared quietly at the defendant throughout. During the half-hour hearing Justice Cameron Mander ordered Tarrant to undergo two assessments to determine whether he may be mentally impaired, legally insane or fit to stand trial. This is a routine step during many New Zealand trials. Mander suppressed the names of those Tarrant is accused of attempting to kill. The accused is being held in the maximum security wing of Auckland prison – more than 1,000km north of Christchurch – and has laid a complaint regarding his detention, saying he is being deprived of his basic rights. Tarrant, 28, a suspected white supremacist, was previously charged with only one murder following the attack and has been remanded without a plea. He has not applied for bail or name suppression, and his duty lawyer described him as “aware, lucid” in the hours following the massacre, and presenting as an “everyday sort of person”. Although initially indicating he planned to represent himself in court, and dismissing his duty lawyer, two Auckland lawyers, Jonathan Hudson and Shane Tait, have now confirmed they will represent him, in what will be one of the most complex and lengthy court proceedings in New Zealand history. Armed officers continue to guard the justice precinct – including the courthouse – in central Christchurch, but the proceedings on Friday were open to the public, with some family members who lost loved ones in the shootings in attendance. Twelve media applications to film or record the appearance were declined by Mander. Three weeks ago the alleged shooter attacked two mosques in inner-city Christchurch, killing 50 Muslim worshippers attending Friday prayers. The attack on 15 March was the worst mass shooting by a lone gunman in New Zealand, and has prompted immediate and sweeping gun reforms by the Labour coalition government. This week the country’s MPs heard oral submissions on the government’s gun law reform bill, which seeks to ban military-style semi-automatics and assault rifles and related components, and arrange a buyback scheme for guns that become illegal. Thousands of written submissions on the changes have already been received, including strong pushback from some parts of the hunting and gun enthusiast community. On Friday afternoon Al Noor and Linwood mosques will host prayers again for the first time since the attack, with leaders of the Muslim community saying worshippers were eager to regain a sense of normality, despite an ongoing sense of anxiety regarding their safety. Shane Tait, one of the lawyers representing the accused, stated on his website that he had more than 20 years’ experience defending those charged with “serious criminal offending”, and had worked with Jonathan Hudson for 15 years. Tarrant is due to return to court on 14 June.