This is a lovely way to showcase new season jersey royals; golden chunks of delicate new potatoes tossed in sweet, sauteed onions and topped with a zippy crab and watercress salad, plus some garlicky mayonnaise for good measure. This recipe will get you out of many a last-minute food fix, too, because it’s so versatile: go simple and add a fried egg and chilli oil, or pair with a crisp caesar salad. The garlicky aioli is a delicious dressing for the light crab salad. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4-6 650g jersey royals, cut into 2-3cm cubes1 large onion, finely chopped3 tbsp olive oil25g butter1 tsp smoked paprika For the aioli1 garlic clove, roughly chopped1 red pepper, roasted and peeled 2 egg yolks1 tsp smoked paprikaJuice of ½ lemonSalt and black pepper200ml olive oil 200ml vegetable oil For the crab salad200g white crab meat60g watercress, roughly chopped½ red onion, very finely sliced2 tbsp capers1-2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1-2 tsp fresh lemon juice Put the potatoes in a pan of salted water, bring to a boil and simmer for three minutes. Drain in a colander and leave to steam dry. To make the aioli, put the garlic and red pepper in a tall measuring jug with the egg yolks, paprika, lemon juice and several large pinches of salt. Blitz with a stick blender for 30 seconds, then slowly pour in the olive oil in a thin, steady trickle as you blend. After a minute, increase the trickle to a thin stream, continuing to blend. Once you have poured in all the olive oil, pour in the vegetable oil, now in a thicker stream, until it is all mixed in. Add 45ml water to thin the aioli, then check the seasoning and add more lemon or salt, as needed. Fry the onion in a small frying pan with two tablespoons of the oil for 10 minutes, until soft and just coloured. Meanwhile, melt the butter and remaining oil in your largest pan over a medium-high heat, then fry the potatoes in a single layer for 10 minutes, tossing them in the fat and shaking the pan occasionally, until they are crisp and golden. Stir in the onion and paprika, and fry for another minute. To make the salad, put the crab, watercress, red onion and capers in a bowl and dress with the oil, lemon juice and a pinch of salt and pepper. Taste and adjust the seasoning with salt and lemon juice. Empty the home fries into a large, shallow bowl and top with the crab and watercress. Drizzle over the aioli and serve at once. You won’t need all the aioli, and it lasts well in the fridge for eight-10 days. It’s delicious served with a Spanish omelette, makes a great addition to sandwiches and is an amazing dip for crisp black pudding bites. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US.