Five young men who spent months languishing in the Calais refugee camp are to be rewarded in parliament for their efforts fighting Home Office mistreatment of child asylum seekers. Nisar, Naqeeb, Tariq, Wasim and Mohamad*, all travelled across Europe alone as minors before reaching the UK in 2016. The five, now aged between 18 and 22, all faced long delays to their asylum procedures but used the time to contact MPs and join campaigns to highlight failings in the system. On Tuesday, they will receive a Your UK Parliament community campaigner award. In February they hosted an event at parliament and invited the chief inspector of borders and immigration, David Bolt, to hear evidence about their experience in the asylum system. After hearing about the severe impact on young people’s mental health from delays of months and even years, Clarke decided to launch an inquiry into how the Home Office treats unaccompanied minors. Despite receiving an award from parliament, Naqeeb has been refused asylum after waiting nearly three years to have his case resolved. He told the Guardian that he will fight for a fairer system as long as he is in the UK. “The Home Office doesn’t believe the evidence I have given them about my case, which is upsetting as my life will be in danger if I am returned to my country,” said the Afghan national, who is 18. “However, I still believe in the UK and its values, and so I will keep contributing to this country and the people here. I believe we would all benefit hugely if people seeking sanctuary were given the chance to fully contribute to this country. So I will continue working as hard as I can for this. I know there is so much we can achieve together.” Elaine Ortiz is the leader of the Hummingbird Young Leaders group, which helped the young men. She told the Guardian: “We didn’t tell them to do this, we just gave them space to learn public speaking and how to bring about change and they ran with it. “They knew it wouldn’t help their own individual cases but they wanted to try and help others, that is what is beautiful about this.” Some refugees have had to wait as long as four years for their decisions. Ortiz says the impact on young people has been devastating, with suicide attempts and multiple hospitalisations. Despite facing his own problems, Naqeeb says the award means a lot to him. “This award gives me strength. It shows there are people listening to our stories.” * The men have asked for their surnames not to be given as some still have open asylum cases.