Car-sharing service Car2Go was out of service in the Chicago area on Friday after dozens of its vehicles were stolen through the app this week. Up to 100 cars were reported missing on Wednesday, the Chicago police department confirmed. Most cars have since been recovered, but a representative for Car2Go said Chicago vehicles have been put out of service until further notice. Police have charged 21 suspects in connection with the stolen vehicles. “The Chicago police department was alerted by a car rental company that some of their vehicles may have been rented by deceptive or fraudulent means through a mobile app,” a Chicago police spokesman said. “Due to the information provided by the company, numerous vehicles have been recovered. The investigation is ongoing.” Car2Go tweeted that no other cities have been affected by the incident and that the incident was not a hack but “an instance of fraud”. “We are working with law enforcement to neutralize a fraud issue,” the company said. “No personal or confidential member information has been compromised. As a precaution, we are temporarily pausing our Chicago service.” Car2go launched in Chicago in June of 2018 where it offered Mercedes-Benz CLA and GLA vehicles in addition to the miniature smart cars. This week’s breach highlights broader security issues with shared driving apps, said Nathan Wenzler, the senior director of cybersecurity at IT firm Moss Adams. “All it takes is for a malicious user to use a false identity paired with someone else’s stolen credit card information, and they can set up an account and use any of these cars without having any obvious personal information that could be used to identify the fraudsters,” he said. Theft and vandalism of shared vehicles, including cars, bikes and scooters, is a major challenge for companies in the space, according to a 2017 report from the Transportation Sustainability Research Center at the University of California, Berkeley. Insurance premiums for policies with $1m to $2m in liability limits and $500 to $1,000 deductibles ranged from $1,200 to $6,000 per vehicle year, the study said. The high cost and lack of available insurance options have given many car-sharing companies rocky starts when entering new markets. RelayRides, now called Turo, was fined $200,000 in 2014 for false advertising, unlicensed insurance activity, and other violations and ordered to cease operations. In 2017, Enterprise pulled its car sharing service out of Chicago after “significant vandalism, theft and fraud” in the market. Many companies in the space are struggling to balance thorough security measures with seamlessness and convenience, said Ippei Takahashi, an analyst at ride-sharing comparison site RideGuru. “In online marketplaces and app-enabled gig-economy, the concept of online identity has always been vague and a cause for concern,” he said. “Add this to the lack of policing by real people, we have a playground where crooks can thrive.”