If any artist has shown her ability to code-switch between styles, it’s Madonna, who’s adroitly shifted from dominatrix to disco queen to Earth mother with previous album cycles. Her latest reinvention is Madame X: the title of her forthcoming 14th album (out 14 June), and also the name of a chameleonic character that she will play across the record. She announced it last week in a cinematic, enjoyably OTT video featuring a panoply of guises that included multiple eye patches and the singer wearing a hooded bonnet as if preparing for Gilead. In a voiceover she details 15 identities – dancer, prisoner, nun and whore among others – and explains: “Madame X is a secret agent. Traveling around the world. Changing identities.” And it seems that Madonna’s gaze is reaching just as wide for Madame X, which features the American rap artists SwaeLee and Quavo, as well as the South American superstars Anitta and Maluma, the latter of whom is featured on the album’s iridescent lead single, Medellín. Co-produced by Madonna’s American Life collaborator Mirwais, Medellín is quite unlike anything we’ve heard from the singer before, and her most subdued lead single since 1998’s stately Frozen. The most initially disarming thing about it is its balmy sense of ease. “I woke up in Medellín,” she sings over airy synths, before slyly adding, “Another me could now begin.” A rhythmic reggaeton beat kicks in for a fiesta-starting chorus, with lovey-dovey call-and-response between the duo. At nearly five minutes, Medellín’s pacing feels refreshingly relaxed, though it wouldn’t be a Madonna co-write without a few lyrical clunkers (“pain” rhymed with “champagne”). It doesn’t exactly do much to dispel stereotypes of Colombia either (“We built a cartel just for love,” she sings). But those are minor quibbles: Medellín is a potent reminder of Madonna’s deft history of meshing genres and a convincing addition to the roll call of western megastars like Beyoncé and Justin Bieber linking up with Spanish-language artists. And unlike the occasional trend-chasing of her most recent albums, MDNA and Rebel Heart, Medellín proves that Madonna is well equipped to weather the demands of today’s listening trends while bringing global styles into her own world. For Madonna, it seems that the streaming age may just speed up her shapeshifting.