I’m not religious, but I am very curious about people who are and their motivations. Five years ago, after seeing Jessica Hausner’s 2009 film Lourdes, I booked myself on a pilgrim package tour to the south of France. Lourdes is overwhelming when you first arrive. It’s a bit like a Disneyland of faith, crass and commercial, with thousands and thousands of pilgrims and tourists and trinket shops. It’s a spectacle. I had timed my visit to coincide with the Order of Malta’s annual international pilgrimage, and it was like stepping on to a film set: women sweeping through the streets in long, black cloaks emblazoned with the order’s insignia; the men in military-looking boilersuits, pushing sick people around in chariots. It all felt as if it were from a different time. What I sought out though were quieter, calmer moments. I was deeply moved by the emphasis on healing and the relationship people had with nature. The site is known for its healing powers, and the sick are very much revered in Lourdes. I photographed some pilgrims, but none with very visible illnesses. I chose instead to focus on the helpers. A lot of the young people who volunteer with the order are professionals - doctors, lawyers. They act as chaperones and carers for the pilgrims they’re paired with – often, they’ve accompanied the same person several years in a row. They take their responsibilities very seriously: they’re on strict schedules, getting them ready, bathing them. There’s a great deal of compassion. I spent the next three years going back and forth. I started working in colour, but it felt too documentary, like a travel feature for a magazine. It was frustrating. I went back one last time, with my old plate camera, deciding to try more formal portraiture in black and white. And I realised it was what I should have been doing all along. A friend who is fluent in French, Italian and Spanish helped me to approach people. For the volunteers, going on the pilgrimage is the big social event in the calendar: it’s a great week hanging out with other young volunteers from all over the world. We ended up at a party, drinking with all the youth of the Order of Malta in a function room in the Hotel Solitude. That’s where we spotted Markus. He had this austere presence about him. He was chatty but slightly set apart from the raucous drinking crowd. We arranged to photograph him the next day. I chose a location across from the famous baths on the river Gave de Pau. The water plays such an important part in the healing stories. He had been paired up for the week with an older Austrian man who was in a wheelchair, and I gathered they had formed a close bond, as often happens during the pilgrimage. Markus worked in finance in Austria. He was very young – early to mid 20s – but came across as a wise soul, much older than his years. The connection I felt to the sitters was also down to the way that specific camera works. It’s not a quick snap. It takes a good half an hour to get a shot. I also can’t do lots, because the film is so expensive. Markus blinked the first time, so I had to do a second one. This slow, meditative process mirrored the meditative aspect of the pilgrimage. I would often observe people sitting for hours by the river, thinking and praying. I spent time like that too. Sometimes I would be out all day and not take a single image. It’s a very atmospheric place with bells and Ave Marias and beautiful singing. Even if you don’t share the religious beliefs, you can feel quite immersed in it all. Lourdes was one of three pilgrimage sites I photographed for this project, Ex-Voto (the other two being Ballyvourney in Ireland and Grabarka in Poland), and the longer I spent in them all, the more I realised it’s not just about the pilgrims, but their experience of being in the natural environment and what nature offers in terms of faith. Photographing these people was a way of depicting how I felt. It’s not that the project has converted me, but I did feel a deep sense of spiritual presence, a sense of the unknown, an otherworldliness. I can’t pretend that everyone at these sites looks like they’ve walked out of a different era. There’s the fleece-wearing and the anorak-wearing brigades. I picked people who looked timeless. Lourdes only became known in 1859, but Grabarka dates back to the 13th century, and Ballyvourney to pagan times. Pilgrims have trodden these same paths for centuries. • Ex-Voto is at HackelBury Fine Arts, London, until 18 April, Ex-Voto, the book, is published by GOST. Born: Brighton, 1975. Trained: University of Leeds, Central Saint Martins, SOAS Influences: August Sander, Emmet Gowin, Judith Joy Ross, Jean Rouch. High point: “Winning the Sony world photographer of the year in 2018.” Low point: “My camera stopped working on a job in Copenhagen – I was too broke to have a backup.” Top tip: “Read, write, look, observe … don’t just take photos!” 