Born in Somalia, Farah, 36, came to Britain at the age of eight. At the 2012 London Olympics, he won the 10,000m and the 5,000m; four years later, in Rio, he successfully defended both titles. In 2017, after winning his sixth World Championships gold medal, he switched to marathon events. He is running the London Marathon on Sunday, wearing the Nike Zoom X Vaporfly NEXT% shoe. He is married with four children and lives in London. What is your earliest memory? As an eight-year-old, turning up in the UK was incredible: getting off at Heathrow and seeing the baggage moving round, getting excited about my new life. What did you want to be when you were growing up? A mechanic when I was a little kid, and then, when I came to the UK, I wanted to play professional football. What is your greatest fear? Seeing a snake. What is the closest you’ve come to death? When I was a kid, travelling from Ethiopia to the UK, the plane door opened, the oxygen masks came down and the plane did an emergency landing in Egypt. What was your most embarrassing moment? The European Indoor Championships in Birmingham [2007], when I fell over then started running in the wrong direction. What is your most treasured possession? My Olympic medals. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? Being ruthless. What do you most dislike about your appearance? It would have to be my toes. You know what? Actually, I like everything about myself. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose? I wouldn’t want to mess around with nature. Who would play you in the film of your life? Denzel Washington. What is your most unappealing habit? Someone will text me, I’ll get excited and think about replying, but don’t. I am not being rude or disrespectful, it’s just me, I’m like a little kid. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Sweets, like Swedish Fish. What do you owe your parents? Everything: they gave me life and they taught me things that, at the time, I didn’t appreciate – particularly my mum. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why? Probably my wife, because sometimes I do crazy things. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party? Usher, because I feel like I have no moves and I could learn a couple off him. What is the worst job you’ve done? I have worked in McDonald’s. What has been your biggest disappointment? Beijing 2008 – not making the Olympic final. If you could go back in time, where would you go? To when I was 15 or 16. Just knowing that you can always come home and find Mum there cooking you food; you chill, go upstairs to play PlayStation – no responsibilities. What do you consider your greatest achievement? Being dad to my kids and having a family.