9pm, Sky Arts Documentarist Morgan Neville (Keith Richards: Under the Influence) explores the rise of the singer-songwriter genre, which emerged in Los Angeles during the 1970s and coalesced at impresario Doug Weston’s hallowed Troubadour club. A joyous, nostalgic wallow in the musical culture of the time, framed by a chronicle of the careers of James Taylor and Carole King, who reunite to perform old favourites, including a spine-tingling rendition of You Can Close Your Eyes. Mike Bradley 8pm, Channel 4 Early supercar the Jaguar XKSS was a road-worthy conversion of the 1957 D-Type racing car that dominated at Le Mans in the 50s. Only 25 were ever built, of which nine were destroyed in a 1957 factory fire. This film follows craftsmen as they create nine roaring replicas from scratch. MB 9pm, Channel 5 How do stores gain access to the exclusive group that display a royal coat of arms as official suppliers to the monarchy? This week’s glimpse into the lives of HMQ and co looks at why, from chocolate to bespoke suits, they tend to favour old, established brands with the honour of a royal warrant. MB 9pm, BBC Four Season three of the taut Danish thriller has seen timid bank teller Anna morph into an adept money launderer, while wan drug dealer Nicky has been glumly trying to leave the life. In tonight’s double bill, both feel the squeeze from ominous forces, while pill-popping cop Alf is also under pressure from his shady boss. Graeme Virtue 9.10pm, BBC One The latest series of this ludicrous but watchable mess of slapstick, cross-dressing, baffled celebs and antediluvian humour concludes. It’s generally dependent on the quality of its guests: this week’s visitors are Dani Dyer, Paddy McGuinness and Busted – so make of that what you will. Phil Harrison 11pm, Quest Red Where does reporting end and true-crime titillation begin? It is 12 years since Madeleine McCann disappeared and Netflix has already dished up a docu-series offering little fresh evidence. Now this investigation promises new theories about the case and interviews with those who worked on it. Hannah Verdier Ghost in the Shell, 9pm, Channel 4 The anime classic gets a Hollywood makeover from director Rupert Sanders. It is set in an Asian metropolis where Scarlett Johansson’s cyborg cop hunts mind-stealing hackers and explores her own mysterious past. A spectacular slice of sci-fi, albeit one that faced “whitewashing” criticisms over its non-Asian actors. Paul Howlett Snooker: World Championship, 10am, BBC Two The second round continues. Premier League Football: Tottenham v West Ham United, 12.10pm, Sky Sports Main Event Brighton v Newcastle United airs at 5pm on BT Sport 1. Premiership Rugby Union: Exeter Chiefs v Harlequins, 1.30pm, BT Sport 2 Wasps v Saracens follows at 4.15pm.