The New York Giants general manager, David Gettleman, has defended his team’s much criticized decision to select quarterback Daniel Jones with the sixth overall pick of the NFL draft. The Giants had three selections – at No6, No17 and No30 – in the first-round of this year’s draft and many expected them to take the talented edge rusher Josh Allen with the sixth pick. However, they chose Duke’s Jones, a player many believed they could have picked up with one of their lower first-round selections, or even in the later rounds. Giants fans booed when Jones was picked and there was a huge backlash on social media. Gettleman had already been criticized by many Giants fans for trading away the hugely talented receiver Odell Beckham earlier this year. @BigBlueInteract @GiantInsider the moment when it went so horribly wrong. #NYGiants. Talk about killing the life out of the party pic.twitter.com/sBU3dbalEf “I can say this to you guys right now. When we got in here Thursday night, the question was posed, ‘Why didn’t you wait until 17? [to pick Jones]’” Gettleman said after the draft ended on Saturday night. “Well, I know for a fact there were two teams that would have taken him in front of 17. I know that for a fact. “So it’s tough. It really is. It wasn’t easy for me to pass up Josh Allen. For me, my background, that was very, very difficult. But I think that much of Daniel Jones and his future as an NFL quarterback.” Washington took Ohio State quarterback Dwayne Haskins at No15 but sources told ESPN that neither Washington nor Denver – who had the 11th pick and were interested in a quarterback – would have taken Jones. Miami and Cincinnati also picked before No17 and had interested in quarterbacks but opted to take players in later rounds. Jones is seen as a competent game manager with decent athleticism but most scouts did not rate him as a standout talent. Gettleman, however, is sure Jones has the talent to succeed current starter Eli Manning, who is now 38. He said Giants fans would end up being “very pleased” they have Jones. “We were going to make the pick [of Jones] at six and then go from there,” Gettleman said. “I had no intention of moving up [from 17]. None.”