“I’m not going to say that I snuck in,” says David Powell, remembering the end of Maddie Newton’s previous relationship in 2017. “But I thought: ‘Give it a go if I’m really this crazy about her.’” They had met the year before at a bar in Brussels. David’s friend had come over from the UK and forced him out on a Saturday night – “We’d been out the night before, so I wasn’t feeling particularly amazing” – and he was getting ready to go home early. “Then, all of a sudden, he says: ‘Hi, Maddie, how are you?’” says David. They had bumped into mutual friends. “I started chatting to her and I was like: ‘Can I get you a drink?’ and she said: ‘No, no, my boyfriend’s getting me one.’ I was like: ‘Fantastic – just my luck.’” David was seeing someone, but it wasn’t really working out. “The first thing I liked about David was his sense of humour and his kind eyes,” says Maddie. “He made me laugh constantly and was such a genuinely kind-hearted soul.” David says he was struck by Maddie’s beauty and “her sense of humour – I had never met a woman I just clicked with instantly. She is the funniest person I know, and I realised very quickly that she was also the sweetest person I had ever met. We were able to talk about anything and everything.” “We were both in relationships,” says Maddie, “but we hit it off as friends.” For about a year, they met up for coffee or drinks, either alone or with friends. “We never did dinners – that would have crossed a line,” says Maddie. “I like having guy friends as well as girl friends.” When Maddie’s relationship ended, David – who was also single by now – was “a bit worried about being friend-zoned. I thought I might as well tell her how I felt.” Maddie smiles: “But you didn’t tell me. I had to open the door into the relationship. We went out for drinks and had quite a few beers. I said: ‘Isn’t it funny how we’re perfect for each other on paper?’ Because we’ve got the same sense of humour, values, goals … His face fell – it just went white. He said: ‘I’ve been in love with you since the moment I saw you.’” David grins. “I think I said: ‘I’m crazy about you.’” Maddie corrects him: “You said ‘in love’. Then we went and did a couple of tequila shots.” “To celebrate,” says David. Had he been planning to tell her how he felt? “When she broke up with her boyfriend, I didn’t really have a timeline, but I thought: ‘One day I’m going to have to say something.’ If she’d started dating other people, my reaction would have been pretty evident – I don’t think I would have been able to hide how disappointed I was.” For a while, it felt awkward to go from friends to something more intimate, says Maddie. “The next day we were holding hands and we were looking at each other, like: ‘What are we doing?’ I think for about a month we would forget we were actually a couple: ‘Wait, no, I can kiss you now.’” But their relationship moved fast – Maddie moved into David’s flat after two weeks and they got engaged after a year. They are getting married in the autumn. Do they wish they had got together sooner? “I don’t see why it wouldn’t have worked if it had happened sooner, but I’m not sad about the timing,” says David. Maddie nods. “I think that, when we got together, it was the perfect time in both of our lives.” She laughs. “God, I never thought I was so cheesy.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about you, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.