When Leicester sacked Dean Richards at the beginning of 2004, the reaction was seismic. Not only had 23 years at the club as a player and the director of rugby been abruptly terminated but the Tigers had won four Premiership titles and two European Cups under the former England No 8 who paid for his job after two league finishes the club would now happily take, sixth and fifth. Leicester sacking the man at the top now creates more of a reaction for its timing than its occurrence, Matt O’Connor after one match this season, Richard Cockerill halfway through the 2016-17 campaign. If the decision to remove Richards were vindicated with the next nine seasons culminating in Premiership finals at Twickenham, five of which were won, recent dismissals have tended to accelerate decline rather than halt it. Leicester lost 14 matches during Richards’s four title years from 1998-99, a figure that on form they will at least match this season having been beaten 12 times in the Premiership with four rounds to go. They are at Newcastle on Friday night, their first eight-pointer in the Premiership. A year ago, the sides met with something at stake at Welford Road. It was a place in the top four, rather than the Championship, a position that had been Leicester’s since the season after they sacked Richards. He returned to Welford Road with Newcastle and they duly won there in the league for the first time since 1997 to make the play-offs. Leicester have never failed to qualify for the European Cup but that is less of a concern this week than their Premiership status. No one is saying they are too good to go down and not just because their recent record suggests the reverse. A club that defined itself, easily identifiable in the way it played, is lost. It remains the best supported in the Premiership but it no longer has the highest turnover having fallen behind Wasps, Harlequins and Exeter, with Bath catching up. “When I left, we had never been out of the top four and had won the Premiership three times,” said Cockerill last month. “More than two years later, they are in the bottom three and have had three head coaches since I left. The people who are making the decisions are going to have to take the responsibility. There is too much self-interest in the club.” Cockerill’s departure summed up the confused state of Leicester. Like Richards, he had been moulded by the club, part of what it stood for, so when Aaron Mauger was brought into his coaching team from above, the former New Zealand centre who had finished his playing career at Welford Road, there was a clash of styles. They became more adventurous but also easier to score against. Confusion replaced certainty. Mauger did not last much longer than Cockerill and that summer Leicester traded their second-row Ed Slater for the Gloucester and England wing Jonny May. If it summed up the shift in emphasis to greater potency behind rather than at forward, it created an imbalance which has been evident this season. The Leicester chief executive, Simon Cohen, said in his programme notes last weekend that when he looks at the club’s squad, “it looks as good as any in the Premiership”. His words did not carry much resonance after a match that Exeter won 52-20, the most points Leicester had conceded in the tournament. A glance at the two benches challenged his contention. Exeter had an all-international front row, as Leicester did in the year they last won the title when Dan Cole and Martin Castrogiovanni tighthead prop, with Marcos Ayerza and Logovi’i Mulipola the options on the other side; sandwiched between them was Tom Youngs or George Chuter. Leicester’s replacement front row against Exeter had made 19 starts for the club between them. Injuries were a factor behind the inexperience but Leicester lack the depth of old. When they last won the Premiership in 2013, Castrogiovanni, Slater, Steve Mafi and George Ford were on the bench. The starting lineup included Vereniki Goneva, Toby Flood and Mulipola, who all started for Newcastle at Saracens last weekend. Three forwards that season, Geoff Parling, Thomas Waldrom and Julian Salvi, were to leave for Exeter. Leicester no longer seem to sign forwards of international quality, despite two marquee players being allowed on top of the salary cap. So while they have a back division as threatening as most, the failure to invest in the supply line and produce a Leicester-style pack has left the backs having to do more defending than attacking. The result is the leakiest defence in the Premiership and from being a side who would have been recognisable without shirts on, it is difficult to discern now what the Tigers stand for. “What are Leicester?” asked Cockerill, answering his own question with: “They are neither one thing nor the other.” And so England’s most successful club in terms of trophies won heads for Newcastle, a well-trodden route made unfamiliar by the plight it finds itself in. The three other relegation contenders are used to battling at the wrong end of the table. Leicester’s lineup against Exeter contained six of the current England squad: Newcastle, Worcester and Bristol have two between them. It is about the mongrel within, and while the outcome on Friday will not determine Leicester’s fate, it is taking the shock of failure to jolt the club into facing reality. As Manchester United found in 1974, the bigger the club, the harder the fall. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions.