Last week, TV naturalist Chris Packham woke to a scene out of Game of Thrones. Hanging in front of the gate of his New Forest home (a gate whose lock had been glued shut), two dead crows swung by their necks in the breeze. Packham cut them down, called a cab (he couldn’t get his car out of the drive) and carried on. It was the latest chapter in the strange history of the “general licences”, a story that has seen petitions and counter-petitions, threats and smears and says a great deal about the caustic and polarised nature of debate in Britain in 2019. Business school types will tell you that a company is at its weakest when there is a change of leadership. This, perhaps, goes part of the way to explain the general licences fiasco. In January this year, it was announced that Andrew Sell, the chair of Natural England (the government’s adviser on rural affairs), was to retire. Days before the new chair, Tony Juniper, was due to start, Natural England’s lawyers took the decision to revoke the licences that permit landowners legally to control 16 “pest” species of bird, including crows, jays, rooks and woodpigeons (and parakeets and sacred ibises). A petition calling for Packham to be sacked by the BBC was signed by more than 100,000 people Giving only three days’ notice, the organisation said that anyone wishing to cull birds would need to apply for an individual licence or risk breaking the law and this at a crucial time for farmers with the year’s crops just emerging. Natural England claimed the move was in response to a “legal challenge” by Wild Justice, the not-for-profit run by Packham, the ornithologist Mark Avery and conservationist Ruth Tingay. Farming and shooting lobbies were mobilised, a petition calling for Packham to be sacked by the BBC was signed by more than 100,000 people and then the hanging crows. The truth hasn’t stopped many fulminating against “eco-warriors” seeking to stop farmers acting as they have for centuries. Juniper found himself attacked for his environmentalist credentials on his first day in the office, despite the fact that the decision predated his arrival. (NB: it may not be the worst idea to have Natural England led by someone who cares about the environment.) As Tingay told me, Wild Justice had never sought for the licences to be revoked. “Our ask,” she said, “was for Natural England to acknowledge that the current general licences were unlawful and for them to be changed and improved before they issued them again in January 2020.” Wild Justice accepts that in certain circumstances farmers and some other land users need to control certain species, but this should be, Tingay says, “regulated, monitored and proportionate”. (Natural England has said that it will reissue the general licences on Monday, with updated wording to reflect issues raised by Wild Justice.) But what all this sound and fury, all the tweets and trolling, has done is to mask the nuance, to silence a conversation that needs to be had. The reapproval of the licences each year should not be done without consideration and the place of the jay, especially, on the list – the “British bird of paradise”, as nature writer WH Hudson called it – ought to be questioned. A list that ranks parakeets and sacred ibises alongside crows and rooks seeks to address different problems with the same regulation and again is worthy of further discussion. The violence of the reaction from the farming and shooting lobbies feels like a sublimation of other guilts – each has played a part in the shameful extermination of our songbirds and raptors, each is complicit in an agricultural-industrial complex that has devastated the environment that Juniper and his team at Natural England are tasked with protecting. The furore around the general licences renewal is a noisy distraction from the real story. As author and ornithologist Mark Cocker sets out in his brilliant and coruscating book, Our Place, the British have become world leaders in the extermination of their birds. In fact, next to the devastation wreaked by intensive farming practices, the numbers killed in culls can look like a mere rounding error. •Alex Preston is the author of As Kingfishers Catch Fire