It is, frankly, a miracle that Natalie Mering is not making polite, middle-of-the-road lady-muzak. Languid and disarming, her voice has a potent, old-school beauty that doesn’t have to work at all hard to impress. As Weyes Blood, however – a riff on Wise Blood, the title of Flannery O’Connor’s southern gothic classic – the 30-year-old has taken her instrument down some unexpected byways. On a track like Movies – the highlight of Titanic Rising, Mering’s fourth and most assured album – it gradually unfolds, first as an intimate, conversational presence playing off against a looped analogue keyboard run whose roots are in the systems music of the 70s electronic avant garde. It grows in authority. “The meaning of life doesn’t seem to shine like that screen,” Mering thrums. The roles of screens big and small recur on this elegant album, whose title refers to a certain 1997 watery blockbuster. As the track plays out, her vocal grows increasingly iridescent – chased by the swelling string arrangement, until the combination of melody, backing vocalists, drones and strings becomes almost overwhelming – a drowning in sound. That’s on purpose, you suspect. Mering set up camp some years ago on more challenging terrain than that normally favoured by conventionally lovely singers. She grew up in Pennsylvania, singing madrigals and Renaissance music; it was an easy jump to folk. Mering, though, spurned the nicey-nicey stuff and went hard for leftfield drones and incantatory spook. Her subtly psychedelic 2011 work as Weyes Blood and the Dark Juices is still on her Bandcamp. For 2014’s The Innocents, she mixed medievalism and off-kilter rock. She toured with chaos-bringers Jackie-O Motherfucker, abetted Ariel Pink, and her swoop on to a Perfume Genius track, Sides (2017), was nothing short of devastating. She appeared as a “sweet angel” on the title track of Father John Misty’s 2018 album, God’s Favorite Customer, and it would not be a stretch to claim that Mering’s latterday works are a more poetic, mellifluous counterpoint to Misty’s angst-ridden grappling with the human condition. On 2016’s Front Row Seat to Earth, Mering began to pivot increasingly towards big themes and 70s sounds – harmonies, warmth, organs and songcraft. It’s a move that reaches full fruition on Titanic Rising – an album as easy on the ear as it is subtly unsettling. There’s an afternote of Karen Carpenter to Mering’s pure delivery now, of Carole King in the way she sets out her jauntier stalls. In some of the videos, Mering, who lives in Los Angeles, looks like a spare Haim sister: long, flowing hair, one ear cocked to the AM dial. Titanic Rising unabashedly privileges slow grace in a time of tumultuous anxiety. (Mering’s not alone here: fellow LA singer-songwriter Bedouine has an album out next month that glories in a comparable retro vein.) The massed strings of these songs sweep you up, Disneyish in their classicism, but juxtaposed against retro-futurist burbles and unexpected stylistic swerves. The younger Mering loved films, becoming particularly obsessed with the grand doomed romance of Titanic. At one point she rejected cinema’s affective lies and unattainable dreams, but this album finds her back eating popcorn again, though this time, aware of the cognitive dissonance. “I’m bound to that summer big box-office hit,” she sings. In the past, Mering’s works have tended to accrete, rather than sucker-punch, but there is a refreshing directness to some of the songs here, even as they mount an unfashionably slow assault. “No one’s ever going to give you a trophy for all the pain and the things you’ve been through,” opens one key track, Mirror Forever, with a jolt of electric truth: “No one knows but you.” Mering is not alone in this regard either: in a recent interview previewing Vampire Weekend’s forthcoming album, Ezra Koenig reflected on how he took inspiration from Kacey Musgraves and the way country music tells you instantly who is singing, and why. On A Front Row Seat to Earth, Mering began, obliquely, to contemplate our planet’s lot. Titanic Rising revels in the old, but tackles a clutch of contemporary themes – the climate emergency, and our technologically induced inability to connect. Certainties have flown from the get-go. The very first lines of A Lot’s Gonna Change, the album opener, ponder how you can never feel as safe as you did as a child. Coastal city-dwellers are, unsurprisingly, more tense than others about rising sea levels. For the front cover of Titanic Rising, Mering drowned an entire bedroom, complete with teddy bear and laptop. The Movies video takes place partially under water; by contrast, Everyday plays out as a horror film. It’s love, though, that frequently takes the best supporting role on this album – or, if not, the idea of romantic certainty. Plenty of these songs deal with romantic bewilderment, but Andromeda finds Mering staring at the heavens, looking for “something I might never find”. For all the retro sumptuousness on display, Mering does raise a very modern eyebrow from time to time. “The other night I was at a party,” she recounts on Everyday, “Someone sincerely looked at me/ And said, ‘Is this the end of all monogamy?’” Ultimately, it is Titanic Rising’s fusion of ancient and contemporary, 70s singer-songwriter tropes and electronic burbles, that convinces; the beauty Weyes Blood offers has its eyes wide open.