The former 5 Live presenter George Riley will never work for the BBC again, staff have been told, after multiple accusations of sexual assault were made against the presenter. At least eight women had complained to the BBC about Riley, including claims he had grabbed women between the legs and behaved inappropriately in the workplace and at work events, according to multiple sources at the broadcaster. Riley, who presented the sports coverage on the 5 Live breakfast show in addition to his own programmes, was suspended by the corporation at the height of the #MeToo movement in October 2017. Following private reassurances regarding Riley’s departure, the 5 Live controller, Jonathan Wall, publicly told staff during a discussion on workplace culture in February that an unnamed individual who had been suspended by the station had left the corporation and would not return to air. Multiple sources said this was clearly understood by those present to be a reference to Riley. In response to the disclosures, first reported by the Sunday Times, a BBC spokesperson emphasised that no individual was named in the meeting and declined to comment on the outcome of the investigation into Riley. The presenter did not respond to multiple requests for comment from the Guardian, but confirmed his departure from the BBC in a tweet in January. Riley had been with 5 Live for more than a decade when a number of claims about his behaviour were made by colleagues to the BBC’s internal investigation unit. He continued to broadcast for a week after the initial allegations were made to BBC bosses, during which time some complainants were encouraged to go to the police with their claims by the internal investigation unit. On Thursday 26 October 2017 some of those who had complained about his behaviour were told Riley had been suspended, only to hear him presenting a show on 5 Live later than evening. Riley was eventually suspended the following day, prompting a formal investigation. He then quit his job last summer without giving evidence, meaning the investigation finished without his side of events. Although the BBC internally concluded he had a “case to answer” in reference to the allegations, the fact that Riley had already left the corporation meant it did not reach a definitive verdict, leaving those who made the accusations in the dark. The broadcaster, 40, was due to be the face of the station’s Rugby League World Cup coverage until he was suspended and vanished from the airwaves without any public comment. Following a spell off social media, he has recently returned to being a prolific tweeter, sharing messages about how 2018 had been a tough year and thanking his family for supporting him during a difficult period. The BBC had until now declined to comment on the case and failed to issue any update on the investigation to members of staff at the national radio station, prompting fears among some staff of a cover-up. A BBC spokesperson said: “We can’t comment on a private staff meeting or indeed on individual staff matters although we take all concerns about harassment very seriously and investigate allegations thoroughly and take any appropriate action. We keep complainants informed as appropriate.”