The 15th anniversary of Gareth Myett’s death in a children’s prison is being commemorated by a campaign to end child imprisonment in the UK. It is hugely appropriate – because in the intervening years, those responsible for running children’s prisons have repeatedly shown that they are incapable of nurturing and rehabilitating the children in their care. Time and again we have seen children leave these institutions abused and irreparably damaged. That is, if they are lucky enough to come out at all. Gareth Myatt wasn’t. In April 2004, Myatt died while being restrained by three custody officers at Rainsbrook secure training centre in Northamptonshire, operated then and now by G4S. The restraint followed his refusal to clean a sandwich toaster. Gareth was under 5ft tall and weighed six and a half stone. One of the restraining officers was 6ft tall and weighed 16 stone. During the restraint Myatt said he could not breathe. He was told: “If you can talk, you can breathe.” He died from positional asphyxia, choking on his own vomit. He was 15 years old and had been in custody for three days. Article 39, a children’s rights charity, Inquest, which provides expertise on state-related deaths, the Howard League for Penal Reform and others launched a campaign in November to end child imprisonment. The campaign is pressing for the closure of England’s child prisons, proposing that children are only deprived of liberty as a last resort. It is also pushing for the care and support of detained children to be moved from the Ministry of Justice to children’s social care services. This might sound like a radical proposal, but it isn’t. In fact, in 1990 the UK signed up to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which states that incarceration for children should only be used as a measure of last resort and for the minimum time possible. In recent years, the numbers of jailed children has thankfully fallen, but Britain still locks up more children and for longer than any other European country. And England, Wales and Northern Ireland have the youngest age of criminal responsibility in Europe – children can be convicted for a crime at the age of 10. The most common age of criminal responsibility in Europe is 14. We have reported on child detention in British prisons for two decades, and have had the unwelcome privilege of “getting to know” some of these children who died in prison. There was Joseph Scholes, who took his own life in Stoke Heath young offenders’ institution in 2002. He had been sent there after taking part in a street robbery in which a mobile phone was stolen. The prosecutor informed the judge that Scholes had offered no physical violence to any person during the offence. In sentencing, the judge acknowledged Scholes’s vulnerability and drew the attention of the prison authorities to his acts of serious self-harm leading up to his trial. Stoke Heath’s reaction? To place him in a filthy strip cell with a concrete plinth for a bed, remove his underwear and make him wear a rough garment that resembled a horse blanket. At his inquest, a year later, some members of the jury wept openly when they were passed the garment for inspection. Joseph killed himself in that cell, nine days after he entered custody. He was 16 years old. We have also repeatedly reported on the widespread physical and sexual abuse of children in custody, stretching back decades and still taking place now. In 2013, we reported on the serial rape of boys by a prison officer at Medomsley detention centre, Durham, throughout the 1970s and 1980s. The perpetrator, Neville Husband, who ran the kitchens, was later sentenced to 10 years in prison and is now dead. Many of his fellow officers appeared to turn a blind eye to the horrors acted out before them. Giving evidence at Husband’s trial, one officer said: “Husband always used to keep a boy behind at night. We always felt sorry for that boy.” Sorrow, but no action. In 2014, we exposed the abuse of children in Medway secure training centre, then operated by G4S. In particular, we told the tale of Roni Moss, who was sent to Medway in 2010 when she was 15. She thought she may have been pregnant and asked staff if she could have a scan. They refused, saying she simply lacked iron. Two weeks later, she miscarried at around 2am. She rang the alarm bell in her cell. “I was in such pain, there was blood everywhere. I knew what was going on, but I didn’t want to believe it,” she told the Guardian. The member of staff took 25 minutes to bring three other officers into her cell. “They gave me two sanitary towels and told me to go back to sleep.” She was not taken to hospital for a week and a half. G4S later confirmed to us that Moss’s account was accurate. After the Guardian report, Durham police launched Operation Seabrook, an investigation into abuse at Medomsley detention centre. In total, 1,784 people have now come forward to allege they were victims of physical or sexual abuse at the detention centre. This month, five former officers have been convicted of physical abuse at Medomsley and jailed for a combined time of 17 years and 11 months. Yes, you may say, this is historical abuse that occurred nearly 50 years ago. But, shockingly, these abuses are continuing today. In January, we reported that staff at Medway secure training centre, now run by the state after G4S was stripped of its contract, were still unlawfully restraining children for non-compliance. This week, parliament’s human rights committee said the government must comply with international law and end use of pain-inducing restraint techniques and solitary confinement of children in detention. Which takes us back to another tragic death of a child in detention. In August 2004, 14-year-old Adam Rickwood became the youngest child to die in custody in this country in over 100 years. In 2004 Adam was remanded to Hassockfield secure training centre (built on the site of Medomsley), where he had been remanded for a month on wounding charges. At Hassockfield he was restrained for non-compliance using a tactic called nose distraction technique which basically involved a karate-like chop to the nose. Adam killed himself shortly afterwards – but not before writing a detailed letter asking, “What right do they have to hit a child?” Fifteen years on, we’re still asking the same question Adam did. And that is why we support campaigners in calling for an end to child imprisonment unless in exceptional circumstances. The simple truth is the prison service and the private contractors have forfeited their right to be trusted. Over the years they have shown that they only know how to punish rather than repair our most damaged children, and that is not good enough. • Eric Allison is the Guardian’s prisons correspondent. Simon Hattenstone is a Guardian writer