I work in the Israeli industry of melancholy, and I didn’t even know it. Luckily, over a year ago the Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu boldly exposed this enterprise and helped me and my coworkers realise that we are part of it. In several scoffing speeches and a memorable photograph – in which he was beaming like only truly happy people do, his left arm resting on a can of pickles, which in Hebrew denotes “sourpusses” – Bibi saw through us, and showed us for the whiners that we are. Now, with elections looming, even a taxi ride reflects his insight: “Look at the traffic to the airport, at the bustling cafes,” my driver told me. “Life is good, Bibi is great, what are you leftists complaining about all the time?” My response could only betray that I am, indeed, a kvetch. Discarding such relics as a political platform, under Netanyahu the Likud’s party line is “party time”, while centre-left contenders try to fathom how to urge voters to opt for real change without saying things are really bad. And, in a way, they are. Even without Israel’s 50-year occupation and retreating democracy, security concerns, social rifts, struggling health and transportation systems and the high cost of living make Netanyahu’s plea for glee look incongruous. But Israelis, especially Jews, are exceedingly, and increasingly, happy. Israeli happiness also ranks remarkably well worldwide. The UN world happiness report ranks Israel 13th of 156 countries. Netanyahu may not be overjoyed about his expected indictment on corruption charges, but polls suggest a plurality of Israelis are pleased enough to support his bid for a fifth term. Why are Israelis so happy? Presumably because they have what they want. This begs another question: what do people want? The OECD better life index, for example, measures 11 parameters, which taken together should predict people’s life satisfaction. On some parameters Israel is doing well (procreation and longevity), on some, OK (employment, safety, community), and on others quite poorly (inequality, density, pollution and work-life balance). But the big surprise is that Israelis’ life satisfaction is so high, it surpasses even the best of these predictive parameters. Something else is making Israelis so defiantly happy. The plot thickens. Experts employ two prevalent measures of happiness: evaluative and affective. The former asks people to imagine a ladder with 10 rungs, the lowest being “the worst possible life”, the top being the best, then asks them to assess where they currently stand. The affective measure asks respondents how often they experience certain positive/negative emotions. The two measures usually correlate – except when they don’t. Israelis rank themselves very high on the ladder, but their emotions fall far behind, indeed rating among the worst worldwide. Israelis enjoy life slightly less than the OECD average, and are three times as angry, twice as depressed and far more worried. So what is the missing part of the jigsaw? Fear, I think. For years I have been studying the politics of fear focused on illiberal leaders, Netanyahu included, who employ fearmongering to gain popularity. But I have missed a seeming paradox: fear can promote happiness. Fear works in insidious ways. If happiness equals what you have divided by what you want, then to become happier you should either get more or want less. And nothing makes you settle for less so much as fearing for your life. For many Israelis, simply having “life itself”, to cite Netanyahu, is a sound bargain, especially in the troubled wake of the Arab spring. A particularly effective way of scaring people into happiness is to invert the have/want equation: rather than trying to have what you want, want what you already have. And it makes some twisted neoliberal sense when the pursuit of happiness is not just an inalienable right but becomes an ultimate duty (you have to be, and want to become, happy). In fact, scared for dear life, you should be particularly grateful for, not just want, what you already have. After all, isn’t practicing gratitude the most wonderful way to become happy? Fearmongering is a tricky art. It obviously thrives on real dangers, but it goes one step further. An occasional, visceral fear is not enough; one needs to pile up fears in order to elicit anxiety that can linger in the imagination regardless of the facts. Bottled water is rarely safer than tap water, but mysophobia (fear of contamination) allows its global market to exceed $200bn a year. Likewise, according to Netanyahu, “it’s 1938 and Iran is Germany” for the past two decades. Next, you need to become the sole reassuring custodian. During the 2015 election campaign, Netanyahu presented himself as “Bibisitter”, the only responsible adult able to keep Israel’s childlike citizens safe. Overall, while fear is neither necessary nor sufficient for happiness, Netanyahu’s fear factory has effectively put the melancholy industry out of business. Israelis can joyfully join the choir: “if you’re happy and you know it”, vote for Bibi. Conversely, sadness is not merely an unfortunate personal condition: it’s a sign of betrayal. Is there hope? While happiness is driven by having what you want, hope thrives on recognising the gap between the is and the ought, realising that things could, indeed ought, to get better, that one can help make them so. If fearmongering is Netanyahu’s greatest faculty, hope is his greatest fear. By ridding Israelis of their hope, saying they are to “for ever live by the sword”, Netanyahu may let go of his fear. Yet Israelis, I hope, are courageous and creative enough to regain hope, even if that might make them slightly less happy. • Uriel Abulof is a senior lecturer in political science at Tel Aviv University and a research associate at Princeton University