Amber Rudd has said she will not rule out running to succeed Theresa May as prime minister, despite her unpopularity with Conservative party members over her fight against a no-deal Brexit. The work and pensions secretary said she was “leaving the door ajar” to a leadership bid, although she was not not particularly working on a campaign. May has not set a date for her departure yet, only promising to go once her Brexit deal is through. But several cabinet ministers, including Sajid Javid and Jeremy Hunt, are building leadership teams, as well as the leading Brexit supporters Boris Johnson and Dominic Raab. A Conservative leadership contest has two stages. In the first part, MPs vote for their choice of leader from all of the candidates who have been nominated. In each round of voting, the candidate with the least number of votes is eliminated from the contest. MPs then vote again, until there are only two challengers remaining. This usually takes place over several days. At that point the second stage is a postal ballot of Conservative party members to chose which of the two candidates they wish to lead the party. In 2016 the party members did not get to vote. At the point that the contest had been narrowed down to a choice between Andrea Leadsom or Theresa May, Leadsom stood aside. This left Theresa May to become leader and prime minister unopposed. Under the existing rules, since she won a vote of no confidence in December 2018, Theresa May's leadership cannot be directly challenged. However, she would trigger a leadership contest by resigning, as she has now promised to do. Rudd told Emma Barnett on BBC Radio 5 Live that it is “entirely possible” she will launch a campaign for the Tory leadership, saying: “I don’t rule it out.” There has been speculation that Rudd sees herself more as a kingmaker than likely winner of the competition, meaning she could run to drop out and take her supporters to back one of the remaining hopefuls. There has been speculation that she could eventually back Johnson, who is a friend, despite her saying during the EU referendum campaign that he was “not the man you want to drive you home at the end of the evening”. Rudd told the BBC she was not going to be drawn on whether she would support Johnson, adding that his language is “an area we would certainly want to test him on”. She added: “The area that we really disagree on is how we leave the European Union and that’s one of the key areas that I would start with with any leadership candidate. And I know that other members of the One Nation group feel the same. “We have to do it in a way that protects the economy and jobs. So what we oppose – not everybody in the One Nation caucus, but almost everybody – is leaving without a deal, which we think would be damaging. So that’s where we start. And on that I’m afraid I do have a disagreement with a number of my colleagues.” Under the rules of the contest, MPs will pick two candidates who would then be put to a ballot of Tory members. ConservativeHome surveys show Rudd’s popularity has plummeted among activists after her campaign against a no-deal Brexit alongside David Gauke, Greg Clark and David Mundell, which led to them being nicknamed the Gaukeward squad.