The sand is all I can think of, sticking to moist places and rasping them dry. But the people involved in Channel 4’s latest venture into putting naked people on screen, this time on a beach, in a programme called Naked Beach, have their minds on higher, dryer things; they are out to improve participants’ minds. Natasha Devon is a body-image activist and was governmental tsar for children’s mental health until the government sacked her for … having ideas about how to improve children’s mental health. Dr Keon West is an associate professor of psychology. Together, they have designed a four-day experiment to see if they can encourage people with low self-esteem and little body confidence to feel better about themselves by surrounding them with normal-bodied people in their birthday suits, who have absolute buckets of the stuff. Kaye, Darrell and Elysia are all twentysomethings whose body issues (best summarised, perhaps, by Kaye from Preston – “I hate everything about myself apart from my toes”) are preventing them from living life with any gusto. They are sent to a Greek villa to live with eight hosts of all shapes and sizes, all made of gusto. The trio do not know, when they first arrive, that their hosts will be – except for body paint and the occasional penis pouch – naked. I live my own life with the abiding hope that, one day, there will be, gloriously, a participant in some kind of reality show who will prove absolutely resistant to the premise, to blandishments, to all opportunities for personal growth, self-realisations or actualisations. Instead, they will emerge at the end like Andy Dufresne in The Shawshank Redemption, who crawled through a river of shit and came out clean on the other side. That hope flared anew with Kaye, whose immediate reaction to every body-positive suggestion was a look of abject horror and a firm, clear “NO”. The three were told they would need to spend 20 minutes before every bedtime looking at their unclothed bodies in the mirror. “NO.” At the end of the week, it was hoped they would feel able to be naked on the beach with their hosts. “NO.” Would she try on some lingerie? “NO.” What does she see when she looks in the mirror? “A fat chicken.” That’s just another way of saying no. As a lifelong bikini-avoider, my heart was doubly gladdened by her attitude. But we both weakened over the course of this cheeringly nonsensical programme that invited us to partake of the notion that complex psychological attitudes and internalised prejudices can be as easily cast off as a towelling dressing gown on a Hellenic beach if you have seen enough flesh au naturel instead of through modern life’s Instagram filters. Nevertheless, sufficiently reprogrammed by reality were they by the end of the four days that Elysia was able to sport her stretchmarks with pride, Darrell was ready to conquer the world, and my beloved Kaye even found it in herself to mutter that she felt like “a curvy …” – and, after some hesitation and in a quiet, hurried mutter – “sexy lady”. Attagirl! I almost took off my outer cardigan in solidarity. There are so many fascinating questions to be asked about body image and attitudes. Are women (75% of whom hate their bodies, compared to 45% of men in studies) innately more susceptible to toxic messages, or are they simply messaged more unrelentingly? Is a realistic appraisal of one’s flaws the same as a negative assessment of one’s body? What should we read into the fact that the hosts may have been a body-positive variety of shapes and sizes, but all sported the same amount of grooming – full makeup, golden tans, depilated and (overweight or not) relatively toned? Is normal not the same as natural? Who decides the acceptable measure of artifice that still allows you into the church of BoPo? And where, if you have it, does body confidence come from in a world that tells us that anything short of (or shorter than, or fatter than, or less symmetrical than) Gisele Bündchen will not do? How do you resist the onslaught, which begins long before you have the mental tools to avoid or unpick it? Naked Beach didn’t answer these, nor did it set out to. But it can’t, at least, do any harm and may even enable you to triangulate some of your own issues. I can now proudly self-identify as a fat chicken and am aware that I may have a pinch more work to do on some areas of my psyche as well as my thighs. And while I am proud of Kaye, I also know that I am quite content to stay hidebound, covered-up and sand-free. To any attempt to persuade me otherwise I say: “NO.”