If I had to call it, broccoli would be my favourite vegetable (or at least a dead heat with potatoes). The way they soak up flavour is unmatched by any other vegetable. At this time of year, I cook mostly with purple sprouting broccoli, as it’s tasty and affordable. I love normal calabrese broccoli just as much: I love it cut thinly and cooked with garlic, chilli and olive oil until it becomes buttery, then tossed through pasta. This week, as I often do in my kitchen, I’ve taken it down a soy and chilli route, with kimchi fried rice, and a sunny yuzu lime-dressed broccoli. This is a brilliant way to use up leftover rice. I use a cup measure as I find measuring rice and water by volume is simpler and gets a better result. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 2 1 cup (about 175g) basmati riceOlive oil200g purple sprouting or Tenderstem broccoli, stalks roughly chopped, florets kept whole2 tsp sesame seeds4 heaped tbsp kimchi (depending on its spiciness – taste it first)4 tbsp soy sauce2 eggs2 spring onions, finely chopped Rinse the rice under cold water until the water runs clear. Heat a pan over a medium heat, add a little oil, then add the rice. Fry the rice for a couple of minutes, then add double the volume of boiling water. Bring to a boil, turn down to a gentle simmer and cook for eight minutes. Turn off the heat, cover with a lid and tea towel, and leave to steam for another eight minutes. Heat two teaspoons of oil in a wok or large frying pan over a high heat, add the broccoli stalks, then add a splash of water. Once the water has evaporated, add the sesame seeds, broccoli heads and kimchi, then cook for about five minutes, until the seeds are toasted. Stir through two tablespoons of soy sauce and the cooked rice, mixing everything together. Beat the eggs with the remaining soy sauce, push the rice to one side, and heat a teaspoon of oil. Pour in the eggs and cook for a couple of minutes, until just set. Mix the eggs through the rice with a spatula, then serve with spring onions and more kimchi on top, if you like. Ponzu is a mix of zingy yuzu lime juice and soy sauce. Some ponzus contain rice wine and other seasonings but I try to buy one that is a mixture of just yuzu juice and soy. If you can’t find it, then a 50/50 mix of soy sauce with lime and clementine juice will be a close match. Prep 10 minCook 10 minServes 2 250g purple sprouting or Tenderstem broccoli2 tbsp chopped nuts or seeds (I like a mix of peanuts, sesame and sunflower seeds)4 tbsp ponzu (see below)1 tsp runny honey To serveCooked rice or noodles, tossed with sesame oilChilli oil First, steam or blanch the broccoli in boiling water until just tender – about three to four minutes, depending on its thickness. In a large frying pan, toast the nuts or seeds until they are just beginning to brown and smell toasty. Once the broccoli is cooked, drain and leave to dry, then add to the pan with the nuts and seeds, and toss. Add the ponzu and honey, then toss again. Take off the heat and serve: I like mine on top of fluffy white rice or udon noodles with some chilli oil.