Libyan militias allied to the government in Tripoli have taken prisoner 145 troops from a rival force advancing from the country’s east as fears mounted of a renewed civil war and the UN secretary general prepared to meet the eastern forces’ powerful leader. The men were captured in the town of Zawiya, west of Tripoli, along with 60 vehicles, a commander told Reuters. The captured men are fighters in the self-styled Libyan National Army (LNA) of Khalifa Haftar, who ordered a march on Tripoli on Thursday, in a surprise move marking a dangerous escalation of a power struggle that has dragged on since the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi in 2011. Libya is riven between two rival factions, one broadly supporting Haftar in the east and another based in Tripoli in the west, including the UN-backed government led by Fayez al-Sarraj. LNA forces took Gharyan, about 50 miles south of Tripoli, but they failed to take a checkpoint about 18 miles west of the capital in an attempt to close the coastal road to Tunisia. An LNA-allied militia withdrew overnight from so-called Gate 27, leaving it abandoned in the morning, a Reuters reporter said. Meanwhile, militias allied to the Tripoli government moved more machine gun-mounted pickups from the coastal city of Misrata to Tripoli to defend it against Haftar’s forces. “We are the revolutionaries and the elders … we declare we are on full mobilisation and war,” said militias from the western cities of Zawiya and Misrata on social media early on Friday. António Guterres, the UN secretary general, was due to meet Haftar in Benghazi on Friday in a bid to avert renewed civil war. Guterres, who has been in Tripoli this week to help organise a national reconciliation conference planned for later this month, spent Thursday night in the heavily fortified UN compound in a Tripoli suburb, before a planned flight to Benghazi. He will also go to Tobruk, another eastern city, to meet lawmakers in the House of Representatives, which is also allied to Haftar. “My aim remains the same: avoid a military confrontation. I reiterate that there is no military solution for the Libyan crisis, only a political one,” Guterres said on Twitter. Since the fall of Gaddafi in 2011, Libya has slid into chaos and frequent spasms of violence. Successive UN-led efforts to unify Libya’s key institutions, including the central bank and political bodies, have failed and the country’s major oil installations have frequently been held to ransom by a variety of militia groups. Across many of the towns in Libya’s west there would be deep resistance to Haftar or any effort to impose military rule, partly because they would fear reprisals by Haftar forces and because they do not want to return to the authoritarian rule of the Gaddafi era. Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report