I have under-proved doughs and over-proved them. Forgotten some and started baking others well before they were ready. In one case I let an over-enthusiastic batch spill over the side of the bowl and swell across the kitchen counter like an alien. But my main fault has always been making a dough too tight, one without enough liquid and that struggled to rise. I guess I needed to be in control. I have recently started making softer doughs, using a little more water and getting a better rise and a softer texture I have recently started making softer doughs, using a little more water and getting a better rise and a softer texture. When I am kneading them on the work bench they feel more alive. The doughs are now a bit stickier and messier to handle, and tend to do their own thing in the oven, slouching rather than standing up straight. The shape gets a bit out of hand, too, but I like that. Freeform is good form in my book. The sweet dough I made last week (just 2 tbsp of sugar to 450g of flour) held a ribbon of dark chocolate and chopped crystals of candied orange. I put them in a thread through the centre, but I could have kneaded them in. The pine kernels I scattered on the top cooked to a deep crunchy brown. The crumb was flecked with grated orange. We sliced the loaf thickly and ate it with coffee. While I was at it, I made small buns of cheese, soft-textured ham and little shards of fried smoky bacon. The cheese frizzled, the bacon crisped and the dough was soft and springy. The buns kept in foil in good condition until the next day. I don’t know why I call them buns; warm from the oven they were more like little pockets of melted cheese, soft ham and rosemary. If you are looking for a really fine red Leicester (there’s a few duff ones about), I am happy to lead you in the direction of Sparkenhoe Vintage, which is stocked by Neal’s Yard Dairy. They describe it as “complex and balanced, savoury and mellow”. They are right. Makes 8, serves 4 strong bread flour 450gsalt ½ tspeasy-bake dried yeast 7gwater 375ml, warmsmoked streaky bacon 200golive oil a little rosemary leaves 2 tbsp, choppedfarmhouse cheese such as Cheshire or red Leicester, 250gYork ham 200gegg 1, beaten Make the dough by first putting the flour in a capacious bowl. Add the salt and yeast, then enough of the warm water to form a soft, slightly sticky dough. Dust the work surface generously with flour and knead the dough for 9 minutes. Alternatively, make the dough in an electric mixer fitted with a dough hook, kneading for 4 minutes. Place the dough in its bowl in a warm place, covered with a clean tea towel, and leave to rise for about 45 minutes to 1 hour, until the dough is almost twice its original size. Set the oven at 220C/gas mark 8. Cut the bacon into shreds approximately 1cm wide and fry them in a little oil until crisp, then drain on kitchen paper. Finely chop the rosemary. Tip the dough onto a floured work surface and roll or lightly punch into a rectangle 30cm x 24cm and transfer to a baking sheet. Crumble the cheese into small pieces and scatter three quarters of it over the surface of the dough. Add most of the bacon and all of the ham, torn into small pieces, and most of the rosemary. Fold the pastry in half lengthways, as if you were closing a book, then roll out once more to a rectangle 30cm x 24cm and transfer to a baking sheet. Brush the surface with the beaten egg, then scatter the reserved bacon and rosemary over the surface. Cut into 8 squares and bake for 25 minutes until puffed up. Serve while still warm. A sweet, slicing loaf, soft of crumb and with a heart of dark chocolate and chopped peel. I suggest buying the large pieces of candied fruit and dicing them yourself rather than using the “sweet gravel” in tubs. Makes 1 small loaf, serves about 6 strong bread flour 450gsalt ½ tspcaster sugar 3 tspeasy-bake dried yeast 7gcandied peel 235gorange 1dark chocolate 100gegg 1, beatenpine kernels 2 tbsp Make the dough first by putting the flour into a wide, deep bowl. Add the salt, sugar and yeast, then enough warm water to form a soft, slightly sticky dough. Cover the work surface generously with flour and knead the dough for 9 minutes. Alternatively, you can make the dough using an electric mixer with a dough hook, kneading for 4 minutes. Place the dough in a bowl in a warm place, covered with a clean tea towel, and leave to rise for about 45 minutes to 1 hour, until the dough is almost twice its original size. Chop the candied peel into small, ½ cm cubes. Turn the dough onto a floured work surface. Pat the dough into a round about 24cm in diameter. Grate the zest of the orange over the surface. Break the chocolate into 2cm squares and place them in a row down the centre of the dough. Scatter the candied peel over the chocolate. Brush the edges of the dough with the beaten egg, then bring the sides into the middle and pinch together to seal. Turn the dough over and pat it into a large bun shape, then place on a baking sheet. Cover with a clean tea towel and leave in a warm place to rise for about 30 minutes. Set the oven at 220C/gas mark 8. Brush the loaf with the beaten egg, sprinkle over the pine kernels, then bake for 25 minutes until golden. Dust with icing sugar and leave to cool before slicing. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater