The response of unionists to Nicola Sturgeon’s latest timetable for Scottish independence was as feeble as it was predictable. In the four and a half years or so that have elapsed since the last independence referendum, their response has rarely risen above their favoured catcalls of “divisive” and “now is not the time”. If not now or in the next couple of years though, when? The UK’s Brexit strategy, if it can be called such, was abducted by the Tory hard right at the start of this process and has not been seen since. In its place has been a three-year circus of the damned where the grotesques and freaks that we all knew scuttled around the frayed edges of Conservatism got their chance to appear in the spotlight. Thus, the government’s offering was reduced to muttering about dodgy and untrustworthy Europeans and to a curious concern for Ireland not seen since it carved out the gerrymandered fake state of Northern Ireland. The post-Brexit bequest for England will be a country that has fallen in on itself, grievously riven by the rancid nature of political debate since the EU referendum. Its government will be led by a hard-right faction for whom the words “healing” and “reconciliation” are regarded as signs of weakness. Compared with this, the “divisiveness” of another Scottish independence referendum will be like a day out at the seaside. Has there ever been a better time for Scotland to gain its independence? Scottish nationalists and the wider independence movement have been preparing for the next referendum for a couple of years now and Sturgeon’s speech last Wednesday marked the end of the first stage of this process. It produced the growth commission report overseen by the SNP’s respected economic adviser, Andrew Wilson, which sought to provide a more realistic cost and risk analysis of independence than was apparent in 2014’s sunny white paper. During this time, the concept of independence has been portrayed as the normal one for modern democracies to aspire to. Of course, Theresa May or whoever is in her place when the time comes will refuse the request for section 30 to be triggered. Sturgeon’s speech, though, is the first step in the SNP’s strategy of portraying the Tories as fearful, inflexible and patrician. The post-Brexit bequest for England will be a country that has fallen in on itself, riven by rancid political debate Yet, while Sturgeon indicated her desire for a referendum to be held before 2021, senior voices in the SNP are also looking at the Holyrood election that year to determine the fate of independence. At the top of the SNP’s election manifesto would be a pledge to hold a second referendum. An overall majority would morally oblige Westminster to grant it and tip the scales towards the SNP if the UK supreme court were to get involved. Viewed through this lens, Sturgeon’s speech could be considered as a potentially defining move on the constitutional chessboard. The absence of anything resembling a properly led opposition in Scotland characterised the lazy responses to Sturgeon’s speech by the two main parties of the union. They ought to be targeting the SNP’s patchy record in delivering in some key devolved areas. One of these is the Social Security Act, the Scottish government’s most ambitious programme of change and one that seems to be stalling. The timeline on this has been pushed back significantly and how this additional responsibility will be funded has still not been agreed, as Shirley-Anne Somerville, the cabinet secretary for social security, admitted in a recent interview in the Times. Somerville said last month that full control over the first wave of 11 social security benefits would be maintained by the DWP until Social Security Scotland has the capability to administer them in 2024. The Scottish government claims it has paid out an additional £197m in welfare benefits. This is more than slightly misleading as £197m is the amount that’s so far been spent on implementing the new agency while there’s been no mention of the start-up budget having already climbed from £300m to £400m. No one can accuse the SNP of failing to invest in the Scottish NHS but historical failure characterised by rank managerial incompetence has made this the most difficult portfolio in Holyrood. It will take a decade of firm cabinet leadership to repair the damage. There’s been a failure to deliver on the government’s health and care delivery plan, with integration of health and social care in particular falling down, as mentioned in the last two Audit Scotland reports. There has been little progress on moving patients away from acute care, a key plank of the strategy, and, inexplicably, five new elective centres being built. Scotland’s first minister once asked us to judge her on her record in education. While there has been long overdue progress in loosening the private school stranglehold on our elite universities, there has also been a steady decline in primary-school literacy and numeracy as well as huge teacher shortages and little delivered by way of reform of school governance and granting head teachers more power to control decisions. John Swinney’s tenure as education secretary has been marked by U-turns, with teachers contemplating the first national strikes since the Thatcher era in protest at SNP handling of pay and conditions. Amid the train wreck of this disfigured Brexit, a compelling case has been made for Scotland to leave it all behind and to renounce the ugly and bitter future that awaits the UK. The SNP, though, must do much more to show that it is worthy of taking us there. • Kevin McKenna is an Observer columinst