Sick of Brexit? Yeah, me too. Partly because it becomes clearer with each chaotic day that for some of the second-tier “Brexit ultras” no one much cares about (Mark Francois, Steve Baker, Andrew Bridgen, Bernard Jenkin et al), this is the most attention they’ve ever had and are ever likely to get in their sad, blustering, self-important lives. While it’s Remainers who are supposed to be the soppy drama queens, just look at this bunch – flapping about the media, mouth-breathing through their camera-time, sparkly eyed with their own significance. Brexit as a debilitating national crisis? Hardly. They’ve never felt so alive. It’s increasingly difficult to ignore the fact that some very unimpressive politicos appear to be “having a good Brexit”, achieving a prominence that until now not so mysteriously eluded them. When the likes of Boris Johnson scuttled off to perfect leadership bids, a vacuum appeared and into it swooped “who’s that?” characters to variously spray sub-military, spittle-flecked drivel into television cameras (Francois), rant about bulldozing Westminster (Baker), brag about refusing to compromise (Bridgen) and wail about no deal (all of the above). Politically, they’re hardened Brexiters having their “moment”, but a dark psychological subtext also hints at near-nonentities lapping up the attention they’ve long craved. We’ve all met types like this at school or work – people who suddenly appear in some unlikely position of importance, who haven’t got the wit or intelligence to hide the fact that a little bit of power and attention has gone straight to their heads. These situations can initially seem amusing, but such people are dangerous, not because of their charisma, rather their lack of it. These are characters who may have (resentfully) accepted that they were destined for the parliamentary equivalent of collecting the books at the end of class. Suddenly, Brexit transforms them into major players, mavericks, star-makers. They’re on the news, being questioned, criticised, studied, noticed. All that’s got to be hard to give up. I’m not suggesting that this is the reason that no resolutions could be found, just that on some level it must have suited them when they weren’t. After all, a resolution means being plunged back into obscurity. No more BBC radio or Sky TV to provide “balance”. No more green rooms and lovely attention. Back to endless boring MP-nothingness, sorting out bin collection disputes. Never underestimate how much the also-rans of Westminster crave the tiniest beam of spotlight. Nor mistake this for “revenge of the nerds” (nerds tend to know their stuff). See them for what they are: a parliamentary voodoo carnival of the self-sabotaging, mediocre and overlooked. Brexit ultras, though? More like Brexit extras in the thespian sense, bit-part players, understudies, spear carriers. Or competition winners. Perhaps it’s time to prise those needy little fingers away from the golden ticket of political stardom that they believe has fluttered so unexpectedly into their grasp. Dan Robbins, the US artist who created the paint-by-numbers kits, has died, aged 93. Paint-by-numbers is a great example of a product that was sneered at by the elite, but sold shedloads and became part of the culture. While it isn’t perfect (those fiddly little pots!), and there are obvious limitations in terms of artistic expression (the whole point is that you rigidly follow the rules), you can see why it’s enduringly popular – helping ordinary people create something beautiful. The kits were inspired by Leonardo da Vinci’s teaching techniques, and became very varied, but that didn’t stop purists worrying that they devalued true art. Maybe so, but not everyone is fortunate enough to attend art college or even to be talented. While painting by numbers may have idiot-proofed art for the masses, it also democratised it. The technique has since been used to keep children focused on art projects, when they might otherwise lose heart. Then there is the therapeutic effect for adults who just want to sit and be still – a form of meditation, if you will. So, RIP, Dan Robbins. His invention may not have been about high art, but it showed he knew about humans. Whatever stops a football career (age, injury), it shouldn’t be racism. The England and Tottenham Hotspur player Danny Rose, who was abused during the Euro 2020 qualifier in Montenegro, said: “When countries get fined what I probably spend on a night out in London, what do you expect?” Rose added: “I’ve got five or six more years left in football and I just can’t wait to see the back of it.” First, I’m up for a night out with Rose – such a fine would be around £42,500 – but, realistically, that’s not much in international footballing terms and we all know what Rose means. In the UK, racist abuse remains rife, despite the No Room for Racism campaign by the Premier League and the sport’s anti-discrimination organisation, Kick It Out. Only last week, Wymeswold striker Linford Harris was racially abused as he was sent off during the Vase cup final, leading to a fight involving both players and fans and the match having to be abandoned. Rose and Harris are literally in different leagues in footballing terms, but that’s the point – Premier League or amateur, they’ll both have had a gutful of racist abuse. This behaviour isn’t representative of the average fan, but it’s still painful to behold, not least because football remains a proud bedrock of working-class culture. However much big money sloshes around, despite the attempts to gentrify it, football has stayed stubbornly working class in spirit, which is miraculous. Racism degrades this achievement – especially as other events attracting large crowds (other sports, music festivals) prove that such ugliness isn’t inevitable. It’s sickening that someone such as Rose is counting down the days. What can be done? – sStopping matches as soon as the abuse starts, the same way concerts are halted if bottles are thrown? While efforts have been made, they’re not enough. Where’s zero tolerance when you need it? • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist