Tiger Roll has won the Grand National for a second time, becoming the first horse since Red Rum in the 1970s to win the race more than once. Underlining the scale of his achievement in the 40-runner race, he is only the third horse to win multiple Nationals since the nineteenth century. “I can’t believe it,” said the winning jockey, Davy Russell, between tipping buckets of water over his mount’s neck in the moments after the race. “Ah Jaysus, I can’t ... at my age now, you’re after winning two Grand Nationals... He’s one hell of a horse.” The winning trainer, Gordon Elliott, said: “What a horse. He’s a tiger.” The trainer had 11 runners in the race but only needed the favourite. Already seen as the most popular racehorse in the world, Tiger Roll immortalised himself by cruising through the race for a second time and could be called the likely winner from a mile out. While he needed a photo-finish to be called the winner a year ago, this time his supporters could breathe easy for the final furlong as he won by daylight. Magic Of Light, a first runner in the race for Jessie Harrington, ran a huge race to be second, having led for much of the way and made a blunder at the last. Rathvinden, also prominent from an early stage, stayed on for third after a bad blunder at second Valentine’s. Walk In The Mill was fourth. The first circuit of the race was notable for how many fences passed without incident. But Vintage Clouds fell at the first and may have brought down Up For Review. That meant that more than 30 runners had to be funnelled around the fence second time around, causing a moment of high tension as the crowd waited to see if there would be sufficient room, but horses and jockeys coped remarkably well with the task. Up For Review suffered a fatal injury in that fall while General Principle was brought back in the horse ambulance but the reports are that he only has superficial injuries. Step Back made the early running but tired and was pulled up. Rock The Kasbah was one of the handful of fallers, early on the second circuit, meaning that Richard Johnson is still waiting for his first Grand National success.