Parliament was mired in deadlock once more on Monday night after MPs failed to back either a soft Brexit or a referendum in sufficient numbers to forge a cross-party compromise alternative to Theresa May’s Brexit deal. Tories also narrowly resisted entreaties to back a customs union motion proposed by former chancellor Ken Clarke – rejected by a margin of just three votes – and a confirmatory referendum on any Brexit deal, an option which fell short of a majority by only 12. Despite Labour and SNP backing for the Norway-style Brexit deal championed by the Tory MP Nick Boles, its supporters failed to win a majority of MPs, by 261 votes to 282 MPs. Boles said: “I have failed, chiefly because my party fails to compromise” – and made the dramatic announcement to MPs that he would no longer sit in the House of Commons as a Conservative. All three alternative options lost by a significantly narrower margin than the prime minister’s deal, which was rejected for a third time by 58 votes last Friday. MPs also declined to back a separate bid by the SNP MP Joanna Cherry to allow parliament to prevent a no-deal Brexit, on April 12. Brexit secretary Steve Barclay said the Commons had failed to reach a majority, and cabinet would now consider the way forward on Tuesday. May will summon her warring cabinet to Downing Street for a five-hour showdown on Tuesday as the government faces a historic choice between accepting a softer Brexit and leaving the EU in 10 days’ time without a deal. After MPs had their say on four alternatives to the prime minister’s thrice-rejected deal in a process of indicative votes on Monday, cabinet ministers will discuss whether to tack towards a closer future relationship with the EU. Several cabinet ministers, including Andrea Leadsom and Liam Fox, are adamant that a no-deal exit would be preferable to a customs union – and they claim the support of more than half of the parliamentary party, many of whom signed a letter to May making the point. The home secretary, Sajid Javid, a contender to succeed May as Conservative leader, made his position clear on Monday, tweeting that a customs union might appear to be “some kind of soft comfort blanket” but was “in reality more of a straitjacket”. However, another well-organised group of ministers, including Amber Rudd and David Gauke, are determined to avoid no deal and believe May should instead seek a cross-party consensus. A cabinet source said: “I honestly just think the prime minister needs to make a firm decision.” The deeply divided cabinet, which May’s chief whip, Julian Smith, described in a BBC interview as the “worst example of ill-discipline in cabinet in British political history”, were instructed not to vote on Monday. Asked about Smith’s comments, May’s spokesman said: “I’ll leave it to historians to make their judgments on history.” He underlined the prime minister’s continued objections to Britain remaining part of a customs union. “She has said on a number of occasions that she believes it is important for the UK to have its own trade policy,” the spokesman said. Ministers have been told to expect three hours of political cabinet – excluding civil servants – on Tuesday morning, and another two hours of full cabinet in the afternoon. No 10 has not ruled out bringing the prime minister’s deal back to the House of Commons for a fourth time, most likely on Wednesday, if the Speaker will allow it. May could table it together with an amendment submitted last week by the Labour MPs Gareth Snell and Lisa Nandy allowing parliament a greater say in the next stage of the Brexit negotiations. That could help the government to circumvent the Speaker’s ruling that May cannot bring her deal back unchanged. May said last Friday that she would accept the Snell-Nandy amendment, and Conservative whips hope it could attract the support of a string of Labour MPs from pro-Brexit seats this week. But just five voted for her deal last week after hearing that she would back it. If she brings her deal back, the prime minister is likely to seek to pit it against a backbench-led effort to push the government towards a softer deal, sharpening the dilemma for Brexiters, who prefer a cleaner break with the EU. The schools minister, Nadhim Zahawi, said: “I would like the option that parliament comes up with put up against the prime minister’s deal. I am confident that the prime minister’s deal would win the day.” Many Conservative MPs, including Boris Johnson and Jacob Rees-Mogg, changed sides to support her deal on Friday after May’s promise to leave Downing Street if she won the vote. May has invited those MPs who switched sides in favour of her deal to meet her, in the latest attempt to shore up support. EU27 leaders have granted Britain an extension to the article 50 deadline to 12 April, but if May wants to avoid no deal she will have to request a longer extension at an emergency EU summit next week. Brussels sources say that would be granted only if the prime minister points to a plausible alternative Brexit plan that could command the support of a stable majority in the Commons. While the backbench-led debate on Brexit options continued on Monday, MPs were also holding a separate discussion triggered by a mass petition calling for article 50 to be revoked, which has gained more than 6m signatures. The petition is the most popular in parliament’s history. The Independent Group MP Chuka Umunna said young people would suffer the worst effects of no deal. “They are the ones who will never forgive this generation of politicians if we allow this catastrophe to happen,” he said.