Manchester United have earned promotion to the Women’s Super League in their maiden season after beating Aston Villa 5-0. Goals from Millie Turner, Alex Greenwood (penalty), Jessica Sigsworth, Ella Toone and Charlie Devlin secured their passage with three games to play – against the bottom three sides. Aston Villa’s goalkeeper, Sian Rodgers, was sent off at 4-0. Promotion is subject to meeting WSL licence criteria, though the Football Association does not foresee any problems and will confirm the outcome in mid-May. There had been times when it looked as if the race at the top of the Women’s Championship would go to the wire. Tottenham, Charlton and Durham all kept pace with United. But with Durham having surprisingly dropped points at home to Sheffield United on Sunday and Tottenham having suffered a 5-1 home defeat by Casey Stoney’s team before the international break, the way was clear for United to secure a place in the top division. After Ed Woodward, United executive vice-chairman, announced in March last year the club’s intention to launch a fully professional women’s side in the second tier, Stoney was quick to make promotion their primary objective. To gel a team and make them competitive in a single season is impressive but the decision to enter a step below the top, into a semi-professional tier, was calculated. It has given Stoney the chance to blood a young side before they take on teams with resources closer to their own each week. Promotion was almost a formality. United Women have benefited from the injection of a rumoured £5m, dwarfing the funds available even to the top WSL sides. The team have acquitted themselves well against WSL opposition, winning four cup meetings and losing three, including a League Cup semi-final against Arsenal and a 3-2 defeat by Reading in extra time of their FA Cup quarter-final. A win against Crystal Palace on Saturday would confirm the title, giving Stoney extra time to experiment before she looks to strengthen in the summer. Yeovil Town’s relegation from the WSL was confirmed as they lost 5-0 at home to Reading. The Somerset side have won just twice this season and a points deduction handed down as they prepared to enter administration means they are on -3 points after 17 games. The Glovers did not go into administration after receiving financial support from the FA, but did not appeal the deduction and will bid for a second-tier licence next season as a part-time side. Doubles for Lauren Bruton and Millie Farrow followed a curling finish from Fara Williams as Reading put their FA Cup semi-final defeat to West Ham behind them. In the evening’s other game, Ellen White scored twice as Birmingham won 3-1 at Everton to consolidate fourth place in the table.