In Sunday’s Child, Serena Katt pieces together the story of what her German grandfather did during the war using some of his words, a few of her own and, most powerfully of all, her magnificently unsettling, largely monochrome illustrations. The result brings to mind an old photograph album, except that even the most seemingly innocent images on its pages come with a strong historical resonance. A family crowded around a radio. A crowd gazing at posters pasted on a wall. A group of teenagers marching with their backpacks through a forest. In some other book, these things would not be out of the ordinary. Here, though, they tell, with utmost concision and great eloquence, a story of war, propaganda and collective blindness. Katt’s grandfather, Günter, came originally from Polish aristocratic stock, and perhaps it was this that fuelled his fervent desire always to belong: his parents, down on their luck, were only immigrants to the country where, in 1938, he joined the Hitler Youth at the age of 10. In Sunday’s Child, we see him in uniform attending summer camps, and we look on as he wins, some years later, a place at an elite teacher training academy for particularly talented National Socialist students. We are there, too, for his military training, and at the moment when, in 1944, he receives his call-up papers – only to be unaccountably sent home by the first officer he meets. The following year, still desperate to prove himself, he volunteers to fight with the Volkssturm, the Nazi militia set up in the war’s last months. But again, he is thwarted, this time by his big sister, Inge, who burns his uniform, and hides him in the cellar (unlike the still credulous Günter, she knows the game is up for Hitler). The book ends after the war is over, when he gets a good job in a bank – he really is the ever-lucky Sunday’s child of the book’s title – whereupon “life begins again”. He will be respected, and loved, and live on into old age. But the bare bones of Günter’s story, put like this, hardly convey its might on the page. His granddaughter is always in the background, asking questions. What did he know? What did he see? From what did he avert his eyes? And though she is not in the business of making excuses for him, she is interested in the pressure exerted by the internal violence that was encouraged in the Hitler Youth; when he is away at the academy, she wonders what goes on after the lights are out in its dormitories (here she gives us two entirely black pages – a darkness that is particular but also symbolises a wider malaise, an entire nation thrown into an endless night). Even as she worries about his acceptance of all that he is told, she is able to picture what must have appealed to boys like him: the flags and the songs, the ostentatious rallies and the overblown monuments. Her pencil makes these things look beautiful and extraordinary; Günter and the other teenagers, though strong and muscular and wilfully ignorant, seem rather small by comparison. There is, I think, real daring here, as well as empathy and imagination. What would you have done? she quietly asks: an age-old question, but still an enduringly good one. • Sunday’s Child by Serena Katt is published by Jonathan Cape (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99