Up to 20 Conservatives could vote against the government in a confidence motion to stop a soft Brexit or a long delay, the former Brexit secretary David Davis has said. Davis, who did not rule out running for the party leadership, said significant numbers of MPs were prepared to put the delivery of Brexit above their party allegiance. His warning came as Theresa May’s cabinet met on Tuesday morning, though the planned lengthy session has been shortened in light of the results of the indicative votes in the Commons. Instead, ministers will meet for two hours of political cabinet – without civil servants – and then for a normal cabinet meeting. On Monday night, MPs came within three votes of backing a post-Brexit customs union with the EU, but no Brexit option reached a majority. The cabinet meeting changes prompted speculation that ministers had previously believed they were heading for defeat. May had been expected to propose a runoff between her Brexit deal and any compromise option supported by a majority of MPs. The former minister Nick Boles, who spearheaded a drive to get MPs to back an alternative Norway-style deal dubbed “common market 2.0”, quit the party on the floor of the house, saying the Tories had never been prepared to compromise. Davis said a general election would not necessarily break the impasse. “I would make one warning to the cabinet this morning: don’t be sure every Conservative MP would vote for you if it was made a confidence vote,” he said on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “One or two have said already, I think there are probably 20 who would say [Brexit] is so important, it’s the future of the country, it’s our destiny at stake, it’s more important than the Tory party.” On Tuesday morning, the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, said the UK had three options: agreement this week on the prime minister’s deal or a variant of it, no deal, or a long extension to article 50. “The UK may ask for another extension. Such an extension would carry significant risks for the EU,” he said. “Therefore a strong justification would be needed. We have always said that we can accept a customs union, or relationship along the style of the Norway model.” Theresa May's cabinet will meet to discuss what to do next after the outcome of the indicative votes. With no alternative options gaining a majority among MPs, she could still decide to go for a fourth 'meaningful vote' on her deal. Parliament may decide to have another set of indicative votes - possibly on the paper will be a compromise option that combines a customs union with a confirmatory public vote. That may finally command a majority in the Commons. Thursday may see another attempt for No. 10 to get the withdrawal agreement through parliament. If the UK parliament or government have significantly changed position, then a lengthy Article 50 extension may be required. EU leaders would decide how long at a summit on this date. Negotiator Michel Barnier has suggested there might be three reasons for the EU to grant a long extension: for a second referendum, a general election, or because parliament wants to again examine the political declaration. But there's no guarantee the EU27 would unanimously agree to this. If Theresa May's deal is not passed by parliament, then, with no other significant developments, this would be the date by international law that the UK leaves the EU without a deal. If Theresa May's deal does pass parliament, this would be the scheduled date of the UK's departure from the EU. Unless there is a further longer extension of article 50, the EU27 will vote for a new set of MEPs without the UK participating. However, if Brexit has been further delayed, the UK would hold European elections on the Thursday. If Theresa May's deal passes parliament, she is expected to stand down after the UK leaves the EU on 22 May, triggering a contest for the leadership of the Conservative party. There has been some suggestion though that she might hold out through the summer so that the contest takes place after the next Tory conference in October. Davis said a long delay to Brexit “would tear apart” the Conservative party. “You saw what happened last night with Nick Boles. You would see some bleeding away of people but … you would almost certainly have a leadership election and then all bets are off,” he said. The Conservative MP Oliver Letwin, one of the key drivers behind the push for parliament to hold indicative votes on Brexit options, was expected to lay out his plans later on Tuesday for parliament to hold a fresh round of indicative votes on Wednesday. A number of Tory MPs have already publicly suggested they could vote against the prime minister in a confidence motion in order to force a change of leadership or a general election. Any Tory MP who voted against the government would be risking their chance of standing again as a Tory candidate. Steve Baker, a leading figure in the European Research Group of hard Brexiters, told the BBC the option of voting against the government in a confidence motion was possible. “We are approaching the point where the stakes are now so very high, and so transcend party politics and what this country is about and the fundamental British value that political power rests on consent, that I think these things are coming on to the table,” he said. “There’s no point denying things are running away.” 