If this is to be Liverpool’s year, it may be resilience and an admirable ability to bounce back from setbacks within games, rather than a dazzling forward line or stingy defence, that makes the difference. They were rarely at their best on the south coast and even fretted in arrears for a period but, ruthlessly, they still prevailed. In time – particularly if that agonising 29-year wait is finally ended next month – they may reflect on this win as having far more significance than merely serving to re-establish a two-point lead over Manchester City in the run-in. Jürgen Klopp would have attempted to spin a positive riposte, no doubt, but dropping points even at a revitalised Southampton would have felt disastrous, surrendering all momentum to the champions. Instead, by rallying in a frantic finale, they retained a psychological edge in this hypnotic tussle at the summit and the German was able to indulge in his customary euphoric fist pumps in front of the away contingent at the final whistle. “In the end it’s brilliant,” said Klopp through that familiar grin. “Southampton are outstanding, really tough to play against, brilliantly organised with good players in all positions. Everyone will come here in the future and feel how difficult it is, so that makes this even more satisfying.” Their pursuit has long since taken on a relentless nature – no one can match the 16 points they have secured from losing positions in the top flight this season. Liverpool had conceded first to Burnley at Anfield recently. They also suffered potentially damaging equalisers to Fulham and Spurs but on each occasion found a way to emerge victorious. This game, against resilient and resurgent opposition, proved no different even if it did drift into the final 10 minutes with the visitors heaving first to clear a corner and then a follow-up centre, before they sprang decisively on the counterattack. The substitute Jordan Henderson’s header propelled them upfield, though it was Mohamed Salah, running from well inside his own half, who in the end punctured Southampton’s optimism. The Egyptian sprinted mercilessly at a backtracking Ryan Bertrand, exposed and alone guarding his own half, before spurning the chance to supply a galloping Roberto Firmino at his side – “Mo Salah could not pass for his goal, so go, go, go...” said Klopp, reliving the moment in his mind – and instead dispatching a glorious shot beyond Angus Gunn from just inside the home side’s penalty area. Salah’s 50th Premier League goal, chalked up in a club-record 69 games, was his first since mid-February, ending what he would have considered an eight-game drought. If their most prolific forward is restored to form for the run-in, it will only add to this team’s belief as they consider those domestic challenges still to come. They have only Chelsea and Wolves, both at Anfield, of the top seven still to play. In truth their final five fixtures do not look terribly daunting. There were other quirks for them to celebrate. Naby Keïta, who played under Ralph Hasenhüttl at Red Bull Leipzig, leapt to meet Trent Alexander-Arnold’s fine cross nine minutes from the interval to head a first Liverpool goal through Gunn’s attempt to save at the foot of his post. That was an equaliser to ease the nerves – albeit one which relied on an assistant referee missing Salah’s marginal offside in the buildup – though it took the introduction of older heads in Henderson and James Milner just before the hour for the visitors to impose themselves properly on the game. Late on, once their lead had been established, Henderson even surged upfield and tapped home Firmino’s centre for a first goal since September 2017. Southampton left deflated, though they will not be downhearted for long. Their revival under Hasenhüttl, from the ugly mish-mash of a side that loitered near the foot of the table under Mauricio Pellegrino and Mark Hughes, has been remarkable. They are unrecognisable these days. The manner in which they unsettled lofty opponents, particularly in the early exchanges, was a reminder that they have unseated Arsenal and Spurs under the Austrian, and tested all comers. Nathan Redmond and Bertrand threatened to overrun Liverpool down their right. It was no surprise that their early advantage was secured from that flank, Bertrand’s cross from deep arcing over an uncertain Joël Matip for the untracked Pierre-Emile Højbjerg to flick on beyond Virgil van Dijk. There loitered Shane Long, with Andrew Robertson distracted by James Ward-Prowse’s run and Keïta slow to react, to collect and convert only his second league goal of the season. Southampton had gone over five hours against these opponents without netting – Sadio Mané had actually been their last scorer in this fixture, three years ago – and, had the Irishman not fluffed a finish from another fine Bertrand centre they might have forced themselves further ahead. “Maybe we scored a little bit too early,” said Hasenhüttl. “Or, if you go 2-0 up, defending as we did today, then you have a chance.” His own side, disciplined and impressive until that frantic final 10 minutes, will surely soon edge themselves clear of trouble.