Lori Lightfoot made history on Tuesday as she defeated Toni Preckwinkle in a runoff election to become the next mayor of Chicago, becoming the first black woman – and first openly LGBT person – to hold the position in the city. The reform candidate, who won in a landslide victory, will succeed Rahm Emanuel this spring. “Together, we can and will finally put the interests of our people – all of our people – ahead of the interests of a powerful few,” Lightfoot said in her victory speech Tuesday, vowing to bring an end to the city’s gun violence, corruption and other problems. “Together, we can and will make Chicago a place where your zip code doesn’t determine your destiny.” A crowd of supporters, who packed the ornate Hilton Chicago Grand Ballroom in downtown Tuesday evening, erupted in raucous cheers as outlets called the election for Lightfoot, less than an hour after polls closed. As the mayor-elect took the stage a little after 9pm local time, supporters – some of whom toted signs bearing her campaign slogan, “Bring in the Light” – chanted Lightfoot’s name as she took the stage. “Today, you did more than make history,” Lightfoot said. “You created a movement for change.” Lightfoot, 56, has never held elected office, but has served in other roles in the city’s government – most notably as the head of Chicago’s police board and its police accountability taskforce, which was established by Emanuel in 2015 amid criticism of his administration’s handling of the murder of Laquan McDonald by the former police officer Jason Van Dyke, who was convicted in 2018. The race to replace Emanuel has been contentious, particularly in the weeks since Lightfoot earned the most votes of any candidate in the crowded field in February’s election to force a runoff against Preckwinkle – who had, for months, seemed the favorite. Preckwinkle’s prospects, though, were probably hurt by the January indictment of Ed Burke, the city’s longest-serving alderman. Preckwinkle and other top mayoral candidates were associated with Burke, opening the door to Lightfoot, who had made reforming Chicago’s political machine a centerpiece of her campaign. “[Burke’s arrest] refocused the election,” Dick Simpson, a political science professor and former alderman who endorsed Lightfoot, told the Guardian before the vote. “While Preckwinkle has some reform credentials … she isn’t proposing the same kind of reform platform as Lightfoot.” The police board increased its disciplinary action against problematic officers under her leadership, and her panel criticized both Emanuel and Chicago police over the McDonald killing. But her association with law enforcement, with which many here in this racially and economically divided city have a fraught relationship, has been viewed with skepticism by critics and used against her by political opponents. “The resounding voice [among activists] has been that they don’t necessarily feel comfortable or safe going into a city where Lori Lightfoot sits on the fifth floor [of City Hall],” said Chance the Rapper, whose father ran Preckwinkle’s campaign, in his endorsement of Preckwinkle, the Cook county board president, last month. Still, Lightfoot went into election day Tuesday with a comfortable lead in polls and won in a resounding victory, defeating Preckwinkle by nearly 50 percentage points. Voter turnout appeared low in the runoff, as it was in the initial election in February. Both candidates have agreed to honor the Rev Jesse Jackson’s calls for a post-election press conference focused on unity. In her concession speech, Preckwinkle said: “This may not be the outcome we wanted, but while I may be disappointed, I am not disheartened.” She told supporters that she would continue to serve as Cook county board president, calling it “a historic night”. Lightfoot, meanwhile, said of her opponent: “Our differences are nothing compared with what we can achieve together,” adding: “I know we will work together for the city that we both love.” In electing Lightfoot, Chicago will become the largest US city to be led by a black female mayor. Harold Washington, who was elected in 1983, and Eugene Sawyer, who was appointed after Washington died in office in 1987, are the only two African-Americans to have served as mayor of the city. Jane Byrne is the only woman to have ever served in the role. Lightfoot will take the reins at a precarious time for the city, which continues to face issues with its gun violence, education system, and pension crisis. But at Lightfoot’s crowded election night party, her enthusiastic supporters expressed confidence that the reform candidate would be a step forward for the city. “I really hope that Lori can be the light for this city,” said Shawanda Johnson, a resident of the city’s Roseland neighborhood who began volunteering for Lightfoot after the February election. “I’m just glad to be part of history.”