When I tell my children I’m writing about how parents cope with their offspring’s first love they are all – separately, explosively – incredulous. “You’re writing about how parents cope?” all four say, one after the other. “Why? It’s all about the kid, not the parents.” So there’s the heart of the matter. When our adolescent children embark on their first “real” relationship – often, if polls are to be believed, around the age of 14 or 15 – they think it’s all about them and doesn’t really concern us. But we can see ghosts and echoes of our own lives in what they are going through. We fear patterns will repeat; we think their stories will mirror our own. Plus, we struggle with the idea that they will prioritise a relationship that isn’t with us. It’s a move for emotional independence and there’s a letting-go for parents as well as exciting autonomy for children. The psychologist Linda Blair, author of several books on parenting, believes falling in love is a lot more difficult for young people now than it was in their parents’ day. “It’s become so hard to be vulnerable,” she says. “The message young people get from the world around them is all about not being vulnerable. It’s like, sure, post your lovely pictures on social media – but don’t reveal anything about what’s going on inside. But falling in love is all about being vulnerable – you open up, you totally lose yourself in someone else. I feel admiration for young people today because I think there must be a conflict there, and it’s not an easy thing to negotiate.” John Coleman, author of Why Won’t My Teenager Talk to Me? and a psychologist who runs groups for parents of teenagers, knows one of their biggest worries is about what happens online. Yet, he says, as a society we are failing to clock that all relationships, certainly including our children’s first experience of being in love, will take place in a virtual as well as a physical space – or even solely in a virtual space. This may seem to have some advantages – online sex won’t make them pregnant or give them sexually transmitted diseases – but it certainly increases the time young people spend immersed in their first love affair, may serve to make the experience even more intense, and leaves them open to various sorts of abuse. All the same, he says, “When you’re in love, you want to be together all the time – and now, you can be together all the time. It’s an incredible outlet.” And for most it’s more than texting – it’s sexting as well. So what about sex? For many parents, that seems the most difficult aspect. Under-16s need to be warned that it’s illegal, but whatever the law says, many children under 16 have sex. And the age-old issue, whatever age your child, is whether or not to ban it “under my roof”. Most parents seem to believe that if you say no to it on your property they will find a way to do it somewhere else (possibly, still on your property). Worse, it might not be somewhere safe. One wise mother of my acquaintance told her daughter: “Every future experience of sex you have will be compared with the first time, so you want it to be someone you really care about and feel safe with.” That mother also told her daughter: “Your room is warm and cosy and it’s there for you when you decide the moment is right.” Which brings us to another issue in this whole maelstrom: that first relationship is one of the key moments in our lives as parents when we have to trust them. If you haven’t had conversations about sex long before they are 15, says Coleman, it’s too late; besides which, it’s as much what we do as role-models as it is about what we say. When I ask Blair how she thinks parents should manage children’s expectations about falling in love, she balks at the question. “That word ‘expectation’ makes a psychologist shiver. You never know what the future will bring – it’s all about inner resilience and preparing them to cope with whatever life throws up.” Which is why she’s so concerned about the impact of what’s often called helicopter parenting: some parents simply don’t understand boundaries where their kids are concerned. “They’re so mixed up,” she says; she’s talking about the parents, of course. In so many ways, a young person in love for the first time is saying: “Give me space! Let me negotiate this.” And your job as a parent, Blair and Coleman agree, is to allow them to do precisely that. Few life lessons, after all, have as much to teach as a broken heart. I heard the Irish singer Imelda May in concert last summer, and she talked about how her father said, when she broke up with a lover, that she should “sing it out”. She would be better, he told her, because of what she’d gone through. Not all children are performers or artists, but they can all fold experiences of love and loss positively and effectively into who they are. Love changes us but, in order to work out how, we need to spend time with the puzzle. “It’s not that they are not going to make mistakes,” says Blair. “It’s that they are also going to learn from them.” So – deep breath – less is definitely more when it comes to negotiating your way round this particular assault course. And never more than if your son or daughter finds a partner you can’t stand or believe is bad for them. A caveat here: if you fear they are in an abusive relationship you must step in and do all you can to prevent it continuing – but if your feelings are driven by dislike rather than fear for your child’s safety, steer away at all costs from trying to end it. “Parents say to me, ‘I should put my foot down,’” says Coleman. “‘I don’t like him/her, and I don’t want them sleeping together in my house.’ To which I reply, ‘Go very carefully indeed. Even if they are totally unsuitable, your child has to work that out. If you intervene, you’ll end up possibly pushing them even closer together, or even out of your house.’” And along the way, you can do immeasurable damage to the real long-term relationship in the middle of all this – your own relationship with your son or daughter. But what if you have younger kids at home? One mother I know was about to send her 10-year-old upstairs to fetch something, and decided at the last minute to get it herself – which was fortunate, since she chanced upon her son and a girlfriend, who had just arrived at the house, in the midst of full-blown intercourse on the top landing. “It was quite amusing in hindsight,” she says. “But it wouldn’t have been at all funny if my little girl had seen what I saw.” Her response was to reinforce the message that, liberal though the household was, sex belonged behind closed doors – however passionate the moment. Speaking of which, there may be an element of jealousy if your children seem to be having more sex than you. It’s another way in which the dawn of our children’s love lives peels away the layers of our own. Since so much is – and can only be – unspoken, it’s particularly important to be savvy about stirred-up adult feelings, lest we subjugate them in ways that aren’t helpful to anyone. Complication upon complication, you may think, but love and feelings, and sex, are among the greatest complications on the planet. When a child first falls in love is one of those moments when parental responsibility hits home. We brought them into the world, and now they are about to find out how very tough life can be. All we can do is stay connected, be available and admit that we don’t have all the answers – and almost certainly don’t even know all the questions.