Win, win, win, win, win and win again (and pray Manchester City slip up) is the obvious answer to what Liverpool must do to be finally crowned Premier League champions. As they prepare for Friday’s visit to Southampton, we look at five key areas that can help Jürgen Klopp’s team maintain their push for that elusive title … There is no overstating van Dijk’s importance to Liverpool’s chances of winning the biggest prize in England or Europe this season, as Moussa Sissoko can testify. The £75m centre-half – so good his price-tag as the world’s most expensive defender is barely mentioned any more – suffered an ankle injury when steering the Tottenham midfielder on to his weaker left foot and into a costly miss at Anfield on Sunday. The 27-year-old resumed training on Tuesday, however, and will be available to face his former club at St Mary’s Stadium. Van Dijk’s fitness record has been as exemplary as his form since his arrival on Merseyside. Preserving his ever-present run in the Premier League this season will bring Liverpool the authority, quality and composure required at this critical stage. The Egypt international’s irritation at criticism of his form was clear after the vital victory over Spurs. “I haven’t scored for couple of games but there are some players who have the same number of goals as me but are having the season of their lives,” he told Jamie Carragher on Sky. “I’m supposed to be having a bad season!” Salah’s argument has merit – only Sergio Agüero has scored more goals in the Premier League this campaign than his 17 – and, let’s be honest, no one of sound mind has suggested the striker is having a bad season, only that it has failed to match the truly phenomenal heights of his first for Liverpool. He had been contained again against Spurs until forcing the decisive mistake by Hugo Lloris in the 90th minute. Liverpool need him to build on that break, and recapture December’s form, to shape their remaining fixtures. One attribute Klopp does not have to worry about during the run-in, and Pep Guardiola does, is Liverpool’s strength of character. No team has scored more last-minute winners this season than Liverpool who, though second best after the interval against Spurs, prevailed thanks to good fortune, set-piece planning and the resilience their manager believes will decide the title race. The refusal to accept a point from a game they could easily have lost typified a team that have routinely found a way to win regardless of circumstances this season. It reflected their manager’s approach, too, with Klopp swapping a midfielder for a striker at 1-1 – Divock Origi for James Milner – and loading the penalty area for that all-important cross by Trent Alexander-Arnold. The Brazil international has improved gradually and impressively during his debut season at Anfield although, as the starting lineups against Spurs and at Bayern Munich showed, Klopp still appears to harbour some doubts over the midfielder against higher-calibre opposition. The Liverpool manager opted for the tried-and-trusted trio of James Milner, Jordan Henderson and Georginio Wijnaldum against Niko Kovac’s and Mauricio Pochettino’s teams, opting for safety and security in midfield while his full-backs utilised their attacking quality. Henderson’s early injury forced a reshuffle in Munich and the effective introduction of Fabinho, who had to wait 77 minutes to enter the fray on Sunday despite the obvious toils of his captain and Wijnaldum. Having the right balance alongside Fabinho, rather than at his expense, would be to Liverpool’s overall benefit. Liverpool have produced a strong finish to a league campaign only once in three attempts under Klopp – 2016-17, when they had no European football to contend with. Without bringing the Gary Neville argument into it, their handling of the dual demands of Europe and the Premier League must improve in this finishing straight. Liverpool’s league record was identical over the final six games of the 2015-16 and 2017-18 seasons – when reaching the Europa League and Champions League finals respectively – with two wins, three draws and one defeat yielding nine points from a possible 18. Even in 16-17 five points were dropped in the last six matches. Reaching two European finals with resources stretched to the limit provided mitigating circumstances for the mediocre finales in the Premier League. This season, with a much stronger squad, Liverpool have won six and drawn two of their eight games following Champions League duties. With Porto awaiting in the quarter-finals, strength in depth must continue to prove its worth.