Just when it seemed Arsenal had discovered the resolve and momentum to propel themselves into next season’s Champions League they reverted to being, well, Arsenal. The old flaws of recent years, particularly weakness in character and defence, resurfaced at Goodison Park to ruin Unai Emery’s hopes of leaving with his team’s grip tightened on third place. Everton were far more comfortable victors than the scoreline suggests. Phil Jagielka, a late inclusion in Marco Silva’s starting lineup, pounced early to give the home side a third consecutive win and a second in succession at home against a member of the so‑called big six. Silva’s side were dynamic, industrious and resilient in every department as they kept a fifth clean sheet in six outings. Arsenal were found wanting on every count. With one away win in the Premier League since November and only two of their remaining six matches at the Emirates Stadium, the greatest obstacle to their chances of rejoining the European elite is abundantly clear. Yet Emery’s latest attempt to remedy the fault was as ineffectual as his team. Everton controlled proceedings, with Bernard and André Gomes injecting elegance and class into an industrious afternoon. “I am delighted with everything we did from the first minute,” Silva said. “The desire, the fantastic spirit, and we deserved the three points. We were the best team on the pitch and with more goals it would have been fair. We showed the solid team that I like.” Jagielka was called into the side moments before kickoff after Michael Keane fell ill during the warmup. The 36-year-old has endured a frustrating campaign, suspension, injury and heightened competition restricting him to three league starts, but that was forgotten as he swept Everton into a lead their display richly deserved. The breakthrough reflected much of the opening exchanges – direct and effective by the home side, weak and careless from the visitors. Lucas Digne launched a long throw into the Arsenal penalty area that Jagielka won comfortably. Dominic Calvert-Lewin won the second ball with a diving header that deflected back to the veteran defender and, onside and unmarked, he beat Bernd Leno with a close-range finish. The setback preserved Arsenal’s record of conceding in every league game on the road this season, the only club in England’s top four divisions to do so. Everton remained comfortable against a lightweight Arsenal midfield of Mohamed Elneny and Matteo Guendouzi. The home side’s work-rate has improved immeasurably, along with their form, and their growing confidence was typified by a lovely back-heel from Bernard that released Gomes and Kurt Zouma performing stepovers during one determined run. Gomes was immaculate in central midfield. Calvert-Lewin is developing as a young centre-forward of promise by the game. Only Richarlison struggled and several inviting situations for a second goal went astray down his right flank. Silva’s team were given licence to dictate by Emery’s 5-3-2 formation and decision to omit Aaron Ramsey and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang from the starting lineup. The introduction of both at the start of the second half, and a switch to 4‑2‑3‑1, was the manager’s admission of his own mistakes. The brittle defending and lack of movement was entirely the responsibility of his players. Arsenal improved as an attacking unit after the interval, and Ramsey could have levelled when Jordan Pickford’s weak punch dropped into his path inside the area. The midfielder’s volley sailed harmlessly over and the chance to wrestle back the initiative went with it. Emery’s side had the occasional moment, with Henrikh Mkhitaryan shooting inches wide of Pickford’s far post, but Everton were the brighter, stronger and more dangerous unit throughout. Only their failure to land a second blow on Arsenal’s glass jaw kept the contest alive. Bernard was presented with a clear run at Leno’s goal when Ainsley Maitland-Niles miscued a header. The angle and the bouncing ball were awkward for the Brazilian, and the Arsenal keeper saved comfortably at close range. Gylfi Sigurdsson, tireless alongside Bernard and Gomes, had several opportunities to convert from well-timed runs into the area. One volley was driven over, a shot from Richarlison’s cutback was straight at Leno and a third effort was blocked by Sokratis Papastathopoulos. The rebound on that occasion dropped kindly for Richarlison only for the £40m Brazilian to slice wide. A cynical foul by Shkodran Mustafi on Calvert-Lewin prompted an angry exchange between Silva and Emery on the sidelines. Mesut Özil, substituted by this stage, threw his jacket in the direction of the Everton manager and his staff. It was a rare – and pointless – show of aggression from Arsenal’s captain on the day and befitting of the team’s performance.