The Premiership marathon is not yet over but Worcester’s hard-earned win in the River Severn derby has clarified several significant issues with two rounds to spare. The Warriors are now safe from relegation, Gloucester’s losing bonus point has assured their play-off place and Saracens can now plan for a guaranteed home semi-final at Allianz Park next month. It also leaves Newcastle all but marooned at the foot of the table, with Championship rugby beckoning unless they beat the Cherry and Whites at Kingsholm on Saturday. Gloucester’s head coach Johan Ackermann has already made clear he will not be rotating his side – “we won’t rest anybody, we’re not going to make it easy for them” and the Falcons could be sunk by then anyway if Leicester earn two points or more at Harlequins on Friday night. None of this is still a pressing concern for a delighted Worcester, Alan Solomons’s side having deservedly battled back from 15-13 down at half-time to secure one of their most satisfying results of their season. There was always a sense they had too much quality, particularly at home, to go down but in a league as competitive as this season’s Premiership the only currency that ultimately counts is points in the bank. Their defensive workrate and desire were certainly testament to how badly they wanted this victory, with their pack giving their Gloucester counterparts a properly tough work-out. When the second-bottom team in the competition can beat the third-placed side fair and square it suggests Gloucester may not be entirely ready to win silverware this season, particularly if they end up having to travel to Saracens in the semi-finals. Ackermann, for one, is under no illusions that his team will have to improve sharply to progress any further. “There are still soft moments when we don’t play as well,” said the South African. “Sarries, in my view, have shown they’re the best side in this competition. If we don’t want to be just a number we have to be better than we are.” The immediate consolation for Cherry and White fans is that the finger injury which curtailed Danny Cipriani’s afternoon is not serious. The fly-half has had a problem with his right hand since the Bath game this month but Ackermann insists there is no fracture and there was little wrong with Cipriani’s distribution in the first 40 minutes. Both of Gloucester’s first-half tries owed much to his spatial awareness, a subtle little pass to Henry Purdy for the opening score typical of his ability to put those around him into previously undetected space. François Venter was checked just enough to allow Purdy to surge for the line and the winger’s momentum took him over. By the end of the first quarter Worcester were 13-5 ahead, with Duncan Weir adding an opportunist 18th-minute try to help boost his eventual match tally to 17 points, but the lead changed hands for the fourth time shortly before the interval. This time Cipriani was involved twice, exchanging passes with the straight-running Billy Twelvetrees in a slick zig-zag attack down the middle which ended with Mark Atkinson supplying the final ball to his skipper Willi Heinz. In front of England head coach Eddie Jones, however, that was as good as it got for the visitors. Worcester were the livelier side in the third quarter and two tries within seven minutes from hooker Neil Annett and lock Darren Barry, both of them converted by Duncan Weir, gave the scoreboard a much healthier look from a home perspective. Gloucester did manage a further try through Purdy with 18 minutes left but it would have been rough on the Warriors had the sweat and graft of their pack and scrum-half François Hougaard been denied. They have lost just twice at home in the league since September and, even with Ben Te’o, Josh Adams and Jack Singleton due to depart, their team spirit has remained unshakeable. “I believe we’ve got a quality side,” said Solomons, understandably happy not to have been sucked back into the relegation dogfight. “I felt it was important we put it to bed today. It’s fantastic we’ll be playing in the Premiership next season.”