Are we entering a new era of political campaigning? As Westminster grinds to a halt and the traditional party system teeters at the edge of collapse, those seeking progress need only look across the road to Parliament Square, where the grass is worn from a year of new protests and new faces. Young people have been a driving force in almost all of these. From school climate strikes, Extinction Rebellion occupations and multiple Brexit demonstrations, my generation has led a new, peaceful era of political campaigning. Ahead of the European elections, our parties could have channelled the energy of these movements on their doorstep, and embraced the young in an election with potentially profound consequences for our futures. But it wasn’t to be. We’re active and engaged, yes, but the electoral process shows no signs of being ready for us. Instead, older candidates from old politics will battle it out this May. To some extent this is unsurprising. Our aims might be considered noble, but our politics is different, our organising disparate and our electoral threat too limited to require a serious response, some will say. True, one in three young people are not currently on the electoral register. But why aren’t our political leaders speaking out to get young people to the ballot box next month? With just 4% of Conservative votes estimated to be coming from the under-24s, it’s unsurprising that the youth vote isn’t a priority for elections the party still claims won’t take place. But others don’t fare better. The Labour party still refrains from unequivocally offering a confirmatory referendum – which polling suggests would be the best way to see off Nigel Farage’s Brexit party. Their lack of clarity only makes the challenges in our remain alliance harder. Last week’s unveiling of Change UK candidates – an opportunity to present a new kind of politics that many young people yearn for – trumpeted leading lights already well-known within the Westminster bubble. The Liberal Democrats still struggle to repair a brand tarnished among my generation. And both parties compete with the Greens for existing pro-European votes, when speaking to the electorally dormant in my generation could win over so many more. Are we forgetting something? Finding a solution to the current Brexit impasse has fallen by the wayside as parties obsess over selection processes, single candidacy lists and offensive men shouting offensive things. In doing so they alienate a generation still capable of making a decisive difference to the result. In other countries, politicians are proving that when you speak to young people, they listen. In the US, Pete Buttigieg, a candidate for the Democrat nomination in the 2020 presidential election, has shot to fame. The 37-year-old would be the youngest president in US history, and proudly states that his youth is one of his primary reasons for putting himself forward. He claims this election is about winning an era – and the young, and the issues they care about, must be at the centre of it. Back in Britain there’s no serious drive from parties to register young people ahead of the 23 May poll. There’s no attempt to select young candidates, and no desire to integrate the issues they care about most into the campaigns. The opportunity to fuse the energy and ingenuity of a year of peaceful protest with the European elections has been ignored by politicians promising change.Young people like me will continue to campaign for a people’s vote, but it is a missed opportunity, and a worrying one. If those in positions of power and influence in our movement do not feel the political landscape shifting beneath their feet, and embrace the genuinely new force my generation brings, we risk rolling back the progress of the last three years. To do that would be to betray everything young campaigners have stood up for, and to dismiss the most powerful remain argument of all: that the voices of those whose futures are most at stake from our political failure must be heard. • Lara Spirit is co-president of Our Future Our Choice