What were you hoping for?Someone incredibly fun. First impressions?Tall, confident, great glasses, easy to talk to from the outset. What did you talk about?His days as a DJ, modernism, the art of finishing projects, Danny Dyer, finding catharsis in writing, that another season of The Thick Of It is long overdue. Any awkward moments?I went to faire la bise and he greeted with a hug so I sort of kissed his neck. Good table manners?He ate his pizza with a knife and fork, otherwise impeccable. Best thing about Harry?He embraces eccentricity. Would you introduce him to your friends?He’s chatty, fun, liberal and up for getting pissed, so I’m sure they’d get along. Describe Harry in three words?Witty, tactile, original. What do you think he made of you?He said he thought I was “really great”, but that was after three bottles of wine and earlier in the evening he’d said I was quite scary, so who knows? Did you go on somewhere?Yes, to the oldest gym in the UK, now a wine bar. And… did you kiss?A bit. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I really regret declining the pudding menu. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Yes. What were you hoping for?Somebody interesting, challenging and funny. First impressions?Smart, relaxed, engaging. The pizza and cocktails were nice, too. What did you talk about?Aspirations, anthropology… She also schooled me on architecture – turns out I know zero. Any awkward moments?Nope. Good table manners?Following a lengthy debate about eating pizza with a knife and fork (or not), it was clear that Amy did have excellent table manners. Best thing about Amy?Very intelligent – the conversation was incredibly stimulating. Amy seems to think about the world in quite a similar way to me. Would you introduce her to your friends?I think she vaguely knows some of them anyway. Describe Amy in three words?Curious, polite, funny. What do you think she made of you?I think she found the conversation interesting and had a fun time. Did you go on somewhere?We did – we found a very nice bar and then went to Soho, and went our separate ways at around 2am. And... did you kiss?A gentleman never tells. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We should have gone to a club. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Yes – I had fun and usually find it hard to tell what I think after one date. • Amy and Harry ate at Happy Face, London N1C. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.