This summer could be the greatest in the history of English cricket, we’re told on an almost daily basis, when the World Cup and the Ashes come home together in a feelgood rush that might even obliterate the embarrassment of our being the biggest idiots in Europe. The last time such cheeky thoughts invaded the national psyche (cricket, not the politics), in 2005, I spoke with Alec Stewart about an upcoming Ashes series as eagerly anticipated as any since Bradman’s Invincibles toured in 1948, with a significant difference: this one was winnable. Stewart was the perfect sounding board. Nobody had lost more nobly against the Australians than The Gaffer. He was England’s most-capped cricketer to that point, but had zilch to show for it in seven losing Ashes series. In 33 Tests against Australia, Stewart had been on the winning side only six times. They were awesome, of course, and England were punch-drunk. Stewart, who quit the game in 2003, could have been cricket’s Victor Meldrew, except he was resolutely upbeat. And he caught the mood. England went in against the world’s best team on a wave of infectious optimism, having won five series on the spin, and 14 of 18 Test matches since March 2004. Stewart, who would love the national anthem to be played before every Test match, was the leading cheerleader. “If England are winning the series after two Tests,” he told me back then, “just as the football season is starting, no sports editor will be able to leave cricket off the back page. And I say that as a Chelsea fan who thinks we will win the Premier League again. Maybe we could have a bit of Chelsea on the inside back page.” Glenn McGrath famously predicted a 5-0 whitewash. He did his best as Australia won a bloodbath opener at Lord’s, a brutal contest that disappointed the hosts but encouraged fans of both teams to believe we were witness something special. It set the tone. McGrath rolled his ankle on the morning of the second Test, and the series was levelled. From there to the draw at the Oval, cricket’s Globe Theatre, it was Shakespearian stuff of Macbeth proportions. I was in the Australian dressing room at the end of that famous final day, and to describe the mood as devastated would be an insult to understatement. This was an England triumph to stand comparison with The Oval, 1926. (Ask your grandad). And Chelsea went on to win the Premier League with a then-record 95 points, winning 29 times, home and away. So, what does Stewart – now Surrey’s director of cricket – think on the eve of what could be the summer of all summers? Kiss goodbye to Chelsea’s title ambitions, maybe (although he holds out hope of a win over Slavia Prague in the Europa League quarter-final first leg on Thursday night), but he agrees that, for a few months, one more time, cricket could be king again. “Whenever the national team is doing well in football, rugby or cricket, then that happens. Tell me if I’m wrong, but there isn’t a load of international sport going on this summer. So there is that opportunity for cricket, until the Premier League starts again. If England are on a roll, and have won the World Cup going into the Ashes, then I’d suggest there’ll be similar levels of public interest to ’05, and therefore the media as well. The Ashes are always special. We’ve never won the World Cup. It could be a 100%, the greatest season ever. And I hope it will be.” The perceived downside after 2005 was cricket was snatched from the public’s gaze at the very moment of its apex on free-to-air, jargon-busting Channel 4, and sold to the more lucrative embrace of subscription Sky Sports for £200m. It was, said critics, a wasted legacy. Others called it a shameful sellout. Stewart disagrees. “It can’t be wasted in any shape or form,” he says. “For one, we’d won the Ashes for the first time in [19 years] and, secondly, it engulfed the general public in a way we hadn’t seen for a long, long time. It was the first time we had Trafalgar Square celebrations like that.” It remains, he says, a memory set in stone. He also identifies a key difference between Michael Vaughan’s England team and Joe Root’s. “England then didn’t perform as well as they could have done after that. These things happen. Teams break up, whereas this group of players are still improving. That’s the exciting thing. From a Test point of view, this team is still growing. In 2005, that team had just about peaked.” So he’s even more buoyant now than he was then. “The 2005 series, for all kind of reasons, was as good as any: Australia being involved, the closeness of the games, the way it ebbed and flowed, the fact that we finally won the Ashes. This time, there is more of an expectation. “But it’s never going to be easy. Australia have had their well-documented issues to deal with the past 12 or 14 months. They will come here with a purpose of winning in England. I don’t see it being a cakewalk. If Australia keep their bowlers fit and [David] Warner and [Steve] Smith return – which I’m sure they will – they’ve got match-winning and game-changing cricketers. It will be a real challenge, but I would hope that England will have too much for the Australians.” We too easily take for granted how blessed we are for sport in this country, a “small island” achieving great things, as well as putting on an annual show that even the Americans struggle to match. They’ve got the Masters, the World Series and the Super Bowl. We’ve got Joe Root. If sport actually were politics, the Brexit debate would be a done deal – for leaving everything exactly as it is. All such over-the-top cheeriness, of course, is tempered with hard-wired self-deprecation, caution, history, all-round Meldrewism. Nevertheless, tempting fate to breaking point, the cricketing summer of 2019 could indeed be the most memorable of them all. England could win the World Cup and the Ashes. At home. That’s never been done. That’s crazy. Boris Johnson might even have run off and joined the circus … [checks texts] … what more could we ask for?