In the apocalyptic event of a nuclear strike on Britain, the government offered householders make-do-and-mend advice on how to create refuge shelters under stairs and tables, and knock up temporary toilets from a chair and bucket. Few were reassured by the DIY defences advocated in the widely lampooned public information “Protect and Survive” pamphlet, published in 1980, and a new cold war exhibition at the National Archives in Kew, featuring such a shelter, will do little to augment faith in this as a robust strategy for civilian survival. Complete with identification tags for the dead, shelves of tinned food, and “sandbagged” with suitcases, furniture and soft furnishings, it seems unlikely it could much prolong life. “We want people to think, ‘how would I have coped if the worst had happened?’,” said Mark Dunton, the curator of the Protect and Survive exhibition, part of the National Archive’s Britain’s Cold War Revealed season. Documents, posters, photographs and newsreels on display reveal how, in the corridors of power and in hidden government bunkers, contingency plans were hatched during an era of great political turbulence between 1945 and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. The iron curtain came down, the Berlin Wall went up, then fell, the Cuban missile crisis rocked the world, and the advent of the atomic bomb raised the stakes to the highest level possible. Documents from Wintex-Cimex, the Nato codename for the exercises designed to test the west’s responses in the event of a nuclear strike, show civil servants preparing for fictional scenarios. One imaginative script has the Soviet Army invade Yugoslavia on Friday 13 March 1981, and in the ensuing days, Labour’s leader, then Michael Foot, and the archbishop of Canterbury, then Robert Runcie, arrested at a peace rally – though it was a “mistake” to arrest the archbishop, the memos concede. When British bases are then bombed, Margaret Thatcher gives the go-ahead to launch 29 nuclear weapons at the communist bloc. By dawn on 21 March, the third world war has begun. Civil servants even mocked up an address for the Queen to deliver to the nation. Unofficially nicknamed “Ma’ammageddon”, the 1983 script reads: “Not for a single moment did I imagine that this solemn and awful duty would one day fall to me.” One of the starkest displays is the “percentages document”. Winston Churchill called it his “naughty document” not meant for public eyes. In a late-night, whisky-soaked session with Joseph Stalin at the Kremlin, the prime minister scribbles down suggestions for carving up eastern Europe: Romania – Russia 90%, the others 10%; Yugoslavia: 50/50. It did not pan out exactly as planned. “The idea that the fates of millions were being decided by these little sweeps of a pencil is quite extraordinary,” said Dunton. In one dramatic memo Clement Attlee, shortly after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, stresses the need to end all wars, writing: “The time is short … I believe that only a bold course can save civilisation.” One year later, Ernest Bevan, then foreign secretary, is recorded in official minutes, arguing Britain must have its own bomb. “ We’ve got to have this thing over here , whatever it costs. We’ve got to have the bloody union jack on top of it.” A 1954 letter from Churchill to the Queen informs her the cabinet is considering developing an H bomb. “A final decision is to be taken before the end of this month,” he writes. Someone adds in handwriting: “There is very little doubt in my mind what it will be.” The cloak and dagger machinations of spies and traitors is explored through files transferred from MI5. They include George Orwell’s infamous list of suspect crypto-communist sympathisers, but also show he himself was under special branch surveillance. Transcripts of intercepted telephone calls relate to members of the the Cambridge spy ring. Others relate to Soviet spy George Blake’s audacious 1966 escape from Wormwood Scrubs using a knitting needle ladder. The final page of the confession of Klaus Fuchs, the German physicist who passed atomic secrets to the Soviet Union, is on display. Fuchs, apparently, often contacted his handlers by throwing a copy of Men Only magazine over a particular garden hedge in Kew, with page 10 earmarked with instructions for a meeting. The exhibition also examines the CND and Greenham Common protest movements, and cold war influence on popular culture, including a special Spotify playlist #ColdWarSeason, which features songs such as Two Tribes by Frankie Goes to Hollywood and Stand Down Margaret by The Beat. The free exhibition runs from 4 April-9 November. Other cold war season events at the National Archives include film screenings and an evening with the real-life M, Dame Stella Rimington, the former head of MI5, and evening gallery tours and drop-in family workshops on the first Sunday of each month.