It’s well known that once you pass a certain age, falling over requires a noun rather than a verb. And on Easter Sunday, I had a fall. For one reason and another, I had been feeling overwhelmed with stress and anxiety, so I rummaged around in my Roman Catholic bag of tricks and pulled out the trusty old hair shirt. I was staying on the southern tip of the Gower Peninsula in south Wales and resolved to walk 17 miles to St David’s Priory church in Swansea for that evening’s Easter mass. That should sort me out, I reasoned. For added difficulty, I would not take the obvious coastal route: no, I would proceed along Cefn Bryn, the ancient ridge in the middle of the peninsula known as the backbone of Gower. That would show the Almighty my mettle, and no mistake. Then it would be steeply down into wooded valleys and up and over commons and moorland to Swansea. It started off very well: all things were bright and beautiful. High up on the drovers’ track atop Cefn Bryn, it felt like God’s green earth was a very special place indeed. It felt good to be alive. Down into a valley I went, and then up a hill near a village called Kittle. I skirted around a big, new, humming factory unit, sitting improbably amid the pastures. There were high fences around it, and CCTV “for the protection of the public”. I saw the word “poultry” on some signs; I’m no great animal rights warrior, but I had a little shudder anyway. A mite spooked, I headed into an ancient wood. Following an overgrown path that looked as if nobody had trodden it this millennium, I came to a rotten old stile. Entirely predictably, it gave way beneath me. I felt an astonishing pain in my back, and then nothing. After a matter of seconds, I think, I came round, flat on my back lying in a mass of wild garlic. Yes, I’d had a fall all right and, in doing so, seemed to have nearly skewered myself on a fence post. The pain was horrendous; the wild garlic smelled lovely, though. I felt my back and there was blood on my hand. My own stigmata, I reflected, not without pleasure. It is funny how your mind works at times like this. Three thoughts came to me as I looked up through the trees. First, Good Friday would have been a better day for stigmata. Second, I didn’t want to die here. Third, it was Easter Sunday and therefore I would rise to my feet and soldier on. Not because I was brave, but because I had no choice. It was another 15,000 steps to the church. As I walked down a hill in Mumbles, a couple of lads in a car, drinking lager and smoking weed, shouted my name. They wished they hadn’t. I had no idea what my back looked like. “Fuck me,” they said. “I’d get that looked at.” And with that, they sped off. I walked on. Arriving at mass, bloodied, muddied and pained, I stooped to genuflect and yelped in pain. A few concerned glances shot my way. I found a quiet corner, just about managed to stand, kneel and sit at the right times, and then I got a taxi home. “You look terrible,” the driver said. “Happy Easter,” I replied.