Worcester Warriors are looking to identify four spectators who they believe used lasers in an attempt to distract Harlequins players during their Challenge Cup quarter-final at Sixways on Saturday. After complaints were made following Harlequins’ 18-16 triumph, Worcester have studied CCTV footage and are threatening the spectators with “lengthy bans” if found. During the match a green light could be seen moving across the pitch as well as on the ball as Harlequins’ fly-half Demetri Catrakilis was about to kick the winning points. Worcester have used the footage to identify an area of the East Stand of the stadium where they believe the flashes of light were coming from and have released an image of four spectators, asking for assistance in identifying them. “We are working closely with Harlequins and Premiership Rugby to investigate what is a very serious matter,” said Worcester’s operations director Peter Kelly. “We have identified four male spectators who occupied seats in the front row of the central block of the East Stand. Those seats were unsold which suggests that the four men in question had purchased seats elsewhere. “We have clear CCTV footage of them which we are making public in the hope that other spectators can help us to identify and trace them. If we can do that, and they are found to have used a laser to distract players, then they can expect to receive a lengthy ban. Warriors subscribe to rugby’s core values, one of which is respect for the opposition. Anyone who behaves in an unsportsmanlike manner is not welcome at Sixways.” This is the second spectator incident involving Worcester to take place in recent weeks after a fan was ejected from Bristol’s Ashton Gate stadium after claims he threw a punch in the direction of a female supporter. That fan has been suspended by Worcester pending police investigations. Meanwhile, the Gloucester wing Ollie Thorley could be sidelined for the rest of the season with a knee injury. The 22-year-old, whose form for Gloucester earned him a place in England’s wider Six Nations squad, sustained the injury in the club’s recent win over Wasps. The head coach Johan Ackermann is hopeful Thorley will play again this season but conceded it may depend on whether Gloucester reach the play-offs. Ackermann’s side are currently in third place in the Premiership, eight points ahead of Northampton, who they face at Franklin’s Gardens on Sunday. “We may see Ollie in the last round [of the season] or the play-offs,” said Ackermann. “It was thought it could be a 12-week injury, in which case his season is finished, but I hope a miracle can happen and he is back within six or seven.” Bath have posted a loss after tax of £3.1m in its accounts for 2018. The club’s revenue is up to £19.8m but its overall loss is £600,000 greater than in 2017. Identifying player wages as the club’s “most significant expense“, Bath, who host their west country rivals Bristol at Twickenham on Saturday, are aiming to develop a squad of at least 50% homegrown players by 2023