The aural scene setter for Pose, this 1981 dance classic opens the show. While we associate Gardner’s dubby club hit with NYC’s 1980s club culture, 1980s NYC clubbers weren’t especially keen on the tune to begin with. Larry Levan – who had mixed it – often cleared the floor when he played it at the Paradise Garage, as its tempo was regarded as too slow. Just how two Danish rock/pop musicians created one of the best and strangest club hits of the 1980s remains a pop-cultural mystery. The proto-techno tune was originally released as the B-side, before taking off in US and European clubs, and warranting a release all of its own. The band say they were discouraged from touring in the States, as their label feared their new audience assumed they were black. Arthur Russell was a high-brow composer and friend to the likes of Allen Ginsberg and Philip Glass. Yet he also moved within the club scene, leading him to record many wonky dance classics, such as this. Apparently, Larry Levan didn’t pay for the studio time when he remixed it, so was kicked out halfway through, leading to the song’s unfinished feel. Prince wrote this risqué synth pop hit for Easton under the pseudonym Alexander Nevermind, though that coy credit didn’t prevent Parents Music Resource Center adding it to their Filthy Fifteen, a 1985 list of the most corruptive pop and rock songs. Today it stands out more for its keyboard hooks, rather than its moderately sexy lyrics. High Energy, the 80s gay club sound, plays a supporting role in the fourth episode, The Fever, courtesy of this UK single, produced by northern soul pioneer and Doctor Who megafan Ian Levine, and sung by Brown, the mother of one of Simon Cowell’s earliest signings, Sinitta. Freestyle, the electro-y, vocal-led club genre, largely made by Latino producers in New York and Miami, more or less begins with this 1983 banger. Producer Chris Barbosa was heavily influenced by Afrika Bambaataa and Soul Sonic Force’s Planet Rock, though he let a little Latin syncopation creep in there, too. This early techno classic plays in the ballroom scene of episode five, Mother’s Day, reminding viewers that Pose is set in 1987-1988, when producers in Detroit and Chicago were retooling NY’s disco sound to create tracks that would also work at UK raves. The sixth episode of Pose focuses on the ballroom MC Pray Tell’s inability to let go of this classic. Younger listeners might find it hard to appreciate its appeal, as the first half sounds like the opening credits of Charles in Charge. Skip to the breakdown, just under four minutes on Spotify – to find a moment that inspired everyone from Madonna to Carl Craig. Few tunes capture the 80s club sound better than this 1984 synth hit by the Californian girl group. However, Automatic’s composers were a little more versatile than this tune suggest. Mark Goldenberg, the co-writer of this song, also worked on the 1996 indie tune Novocaine for the Soul for Eels. Producer Hal Davis had a strobe light brought into the studio, and scheduled the recording session for 2am, to get Diana Ross in the mood for what would become her first No 1 disco single. The musicians were also offered shots of Remy Martin – Ross herself preferred vodka – prior to the creation of this classic.