This part of west London has never been a happy hunting ground for Neil Warnock. His 11th attempt to record a league victory at Craven Cottage ended in failure after a superb strike from Ryan Babel shattered Cardiff’s hopes of piling the pressure on Brighton in the battle to avoid relegation. With just two games left to play and still trailing by three points before their rivals’ meeting with Newcastle later on today, it will take all of their manager’s expertise in escapology to survive now. Yet Warnock will know it could all have been so different had Cardiff been awarded a penalty in the first half, even if they could do nothing about Babel’s touch of class that earned the points for a Fuham side that has equalled their club record of three consecutive Premier League victories. These two clubs know each other well after slugging it out for the second automatic promotion spot last season behind Wolves, with Cardiff coming out on top as Fulham eventually went up via the playoffs. Yet the contrast between their approaches to life in the top flight could not have been greater, with the Londoners having spent more than £100m on new recruits in the summer but still ending up being relegated on 2 April whereas their opponents are still in with a fighting chance of survival despite one of the smallest budgets in the division. Warnock’s side went into this game unbeaten in all seven league matches they have played this season against the rest of the current bottom five, winning five and drawing two - testament to his ability to motivate his players when it matters most. Yet despite their woes this season, Scott Parker has instigated something of a revival at Fulham since relegation was confirmed and the former England midfielder should now be in line to be handed the permanent role at the end of the season. On a blustery day by the Thames, this was always going be a test of both sides’ mettle but Cardiff certainly had reason to feel aggrieved in the eighth minute when Sean Morrison was dragged to the ground in the box by Aleksandar Mitrovic. Warnock will surely have noted the similarity to last week’s incident against Liverpool involving Morrison and Mohamed Salah that ended with a penalty being awarded, although on this occasion referee Chris Kavanagh waved away the appeals. Having escaped at one end, Mitrovic was close to giving Fulham the lead after he was set up by Babel but the outstanding Neil Etheridge was there to beat his shot away. Denis Odoi, who had already been accidentally struck in the face with the ball by Aron Gunnarsson after being fouled in the third minute, then came to the rescue for his side as Oumar Niasse was bearing down on goal, heading the ball back to his goalkeeper just in time but taking another whack in the head, this time from his own team-mate Maxime Le Marchand. The Belgian seemed to be out cold as he hit the ground and received treatment on the pitch for nine minutes before being taken to hospital. Unsurprisingly, the delay seemed to affect the rhythm of the game, although Fulham could easily have gone in ahead had Ryan Sessegnon not snatched at Babel’s cross in injury time. Warnock emerged early for the second half and headed over to Cardiff’s travelling support in an attempt to raise the atmosphere. Yet he was grateful to see Mitrovic spurn another golden opportunity just two minutes in after Tom Cairney’s intelligent cutback ended with the Serbian placing his shot embarrassingly wide. The swirling wind then almost helped Joe Bryan’s cross deceive Etheridge and forced the Cardiff keeper to turn the ball over for a corner as Fulham continued to press. Danny Ward was summoned from the bench to replace Niasse in attack as Cardiff’s sense of urgency grew, with the fans offering a rendition of ‘all we are saying is give us a goal’. They were duly granted one, albeit at the wrong end. Cardiff could have rescued a point had Junior Hoilett’s effort not struck the crossbar late on but they now have it all to do.