Made of medical-grade silicone and typically available in two sizes, menstrual cups can hold up to 12 hours’ flow, compared with four to eight hours with a tampon – and as they are reusable and can last up to 10 years, they are much better for the environment. Though the Mooncup may still be the best-known, there is now an abundance of menstrual cups, from Intimina’s Ziggy, which claims to be the only one that can be worn during sex, to the FemmyCycle designed specifically for low cervixes. However, Dr Leila Frodsham, a consultant gynaecologist and spokeswoman for the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, warns that menstrual cups are not suitable for women who have been advised not to use tampons. If environmental waste is a concern, washable, reusable sanitary towels are available in a variety of styles and thicknesses. Kate Metcalf, co-director of the Women’s Environmental Network (Wen), recommends rinsing them in cold water, then adding to your normal wash without fabric conditioner. There are even simple templates available for how to make your own pads. Frodsham says if you do not want (or are unable) to use anything that is inserted into the vagina, sanitary towels are a good alternative, with cotton or bamboo pads least likely to cause irritation. Those who can’t – or find it uncomfortable – to use tampons, pads or menstrual cups, may benefit from period-proof pants such as Luna Undies, Thinx, and Carol Smillie’s Pretty Clever Pants. The absorbent underwear, aimed at eradicating the fear of leakage, is especially useful on the first and last few days of a period when flow tends to be lighter. Metcalf says the use of tampons, pads and applicators generates 200,000 tonnes of waste per year in the UK, with plastic a predominant material. TOTM sells tampons made of organic cotton with biodegradable cardboard applicators. HeyGirls, Natracare, Flo and OHNE also make ranges of eco-friendly products. Discussion of menstruation is crucial for women to be able to make informed choices about which products they find most convenient and comfortable, says Metcalf. “Public awareness of the environmental and health impacts of different period products is very poor and exacerbated by the persistent taboo and shame around periods. Periods shouldn’t be a taboo subject.”