Isata Kanneh-Mason, the pianist and sister of the acclaimed young cellist Sheku, has signed with Decca Classics to record an album of music by Clara Schumann in the composer’s 200th anniversary year. Kanneh-Mason, 22, is the eldest of seven siblings, all extraordinarily talented musicians. Her cellist brother Sheku won the BBC’s Young Musician competition in 2016 and found international fame as a performer at the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle. Isata is a postgraduate student at the Royal Academy of Music, having completed her undergraduate studies there as an Elton John scholar. She was a finalist in the piano category for 2014’s Young Musician, and was awarded the competition’s Walter Todds Bursary for most promising musician. Clara Schumann, born Clara Wieck in Leipzig in 1819, was a piano prodigy who made her public debut aged 11. Acclaimed across Europe, she was one of the 19th century’s foremost concert pianists, and, in the early years of her adult life, she also composed – a piano concerto (written when she was 14), songs, chamber music and solo piano pieces. “What struck me most about [her] is her incredible strength,” said Isata. “Not only did she manage to sustain a long and demanding concert career – almost unheard of for a woman during her time – she also raised a large family and dealt with inconceivable tragedies. I also come from a big family, and I am lucky to have been surrounded by many strong and inspiring women throughout my life.” Clara fell in love with and married Robert Schumann, who was nine years her senior and a pupil of Clara’s father, the day before her 21st birthday. She went on to have eight children, seven of whom survived, but as her husband’s mental health deteriorated – he died in a psychiatric institution aged 46 – she was forced to support her family with concert touring, using her fame to promote Robert’s compositions. She composed little after her mid-30s. Her husband acknowledged the enormous practical difficulties she faced: “To have children, and a husband who is always living in the realm of imagination, does not go together with composing. She cannot work at it regularly, and I am often disturbed to think how many profound ideas are lost because she cannot work them out,” he wrote. In later life, she said: “I once believed that I possessed creative talent, but I have given up this idea; a woman must not desire to compose. There has never yet been one able to do it. Should I expect to be the one?” Clara Schumann has been one of several female composers whose neglected works have been reassessed and returned to a public platform in recent years. Concert pianist and writer Lucy Parham has been at the forefront of those championing Clara’s music and is currently touring her “composer portrait”, I, Clara, telling the life of the musician through her own words and music. Parham first recorded Clara’s music in 1996. “Back then nobody was particularly interested,” she told the Guardian. “It makes my heart sing that she’s getting the recognition that she deserves today, and that there’s a whole new generation of pianists bringing her music to the fore. “It’s so important we celebrate her this anniversary year. She was an amazing person – an icon for women, for musicians, for composers … she was the first great concert pianist and a wonderful composer with her own unique style. You can always tell her music – the sign of a great composer.” Kanneh-Mason’s all-Schumann album, set for a July release, includes the piano concerto (with New Zealand conductor Holly Mathieson and Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra), solo piano works and the composer’s three romances for violin and piano, with US violinist Elena Urioste. Clara Schumann’s music will also feature in two of this year’s Proms, only the second season in which it has been programmed.