The author Irvine Welsh has led tributes to the Trainspotting 2 star Bradley Welsh, who has been shot dead in Edinburgh. The 42-year-old former boxing champion and reformed football hooligan was killed near his home in the West End of the city on Wednesday. Police said they found a man with serious injuries on Chester Street who died at the scene. Welsh said his “heart is broken”, adding: “Goodbye my amazing and beautiful friend. Thanks for making me a better person and helping me to see the world in a kinder and wiser way.” Welsh, who was born in Moredun, a district of Edinburgh, starred alongside Ewan McGregor, Ewen Bremner, Jonny Lee Miller and Robert Carlyle in T2 Trainspotting, playing the role of gangland figure Mr Doyle. The former British ABA lightweight boxing champion and Hibernian football fan was involved in charity projects in Edinburgh, including helping young people stay away from crime through his Holyrood Boxing Gym. He also appeared in Danny Dyer’s Deadliest Men and The Real Football Factories, describing himself as a “born leader”. Tributes were paid on social media, with one woman posting a picture of herself and friends alongside Welsh in a boxing ring: “You to me are treasure, you to me are dear. Our coach, our motivator but most importantly our friend, Brad Welsh.” One man described Welsh as a “huge character” in Edinburgh. “Devastating news about Brad Welsh tonight, a huge character in Scottish amateur boxing and the Hibernian support and someone who contributed a great deal to society through his charitable work and boxing gym. RIP.” On Thursday morning, a long stretch of street remained cordoned off, with the stairwell of a downstairs flat covered by a large yellow sheet. A floral tribute wrapped in a green and white scarf – the colours of Hibernian football club – lay at the edge of the cordon. Residents who live within the police cordon were being checked in and out of the taped-off area, but they said officers had told them nothing about what happened. A woman, who did not want to be named, was in her flat across the road from the incident when she heard a “massive bang”. She added: “I was in the kitchen and heard a bang. I ran through to my boyfriend and said ‘what was that?’, because it sounded a little bit weird. Then there were loads of Swat teams – the police were here super-quick.” Lewis Starling, 25, said: “I came home last night at about 8.40pm and the whole place was cordoned off. I had to get permission to get back to my flat and after that more people just arrived and it’s just been locked down. It’s quite surprising, you don’t expect that around here.” He added that the yellow tarpaulin covering the entrance to the flat was put out at about midnight or 1am. Writing on Twitter, Alasdair Morton, a local resident, said armed police converged on the area and residents were told to stay inside. In a statement late on Wednesday, Police Scotland said: “His death is being treated as suspicious and inquiries are continuing. Officers will continue to provide a high-visibility presence in the area to engage with the public, offer reassurance and gather information that can assist with this investigation. “Anyone who believes they have any relevant information should contact police immediately.”