Saracens reached their third Champions Cup final in four years with a decisive, if hard fought, victory over Munster who fell at this stage for the third season bin a row. Billy Vunipola, who received a warning at the start of the week from his club and England for liking a homophobic Instagram post by Israel Folau, scored one of their two tries and was named the man of the match, but after it finished he was confronted by a spectator. Munster faced the sun in the first half and their full-back Mike Haley, once of Sale, spent much of it looking up at it, waiting for one of Ben Spencer’s hanging box-kicks to start its descent. The Saracens scrum-half took the aerial route the first four times he touched the ball and as the last line of defence Haley not only had to contend with restricted visibility but a cortege of chasers ready to thump into him the moment his feet touched the ground. Haley dropped the first kick and after a repeat, CJ Stander played the ball in an offside position for Owen Farrell to open the scoring after two minutes. Haley’s afternoon was to end early and the tone had been set. The precision of Spencer’s kicks contrasted with the more hurried nature of his opposite number Conor Murray’s, indicative of the squeeze the English champions had on the game. Munster were appearing in their third successive semi-final and a tournament-record 14th. Their supporters overwhelmingly outnumbered those of the “hosts” and, led by Peter O’Mahony, they piled into challenges with gusto but struggled to get on to the front foot and were gradually overwhelmed by the relentlessness of the Saracens assault. Saracens had to make a late change just before the start when Sean Maitland suffered a hamstring strain during the warm-up. He was replaced by David Strettle and their captain Brad Barritt, who in the quarter-final against Glasgow suffered a knee injury he feared would end his season, only lasted 40 minutes. It was, though, about the machine rather than man. It gobbled up Munster and spat them out. The opening minutes of the second half were a contrast to the start of the match. Haley’s 22 was wrapped in shadow so Saracens kept the ball in hand and set up phase after phase, making a metre or two every other rumble and fatiguing their opponents on an unseasonably hot afternoon. The number reached 23 when the prop Titi Lamositele, who had been picked ahead of Vincent Koch because of his ability in the loose, launched a raid on the left wing. Pace was not a feature of his contribution but he took out a couple of defenders and ensured quick possession. Munster had no time to set their defensive wall and the prop John Ryan had the choice of two potential receivers to tackle. He went for the wrong one and Michael Rhodes had an unopposed run to the line. Saracens were 19-9 ahead and, for all Munster’s desperate defiance and their supporters’ unwavering spirit, on their way to the final. Munster had done well to limit Saracens’ interval lead to three points. Saracens dominated possession but took no risks. Strettle was tackled short of the line by Rory Scannell and two Farrell kicks to the corner were dealt with reasonably comfortably, but it was about wearing down opponents who were in no mood to wilt and were willing participants in the most physical of contests. Their January victory over Exeter was gruelling, but as well as struggling in the air here they were outsmarted at the breakdown where the Saracens’ endless capacity to get the ball away quickly gave them command of the gainline and forced Munster to try and slow the ball down, bringing the ability of Farrell from the tee in to play. He kicked four of his six penalties in the opening half, three for offside or holding on, but Munster stayed with them. Tyler Bleyendaal equalised with a penalty after nine minutes from Munster’s first attack when Mako Vunipola, making his first appearance since February, went off his feet at a ruck and the outside-half landed two more to tie the scores after Saracens had led 9-3. They were both conceded by Marco Itoje but Farrell ended the half with three points after Peter O’Mahony deliberately knocked the ball forward. When Farrell’s sixth penalty went over 13 minutes into the second-half, Saracens led by 16 points to reflect the gulf in quality between the teams. Munster have forged their reputation in Europe by never giving up and they gave their supporters a reason to hope with a try out of nothing on the hour. Saracens messed up a scrum in their 22 and when the ball went loose Murray reacted more quickly than Spencer. Farrell’s pass to Darren Sweetnam gave the wing the time to wrongfoot Alex Goode. The conversion of JJ Hanrahan, who gave Munster’s attack pep when he replaced Bleyendaal, cut the deficit to nine points, but it was a consolation rather than the start of a comeback. Saracens sealed victory nine minutes from time. Billy Vunipola had been booed when he first touched the ball, though not as loudly as he had been the previous week in Bristol, and he reacted to more abuse at the end of the match when Saracens were walking around the pitch to acknowledge their supporters, but he was at the heart of his side’s effort, barrelling into tackles from the start. Tired bodies were unable to stop him and Saracens were in their fourth final this decade. There was time for Koch to be sent to the sin-bin for a neck roll on Tadhg Beirne, although it appeared to be a joint production with Itoje. It might have been more even if Saracens had played with 14 men from the kick-off, and it was to Munster’s credit that they managed to minimise the difference between the sides. A final against Leinster would, in contrast, be a meeting of equals.