One of the more enjoyable things I’ve seen lately was a man splitting a wheel of pecorino romano. The tom-tom drum-sized round of sheep’s milk cheese, distinct in its black, waxed rind, was behind the glass cheese and cured meat counter at my local bakery, Passi; a warm, yeasty place below our flat I find hard not to enter, and even harder to leave. To “aprire la forma” (or open it), he scored the cheese around its girth, inserting two almond-shaped knives (coltelli a mandorla) at intervals along the scored line, before levering them like a floor jack to break it open. Actually, cracked is probably a better word for the motion and sound as the nearly white cheese parted to reveal two craggy sides akin to a crystalline cheese moonscape. The hope is always that a piece will fall away from the newly cracked round to eat straight away – that’s if you like a strong, pungent cheese. Pecorino simply means sheep’s milk cheese, and there are varieties from all over Italy; pecorino romano is just one of them, and is certainly the more insistent in terms of flavour. Usually aged for eight to 12 months, pecorino romano is sharp, salty and undeniably sheep-y. It also rings in your mouth, stinging the tiny cut on your tongue long after the crumb has dissolved. Many consider it too pungent to be a table cheese and much better suited to grating. Pecorino romano is also effective at salting and melts accommodatingly, which is why it is indispensable in the quartet of classic Roman pastas: amatriciana, gricia, cacio e pepe and carbonara. Eaten younger, at three to five months, pecorino romano can be a table cheese and, as I mentioned last week, is made to go with the first broad beans or peas of the season. This social habit is one Romans have been enjoying around Easter since the middle ages, when ambulant peddlers would wander the streets and taverns selling lupini (lupin beans), squash seeds, olives, coppiette (sun-dried horse meat), and other morsels united by an intensity of salt and therefore invitations to drink more. After all, who doesn’t like something salty before a meal? I have been dedicated to the cause since the age of 10, sitting on a stool in my granny’s pub, alternating between crisps and sips of lemonade in anticipation of Sunday lunch. I love the idea of people peddling salty snacks: seeds and beans, bits of cheese and rounds of salami, leathery olives and crisps. Better still, small fennel salami sandwiches, puffed up anchovy and onion tarts, salt cod on toast – all ideas from Simon Hopkinson, as are these moreish cheese biscuits. While these biscuits are also good made with just parmesan, pecorino gives them a deep, slightly sharp flavour that is good served alongside a bitter-sweet drink such as a Campari, spritz, americano or the drink my partner likes to remind me came about when Count Negroni asked a barman to add gin to his americano in honour of his recent trip to London. This may well be a myth, but as the American author Joseph Campbell noted: “Myth is much more important and true than history. History is just journalism, and you know how reliable that is.” Prep 15 minChill 1 hrCook 9 minMakes 12 50g plain flour75g flaked almonds75g pecorino or parmesan or a mix, grated, plus extra for dustingA pinch of cayenne pepper, plus extra for dusting50g butter, melted1 egg whiteA pinch of salt Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5. Sift the flour into a bowl, add the almonds, cheese, cayenne and melted butter, then stir. Whisk the egg white and a pinch of salt with a fork until soft and frothy. Fold this into the other ingredients until combined, then gather into a ball. Wrap it in clingfilm and chill it in the fridge for an hour. On a floured surface, roll the dough out as thinly as possible then, using a round pastry cutter or a wine glass with a thin rim, cut out the biscuits. Transfer to a baking tray lined with parchment and bake for seven to nine minutes, or until lightly golden. Leave to cool on a wire rack and serve dusted with more pecorino (or parmesan) and cayenne pepper.