Jez Butterworth’s Troubles-set family drama The Ferryman has soared high in the US’s most important theatre awards, picking up nine Tony nominations. The play, directed by Sam Mendes, opened two years ago at the Royal Court in London, becoming its fastest-selling show ever and attracting stellar reviews. After a sold-out year in the West End it transferred to Broadway with much of the same cast and has gone down a storm. On Tuesday, it was the joint biggest recipient of nominations in the play categories along with To Kill a Mockingbird. Flying highest, though, was the musical Hadestown, which had a three-month run at the National Theatre before its Broadway transfer. It picked up 14 nominations. The Ferryman’s nominations included one for best actress for Laura Donnelly, whose real-life experience – discovering her uncle had been “disappeared” by the IRA – inspired the play. Donnelly, who plays a young widow thrown into limbo by her husband’s disappearance, is on stage for nearly all of the play’s three-hour-plus running time. It was a performance that won her an Olivier award last year. For the Tonys she will be up against Annette Bening (All My Sons), Elaine May (The Waverly Gallery), Janet McTeer (Bernhardt/Hamlet), Laurie Metcalf (Hillary and Clinton) and Heidi Schreck (What the Constitution Means to Me). Donnelly was in Los Angeles when she heard about the nomination, so it was 5.30am “and everyone was ringing me so I knew it must be good news. It is so wonderful, it is such a huge honour”. The reaction to the play in the US had been different, she said. “Broadway audiences are more intense anyway and there was sometimes in the UK a sense of discomfort in the audience – it is quite close to home, there was a sense of implication. “In the US people are more separated from the politics of it and got involved in the family drama.” Butterworth, whose previous plays include Mojo and Jerusalem, said: “It is one of the most crowded new play environments I’ve ever been in so all the more an honour to be nominated. Working with Sam Mendes was far and away one of the best creative experiences of my life.” The play’s male lead, Paddy Considine, lost out on an Olivier last year to Bryan Cranston, who won for his lead role in the National Theatre’s production of Network. That play is also now on Broadway, which means both men will again compete for best actor – along with Jeff Daniels (To Kill a Mockingbird), Adam Driver (Burn This), and Jeremy Pope (Choir Boy). Network, based on the 1976 film starring Peter Finch as a TV news anchor who has an on-air breakdown, picked up five nominations. Surprisingly, these did not include best play, but the show’s Belgian director, Ivo van Hove, was named in an all-male shortlist for best director. He is up against Mendes, George C Wolfe, Bartlett Sher and Rupert Goold for Ink, which began life at the small Almeida theatre where Goold is artistic director. The play, which tells the story of the birth of the Sun, won six nominations including best supporting actor for Bertie Carvel, who plays Rupert Murdoch. In the musical categories, Hadestown led the way with 14 nominations, followed by Ain’t Too Proud – the Life and Times of the Temptations with 12 and the newly opened Tootsie, based on the film, with 11. Before its Broadway transfer Hadestown, based on the tragedy of Orpheus and Eurydice, enjoyed a successful London run but was completely overlooked by Olivier judges. It will fight out the best musical category with Tootsie, Beetlejuice, The Prom and Ain’t Too Proud. Only two shows were nominated in the best musical revival category: Kiss Me, Kate and Oklahoma! The nominations were announced in New York by Bebe Neuwirth and Brandon Victor Dixon and the awards themselves will be presented at a ceremony on 9 June, hosted by James Corden.