‘A university of the air.” What a resplendent vision – reminiscent of the shining city on the hill, but with an actual purpose. It was Michael Young’s vision in the early 60s, when – if you clear the hippies aside and look what was under that decade’s self-indulgent, distracting, distorting, defining carapace – most people left school at 15, and just 4% of the country (mostly men) went on to university. How that vision was realised was the subject of BBC Four’s documentary, Happy Birthday OU: 50 Years of the Open University. It was presented by recent alumnus Sir Lenny Henry, who decided to go for the real thing when, after receiving an honorary degree from Warwick University, he watched graduates revelling in their success as they received their certificates on stage. Falling into an obvious trap, the film concentrated on the OU’s BBC television programming, to the detriment of lesser-known parts of the story that deserved to be brought into the light. It opened with a rushed account of the state of higher education at the time (that 4% figure, a mention of night classes and the Workers’ Educational Association). It then galloped through Young’s realisation that Russian methods of distance learning (the Soviet aeronautical engineers winning the space race had rarely been to a bricks-and-mortar university) developed to educate a population spread across an unfeasibly large country, could be applied to a smaller country that now contained 14m households with television sets. The prime minister, Harold Wilson, got behind it in a small way, but Young became so frustrated at the slow progress that he set up the National Extension College as a pilot programme for his grander plans. It was a success, especially if you measure an innovation’s success by the speed with which indifference turns to hostility in the old guard. The civil service and establishment educators thought it was an outrage, but it survived. In 1969, the OU was granted a royal charter and received 40,000 applications (it expected 25,000) for places in its notional halls. Then the show paused for a slightly masturbatory segment on the famous programmes, which went on much too long but at least gave the very specific joy you get when you realise something is exactly how you remember it. All the things you thought you may have invented or exaggerated were there in fuzzy, unforgiving monochrome: the incomprehensible equations and principles being explained by earnest men with string-and-cardboard constructions and spinning arrows, showing how curves and planets and numbers and speed and chemicals and everything else you might care to name, work. Occasionally, an academic came along who was a natural – speaking easily to the camera as if it were a friend instead of a lecture hall full of disaffected students – and made you realise how rare presenting talent is. The final section focused on the literal tonnes of learning materials that had to be developed and posted out to the thousands of people preparing to clear their busy lives for the 20 hours a week of study that earning a part-time degree entailed. This material included entire laboratories that had to be unboxed and set up at home; their ingenuity would make Ikea hang its head in shame. But the earlier lingering meant that this part of the documentary was as rushed as the first. We could have done with hearing far more from the academics involved about the problems of designing material for students you could not see and would never meet, and much, much more about the experiences of students old and new. There were movingly heartfelt accounts from 70s comedian Johnny Kennedy, whose family needed him to go out to work at 16, tearing him away from a school that had just introduced him to Shakespeare and who used the OU to “get the degree I deserved”, and from the former bank robber Bobby Cummines, who discovered the joy of learning during a 13-year stretch in Parkhurst. “Sitting with a pen when in my life previously I’d be sitting with a gun … Getting full marks for an assignment was a better buzz.” There must be thousands of stories waiting to be told. B minus, then, to the Beeb. Could do better.