In the end, this was not exactly the perfect takeaway for a Southampton team finally safe from relegation, but a topsy-turvy game that had both managers shaking their heads made pleasant viewing for Gareth Southgate. Nevertheless the relief was etched across the face of Ralph Hasenhüttl at the final whistle, despite being denied victory by Callum Wilson. It was a satisfying afternoon for Southgate, the England manager watching on alongside striker coach Allan Russell, with Wilson at the double and James Ward-Prowse also on the scoresheet. Bournemouth’s goals-against column took another hammering – only relegated Fulham and Huddersfield have conceded more this season – but after three defeats in their previous four matches, they savoured a point. Shane Long required just 7.69 seconds to open the scoring on Tuesday and, while he needed a little longer this time around, the striker earned Southampton another early advantage here, slotting home inside 12 minutes after dispatching Nathan Redmond’s slide-rule pass. It was slack defending from a Bournemouth perspective but this was a match that did little for either side’s defensive credentials, with soft goals seemingly the order of the day. After 19 minutes, Eddie Howe had seen enough, calling Ryan Fraser back from his warm-up on the touchline. But as Fraser was removing his bib and getting stripped for action, Bournemouth cantered upfield on the counterattack through Joshua King. The forward found Wilson, who unselfishly laid the ball off for Dan Gosling to thump home an equaliser. Howe nevertheless still sought change, switching to a more orthodox back four with Fraser replacing Chris Mepham. On the pitch, Bournemouth were already reaping the rewards. After a dreadful start, Bournemouth were more comfortable in their own skin, so much so that Wilson’s 13th goal of the season came as no surprise. It stemmed from a short corner, when Southampton failed to truly clear Fraser’s cross from the right. David Brooks recycled possession on the edge of the area, driving at goal from 20 yards and catching a scrambling Angus Gunn cold in the Southampton goal. Gunn managed to reach the strike, which funnelled through a sea of defenders, but palmed the ball straight to Wilson, who gladly swept home. By that point, Long should have added to his tally but, in keeping with the comical nature of an entertaining first half, he registered a glaring miss rather than a fifth goal in as many games. Jefferson Lerma snatched the ball off the feet of Ward-Prowse on the edge of the box but inadvertently toe-poked into the path of Long. This time, though, the Southampton striker badly fluffed his lines, scuffing his first effort straight at Artur Boruc, who could only parry, before striking the rebound against a post with the goal gaping. Bournemouth have been blighted by injury and losing Gosling early in the second half led to them surrendering their midfield bite. It was something that Southampton gleefully seized on, with Ward-Prowse unchallenged to steer a low effort into the bottom corner after a lukewarm challenge by King 20 yards from goal. That gave Saints the impetus to push on, with Matt Targett nodding home Yan Valery’s cross. Bournemouth seemed to be floored but they fashioned a leveller through Wilson four minutes from time. In truth, Wilson should have completed his hat-trick but failed to beat Gunn at the death.