Is it worth spending £1,000 to upgrade a basic flight ticket to a seat in premium economy? Not if you are on a British Airways flight from Costa Rica to London, according to one Guardian Money reader angry at the quality he got for his money. Keith Marsden and his wife spent £1,940 to upgrade to premium economy for a trip to South America. But since then he has been battling to get at least half that back, as he claims the service was a disaster. On the return leg to London only three out of eight or nine toilets on the BA flight were functioning, so he and his wife spent much of their time in a queue, he says. He claims that the cabin was so cold it made sleep all but impossible. He was expecting better quality food than in economy, but he says it was “inedible”. To add further insult, he says entertainment system failed to work properly. Marsden, from Cheadle, Cheshire, bought the upgrades with a view to having significantly increased levels of comfort on the 10-hour journeys. The couple had been on an organised tour to Costa Rica which had included economy air tickets in the upfront cost. “The outward flight was uneventful so although we weren’t impressed we agreed to simply put it down to experience. However, the homeward flight was awful. Because only three toilets were working this meant a great deal of discomfort and there were frequently 10 or more people waiting to use the loo. The captain apparently told a lady in business class that, had we been flying over land, he would have made an intermediate landing to get the problem dealt with. We had paid a large sum extra and we feel totally ripped off,” he says. Staff on the flight handed out complaint forms, but Marsden claims BA has been dismissive. The airline offered the Marsdens a £50 voucher against a future flight – but they say they have no intention of using it. “I suggested that reasonable compensation would be for them to refund the upgrade charge for the homeward journey. Instead they have offered us a voucher redeemable only with themselves, which I think is insulting. Ridiculously they have claimed that that is all they are allowed to offer,” he says. BA refused to take the matter further, even after the Guardian became involved. In a letter sent to Marsden it said: “Your case has been reviewed several times by different agents and our duty managers and I’m afraid our response won’t change. The gesture we’ve offered is above our guidelines as the original agent that assessed your case recognised how unhappy you were and used her discretion to increase the amount. Unfortunately, this is the highest amount that we’re able to offer and I’m sorry you still remain unhappy with this.” However, Richard Colbey, a barrister with London’s Lamb Chambers, says if the couple took it to the county court, he thinks a judge would award them damages of at least the return upgrade. “It is a breach of the term implied by the Consumer Rights Act that services be of a reasonable quality. They seem to be realistic in their demand. There is an arbitration service, but unfortunately in my experience, it is more complex than having to deal with county court bureaucracy – and they would be better off using the courts.” Marsden says he intends to file a claim.