This was the day when Leeds were supposed to hit the accelerator and watch the dual carriageway towards the Premier League open up in front of them but, instead, 10-man Wigan delighted in forcing Marcelo Bielsa’s team on to the hard shoulder. Paul Cook’s side arrived with the worst away record in the Football League but they left their opponents as frustrated as the over-heated drivers stuck in Easter traffic on the clogged motorways surrounding the city. On this evidence Bielsa’s defence will require emergency repairs if they are to recover their composure and pip Sheffield United to the second automatic promotion slot behind Norwich. Granted third-placed Leeds are behind Chris Wilder’s side only on goal difference and had 36 shots but, psychologically, this bore all the hallmarks of a disastrous defeat. Undeterred by the early loss of Cédric Kipré to an extremely contentious red card, Cook’s team recorded a vital win that lifted them clear of the bottom three. Hats off to Christian Walton for brilliant goalkeeping, the Everton loanee Antonee Robinson for a masterclass in playing left-back and Gavin Massey for two goals. “This is a very serious wound at the worst moment,” said Bielsa, whose team travel to Brentford on Monday before facing a resurgent Aston Villa here on Sunday week and then visiting Ipswich. “We have a different feeling from reality. But what we have done so far is not enough. Defeat condemns my works.” Wounded teams are often dangerous and, after a season of sustained blows Wigan arrived in defiant mode, apparently minded finally to start fighting back. Leon Clarke should have headed them into an early lead from Robinson’s cross but instead missed the sort of chance that can be the difference between a Championship and a League One future. Patrick Bamford, no matter that he never quite made it at Chelsea, has always regarded himself as Premier League calibre and, confronted by his rapid acceleration and insidious movement, Wigan’s initial feistiness temporarily subsided. Their cause was hardly helped when Kipré was swiftly sent off for handling Bamford’s shot on the line, even though he was arguably powerless to prevent it hitting him. DespiteWalton saving Pablo Hernández’ssubsequent penalty, Bamford was soon surging through the visiting defence with the ease of a jet cutting through cloud. When his right foot connected with Luke Ayling’s cross there seemed an inevitability about the way the shot was swept beyond the goalkeeper. Elland Road rocked in the brilliant April sunshine but Cook’s side had started menacing on the counterattack and, with half-time beckoning, Kal Naismith and Lee Evans combined to cue up a breaking Massey. With the home defence caught cold the winger was permitted to advance unchecked before equalising with an angled, and beautifully weighted, right-foot shot. With Cook using the interval to tell his players the penalty and the red card were injustices, Wigan re-emerged full of righteous indignation. Massey appeared a man on a revenge mission and, having met Clarke’s cushioned header across goal, he used his own forehead to beat Kiko Casilla. As if at the flick of a switch the ground’s mood changed from near-triumphalist to a mix of disbelief and disgruntlement. Shortly after Wigan’s Reece James hit the bar Leeds fans let themselves down by pelting Sam Morsy, the visiting captain, with missiles as he lay injured. Unleashing a more constructive fury Bamford and co hit Wigan’s box with a barrage of shots and crosses but Walton kept on saving while his defence made countless blocks and interceptions. “People who have watched us today will wonder how we’re in this position,” said Cook. Bielsa is probably foremost among them. “Any explanation I could give would be meaningless,” said the Leeds manager. “It’s a time of weakness but it’s my responsibility.”