Sometime this decade, the National won an indie-rock title fight that nobody knew they had entered. No unifying concert or pop culture moment, no critical consensus on a game-changing album. Yet this bookish troupe of Ohioans has grown to symbolise the possibilities for alternative music in the modern era. Their Grammy-winning 2017 album, Sleep Well Beast, sealed the deal, but what got them there, of course, is stamina. Forever maligned as the patron saints of boredom – that particular boredom suffered by highly strung music zealots – they stuck around for so long that detractors got bored with hating them. Anyone planning to disparage them as adult-contemporary frontiersmen could scarcely have chosen a better setting than the Royal Festival Hall, usually known as an arena for Rachmaninoff and Sibelius recitals. But at this one-off London show, the seated venue plays to their strengths. Precise acoustics suit the Dessner brothers’ fastidious arrangements, while charisma-beacon Matt Berninger – emboldened by a rapt, reverent audience – whips out gags with renewed enthusiasm. At one point, he teases co-singer Eve Owen with a slapstick routine; later, he plunges into the crowd to serenade a fan, stealing their phone and posing for selfies. In addition to Owen, a seven-piece string section joins the show, as do singers Kate Stables and Pauline de Lassus. The women are here to accompany Berninger – and temper his ego – on songs from the National’s mellow new album, I Am Easy to Find. (A screening of a short film of the same name, made for the band by 20th Century Women director Mike Mills, precedes the gig.) Perhaps because certain songs originated in the Sleep Well Beast sessions, some halfway-there soundscapes mar a middle section short on Dessner wizardry. But it’s redeemed by Where Is Her Head, a glorious, Broken Social Scene-styled anthem that sees Owen lead the vocalists in prismatic harmonies. Temporarily demoted, Berninger prowls along the horizon, trying not to attract attention. Though she’s absent tonight, Berninger’s wife Carin Besser wrote several songs on the new record, and her input looms large behind the band’s new phase. The self-loathing style of Berninger’s early lyrics painted him as a helpless witness to doomed relationships. Besser’s integration as a songwriter, which began with 2007’s Boxer, signifies a subtle rebalancing of power. Neuroses, delusion and self-scrutiny will always characterise the National’s songbook, but it also contains clues to romantic endurance. Of the new songs, the showstopper is Not in Kansas, a Berninger stream-of-consciousness about the “indelible” early Strokes albums, rediscovering REM and his hometown’s “downward spiral since alt-right opium went viral”. Pivoting into a choral lullaby, the conclusion soothes listeners with an ambivalent reminder of the impending climate apocalypse. The crowd sighs, then roars. Having dispensed with the string section and singers for the encore, Berninger knocks out some theatrics as fans spill towards the stage-front. In the chorus of Bloodbuzz Ohio – a riotous singalong about cumulative loan interest – he crumples to his knees in mock anguish, head yanked back like a disciple in a crucifixion painting. Owen returns for I Need My Girl, a rare Berninger ballad that hits pause on the catastrophising and makes his optimism explicit. Love doesn’t save or destroy, he reminds us. It’s just there, and we watch where it takes us.