What should Chris Lilley do next? It’s a question worth asking because, if you have watched his new Netflix series, Lunatics, you will have realised that the thing he currently does isn’t very good. Lilley’s shtick has always been remarkably narrow. He invents a broad character (gay teacher, Tongan teenager, black rapper, Japanese mother), abuses their stereotype for as long as he can and then attempts to salvage everything at the last moment with a bittersweet humanising moment. When he tried this in 2007 with Summer Heights High, it worked; the characters had some level of humanity, the sweetness was unforced and there was a nice geographical gimmick to tie it all together. But Lunatics is the logical endpoint of his shtick. It’s a death rattle. The characters Lilley plays are either obnoxiously broad (a man called Keith Dick who runs a shop called My Dick and has sex with cash registers; a man with a cartoonishly large bottom who calls himself DJ Qunt) or legitimately marginalised (a hoarder; a 7ft teenage girl), and they are all played for the easiest laughs possible. The hoarder used to be a porn star, the tall girl gets her hair caught in ceiling fans. There’s an Australian boy who moves to England after inheriting a title; he becomes earl of Gayhurst. This is the level Lilley operates at. It’s as if success has led him to cloister himself away from recognisable people and instead forced him to draw his inspiration from daytime television. The problem isn’t that the series is cruel, although playing people with mental and physical difficulties for laughs in a show called Lunatics probably isn’t the smartest choice. It’s that it is boring. The trick has stopped working. The whole thing just feels rote. There’s no overarching theme here, no Summer Heights High-style shared location to make it feel whole. Instead, we have six disparate new characters operating without overlap. You get the feeling that these were just the first six characters Lilley could think of, bundled together under the vaguest possible title. And because the characters are so broad, the patented Final Episode Redemption feels less deserved. The tall girl comes off worst here. To condense her arc to its core, we spend several episodes watching Lilley show us how funny it must be to be tall, before there’s a handbrake turn and she sings a sincere song about how everyone is beautiful in their own way. These about-faces, and every character has one, are grotesque. They’re Lilley having his cake and eating it. They’re the nah-you’re-all-right-I-didn’t-mean-it arm-punch of the inveterate bully. By the time you’ve watched six of them, it’s hard not to feel personally insulted. Lilley has always reminded me of Ricky Gervais, largely because both were enthusiastic adopters of the mockumentary form and their comedy has always had an element of awkward nastiness. By this measure Lunatics is Lilley’s Life’s Too Short. It’s the moment where the unkindness of the work became impossible to miss, with all the potshots aimed at people with obvious disadvantages. It’s Lilley painting himself into a corner. So, what should Chris Lilley do next? One option is to follow Gervais down the path of confused sincerity, overcompensating into an unconvincingly sincere Derek or playing up the drama with an After Life. Alternatively, he could go back to his roots, making something as condensed and well-observed as Summer Heights High. The third option is just to continue in the same direction, ploughing the same field until there’s nothing left at all. At least if he did that, I’d be smart enough not to watch.