A new study has found that suicide among teenagers rose by 28.9% in the month after Netflix launched 13 Reasons Why. The report, published in the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, found that the number of suicides among Americans aged 10-17 in April 2017 was greater than any other month over the five-year period examined. Overall, there were 195 more suicides than expected in the nine months after the show premiered, based on historical and seasonal trends. The drama, about the suicide of a high school student and the effect her death has on her classmates, was condemned upon release by mental health campaigners and psychiatrists. Experts claimed that the show romanticised suicide and could lead to copycat behaviour. While there’s no direct causation cited in the report, the unprecedented rise has left cause for concern. “The results of this study should raise awareness that young people are particularly vulnerable to the media,” said the study’s coauthor Lisa Horowitz, a scientist at the National Institute of Mental Health, in a statement. “All disciplines, including the media, need to take good care to be constructive and thoughtful about topics that intersect with public health crises.” The report also showed that suicides during this period were higher among boys and that while there was a rise for girls, it wasn’t significant. “The creators of the series intentionally portrayed the suicide of the main character,” the study’s lead author Jeff Bridge said. “It was a very graphic depiction of the suicide death.” The results of the study arrive after recently published research from the University of Pennsylvania which showed that young adults, aged 18-29, who saw the second season of the show were less likely to develop ideas around suicide or self-harm than those who didn’t watch it. “We’ve just seen this study and are looking into the research, which conflicts with last week’s study from the University of Pennsylvania,” said a spokesperson for Netflix. “This is a critically important topic and we have worked hard to ensure that we handle this sensitive issue responsibly.” The latest study found no “significant change in level or trend of suicide” among people aged between 18-64. After the first season was criticised, Netflix added warning cards for viewers as well as additional online support for those affected by ideas of suicide. Despite negative reviews for the second season, Netflix ordered a third, which filmed last year. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.