Young adults should be paying at least £100 a month to their parents for living at home, according to a major academic study into the costs of the “boomerang” generation. The main additional cost is food, say the researchers from Loughborough University and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. They found that on average parents spend an additional £15.86 a week on “cupboard food” and cooked meals for their returning offspring, while the extra gas and electricity added up to £4.78 a week. Even if a young adult pays £100 a month for their board, they are still in the money, compared with renting or sharing with friends. The main saving is rent, worth £91.12 a week. The other big savings were council tax – £16.51 a week – and fuel bills, at £12.81 a week. But the savings on food made by young adults were perhaps less than expected. The researchers found that young adults living with their parents tended to spend more on eating out than their friends renting a flat – speculating that it was one way they “escaped” their parents. Other savings were on water rates (£6 a week), insurance (£3.06), broadband (£2.99) and the TV licence (£2.89). The figures assumed that the young adults would otherwise mostly be living in a rented household, with bills shared between flatmates. In total, the researchers said the gain for a young adult from living at home was equal to £8,307 a year – which shows how much they could, if they were highly disciplined, save towards a deposit on a new home. But when the researchers spoke to parents in anonymised focus groups, quite how much the young were saving was a different matter. “Mother 1” told a group that “saving is what they tell people they’re doing … but I’m not seeing a hell of a lot of saving”. “Mother 2” said: “Then they will go out and spend £150 on the latest trainers,” and Mother 1 chipped back: “You know he just bought himself an Apple iMac, and he found £1,750 very quick, so he can save.” But the researchers found that in general parents talked positively about wanting to support their children. They also found that among young adults at home, their motivation and discipline to save increased with age. In their early 20s, savings were less of a priority, but as they reached the end of their 20s – and became much keener to move out – saving improved. Nearly everyone – parents and their children – agreed that a payment for board was appropriate, but there was little agreement about what was fair. One group of young adults suggested a contribution of 10% to the weekly shop was appropriate, while another said 25%. The researchers concluded: “If either no contribution or only a token board contribution is made by young adults living with their parents, the net result will be for parents to be financially worse off … they could have over £1,200 a year less to spend. Some parents may accept this willingly, but for those on low incomes, this additional cost can significantly lower parents’ own living standards. “A board contribution of £24 a week or just over £100 a month could allow young adults to retain most of their savings that they gain from living with their parents, while not making the parents worse off.”