Eddie Jones has ruled himself out of replacing Michael Cheika as Australia’s head coach after this year’s World Cup. The England coach suggested last week he may be open to a possible return to the Wallabies, having said “I don’t think I would ever say never”, but Jones has revealed he sees his short-term future in Europe. Jones is contracted with the Rugby Football Union until 2021 but there is a break clause dependent on whether or not England reach the semi-finals of the World Cup. The RFU is planning for both eventualities, drawing up two lists of potential candidates to either replace Jones at the end of the year or be appointed in the summer of 2020 and work under him for 12 months. He has hinted he may leave the job regardless of how England perform in Japan but now says he will not be taking over from Cheika. Jones coached the Wallabies from 2001 to 2005, including against England in the 2003 World Cup final, but told the Sydney Morning Herald: “I am happy in Europe. The Wallabies need a generational change in culture.” Jones may yet leave England for another job in Europe and reports in Australia have linked him with a role at an emerging nation such as Georgia or Germany, while France are on the lookout for a head coach and next week will hold a referendum among their amateur clubs as to whether they would consider a first overseas appointment. There may also be a vacancy with Italy if Conor O’Shea departs. Meanwhile, Rugby Australia’s director of rugby, Scott Johnson, has reportedly tried unsuccessfully to lure England’s attack coach, Scott Wisemantel, on to the Wallabies staff in time for the World Cup. The Australian first worked with England on last summer’s tour of South Africa and has had a significant impact on England’s attack with Jones’s side scoring 24 tries during the Six Nations, 10 more than their closest rivals. His arrangement with England runs until the end of the World Cup, however, and the RFU has said it is unaware of any approach being made.