We arrive at Israel Galván’s fiesta when it feels as if the party is well under way. You know, when things have started to derail: someone’s on the floor, someone’s taking their clothes off, someone’s dancing on the tables. But that someone is one of flamenco’s most arresting and unconventional dancers, and these tables are mounted on springs, because the ground is always shifting when Galván is around. La Fiesta is inspired by what happens at the end of a flamenco show, when the performers take their bows, loosen up, and everybody swaps roles. Galván’s parents were both dancers and his childhood was spent at these after-parties, and there’s some of that bewilderment here of an adult world you don’t understand. Galván shares the stage with an eclectic ensemble of dancers and musicians, including the brilliant Tunisian singer Alia Sellami, who flits effortlessly from sultry jazz to opera to Arabic song. At the energetic centre, Galván is egged on by his supporting cast, slapping out driving rhythms on table tops. He’s a swaggering performer, all elbows, sharp angles and insouciant speed. His flamenco peacockery has a dash of RuPaul attitude and zero concern for traditional rules. At one point, he imitates a female dancer, kicking up his leg behind him as if tossing the train of a bata de cola skirt. He’s not wearing a skirt, though. He’s wearing Lycra hot pants and football socks, with his trousers round his ankles, because that’s how he rolls. Galván is like the gifted kid in the class who gets bored easily and starts playing up. Of course he could do what you want him to, but why should he? He’s the kind of contrary dancer who puts up a screen in front of his legs while he dances so you can’t see his feet, sound and vision disjointed, expectations dashed. Everywhere is play, experimentation, absurdism and subversion, and fleeting images (Galván’s cape becomes a mourning veil – flamenco’s own funeral, some of the audience who walked out might have thought). Sometimes the mood dives, but mostly it’s brilliantly bonkers, held together and propelled by those rhythms: clapped, stamped, sung or played, flamenco’s pulse startlingly alive. • At Sadler’s Wells, London, 28 April.