According to Sri Lanka’s defence minister, Ruwan Wijewardene, there were nine suicide bombers in total – mostly well-educated and from wealthy families. Eight have been identified and one of them was a woman, he said, though Sri Lankan authorities have refused to officially name any of the attackers yet. One of the attackers is said to be Abdul Lathief Jameel Mohamed, who studied aerospace engineering at Kingston University in London from 2006 to 2007. He went on to study his postgraduate degree in Australia, before leaving in 2013 to return to Sri Lanka. His presence in the country was confirmed by the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, who said it was a matter of “ongoing investigation”. He added: “I can confirm the suicide bomber had been in Australia. They departed in early 2013. That individual had been here on a student and graduate skilled visa.” Two of the bombers were brothers, the sons of one of Sri Lanka’s wealthiest spice traders. One, Inshaf Ibrahim, who owned a copper factory, was the bomber who detonated his explosive device at the busy breakfast buffet of the luxury Shangri-La hotel. The other brother, Ilham Ibrahim, was also said to be involved and some reports have named him as the bomber who detonated his device at the Cinnamon Grand hotel restaurant. Ilham Ibrahim had well known connections to National Thowheed Jamath, a Sri Lankan Islamist group suspected of involvement in planning the attacks, according to a Reuters source. Investigators believe Ilham Ibrahim’s wife may be the female suicide bomber involved, detonating a device at the family home when the police were carrying out a raid. The blast killed her, her children and three police officers. The leader of the attacks was named as Mohammed Zaharan, also known as Zahran Hashim, a Sri Lankan Islamist preacher who had been expelled from his community for his radical views but had continued to make YouTube videos to spread his ideology, and had apparently built up a band of loyal followers. Zaharan was the only figure identifiable in the video of the Sri Lanka bombers pledging loyalty to Isis, released by the group’s news agency as it claimed responsibility for the deadly attacks. Investigators are looking into international connections and support the bombers may have had, including whether they travelled to neighbouring countries such as India or the Maldives for training.