Born in Canada, Maitlis, 48, studied English at Cambridge University and began her career in business journalism with NBC Asia. She has been part of the BBC Newsnight presenting team since 2006, and was recently made lead host. Her book, Airhead: The Imperfect Art Of Making News, has just been published. She is married with two sons and lives in London. When were you happiest? Right now. What is your greatest fear? Being thrown into a third-world jail through a misunderstanding. Nazanin [Zaghari-Ratcliffe]’s story in particular has affected me – we are all a step away from that. Which living person do you most admire, and why? Sammy Woodhouse, who spoke out about the Rotherham abuse. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? 3am Amazon habit. My husband says there’s always a bag in the hallway that has to be given back. What was your most embarrassing moment? During the Bataclan attack in Paris, I was trying to get a message through to my producer about what was coming up and I yelled really loudly, “Migrants!” There is this shot of me yelling at the camera as if I’ve got a very odd xenophobic neurological disorder. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? Our very entitled lazy whippet, Moody. What do you most dislike about your appearance? The hair. What is your favourite word? Atavistic. I overuse it to prove that I understand it. What is your most treasured possession? A bracelet made from the bangle that my grandmother escaped Nazi Germany with. What would your super power be? I’d like to get up and instantly have perfectly blow-dried hair. What did you want to be when you were growing up? A hairdresser and a ballerina. What is your guiltiest pleasure? Fox News and evangelical channels in US hotel rooms. What does love feel like? Scary – there is too much to lose. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party? Ten people who would ideally all say no. I would have that wonderful sense of, “I asked them all, sadly they couldn’t come.” Which words or phrases do you most overuse? To be fair; to be honest. How do you relax? Endlessly scrolling through my phone. What has been your closest brush with the law? I’ve ended up in prison a number of times, once in Cambodia, once in Cuba – for hours rather than days. Hostile-environment courses do prepare you, but when someone is yelling, “You’re lying!” over and over, it’s destabilising. How would you like to be remembered? As somebody who doesn’t actually think about how she’d like to be remembered. What is the most important lesson life has taught you? That everything that you think is set – whether it’s history or a relationship – you redefine the whole time.