Manners matter around Augusta. The club’s official guide for spectators opens with a short note from Bobby Jones on the proper “Conduct, Customs and Etiquette”. In golf, Jones wrote, “etiquette and decorum are just as important as rules”. Which might be why there seem to be so many unmentionables, like exactly who is a member, and just how much they pay in dues. “It’s Augusta, you just don’t ask too many questions,” said Dustin Johnson this week. Which must be why no one ever seems to publicly discuss just how godawful the place smells on a rainy day. It takes an awful lot of fertiliser to make this place look so pretty, and as soon as the ground gets wet the scent of all the fragrant azaleas, pine sap and cigar smoke gets overwhelmed by the stench of something a lot more funky and agricultural. So yes, the unfortunate truth is that when it’s raining Augusta National is redolent with the unmistakable smell of barnyard manure, cut with the sanitary tang of whatever chemicals are in the green kitty litter the groundskeepers throw down to soak up all the water. On Wednesday, when it was really heavy, the smell got so overpowering that there were stewards complaining it was giving them migraines. The rain has already washed out two days of practice. Then there were heavy showers on Friday morning, and it seems likely there will be again through the weekend. Seems like everyone is just going to have to hold their nose and get on with it. It is worst around the busy parts of the course, where the grass gets trampled into a green slurry. So the air was pretty pungent around Phil Mickelson, who was the one player everyone wanted to see before Tiger Woods took centre stage later in the day. Mickelson did not seem too bothered by it, but then you might (politely) describe him as a man who spreads around a fair amount of BS himself. This was Mickelson’s 100th competitive round at Augusta, although he did not know it until a reporter pointed it out to him. He asked Mickelson what it meant, and Mickelson said “just that I’m getting old”. He’ll be 49 in June, which means that if he did win this week, he would be the oldest man ever to win a major. Julius Boros was six months younger when he won the US PGA championship in 1968. Although Mickelson says he doesn’t feel his age. “Every time I come here to play it brings back memories of when I was a kid and it makes me feel young,” he said. “This is a very spiritual place if you love golf the way we do. “I’ve been fortunate to play a lot of rounds here, and I cherish and love every one of them,” Mickelson added. You’d wager he loved some more than others. But he must have been a little sweeter on his opening 67 than the 73 he followed it up with on Friday. That left him four under, three shots off the clubhouse lead. You would think he would have been happy with that at the start of the week, but he said not. “I think I expected to be a little better, to be honest”. Mickelson changed his usual Masters routine this year. Usually he likes to play in a tournament the week before but the changes to the tour schedule meant he decided to get some practice in at Augusta instead. He spent four days here last week, studying the greens, which meant, he said, that when he came back here this week, he didn’t “have to worry about what changes have been made to the golf course because I’ve already made those decisions on how I’m going to play”. Although from this distance, it wasn’t really clear exactly what he had to decide on since he seemed to play the same old way he always does. There were wild drives, mind-boggling recovery shots and brilliant, deft little pitches and chips. His problem, he admitted, was that he kept hitting it left off the tee. “I didn’t drive the ball very well today and that’s going to be the whole key. If I hit it reasonably straight I can attack a lot of holes, but I hit some poor ones.” He sure did. And the worst part of it was that he kept doing it on the birdie holes. At the par-five 8th he sliced one deep into the trees and ended up dropping a shot after he hacked back out the other side of the fairway, and at the par-5 15th he made a similar mistake. Still, Mickelson managed to get around without making a big miss, or blowing up in the way he has seemed to so often here in recent years. “Now if I can go shoot a good one on Saturday I’ll be in it.” And so long as he’s in it, you can be sure he’ll figure in the reckoning. One of his partners, Justin Thomas, will be up there too. He was five under through 15, after an eagle at the 15th, but dropped a shot at the 18th. The other, Justin Rose, followed up his opening 75 with a 73, and finished up four over. Rose has had a real Augusta stinker.