Hammerson, which owns shopping centres including the Bullring in Birmingham and Brent Cross in London, faces a potential shareholder rebellion this week over multimillion-pound share payouts to executives. The property company has been criticised by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), a shareholder advisory group, which has urged investors to vote against executive pay at Hammerson’s annual meeting in London on Tuesday. ISS said Hammerson had not considered the company’s declining share price – down 40% in the past year – when making share award decisions for the chief executive, David Atkins, and other senior executives. It said: “The company’s declining share price has not been taken into consideration when granting share-based awards … Further, a bonus was awarded to the outgoing executive directors despite the financial targets not being met and the company recording an operating loss. As such, support for the remuneration report is not considered warranted.” Peter Cole, Hammerson’s chief investment officer, and Jean-Philippe Mouton, the managing director of its French business, stepped down as executive directors at the end of December, although they continue to work for the company. The past year has been a turbulent time for Hammerson. Last April it abandoned a planned £3.4bn buyout of its smaller rival Intu, which owns the Trafford Centre in Manchester, after pressure from shareholders. Hammerson also fought off a £4.9bn takeover approach from the French shopping centre operator Klépierre. Hammerson is selling off more than £900m of assets after being hit by the crisis in Britain’s retail industry. It gave in to pressure from an activist investor, the US hedge fund Elliott Advisors, which has a stake of more than 5%, and agreed to appoint two new non-executive directors to sit on a newly created investment and disposals committee. Hammerson’s Atkins was paid £1.16m last year, down from £1.8m in 2017. His salary rose to £639,000 from £623,000 and he received £307,000 in share awards under a long-term incentive plan, compared with £376,000 in 2017. Cole was the second-best paid executive with a £986,000 packet, followed by the chief financial officer, Timon Drakesmith, at £785,000 and Mouton, who received £769,000. Neither Atkins nor Drakesmith had an annual bonus, while Cole and Mouton received bonuses of £140,000 and £116,000 respectively. Hammerson said Atkins and Drakesmith had “elected not to take a bonus for 2018 in recognition of the challenging year the business experienced”. The firm also said that it was reviewing its remuneration policy and would put a new policy to shareholders at next year’s annual meeting. On Wednesday, Persimmon, one of Britain’s biggest housebuilders, will be holding its annual meeting in York. It narrowly escaped defeat on its pay policy last year after its decision to give the then chief executive, Jeff Fairburn, a £75m bonus caused widespread outrage. Fairburn was ousted from the company in November.