Jarrell Miller has accepted he “messed up” after Anthony Joshua’s promoter, Eddie Hearn, reported that the US fighter had failed a second drug test ahead of their planned fight in New York. Miller’s participation in the bout on 1 June was thrown into doubt on Tuesday when Vada reported an “adverse finding” in his drug-testing sample, leading to him being denied a licence. Hearn’s tweet, posted on Friday, ended any faint chance of the fight going ahead, and Miller later acknowledged the reported test failures in an Instagram video. A post shared by JARRELL BIGBABY MILLER (@bigbabymiller) on Apr 19, 2019 at 4:44pm PDT “I messed up. I messed up, I made a bad call,” Miller said. “There’s a lot of ways to handle a situation, I handled it wrong and I’m paying the price for it. “I missed a big opportunity and I’m hurting on the inside. My heart is bleeding right now. I’ve hurt my family, my friends, my team, my supporters”. Dillian Whyte, a potential candidate to take on Joshua at Madison Square Garden, could not resist taking a swipe at Miller, posting “you are just a fat shit” in response to the 30-year-old’s video. Joshua’s new opponent for his latest world heavyweight title defence will be announced next week. Michael Hunter and Poland’s Adam Kownacki are among the other names reportedly in the frame. “We have now received news from Vada [the Voluntary Anti-Doping Association] that Jarrell Miller has now failed a second separate test for a further substance,” Hearn tweeted earlier on Friday. “AJ’s 1 June opponent will be announced next week. If you don’t think you can beat him clean, then delete my number!” Miller’s initial adverse finding for GW1516, a metabolic modulator also known as cardarine and endurobol, was recorded on 20 March. Unconfirmed reports published by ESPN claim that Miller allegedly failed three separate tests. On Thursday Miller refuted the initial adverse finding on Instagram, saying “I have never knowingly taken any banned substance and when I found out the news I was totally shocked.”