A judge barred the public and the press from disgraced Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein’s New York court appearance on Friday, after both prosecutors and defense lawyers asked for the hearing to be held in secret. Judge James Burke ejected reporters and spectators from the courtroom in Manhattan as prosecutors argued that more accusers should be allowed to testify in Weinstein’s upcoming sexual assault trial. The allegations against Weinstein to be discussed at the hearing are “highly inflammatory”, Burke said, and letting the public in would “result in a violation of both the defendant’s right to an impartial jury panel and his right to a fair trial”. “The publication of this information at this time would serve no purpose other than to arouse negative public sentiment toward the defendant,” he said, adding it would have a “devastating effect” on Weinstein’s ability to get a fair trial. The former movie mogul faces charges of rape and sexual assault in New York, where authorities say he raped one female acquaintance and forced oral sex on another woman. More than 80 women have publicly accused Weinstein of sexual misconduct. At Friday’s hearing, prosecutors and defense lawyers are arguing over whether evidence of uncharged crimes and other bad acts can be used at his trial, which begins in June. News organizations argued for the hearing to be held in public – saying allegations against Weinstein are already so well known that airing them in open court would not hurt his ability to get a fair trial. “This criminal case is a matter of immense and legitimate public interest,” said attorney Robert Balin, who represented several news organizations. “That is what our constitution envisions, that the people observe and participate in our criminal proceedings.” Lawyers for the press said they would attempt an emergency appeal, as the closed hearing was ongoing. Weinstein denies all allegations of nonconsensual sex. His lawyer Marianne Bertuna argued it was right to hold the hearing in secret. “We are trying to prevent tainted information from going to the press, only to be instantly released to the public, permanently destroying Mr Weinstein’s constitutional right to choose from a jury of his peers,” she said. “Let’s limit the damage that’s been done here in the midst of an insatiable media frenzy.” Hazar Kilani contributed to this report.