This is already resembling a real rollercoaster season for the eight-times Super League champions, Leeds: and if one display thus far can be identified as a microcosm of the first few months under David Furner, then this was surely it. Rhinos supporters could have been forgiven for thinking that a corner had been turned at several stages here. Leading 22-0 at half-time, as well as 28-0 shortly after the resumption, it looked as though this would be a comfortable afternoon’s work for Leeds in their pursuit to climb the table. But old habits die hard for a side still finding their feet under Furner. By full time the celebrations were not so much tinged with satisfaction, but more relief that the Rhinos had hung on following 24 unanswered points from a Hull Kingston Rovers side who had been comprehensively outplayed for the first 50 minutes, and are now level on points with the Rhinos in the bottom three. “I said to them after to dump that second half, forget it,” Furner said later. “We knew they’d mount a fightback after half-time and we put ourselves in a tough position, but that’s two wins in three now.” Leeds delivered arguably their most polished 40-minute display under Furner here before the Robins’ fightback. Within two minutes they were ahead as Ash Handley crossed unchallenged in the corner, the winger then later doubling his and Leeds’ tally midway through the half. Trent Merrin and Tui Lolohea all came within a whisker of extending a lead the Rhinos fully merited, and as half-time approached, it looked as though the gap would be just 12 points. But a crucial two minutes before the interval turned out to be decisive; Tom Briscoe touched down in the corner to make it 16-0 before, from the resulting kick-off, Jack Walker finished a magnificent long-range move. “That was a disastrous period around half-time,” Hull KR’s coach, Tim Sheens, conceded. His side are now level with Leeds on eight points after this defeat, and while there were encouraging signs surrounding the manner of their second-half revival, three successive defeats over Easter suggests this may be another season of struggle for the Robins. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Leeds looked well-placed for a comfortable win when Matt Parcell made it 28-0 six minutes after the break – but the traits which have plagued Leeds for large parts of 2019 then came back to haunt them. There were further missed chances in attack, and when Ben Crooks crossed twice in 15 minutes, the visitors sensed an opportunity. Kane Linnett’s try with six minutes remaining was then backed up by Weller Hauraki’s effort with 90 seconds left, and suddenly, it was 28-24. The nerves around Headingley were palpable, especially given how Leeds had already thrown away winning positions from similar dominance this season. This time, however, they did just about enough to hang on – and who knows how decisive this may prove to be moving forward.