Phil Neville is looking back at his first match in charge of the England women’s football team with undisguised glee. “I was on the touchline, we were 4-1 up against France, who we’d only beaten once in 44 years, and I thought, ‘Nice! Don’t know much about women’s football, me!’” Neville, who has a reputation for being bland, is surprisingly combative in person. “When I got the England job, people said, ‘You don’t have much experience of management’ and I thought, ‘How stupid are you?’ I’ve been the captain of a Premier League club and I’ve coached some of the best players in the world.” Neville’s appointment as head coach last January caused an outcry. He had never managed a team, never worked with female footballers, and hadn’t applied for the job in the first place. Yes, he may have coached at Manchester United and Valencia, but both stints were brief and inglorious. Then, on his first day in charge of England, a series of tweets he had posted years ago resurfaced, suggesting that Neville was a dinosaur when it came to gender equality. In 2012, he had been pulled up for beginning a tweet with, “Morning men!” He had apologised, but dug himself in deeper by suggesting that women would be too busy with domestic chores at that time of day. In another tweet he said: “I’m back chilled – just battered the wife!!! Feel better now!” Though he later said he was referring to beating her at table tennis while on holiday, and regretted the wording, he was condemned by the anti-discrimination pressure group Kick It Out, who accused the Football Association of “what appears to be double standards regarding the threshold for what social media posts are considered discriminatory”. It seemed as though Neville wouldn’t last long in the job. Fifteen months on, things are looking rather different. England finished top of their qualifying group for the World Cup, with seven wins and a draw in eight matches. At the SheBelieves Cup last month they saw off Brazil, Japan and the world No 1 team, USA, to win the tournament. There has been the odd blip: last week the Lionesses lost 1-0 at home to Canada in a friendly. But they are now ranked third in the world, and one of the favourites to win the World Cup when it starts in France in June. Neville is beginning to look like an inspired rather than a perverse choice – though, as he knows only too well, the tide can turn quickly in football. We first meet in December, at a photography studio in Manchester, where Neville still lives. He is dressed formally in his three-piece England manager’s suit, and is a youthful 42. He is handsome in a clean-cut way, with a touch of the comedian Lee Evans about him. Although the Neville brothers were members of Manchester United’s famous class of 92 (the phenomenal youth squad that also produced Paul Scholes, Ryan Giggs and David Beckham), they were never regarded as cool, like Beckham or Giggs; nor were they outrageously gifted in the way Scholes, Giggs and Beckham were. Neville had been a schoolboy football and cricket prodigy (the former England cricket captain Andrew Flintoff once told me that Neville was the star player when they played for Lancashire under-11s), but he evolved into a solid, reliable footballer. This dependability made him hugely valuable to his managers (astonishingly, he played for only two clubs and two managers in his club career: Alex Ferguson at Manchester United and David Moyes at Everton). In the end, Neville made 505 Premier League appearances – the 10th highest of any player, and second highest of any United player. At United he won six Premier League titles, three FA Cups and the Uefa Champions League. Not bad for a journeyman. What was his strength as a player? “I could play anywhere. I played everywhere on the pitch for United, apart from No 9 or keeper. Sir Alex trusted me with his life. I had a good football intelligence. I didn’t need 10 games to get used to a position. I could go out and do a job.” All those people who said I hadn’t got a clue about the women’s game, that was my fuel. Thanks for that What was his weakness? “I could play anywhere!” he says, with a big Lee Evans grin. “There’s that thing – jack of all trades, master of none.” But again, he accentuates the positive. “I say to people, it got me through 386 games at United because if there was a hole on the pitch, Sir Alex knew he could put me there and I would play.” He thinks this versatility has helped him as a coach: “Because I’ve played in nine different positions, I can work with every player.” He got his first coaching badge at 24, and recently completed his Uefa pro badge, the highest coaching certification. Yet his appointment last year was ridiculed. The Guardian ran a story with the headline, “Never managed and didn’t apply: how the FA made Phil Neville its No 1”, while the BBC asked, “How does a man with no managerial experience come to lead England?” Does Neville understand why there was such scepticism? “No,” he says defensively. “I thought they were just looking for trouble. But all those people who said I hadn’t got a clue about the women’s game, that was my fuel. That was like putting unleaded in my tank. Thanks for that.” He says the idea that he wasn’t qualified was more insulting to the team than to him: “When I got these coaching badges, it wasn’t a licence to teach the men’s game – it was a licence to teach football.” In his own reasonable way, Neville is working himself into quite a lather. “They were saying I had to get a new coaching badge – when what I did with Rooney, Ferdinand and Van Persie at United was no different to what I was doing with Houghton, Williamson and Bronze with the England team.” The funny thing is, he says, he did know about the world of women’s sport because he has always been close to his twin sister, Tracey, who manages the England netball team. He had seen up close the struggles women faced in getting the same recognition and financial rewards as their male counterparts. “My sister is one of the best netball players England’s ever produced, and she is now England manager. Almost every day we sit round the table, we talk about what she’s done in her job, how she’s dealt with players. I’ve followed her pathway.” Their parents were sports fanatics. His father, Neville Neville, played league cricket in Bolton, while his mother, Jill, played netball in the local leagues. Neville and Jill spent much of their non-working time driving him and his brother, Gary, to football training, and Tracey to netball. Gary went on to win 85 England caps and Phil 59, making them the most capped footballing brothers to have played for England. Even so, Tracey could be considered the most successful of the three, winning 81 England caps and coaching the national side to their first gold medal at the Commonwealth Games in 2018. But netball has never been as high profile or as lucrative a game as football. When Neville got the England job, he asked Tracey for advice. “I said, ‘People keep telling me it’s different working with women – what do you think?’ She said, ‘Phil, be brutal. They want to be treated like elite athletes and that means you run their socks off for them, and if they’re not doing it, make sure you tell them.’ I said, ‘Well, that’s what I do anyway’, and she said, ‘So stop worrying.’” Does he give players the hairdryer treatment, as Fergie famously did at United? “I have done.” Who to? “The team.” What had they done, or not done? Neville suddenly becomes a master of discretion. “Ah, it was an internal issue. Nothing to do with football.” As for the hairdryer, he says it’s daft to compare him with other managers. “You’ve got to be yourself. I’m quite a placid, level-headed person, but there are things that do rile me. The little things.” He reels off a list of those little things: people smoking outside buildings, traffic jams on the M6, scruffiness. In fact, scruffiness is not such a little thing – in the Neville book of etiquette, it shows a lack of respect. “Every night when the squad go to dinner, everybody has to wear smart clothes – a dress tracksuit [their official team wear]. The players don’t like it because they have to go back to their room to put their dress tracksuit on. But when people come in, they see a team.” Neville admits he will scruff-shame opponents who don’t meet his exacting standards. “I take pictures of other teams looking like a shambles, with different T-shirts on, caps on, earphones in, and I send them to my team on WhatsApp and say, ‘What do you think?’” What do they say? “‘They look scruffy, boss.’ Right, thank you.” Which team is the worst? “That’s personal!” He laughs. We’ve had players in my team who have had death threats. This shouldn’t happen. That riles me Once Neville starts on the subject of respect, there’s no stopping him – respect for hard work, respect for football, and most of all respect for others. “Please. Thank yous. Having respect for people they work with, all the way from the tea lady up to the manager. That’s the strongest value you can have, to show good manners to people around you.” It works both ways, he says; it’s about time the media showed a bit of respect to footballers. “You know what annoys me? I see footballers as easy targets. Why can’t a footballer go out and buy a nice car? I see sportsmen in other walks of life buying nice cars, going on private jets, but it’s the footballer who gets the criticism. I don’t think there’s much respect for footballers these days, and they deserve some. They do so much work that doesn’t get written about – charities, sick children. I think they need protecting a little bit.” We meet a few days after the Manchester City winger Raheem Sterling suggested the media fuelled racism with its portrayal of young black footballers as flash spendthrifts. What did he make of Sterling speaking up? “Fantastic. We need everybody to come out, whether you’re black, white, whatever gender. We’ve had players in my team who have had death threats. And this shouldn’t happen. But it’s like, ‘Oh, because it’s a footballer, it’s part and parcel of the job.’ That riles me. What, it’s part and parcel of the job to get a text saying, ‘I’m going to rape you tonight and kill you’? As a football community we need to get together and take on the world, because the world keeps hitting us with a stick.” Rather than attacking footballers, Neville thinks we need to look after them more. “You can say, ‘Well, footballers don’t help themselves’, but actually they’re young, sometimes they need a bit of education, sometimes they need help. How are we going to protect them, so they can give their best? We need to protect people like Sterling. My son’s at United.” Sixteen-year-old Harvey Neville was at the Valencia academy before moving to United under-18s, and his father says there is a marked difference in the way the Spanish and British media treat their young talent. “In Spain, they’re left alone to be kids, left alone to live their lives, left alone to have success and failure.” Perhaps female footballers are treated more kindly by the British media because their lifestyles are easier to relate to. Last year it was reported that the England captain, Steph Houghton, earned £65,000 a year, while the average annual salary in the Women’s Super League (WSL) was less than £35,000. To put this into context, Sterling is thought to earn almost £300,000 a week. As a result, many of the women in Neville’s squad have had to work doubly hard to be here – particularly those who were not playing professional football in the early part of their career. But Neville argues this is true of virtually every male footballer who makes it, too. “My journey was from living in a two-up two-down in Bury, where my mum and dad had to work every hour that God sends to get me a new pair of boots.” Perhaps, he says, it’s the parents and siblings who deserve more acknowledgment, as they make the sacrifices. “As parents of kids in a football academy, you go there when they are six and playing three to four times a week. So you pick up the kids – on the way you have to feed them, you’ve got to get them 20 to 30 miles, probably. What does your daughter do? She sits in the canteen doing her homework. Then they get home at 9.30pm and Mum has to wash all the clothes.” However hard he tries, you suspect Neville may never quite get the hang of avoiding gender stereotypes. His daughter, Isabella, is 14, and he talks of her with great pride, and not a little awe. She was born 10 weeks premature and given 24 hours to live. At 18 months, she was diagnosed with cerebral palsy and doctors said she would never walk. Another 18 months on, she was walking. Now she swims, runs, dances and models. “She’s a stubborn little sod,” he says. “When she went to school, they told her she’d have to have a trolley bag. She refused and has a rucksack like everybody else. She refuses to go up in the lift. She goes up the steps like everybody else. She takes after her mother.” To leave your premature baby, at 2lb 14oz, in an ICU unit was probably the worst moment of my life He talks about how traumatic the early days were for the family, when he and his wife, Julie, had to leave Isabella at night to go home, because the hospital had no accommodation unit for parents. “To leave your premature baby, at 2lb 14oz, in an ICU unit was probably the worst moment of my life. My wife was distraught.” He fast-forwards 18 months to the day Isabella got her diagnosis. “We went for a walk that night over the hills. This little old lady walked past and saw Julie was crying. She was a family friend. We said, ‘We’ve just been told this.’ And she said, ‘That’s the most amazing news. That child is a gift from God.’” Is he religious? “I became religious. I did start praying sometimes. I had never done that before.” And today? “Yes, my wife is a strong Catholic, from an Irish family. Prayers have become part of our life since we had Isabella.” Soon after their daughter’s diagnosis, the Nevilles were told the hospital planned to build an accommodation block for parents. They decided to raise the money themselves. “We threw ourselves into it – well, my wife did– and we raised £20m in three years.” Family is everything for Neville, and when he talks about football he uses that analogy. His first memory of Ferguson is at United’s training ground, the Cliff, watching Gary train, and the manager talking to their father as if he were a family friend. “I was 11 or 12 and it was a freezing cold Monday night. And Sir Alex came in and said, ‘How are you doing, Nev, is training OK?’ He knew my sister’s name, my mum’s name and he knew Dad played cricket.” For Neville, a golden rule of management is to treat players like family. “My manager was like my second father at both my clubs. And the staff around me were like my brothers and sisters – so every time I went into work it was like going home. It felt warm, secure, safe. When somebody new came in, it was an unwritten law to make people feel welcome in our dressing room. For the first few months it’s like having a newborn child. And when you have a baby and the baby feels that warmth, love and support, she sleeps through the night, she eats well, she grows up to be a really nice person. That’s the feeling I had in my clubs.” It’s something he now wants for his players. “After each game, I go round and speak to every family member, because I want to know everything about them. To get through to the player sometimes you’ve got to go to the mum and dad, because they are the biggest influence.” Who tends to be the bigger influence? “I always go to the mum.” At the crucial moments in his playing career, he relied on his mother. “When it came to meeting the next manager I could be playing for, I sent my mum and my dad. Because my dad would talk football and my mum would suss out the person and say, yes, he’s OK for you, or no he’s not. Your mum looks beyond the football.” Four months have passed. It’s late March and we meet at Prenton Park, home of Tranmere Rovers, where Liverpool Women are playing the WSL leaders, Arsenal. Neville is checking on the form of two of his England players – defender Leah Williamson and winger Beth Mead. He has driven from Manchester with Harvey in a white Bentley that is parked in Tranmere’s modest car park. The car surprises me because Neville does not strike me as a showy man. When I mention it, he looks sheepish. “It was a present to myself when I retired. I treated myself.” Does he look back on those tweets and wonder how he survived, or does he think they were blown out of proportion? His son, whom Neville describes as “my best mate”, is quiet and down to earth. I ask him who his favourite ever United player is. “Ronaldo,” he answers. Now it’s his turn to look sheepish and he backtracks. “Not including my family?” he adds. You can include family, I say. “Oh. My dad and my uncle.” In what order? “Obviously, my dad first!” Neville has now been managing the England team for 15 months. When those sexist tweets emerged last year, that seemed unlikely. Does he look back on those tweets and wonder how he survived, or does he think they were blown out of proportion? He pauses and sighs. “No, they were wrong,” he says. “They were wrong. The jokes I had with my sister in public on Twitter were wrong on any level.” Which jokes? “About who pays the bills.” Bantering with Tracey in 2012, he had tweeted: “U women of always wanted equality until it comes to paying the bills #hypocrites.” Today he says, “Seven or eight years ago, when that tweet came out, it was wrong then and it’s wrong now.” People were less careful with their language then, I say. “Yes, but it’s still wrong and it’s really not something I’m happy with.” Is he more careful with his language these days? “No, I was always known as the squeaky-clean brother.” I tell him I’m talking about sexist language, not swearing. Ah, yes, he says, it has been a very steep learning curve. He recalls his first press conference, during which he said he was looking forward to working with “the girls” and a journalist told him this was disrespectful. “So the first time I sat down with the players, I threw all the staff out and I said, ‘Right, language: hit me with it. Girls, women, female, tell me what you want.’ And they went, ‘Call us what you want, boss.’” They preferred to be called girls. “I said, ‘What about things like ‘man on!’ and they said, ‘Just say man on! If you pass me the ball and somebody’s up my backside, just shout man on!’ What was nice was there were 23, 24 players in front of me, saying it was all rubbish. We went through the language used in football and never once did this bunch of elite players say to me, ‘Boss, that is out of order.’” I ask if he goes into the changing room to give the team talk before matches. “No. We have a meeting at the hotel, team talk, tactics, last message.” Isn’t it tough not being in the changing room? “No, because if you have to give the players a message 40 minutes before kick-off, then you’ve not done your job properly. One minute to kick-off, Laura, the team ops girl, will tell me they’re all ready, and I stand at the door and shake their hands on the way out. Then at half-time, they’ll come and tell me when they’ve had a drink and I’ll go in, deliver, and come back out again. I have four minutes with them at half-time.” He talks about how much progress the team has made in recent months. “What I saw at the SheBelieves Cup was what I wanted – a team playing with arrogance, swagger, style. I was totally content.” Today, despite the fact that Liverpool are playing top-of-the-table Arsenal, there are only 507 spectators at the match – a sign of how far the women’s game still has to go. But the next day, on Radio 4’s Today programme, the sports roundup reports that Arsenal beat Liverpool 5-1 in front of a “disappointing” gate of 507 – a sign of how far the women’s game has come. Neville says it’s a wonderful time to be involved, when rarely a week passes without a first in women’s football. A few days before we meet, Barclays announces it will sponsor the WSL from next season. “Women’s football is in a boom era and I’m just glad I’m part of it,” Neville says. “Just last week there was a world record crowd for a women’s match – 60,000 at Atlético Madrid against Barcelona! Wow!” He stops to admire the cool authority of Williamson at the back. “This girl is a star. You get some players who are born to captain England. She’s a leader. She’s only 22, and she comes into the squad and acts like a 30-year-old.” He tells me Williamson is studying part-time to be an accountant. “I don’t pick players unless they’re doing a course. Some are doing coaching badges, some are doing online courses.” He points out Arsenal’s No 23, the England winger, Mead. She scores two goals but he’s still looking for more. “Beth! Beth! Come on! Ayeeeeeeh! Should have scored!” He winces. “Terrible pitch.” At half-time, we are joined by Arsenal’s England midfielder Jordan Nobbs, who is recovering from a ruptured cruciate, and the retired goalkeeper Rachel Brown-Finnis. I ask Nobbs what Neville is like as a boss. “He’s brought a bit of aggression, but in a good way,” she says. “We were all kept on our toes.” “I can imagine at half-time you lost your shit,” Brown-Finnis says to him about the team’s recent game against Brazil; England were 0-1 down before coming back to win 2-1. “And that’s what we needed.” Nobbs: “Yes. Basically, he loses his shit.” Neville looks surprised. “He doesn’t like fluff,” Nobbs adds. “Has he told you about fluff yet?” What’s fluff? “All the crap,” Nobbs says. “Yeah, I don’t like bullshit,” Neville says. “BS. To the point. Get the job done.” Then he remembers he’s mid-interview and dismisses his players. “Have you not got a job to do down there, yous two?” The team are always chatting on WhatsApp, he says afterwards. It’s a far cry from his time coaching at Old Trafford, when the players apparently nicknamed him “Fuck-Off Phil”, because that was their response when they heard his instructions. “Each girl gets two to three contacts a week with us,” he continues. “People in the media have made fun of the WhatsApp groups.” Why? “It’s just the done thing, isn’t it? I’ve seen one or two things about too many WhatsApp groups: ‘Just leave the players alone.’ But I’m an international football manager – I want to know every single thing they’re doing and how they’re progressing.” He stops mid-sentence, and laughs as one of the players puts the ball through her opponent’s legs. “Ooh, dear me, was that a nutmeg, a little caño? That’s what we learned in Spain – it’s Spanish for nutmeg.” Then he returns to the team’s WhatsApp group. “I say at every camp, ‘Should we get rid of the WhatsApp groups?’ and it’s an absolute no, which tells me I’m doing something right.” In fact, he says, early today he was texting members of the squad who play in the US, because they had just finished playing. “I don’t want them to think that ’cos they’re out in America, I don’t care. So I woke at 5am to text three of them. It was only a pre-season game.” Blimey, I say, that’s a bit obsessive. He smiles. “I am obsessive. The feeling of being stood on the touchline in the technical area… it’s a really powerful thing.” As a player, he says, he slept like a baby, but these days he struggles. “I wake up in the middle of the night, thinking about management things. When I was coach at United and Valencia, I was obsessed then, but it’s not the same feeling as being the manager. I want to be the man who made the decisions, the man people look to for guidance, inspiration, help. Every time I go out there I’ve got to deliver – and that kind of pressure has brought out the best of me.” Neville knows so much hinges on how England performs at the World Cup. The FA is thought to see him as a potential successor to Gareth Southgate, manager of the men’s squad, but to have any chance of securing that job, he must first succeed with the women’s team. What will he regard as success at the World Cup? “Winning!” he says, instantly. So reaching the semis would be a failure? He pauses. “In my mind, yes.” And what if a Premier League job came up between now and the World Cup – would he take it? He looks appalled at the suggestion. “I’d rather die,” he says. • If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).