A key ally of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, has called for EU leaders to reject Theresa May’s appeal for a further short delay to Brexit, in a sign of the dangers of the prime minister’s strategy. Before a crunch summit next Wednesday, May had said she would seek an extra extension of article 50, with a likely end date of 22 May, to allow cross-party talks with Jeremy Corbyn to come to fruition. But there is deep scepticism in the EU’s capitals about the process the prime minister has launched, and concerns that it merely opens up the risk of a no-deal Brexit on the eve of the European elections. The EU’s heads of state and government had agreed at their last summit that the UK could stay in the bloc until 22 May but only on the basis that the withdrawal agreement was ratified by 29 March. An unconditional extension to that date was firmly rejected during the leaders’ discussions in Brussels due to the danger that it risked a full-blown crisis before the elections, offering up ammunition for Eurosceptic parties. Norbert Röttgen, a member of Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union who heads the Bundestag’s foreign affairs committee, tweeted on Wednesday morning: “In the current situation of deep institutional deadlock, there is no point in asking for another short delay of Brexit. EU should insist on long extension with participation in EU elections.” The EU could not impose a long extension on the British government as any decision would need to be endorsed by all 28 member states. It could, however, present a long extension on a take-it-or-leave-it basis, leaving the British government with the option of leaving on 12 April without a deal – or signing up to a delay to Brexit of at least nine months and, more likely, a year or longer. Danuta Maria Hübner, a leading MEP on the European parliament’s Brexit steering committee, told BBC’s Radio 4’s Today programme she feared it would be a “political effort to convince 27 member states to to continue with this process of extension”. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has already warned that the British government should not take for granted any further delay beyond 12 April. “Our priority must be the good functioning of the EU and the single market”, he said on Tuesday. “The EU can’t be held hostage long-term by the resolution of a political crisis in the UK. The three-times rejection of the withdrawal agreement by the House of Commons and the rejection of all alternative plans now puts us on the path of a UK exit without a deal.” Other European politicians have offered a more conciliatory approach in response to May’s statement on Tuesday evening. Denmark’s prime minister, Lars Løkke Rasmussen, tweeted: “Since we could agree to postpone Brexit to right before EP [European parliament] election given the approval of May’s agreement, we should also be patient if there suddenly is a cross-party way forward in UK. But is it too good to believe?” Despite the concerns, Donald Tusk, the European council president, cautioned against a knee-jerk reaction. “Even if, after today, we don’t know what the end result will be, let us be patient,” he tweeted. The European parliament’s Brexit coordinator, Guy Verhofstadt, said: “Good that PM Theresa May is looking for a cross-party compromise. Better late than never.” EU sources said the prime minister’s statement had left people puzzled. “A lot of people are suspending judgment,” one source said, referring to Tusk’s tweet. “We need some clarity before the summit about what this means. There are two big questions. Is May asking for an extension and for what length of time? And are the UK ready to hold European elections?” “It’s probably going to get messier before it gets clearer,” the source added. May’s strategy of not ruling out UK participation in elections, while saying she was against it, may be “too clever by half” , the source said. “If you are a random MP or Brit, you might find yourselves surprised to be in elections in a few weeks’ time. There is a risk by being ambiguous you create a crisis on the UK side.” EU diplomats were quick to point to the legal text in last month’s decision on extension agreed by May and the 27 leaders. It states that the UK would be “under obligation” to hold elections if still a member state on 23 May. Some think May could still pull off a deal. One EU diplomat said the prime minister had created “a darkest hour moment” that could help her agree the withdrawal agreement and a revised political declaration by 22 May. But it could also end in no deal, the diplomat said.