One of Britain’s largest outsourcing companies and its clients are facing mounting protests over plans to withhold the pay of thousands of workers who are among the lowest paid in the UK. They include security guards at Barclays Bank and Goldman Sachs and porters and caterers at NHS hospitals who are facing hardship as a result of plans by ISS to pay staff one week later than they currently do as it “upgrades” its payroll system. Protests this week will include those organised by the GMB union at three south London NHS hospitals on Thursday, and one by the RMT union in Manchester on Wednesday by cleaners working for the company on an Arriva Rail North bus contract. A cleaner earning a flat rate of £260 a week at the Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University hospital, where the Unite union is to hold a second protest on 15 April, said colleagues were crying from stress and worry. “Like most of those I work with, I live week to week and don’t have any savings,” said the man, a father of two young children whose partner is in ill health. One daughter is autistic and dependent on routine, which he said he might not be able to afford as a result. He and others working at the hospital were informed at the end of March of ISS’s plans to change its pay cycle, including for hourly paid workers, as part of what the company have nicknamed “Project Greenfield”. When they get paid on the new pay date of 9 May, hourly paid workers will have worked three weeks but will only be paid for two on the new payday. Staff will receive money owed when they leave the company. “To think that ISS has at some point had a meeting and decided to take a week’s pay off low-paid staff and keep it is beyond despicable morally,” said the man, who said he and others did not sufficiently trust the company to take up its offer of a loan. Other workers, including those in London, are considering turning to food banks. “A lot of people are doing that, though my daughter has special eating needs. I also need to look after her after work and am already doing a second job,” said a woman working as a cleaner at the Princess Royal hospital. Five directors of ISS UK, including the chief executive, Matthew Brabin, shared remuneration of £2m for the year ending December 2017, according to the most recent accounts filed to Companies House. The highest-paid director earned more than £500,000. Jeff Gravenhorst, group CEO of the Danish-owned multinational, earned the equivalent of £2m in 2018. The Unite union, which is taking legal advice on the move by ISS and was due to meet the company on Wednesday, described the plans as the “ugly face of outsourcing”. Colenzo Jarrett-Thorpe, Unite national officer for health, said: “Without proper consultation this multibillion-pound company is withholding the pay of hard-working cleaners and security guards. Many workers who live from paycheck to paycheck are struggling to make ends meet and will face genuine hardship as a result.” ISS said in a statement that it would soon begin a programme to upgrade its payroll system and processes, which it described as a necessity. “Currently we operate 15 different pay cycles, which is complex to manage. To prepare us for the transition to the new payroll system, from 9 May we are moving to just one fortnightly pay cycle and one monthly pay cycle,” it said. “A range of loan options are available to suit individual circumstances, with repayment options from eight weeks up to 30 weeks. Local managers are having proactive one-to-one discussions with their employees to ensure that our people receive the financial and emotional support to meet their specific needs. ISS will not withhold any money that is payable to any employee.”