A few episodes into Back to Life, I felt like pushing it away in protest. “No, no!” I cried inwardly. “It’s too much! It’s too good! I’m still processing Fleabag and Home, and I haven’t sucked the juice out of Don’t Forget the Driver yet. I have to stagger my pleasures, lest I die of a surfeit of brilliance!” This is a rare danger in a television-watcher’s life, despite sterling efforts from streaming services and the channels that are raising their game to keep up, but here we are. The six episodes of Back to Life, starring Daisy Haggard and which she wrote with Laura Solon, are darkly flashing gems and the crowning achievement of their already impressive careers. Haggard plays Miri Matteson, a thirtysomething woman returning to her parents and childhood home in Hythe, Kent, after an 18-year stretch in prison. Her crime is revealed fairly early on, though its gravity is evident from the off by the length of her sentence and by the hostility with which her home town greets her – faeces is sent through the post, abusive graffiti painted on her parents’ garden wall and job applications rejected (“You can clean offices in hell, you sick bitch”). At one point, an effigy of her is tied to a tree in their garden. “This is exactly what she wears,” notes her mother, played by Geraldine James with her customary precision-with-heart. “But ironed.” Alongside the mystery surrounding exactly what happened on the night Miri committed her crime – further complicated by a strange Scandinavian man who is apparently reinvestigating the case, convinced there is a further truth to be uncovered – is the playing out of her mother’s affair with the last man in Hythe with whom she should be dabbling. Then there is Miri’s befriending of Billy (Adeel Akhtar, last seen Thénardiering in Les Miserables), the man next door who is caring for his mentally ill aunt; and the approaching presence of Mandy (Christine Bottomley, all fire and need), one of the people who was with Miri on the night the crime was committed. Oh, and there are the visits from Miri’s magnificently self-interested probation officer, Janice, who dismisses her client’s every concern while working her way through the refreshments provided (“Your biscuit game is strong!”) and advising on the secret to effective pilates (“Squeeze your bumhole shut and then you suck your pompom up into it”). Janice is played by Jo Martin and is a bubble of nitrous oxide injected directly into the vein. Hilarious and lethal. The soul of the story, though, is in Miri’s attempts to construct a life that has been on pause for half its length. She is an optimist – not in a maddening or incredible way, but simply in the way that ordinary people can be; she can be knocked down and get up again, battered, bloodied and slightly more weary than before, and stagger on. She is all of a piece with the closely woven realism of every other part of Back to Life, which doesn’t have a false note in it. Nobody does anything stupid, extreme, inconsistent or out of character. The beauty of the script and the performances – which build relationships so delicately and naturally, which modulate so deftly in and out of grief and laughter, and which turn ordinary moments into hilarity and heartbreak without you noticing how they got you there – will take your breath away. A pleasant chat between Miri’s father (Richard Durden) and a mother at the GP pierces your heart when he pretends he has grandchildren and you release it’s not just one life that has been on pause for nearly 20 years. You place your trust in Haggard and Solon’s world and it holds it without strain. It’s a world where the buying of an ice-cream can be a gesture that reduces you to tears, and yet somehow a world where you bark with laughter all the while. If we have to mention the F-word – and I think it’s law now when something female-led appears, and doubly so here when the series was produced by the team behind Fleabag – then it will just be to say that they have in common only what all great dramas, comedies, mysteries and small-screen fiction of any genre have in common: perfect pacing, polished writing, intricately and carefully laid plots and payoffs, and an abiding sense that everyone involved knows this story and its people in their bones and has done their best – with talent to burn – to lay it before us. A surfeit of everything.