Ole Gunnar Solskjær has stated he will not drop David de Gea for the visit of Chelsea on Sunday despite the Manchester United goalkeeper’s shaky form. De Gea was at fault for each of Manchester City’s goals in the 2-0 derby defeat at Old Trafford on Wednesday. The Spaniard was also culpable for Lionel Messi’s second in the 3-0 defeat at Barcelona in United’s Champions League exit last week. Asked if he might remove the No 1, however, Solskjær said: “No. Not at all. Because I trust David and he’s for me been the best player United have had for the last six or seven years. He has been absolutely outstanding – going through tough patches is part of a footballer’s career and David will be fine.” De Gea is yet to agree a new deal on terms that expire in summer 2020. Solskjær does not believe this is the reason for the goalkeeper’s form. “That’s something you have to deal with as a footballer,” he said. “It’s a situation [that can be normal]. David’s coming in every single day and doing what he should be doing.” The manager also believes Paul Pogba will be at United next season though the manager admits there can be no guarantees. The midfielder’s future is unclear with the Guardian understanding Pogba will consider departing if United do not qualify for the Champions League. Solskjær said: “You can’t guarantee anything in football but yes I think Paul’s going to be here, he’s very determined to succeed at Man United.” The Norwegian understands how Pogba can be a lightning rod for the side – singled out for praise when winning, criticised for being off-form when losing. United have lost seven of their past nine matches. “That’s just the standards he sets because when he’s creating chances, scoring goals, doing loads of work [that’s fine],” said Solskjær. “Everyone looks to Paul, [saying] could you have done better? But he’s done fantastic for us, he’s a human being as well and we’re all the same. “We want him to do well, he’s a leader in that dressing room and on the pitch for us and if I can guarantee [him being here] I would say yes I can guarantee. But in life you can never, but he will be here as far as I’m concerned.” Solskjær was asked if Pogba was a captain to compare with Roy Keane, who led the 1999 Treble team. “I think the world has changed so you don’t have a Robbo [Bryan Robson], a Keane or a Steve Bruce in our dressing room. We’re all different. We have a squad full of talented players and leadership is so many different things. “I loved playing under Roy Keane anyway, and everyone here spoke about Robbo. But we’re all different now, society is different. I don’t lead the way Sir Alex [Ferguson] did, [Louis] van Gaal, [José] Mourinho [all previous United managers]. We’re all different leaders.” Ander Herrera could be involved on Sunday following injury. “I would think so yeah,” the 46-year-old manager said. “Ander’s been training, enthusiastic and will probably be involved on Sunday. I can’t guarantee but he’s trained the last two days.”