I am just so not the kind of woman who would wear a silk scarf. They are for women who are fussily ornamented and prissily polished. Like cufflinks and cummerbunds for a certain type of man. Silk scarves belong with purses that click shut, and tutting at noisy children in restaurants. Oops, my bad. Do you like my scarf? I love it. I make no apologies for the U-turn, because one of the things I really like about fashion is the way it challenges your preconceptions. The world changes and you roll with it. That moment when a colour or a length or a detail that always looked ugly or jarring or twee unexpectedly starts to appeal is my favourite point in the fashion cycle. After all, if you think something just because that’s what you’ve always thought, then you’re not thinking any more. I changed my mind about silk scarves somewhere between Alessandro Michele’s first year at Gucci and the second series of The Marvelous Mrs Maisel. The new-look Gucci, with its everything-plus-the-kitchen-sink maximalised uptown chic, made silk scarves feel as if they were part of a new, fun dressing-up box that also included pussy-bow blouses, oversized pearls and sparkly hairclips. In Mrs Maisel, Rachel Brosnahan’s wardrobe is all saturated mid-century colours and high-definition tailoring. Her character’s eye for the dazzling detail – a scarf, gloves, lipstick colour – is a symptom of a brilliant mind without (initially, no spoilers) more intellectual outlet. One look at the way Mrs M puts an outfit together and you can see she’s sharp as a tack. I started out tying silk scarves on to my ponytail. This is a Max Mara one I was given as a present years ago: I’d kept it because I loved the colours, even when I couldn’t see myself wearing it. The ponytail scarf is great, because anything that makes a five-second ponytail look like an actual look has got to be a good thing. Also, you can’t see it, what with it literally being on the back of your head, and so you forget that it’s there within 10 seconds of leaving the house and don’t feel self-conscious about it. Eventually, I worked up the courage to wear one around my neck. If you fold it flat and knot rather than bow it, a silk scarf with a crewneck sweater can function in the same way as a polo neck underlayer. But it’s more glamorous and keeps you cool. Turns out I am the kind of woman who wears a silk scarf, after all. • Jess wears jumper, £30, rokit.co.uk. Scarf, Jess’s own. Trousers, £39.50, marksandspencer.com. Mules, £149, kurtgeiger.com. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Samantha Cooper at Carol Hayes Management using Mac cosmetics and OUAI This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.