A cross-party group of MPs, led by Oliver Letwin and Yvette Cooper, forced through a bill in less than six hours to instruct Theresa May to seek an extension to article 50 and avoid a no-deal Brexit. It is very rare for backbenchers to take control of parliamentary business and force through legislation in just one day. The situation has come about because May has no Commons majority and some Conservative MPs are willing to work with opposition parties to thwart a hard Brexit. The bill passed through the Commons by just one vote, another unusual occurrence. Fiona Onasanya, a former Labour and now independent MP, voted in favour of the bill, prompting outrage among some Brexiters who believe she should have stood down following a jail sentence for repeatedly lying to avoid a speeding charge. Minutes before the narrow first vote, an amendment from Labour’s Hilary Benn, which would have allowed MPs to hold further indicative votes, was blocked in extraordinary circumstances, as the Speaker, John Bercow, was forced to make the casting vote after a tied result. Bercow, who said the situation had not happened since 1993 during the Maastricht treaty bill, said it was precedent for the Speaker to vote with the government, which had opposed the motion and the amendments. The bill is going to the House of Lords, where there is a strong majority against a hard Brexit. However, there are more opportunities to filibuster in the Lords, where every amendment can be debated and voted on. Some hardline Tory peers may try to talk endlessly to waste time and delay the process. Labour sources in the Lords still believe it is pretty likely to pass though. To a degree, no. May had already said she was going to seek an extension to article 50  – possibly a lengthy one with a guillotine clause enabling the UK to leave immediately as soon as it has passed a withdrawal deal. However, the constitutional precedent is important as it shows that backbenchers have the appetite and ability to force the government to carry out instructions against its will. If there were any further threat of no deal, similar legislation could be passed swiftly again. It was partly a show of power by remainers and soft Brexiters. But it also provided an insurance policy in case Theresa May were to suddenly change her mind and decide to go for no deal on 11 April after all. 