On Friday 15 March, 50 people were shot dead and 48 injured in attacks targeting Muslims at two mosques during Friday prayers in Christchurch. It was the worst mass shooting in New Zealand’s history. Across the Guardian’s three main offices – in London, Sydney and New York – we ensured our coverage of the shooting, its aftermath and the global reaction continued around the clock. Here, some of the Guardian’s key journalists and editors remember how they reported on the unfolding atrocity. I’ve never reported on a terrorism event before. My bread and butter is bird stories, Jacinda Ardern profiles, child poverty and environmental yarns. So I learnt how to do this aspect of my job on the hoof, with guidance from my foreign editors in Sydney and London, who, unfortunately, have coordinated coverage of similar events dozens of times. Terrorism is not new, but terrorism in the south island of New Zealand took everyone by surprise. Now the adrenaline and initial shock of the attacks has eased, New Zealanders are coming to terms with a new version of their peaceful island home. A place where our Muslim brothers and sisters no longer feel safe. Our prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, steered her country through this turbulent week with grace and dignity. She refused to say the alleged killer’s name, stripping him of power and notoriety. Instead she, and New Zealanders, have wrapped the Muslim community in aroha (love), and are looking ahead for how New Zealand can heal itself after this trauma, and ease simmering racial tensions. From a personal point of view, the full impact of the tragedy has yet to hit home. During my week of reporting in Christchurch my head was full of logistics and practicalities. In many ways, I would have liked to have grieved among my fellow Kiwis: taken flowers to the memorial, joined in waiata [Māori songs] at Hagley Park, and participated in the two-minute silence. My country is changed, but it is not broken. If anything, New Zealand is stronger than ever before. We know who we are, and we know who we’re not. The alleged killer is not us. Our home will be peaceful again. The first sign that there was anything amiss in Christchurch was a text message sent to me from Eleanor before noon on Friday 15 March. She was in Christchurch reporting on another story - the measles outbreak – so it was quite a surprise when her message came through: “Shooting at Christchurch mosque heading there now”. But it wasn’t until her second message, which arrived moments later, that we had a sense of the scale of the story: “20 shots 6 people down”. We started a live blog, anchored in Sydney with Eleanor filing regular updates, and built up our coverage as the story grew. It soon became clear that the alleged gunman had livestreamed the attack on Facebook. I first came across the video on Twitter – initially I thought it looked just like a violent video game. My first thought was: this cannot be real. I watched several minutes of it before realising that I was wrong. There was no discussion about using the footage: it was obvious that scenes of people being shot and killed should not be part of the Guardian’s coverage. Instead we mentioned the existence of the video in the blog. Around the same time we became aware of the so-called manifesto and the fact that the alleged shooter was Australian. We decided that we should report on some parts of the manifesto, especially the parts where the alleged gunman wrote about himself and his motivations, but not parts that included incitements to violence or racism. Looking back, I wish I had decided against using the term “manifesto”, which I think gives the document more weight that it deserves. In retrospect, “statement” or “document” would have been better. Once the “manifesto” was out, the comment team in Sydney got in touch with Jason Wilson and asked him to write for us about online fascism. Jason is a writer and academic who is an expert in rightwing extremism and - crucially - is also Australian. By the end of the day in Australia we had several separate stories, as well as the blog: a piece that reconstructed the horror of the attack from witness accounts, a story on Australian media broadcasting footage from the alleged gunman’s live stream of the killings, a piece on what we knew about the suspect, a “what we know so far” piece and several videos - including the very strong words from Ardern “utterly rejecting” the shooter’s actions. US reporter Lois Beckett pulled together a story on previous attacks linked to white supremacism, UK-based New Zealander Elle Hunt wrote about the shock of terrorism arriving in her peaceful home country, and in Australia, a reporter was dispatched to the suspect’s home town of Grafton. In the first few hours after the attack we focused not on the gunman or his agenda, but on the victims, the survivors, the impact on Christchurch and the wider country, and Ardern’s message. In the days that followed we continued to ask ourselves questions about our coverage. When Ardern announced she would not mention the suspect’s name, we had a debate about following suit and ultimately decided that journalists must report the facts and that includes the name of the man allegedly responsible for the attack. We also wanted to spend time on memorialising the victims, which we did with an immersive piece. One of the main issues we need to tackle now is how we cover the suspect’s trial. He plans to represent himself, which could lead to the trial being used as a platform for his extremist views. From Charlottesville, to Portland, to Christchurch, what I have observed is that there are three major factors at play in the genesis of white nationalist violence. One is a large, international cohort of radicalised young men. Mostly they have been immersed in the ideology of violent white nationalism online, and/or by one or a number of emboldened, organised far-right groups. Their belief in ideas like “white genocide”, “demographic replacement”, or the influence of a shadowy cabal of “cultural Marxists” leads them to violent action. Secondly, such men are afforded a platform, or cover, by ostensibly less extreme actors who organise online forums or street demonstrations under the banner of “free speech”. “Populist” or “civic nationalist” groups provide forums for those with more radical beliefs to proselytise and organise, and the barrier between such groups tends to be extremely porous. Lastly, ostensibly mainstream rightwing media either defends big-tent far-right movements from criticism, deflects discussion to other matters, or mainstreams white-nationalist talking points. News Corp pundits like Tucker Carlson in the US or Andrew Bolt in Australia have espoused slightly softened versions of the narrative of “demographic replacement”. In general, the right is not interested in drawing a red line around the far right, and they have more and more in common. The most important thing that my reporting has taught me is that law enforcement agencies – in the US and around the world – have systematically underestimated the danger posed by rightwing extremism. This needs to change. Not only police but segments of the media have underplayed this danger. And that may be because rightwing media throughout the English speaking world promote attitudes — especially Islamophobia — which overlap with the beliefs of white nationalists. Media reform also needs to be part of the picture, as does people power. When large numbers of people show up to counterprotest at rightwing rallies, they rarely become violent, and over time the movements organising them run out of steam. Antifascism should not be the preserve of radical activists. It should be the instinctive response of everyone who lives in a constitutional democracy, and we should view it as a civic duty. The policy here is that we don’t want to glorify an act of terror, give it unjustified or gratuitous prominence, or fall prey to a perpetrator’s propaganda, so it was immediately clear that we shouldn’t use any of his material. It is our purpose, however, to report the news, and through careful choice of images supplied by trusted sources, we try to give our readers some evidence of what’s happening. The shots we published showed the general scene, geographic location, emergency services tending to victims who were unidentifiable survivors and concerned members of the community. Once the main suspect’s identity had been confirmed via official sources we searched for images of him that were not from the live stream and that didn’t play to his political agenda. We made a deliberate decision, in this instance, that although we would publish his image in print, it wouldn’t be on the front page. Over the past few years, coverage of attacks on Muslims has evolved from minimising them as perpetrated by isolated players, “lone wolves”, to acknowledging that there is in fact a more coherent ideological movement behind violent manifestations of Islamophobia. This acknowledgment, however, often finds a way of denying the pervasiveness and danger of anti-Muslim and anti-immigration sentiment, by attributing it to either a backlash against terrorism, or high immigration. But the Christchurch attack, and the clear online radicalisation of the attacker, has forced many to reckon with the fact that there are now other factors – global white supremacy networks and an unregulated web – having an influence that had hitherto not been taken seriously. In that sense Christchurch has been a watershed event, and there have already been measures taken by online platforms to limit content. US responses I received to my coverage in particular, far more readily accepted the conclusion that such attacks were no longer isolated from everyday Islamophobia. But while covering the shooting, it became clear to me that what I had been attempting to do for years, namely, making a link between the normalising of Islamophobia in politics and non-rightwing media, and its violent manifestations, was something that many still refused to accept in the UK, choosing instead to see this as “silencing” or “censorship”. In that sense Christchurch was far from being a watershed moment: if anything it entrenched the defensive view that far-right terrorism has no relation to the mainstream political climate. And so the role of the liberal media becomes even more crucial in framing and presenting anti-Muslim views, and often gets it wrong by falling for false equivalence or the excuse of “legitimate concerns”. Violence or hate speech against Muslims or Muslim immigrants should be covered with the same unequivocal tone as that against other minority groups. One of the biggest difficulties in covering these kinds of incidents is that there is an immediate and entirely understandable demand for a broader explanation of the significance of a terrorist attack, what it might signal in terms of future threat or the evolution of terrorist groups today, whether it’s related to other recent attacks and so on. The problem is that we can only have a definitive answer to these questions months, if not years, after the event. So if as a reporter you need to plunge in and get deep into what is happening right now, as an analyst you have to try to hold back, keep some distance, make some calls to people who have important information or insights and only then start writing. This has been called a watershed moment. But watershed moments are pretty rare. How politicians and the public react is absolutely key. The threat from rightwing extremism has been signalled again and again by security officials, as well as, clearly, by atrocities, but it has not attracted the same resources or interest as the threat from Islamist militancy, and that’s a political decision. I think one good thing that has come out of the New Zealand attack is a new realisation of the international nature of rightwing extremism and that it needs to be fought with many of the same collaborative, global tools as are now deployed with some effect against Islamist militancy. The main thing is to see terrorism in a broader way. It’s an important area because so much feeds into it: politics, social trends, demography, ideas and so on. The two elements that I always try to stress are that terrorism is a social activity like any other, just with morally abhorrent consequences and aims, and that a long perspective is really important. We all have a role to play in pushing back against the extremists, the conspiracy theorists and others who contribute in any way to an environment that makes some of us less safe.