Teetering in on a pair of Manolo Blahniks, Sex and the City hit the screen with a heady cocktail of sweary friendships, strong looks and saucy hook-ups. It was a feelgood hit, with the window on dating in New York providing glamorous escapism and making stars out of its four strong female characters. Carrie, Miranda, Samantha and Charlotte gave the world a refreshingly frank and funny look at a new telly breed: smart women who weren’t asking anyone to put a ring on it (unless it was that episode about Miranda getting very intimate with her running partner). Even better, the mere thought of women talking about blowjobs over brunch was enough to set the sexists off. Hell, it was the show that launched a thousand cupcake tours and Cosmopolitan-fuelled women (and men) screeching: “I am Carrie Bradshaw!” SATC came to the screen in a beautiful pre-9/11 New York, where dates were plentiful and a woman could pay her rent by writing one sex column a week in her underwear. This was a time before Tinder, a charming world in which people still hooked up IRL and, if they were Carrie Bradshaw, kept their bras on during sex. Bradshaw was a woman so badass she could walk around New York in a frothy white tutu, banging from man to man and discussing the whole thing with her faithful friends: anything-goes Samantha, uptight Charlotte and I-don’t-have-time-for-this Miranda. Sure, Darren Star’s glossy show took a while to find its expensively clad feet. The first season was punctuated by vox pops from random New Yorkers and didn’t yet get to the nitty gritty of female friendship, but by season two it was set in its shiny groove. Samantha was flirty and forthright without having yet morphed into a cartoon vagina on a stick, and the four friends faced horrific situations (a baby shower) and tricky choices (to threesome or not?). It didn’t matter that it wasn’t realistic. SATC was made in a different age, when you could smoke indoors and no one raised a pre-Botoxed eyebrow at Samantha calling people “trannies” or the fact that every regular character was white. For years it remained a lovable and re-runnable romp. That was until Carrie began to really grate. Although later seasons had plenty to love, from Miranda’s complicated reaction to her mother’s death to the post 9/11 expression of love for New York, viewers [adopt Carrie’s inner voice] couldn’t help but wonder if Bradshaw might be too annoying for TV. Her constant ruining of any non-toxic relationships became tiresome, with the ultimate sabotage of cheating on Aidan with Big. And then there was the money thing. The ditsy I-don’t-know-how-much-cash-I-don’t have move culminated in season four’s low point when Carrie admitted she’d spent $40,000 on shoes and had to get the bus. She was useless, seeing everyone around her like walking Link machines. Carrie’s move to Paris bordered on ridiculous and then the show committed two sins: giving each character a happy-ever-after man and paving the way for those terrible movies.