Ole Gunnar Solskjær admitted Manchester United “got away with it” after beating West Ham 2-1 at Old Trafford on Saturday to move into fifth place, two points behind Chelsea in the final Champions League position. The visitors were left feeling unlucky after a series of questionable officiating decisions. First, replays suggested Felipe Anderson had a goal wrongly chalked off for offside – Diogo Dalot playing him on – at 0-0 before Paul Pogba gave United the lead in the 19th minute. That goal came from a penalty whose award was also questionable, as Juan Mata may have gone down outside the penalty area and Robert Snodgrass’s challenge on him may have been fair. After Felipe Anderson equalised on 49 minutes, United’s winner came via Pogba’s second penalty 10 minutes from time, following the Frenchman’s pass into Anthony Martial. Yet Manuel Pellegrini, West Ham’s manager, suggested Marcus Rashford got a touch on the pass and was offside doing so. “The last goal from Man United was offside, the last pass,” he said. “A few mistakes but the decisions went for United. Frustrated, of course, because I think we deserve more. Unfortunately for us there were some decisions, very difficult, so I am not complaining about him. With VAR, I am sure we would win the game 1-0. Felipe Anderson was onside. It was not a penalty from Robert. “I am not complaining about the referee because they were not big mistakes, difficult mistakes, but with technology we have a different score. I always say I prefer to play not so well and win the game but it was a pleasure to see the team play.” Pellegrini complained to the officials in the tunnel at half-time. “First I complain about the goal of Felipe Anderson because someone told me it was one metre onside but it [turned out later] it was not one metre but one centimetre,” he said. “I think if you stop the TV, you review the angle two or three times you can see it but the linesman has just seconds to decide. It is not a big, big mistake.” Solskjær was relieved to win but downbeat. “We got away with it, to put it that way, and got three points. They deserved to get their goals but we’re allowed to have a good goalkeeper,” he said of David de Gea’s save from a late Michail Antonio header.” The manager said that if United were as flat at Barcelona on Tuesday night they would have no chance of overturning a 1-0 deficit in the Champions League quarter-final. “With a performance like this we all know we will struggle in Barcelona, and we will have to improve. We got away with it, got three points, in a few years no one will remember how we played if we finish in the top four. They played better than us, it is fair to say, I don’t think anyone will disagree.”