Marc-André ter Stegen 7 For 89 minutes he was an 11th outfield player – but then he made a beautiful save from Alexis. Sergi Roberto 6 Had a comfortable night against Martial, though missed an easy chance just before half-time. Gerard Piqué 7 Presided over the game like an old don, never really needing to get his knees dirty. Clément Lenglet 6 Struggled at times with the movement and pace of Rashford, but also made some good interceptions. Jordi Alba 9 A shuttle train on the left who combined devastatingly with Messi and Coutinho. Ivan Rakitic 7 A white-collar footballer with a blue-collar attitude. Won an early penalty that was overturned by VAR. Sergio Busquets 9 His positioning was so good that at times it felt like he was man-marking both Lingard and Pogba. Arthur 7 Speaks such fluent tiki-taka that he could have grown up at La Masia rather than in Brazil. Lionel Messi 9 Yet more routine genius. Two early goals settled the game, but the champagne moment was his sadistic tormenting of Jones just before half-time. Luis Suárez 6 Selfless performance summed up by the off-the-ball run that distracted Jones and allowed Messi to score his first goal. Philippe Coutinho 8 Scored a brilliant, trademark curler. His movement from the left was a puzzle United never solved. Substitutes: Nélson Semedo (on for Sergi Roberto, 71 min) 6; Arturo Vidal (on for Arthur, 75 min) 6; Ousmane Dembélé (on for Philippe Coutinho, 81 min), 6 David de Gea 5 An almost surreal error gave Messi his second goal and ended the tie. Victor Lindelöf 5 Played in an unusual role at right-back and was overwhelmed by the blue-and-red arrows on Barcelona’s left. Chris Smalling 6 Messi brought it on and was far too good, though Smalling played pretty well in the circumstances. Phil Jones 7 A quietly heroic defensive performance, although all anyone will remember is Messi turning him into a human corkscrew. Ashley Young 5 Frantic and edgy, with and without the ball. His risible error led to Messi’s first goal. Scott McTominay 5 After his influential performance in the first leg, this was an intravenous injection of reality. Fred 5 A microcosm of his United career: busy, did some good things – and made a very costly mistake. Paul Pogba 5 Started well but spent the rest of the game looking on enviously at how the other half live. Jesse Lingard 4 Not so much a false nine as a really false nine. Couldn’t handle Busquets’ street wisdom. Marcus Rashford 7 His movement and attitude were beyond reproach, but his blood ran too warm in the penalty area. Anthony Martial 5 Another game of illusive promise. Was again unfathomably reluctant to take risks and attack his full-back. Substitutes: Diogo Dalot (on for Martial, 65 min) 7; Romelu Lukaku (on for Marcus Rashford, 73 min) 5; Alexis Sánchez (on for Jesse Lingard, 80 min) 6.