Never marry late in life. You’ll have pockets of inflexibility. You won’t know they are there until you run into someone else’s and have to compromise. That takes ages – time you could have spent on hobbies. But my Mr and I, finally, have reduced all our boundary issues to one. He likes a completely clear kitchen surface. I like to see every worktop heaving with stuff, pickles, equipment, the ingredients for slime, breadboards, trinkets. I want it to look like the kitchen in Ratatouille without the rats. Most of all. I want a soda-maker, one of those hi-tech machines that turns out sparkling water, cola and orangeade – or even fizzy wine. “You know we have an old-fashioned soda siphon and they are better,” my Mr says. But I don’t want a glass of water that tastes of rust and could introduce you to each of its bubbles individually. Soda-makers have made a comeback recently and are prominent in many lists of top kitchen gadgets. It is not clear whether this reflects actual popularity or the wishful world in which you pay an Instagram influencer and whatever they say must be true. The Game of Thrones character the Mountain has been pressed into service for the best-known brand – a surprising choice, given you never see his face in the show. Yet a video campaign – in one, the Mountain holds all the scrunched-up cans he didn’t drink in one hand and a single SodaStream bottle in the other – has had over 50m views. (Can this be right? Don’t young people have arguing to do?) This is not a one-horse race, by the way: if you want to use a brand other than SodaStream because of the boycott by the BDS movement for Palestinian rights, there are other makers such as DrinkMate and Ibama. The machine I got didn’t look the same as the one I remembered from the 80s in my fancy friend’s house. The CO2 canister was still the same, and still strangely sinister, with its warnings upon warnings of all the harm you can do to yourself if you use it, dispose of it or look at it wrongly. But the machine itself was electric, which was surprising – how much electricity does it take to release an amount of CO2 that is under extremely high pressure and desperate to get out on its own? Perhaps I was a tiny bit trepidatious. Maybe I didn’t read the instructions because the writing was too small and just about the only sentence I could make out was: “Always read the instructions.” I shouldn’t have worried. There was really only one hole any given thing could go in and only three buttons any given person could press. And the jeopardy of pressing them all was extremely low, just fizzier water than I was expecting. It came out so carbonated it was still babbling as I poured it into a glass. “Taste that,” I said to my beloved. “Isn’t it the fizziest water you’ve ever had?” “It tastes exactly the same as all other fizzy water,” he said stoically. This is a revolution in self-hydration. I love fizzy water. But I have residual parsimony about drinking it other than on a special occasion (OK, not that special: in a restaurant). I rarely buy it for the house. Now I drink it all day long. I have a Pavlovian reaction to the bubbly noise. I don’t dribble. I just feel good. The syrups you can use to flavour your drinks, I’m a bit less sure about: sugar-free orange isn’t as nice as Orangina, and it turns out that part of the enjoyment of Diet Coke is opening the can. They vary in price pretty wildly and at the more expensive end, it works out at about a quid for a litre, which is more or less what you pay for a supermarket own-brand fizzy drink. (That’s not counting the machine itself, which could easily set you back £100.) I ended up, if I wanted it flavoured, just using old-fashioned squash. I’m somehow managing to miss the point, that hopeful tilt at young people, that social media onslaught: this is an environmental workaround. Disposable bottles of water have been under fire for a while, in the sense that people still drink them but are always careful to be carrying a bottle-for-life when they go anywhere at all fashionable. In an ideal world, we’d stop drinking carbonated drinks altogether in the interests of the planet, but failing that, this is a lot less of everything: of packaging, of waste, of distribution. A whole lot less energy has gone into delivering this sparkling life force into my glass than might otherwise have done. My smugness wrestles with my quenchedness. I leave them to it while I go for a wee. I really have drunk litres and litres of fizzy water.