Sari van Veenendaal 6 The Euro 2017 winner, who has had to share keeping duties this season, has six clean sheets in 10 starts. Pauline Peyraud-Magnin 7 Has been favoured by manager Joe Montemurro. She kept eight clean sheets but played in the 3-0 defeat to Chelsea in the FA Cup and the 2-0 loss to Manchester City. Emma Mitchell 7 Usually played at left-back but also used across the back line as the injuries mounted. Recently returned from a month on the sidelines. A reliable member of Arsenal’s defence. Janni Arnth 7 Arnth was recruited from Swedish side Linköpings in January and the Dane made an instant impact, scoring on her debut in Arsenal’s gruelling 4-2 victory over West Ham. Leah Williamson 9 It is easy to forget the centre-back is only 22 but she has been crucial to maintaining the second-best defensive record in the league. Louise Quinn 7 Like Williamson, one of the few players to have featured in most games this season. Can sometimes be caught off the pace but her physical presence complements Williamson and she has a strong passing game. Tabea Kemme 5 Kemme has played just five games after arriving from German side Turbine Potsdam. Lia Wälti 7 Kim Little’s broken leg and Jordan Nobbs’s season-ending ACL injury could have derailed Arsenal’s strong start, but with Wälti sitting in front of the back four it remained on track. Just how vital she became went a little unnoticed until she picked up a knee injury in late January herself. Dominique Bloodworth 8 Used in both defence and midfield, Bloodworth’s versatility and tough tackling have been vital to Arsenal coping with the numerous injuries throughout the season. Danielle van de Donk 8 The Netherlands international has been a stalwart of the starting XI. One of many to step up to the plate in the absence of Nobbs, chipping in with regular goals (10 in the league) and keeping the front line fluid. Jordan Nobbs 7 The engine of undeniably the most exciting team to watch. Cruelly misses out on the World Cup after suffering an ACL rupture against Everton. Despite not having played since November she is still the fourth-highest scorer in the league with nine goals. Kim Little 9 If Nobbs is the engine, Little is the heartbeat. The Scotland veteran has been vital at controlling the tempo of Arsenal’s forward play and is arguably one of the best midfielders in the world. Victoria Schnaderbeck 4 Has played three games having sat out most of the season with a knee injury she suffered in pre-season. Signed from Bayern Munich in the summer. Katrina Veje 6 Veje joined from Montpellier in January and has made 10 appearances in all competitions. The Dane helped alleviate the injury crisis before a spell on the sidelines herself. Beth Mead 8 Mead has had a coming-of-age season for club and country. Her ‘crot’ (cross or shot?) goals have become a bit of a trademark. She has contributed six goals and 12 assists to Arsenal’s title push and must be fighting her way into Phil Neville’s World Cup starting plans. Lisa Evans 8 Evans has most frequently been used as a right wing-back and her runs have been one of the few constants in Arsenal’s attacking play as she takes advantage of the space created by those ahead of her. Katie McCabe 8 Her versatility has been showcased this season having played both as a full-back and across the midfield as required by the manager. That has not held her back – she has directly contributed to 20 goals, including a vital recent winner against a tricky Birmingham side. Danielle Carter 6 Made an emotional return from an ACL injury that had kept her on the sidelines for 10 months just in time for the title run-in. Vivianne Miedema 10 It is hard to look beyond Miedema for every player of the year accolade. The 22-year-old Dutch international has more than 30 goals in all competitions and when Arsenal have struggled with injury, the forward, constantly relaxed and focused on the task ahead, has continued to provide relief. Also ... It would be remiss to not mention the academy players that were called upon during Arsenal’s injury-plagued season. Paige Bailey-Gayle, Amelia Hazard, Ava Kuyken, Ruby Grant, Ana Albuquerque, Hannah Dawbarn and Melissa Filis all featured, with Grant scoring an impressive hat-trick in the 4-0 defeat of Crawley Wasps in the FA Cup.