If there’s any justice, Fontaines DC’s debut album Dogrel will enter the canon of classic dramatic depictions of Dublin. The city is unalterably embedded in the record’s DNA – it is as quintessentially Dublin as the work of James Joyce was a century ago. “I think a lot of our music sounds, to me, like buses and trains and just hordes of people on particular streets in Dublin,” says frontman Grian Chatten, who is sitting opposite me in the Clarence hotel, flanked by his bandmates Conor Deegan III, Conor Curley, Carlos O’Connell and Tom Coll. The band’s punk licks and brogue-heavy narration present an unvarnished but undeniably romantic version of the city: this is music that sounds like Dublin feels. Chatten’s heavily accented vocals play a part; there are references to specific areas, pubs and landmarks, plus a cast of characters who populate the songs. But there is something more than just portraits. The rough production and rickety rhythms conjure familiar Dublin moods: bustling markets, rain-streaked cobblestones and the rumbling of cold early-morning commerce. “I think of Dublin and our music as one and the same, because it was written by people who were intensely absorbed by the city,” says Chatten. “We were just really consumed by it; it influenced us in just the way street corners looked and how people spoke, and absolutely every aspect of it filtered through.” “There’s a natural rebelliousness to Irish trad music,” says Deegan, the band’s bassist. “That combined with punk feels really natural. I think singing in an Irish accent on top of punk, it just doubles down on that sense.” Chatten’s rugged vocals are key in defining the Fontaines DC sound. In person, he spins the streetwise wisdom of a beatnik balladeer, his conversation delivered in a gripping drawl through a sleepy exterior. This classic frontman allure has helped make Dogrel the most hyped Irish rock debut in years – a quick ascent for a group of twentysomethings whose initial desire was to form a kind of “punk Beatles”. Mercifully, their ambitions evolved. Chatten cites the Pogues and their 1984 debut album Red Roses for Me as one of their chief inspirations. “The spirit of it, the carnage of it,” he gushes. “It sounds so raucous but at the same time so intelligent.” Fontaines DC’s album has a live, unproduced feel. “You want it to sound raw, maybe full of mistakes, at its most potent, which is like a living thing,” Chatten says. “The very act of letting it go in the natural form, that it is really very much aligned with our principles as artists: accepting the first way that you phrase something has truth.” The opening track from Dogrel features the lyrics, “Dublin in the rain is mine / A pregnant city with a catholic mind,” bellows Chatten. “My childhood was small but I’m gonna be big,” seemingly willing his fame into existence. Yet according to the writer himself, he’s playing a role. “The ambition that character has is more of a sickness and a product of capitalism,” he says. “His own background he feels is inferior in the context of other people’s backgrounds. So it’s almost sarcastic for us.” This very Irish album arrives at a time when Anglo-Irish relations are as strained as they have been in years, with Brexit negotiations pitting the nations in opposite corners. “The only thing that concerns me about that is the state of Northern Ireland,” says Deegan. “I don’t really care what Britain does. That’s kind of the whole point of forming a republic in the first place.” “You can definitely feel the growing Anglophobia,” says Chatten. This idea is probed on the song Boys in the Better Land, where a taxi driver from a multicultural background asserts his own sense of Irishness by smoking Carrolls cigarettes and yelling: “Brits out!” “He has suddenly found a bit of meaning in considering himself to be Irish and Anglophobic or anti-British,” explains Chatten. “It’s just to show how flippant these things are and how much they are based on ego and wanting to feel part of something, as opposed to a genuine hatred of something else.” There’s a natural rebelliousness to Irish trad music – that combined with punk feels really natural The album ends with Dublin City Sky, a lament to the end of a toxic relationship and the fracturing of the city’s bohemian character under the weight of capitalism and gentrification. “It feels very important to explore the dying culture that’s being murdered by gentrification,” Chatten says. “It’s casting a shadow on what we love about the city and that gives us the impetus to write about what’s in that shadow.” Deegan adds: “The increase of tech companies here, all of the capitalist stuff going on in Dublin right now, the focus on money over quality of life or art, is why gentrification is a given now. I think romantic Ireland is dead and gone.” “It’s with O’Leary in the grave,” shouts Chatten to laughter, completing the quote from WB Yeats’s poem September 1913. According to Deegan, though: “We do our best to try to keep it going.” Bitch Falcon The Dublin trio’s uncompromising grunge throttles with titanic power, with singer/guitarist Lizzie Fitzpatrick’s voice ringing with an operatic gloaming. Bouts Their recent debut album Flow sees the band shape a tuneful indie-pop sound, all smooth chord progressions and catchy hooks. Just Mustard The heavy atmospherics and stifling textures of the Dundalk group’s strong first album Wednesday make being young sound like chaos and disorder. Pillow Queens Catchy guitar licks and regional articulation punctuate the Dublin band’s furious, fun and totally distinct punk sound. PowPig This emerging young Limerick four-piece make lo-fi, pop-focused garage rock tunes with an enjoyably sardonic sense of humour.