A professional dancer who has painted his 95-year-old grandmother as “an example of strength, dignity and authority” is one of four artists shortlisted for the art world’s most prestigious portrait prize. The National Portrait Gallery, organisers of the BP portrait award, has revealed the names and portraits of the artists who will this year compete for the £35,000 prize. They were selected from 2,538 entries from 84 countries, and all four have been shortlisted for the first time. Three of the artists have entered for the first time. The exception is Massimiliano Pironti, who was also selected last year. Pironti, was born in Colleferro, Italy, and taught himself oil painting as a teenager before going to art school. He began to dance professionally aged 16 and has carved out a successful career in musical theatre, including in a long-running production of the Disney musical Tarzan in Germany. His portrait, Quo Vadis?, depicts his maternal grandmother, Vincenza, in her kitchen. He made sketches and took photographs at her home in Gavignano, Italy, before returning to his studio in Germany for the painting process. “My grandmother is an example of strength, dignity and authority,” he said. “Every wrinkle tells her story and I wanted to capture her image to freeze time. This portrait is truly important to me. It touches emotional cords.” Brighton-born Emma Hopkins is nominated for a portrait of her friend Sophie, and her dog Carla. Hopkins is a self-taught artist and first exhibited her work in a staff show at Chelsea Arts Club while working behind the bar. She is now a member of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters. Her degree was in makeup and prosthetics for performance, skills that feed into her paintings, which are mostly nude portraits and studies of the body. “I want to understand as much as I can about what it means to be human,” she said. “We are not just the clothed person we present to the world. We are the mind and body that we inhabit.” Charlie Schaffer, from London, is shortlisted for Imara in her Winter Coat, a depiction of a close friend he first met after moving to Brighton. Sittings took place over four months and she wore the coat because the studio was cold. Schaffer said he set out to paint only the face, but added the coat after being inspired by Titian’s Portrait of Girolamo Fracastoro at the National Gallery. The fourth artist is Carl-Martin Sandvold, who trained in Florence and New York but whose practice began making street art in Oslo during his teenage years. He is shortlisted for The Crown, a self-portrait reflecting his fascination with “the strangeness of being alive”. The winner, who will also receive a commission worth £7,000, will be announced on 10 June. The portrait prize exhibition will run from 13 June to 20 October.