I am what is known in sophisticated circles as a lazy sod. I am rarely happier than when I’m PJ’d and sofa-stretched, thumbing through a good book or weeping at Queer Eye. For a metric of my sloth, I have a long and chequered history of paying fit people to make bits of me stop jiggling. This is the story of how I learned that, if I wanted to do all the things that are most important to me, I could never expect to achieve Beyoncé’s thighs, and also how extrinsic motivation (ie an impossibly toned person cheering: “You can do it – you love the burn,” while you heave out your joy into a puddle of blotches) only gets you so far. I was 15 when I got a personal trainer for the first time. It’s unclear to me whether it was my record label that wanted me to lose weight, or my mother. More likely, I’m just using them as an excuse and it was me all along. Anyway, I somehow ended up with Jacob, a 5ft 9in rake in his late 20s, whom I paid to tell me to jog round the park. The arrangement didn’t last. I had, shortly before this, started smoking as a life choice, and jogging was getting in the way of that. Also, I didn’t fancy him. Perhaps if Jacob had been more my kind of fit, I would now have Beyoncé’s thighs – but, much as I would like to, I can’t very well blame him for that. When I got pregnant for the first time, my then partner’s mother decided that “eating for two” meant two pandas, and proceeded to feed me as if I was a Mongol khan. It turns out that you only need 200 extra calories a day in the third trimester – which is, like, a little bit of cheese. God knows how much needless fuel I was gorging on throughout those two pregnancies. Heartache, my darlings, is the only thing that ever got me “svelte” (to use the Fleet Street vernacular). You can’t buy that, and I don’t recommend it. Supporting the idea that exercise has bugger-all to do with weight loss, I could barely stand up at the time, let alone squat thrust. I was really quite ill, but the papers were delighted. It was at that point that I saw in stark reality the pervasive evil that is society’s perfect body-image neurosis: that I could be evidently unwell yet praised as an example to follow. Luckily, I was soon happy in love again and plumping up nicely. But, goddammit, if in the unheard darklands of the night my supposedly content mind wouldn’t fantasise about those Beyoncé thighs. I would construct a Frankenstein’s lady out of celebrity doll parts and sleeplessly scheme on how they could be my parts, arriving at some frankly bizarre conclusions. Hands down, the oddest exercise to which I ever committed serious energy was called Kangoo. Designed for those of us with knackered knees (rugby tackle, snow), it essentially involved this very energetic young man with jumping shoes turning up at my house at 6am and leading me in an exercise that resembled less the graceful gambol of a kangaroo and more a pissed-up Tigger. It was fun, but my living room ceiling is far too low to be operating mechanical spring hooves beneath, and my inner risk-assessment system deigned it “all a bit much”. Plus, the Kangoo guy was really very chipper, and it was six in the morning. Boxing makes me aggressive. Krav maga makes me cry. After two sessions of shaolin kung fu, I thought I would never walk again. But then along came Tamsin, my lovely yoga friend, who helped me begin to realise that I needed to make an emotional connection between my mind and body, beyond the aesthetic understanding that exercise makes you fit (and therefore sexy, obvs). I’ve got hypermobility syndrome, which means that yoga stretches are easy for me to get into, but not great for me in the long run. However, that recalibration of the object of my expectations, from thigh firmness to overall strength of being, was a deeply important lesson. At a kids’ birthday party a couple of years ago, my friend Kerry, whom I’ve been close to for more than a decade, said she’d help me get in shape. By that point, the only exercise I was getting was on stage performing with the Late Night Pop Dungeon (which would usually be undone as soon as I got off the stage), so Kerry – whose whole bag is applying multiple disciplines of personal training, massage therapy and “energy medicines” such as qigong and reiki in a holistic and bespoke way – was a dream come true. Whether it was high-intensity interval training or advanced breathing techniques, every session I had with her was different and exciting. To this day, I still see her once a fortnight to check in on my physique. But I have changed. I no longer need someone to force me to exercise. Of course, Beyoncé’s thighs would be nice, but I have different goals now. I can’t believe I’m saying this, but being strong is more important than looking sexy. I’ve got an underwater MP3 player and intrinsic motivation to maintain my own fitness. Honestly, I’ve got the best routine I’ve ever had. With gym-and-swim a couple of mornings a week and Kerry once a fortnight, I can look forward to a happy, healthy and sort of jiggly future.