Emma Hayes had warned in midweek that Chelsea “always score an away goal” and, after a second own goal in a week for Magda Eriksson and an Amandine Henry header for Lyon looked to have ended the Blues’ hopes of a huge upset, Erin Cuthbert struck. The Scottish forward’s stunning second-half volley ensured they welcome the Champions League holders, Lyon, to Kingsmeadow next week with a vital away goal in their pockets. With Fran Kirby having seen her tame penalty saved by Sarah Bouhaddi on the stroke of half-time, and the French goalkeeper smartly blocking Maren Mjelde at close range – the Norwegian beating the usually reliable Wendie Renard before shooting – it seemed the visiting team had let one chance too many slip through their fingers. Hayes spoke of “fighting fires” against Paris Saint-Germain and at the Groupama Stadium that quickly became her task. Sophie Ingle and a mixture of Ji So-yun, Karen Carney and Cuthbert all took turns dropping deep to help protect the back four against the “Harlem Globetrotters of women’s football”. And, initially at least, the dam held. But the warning signs where there. After only three minutes Delphine Cascarino flew past Joanna Andersson on the right but her sweeping cross was a little ahead of Eugénie Le Sommer. Perhaps hoping to unsettle goalkeeper Ann-Katrin Berger, who spilled the ball across the line in the second leg of Chelsea’s quarter-final win against PSG, Jess Fishlock had a go from distance but it did not have enough power behind it to trouble the German. Chelsea’s first chance came just inside 10 minutes, Cuthbert shrugged off Fishlock and looked to free Kirby but her pass was intercepted. With Hayes pacing on the edge of her box Lyon upped the pressure. Lucy Bronze raced clear of Carney and into the box, without looking up, she squared to Ada Hegerberg but the Ballon d’Or winner’s first-time shot from close range was brilliantly kept out by a diving Berger. Ramona Bachmann was then released down the right, but her teasing cross was backheeled away by Renard with a casual ease. It was just shy of the half-hour mark when the dam broke, and how cruelly it did. Cascarino raced into the box and her shot was lifted over Berger by the heel of Eriksson, whose 91st-minute own goal last weekend sent Chelsea crashing out of the FA Cup semi-final against Manchester City. With Le Sommer throwing her arms up and down to encourage the crowd after getting the better of Millie Bright and winning a corner, there was no let up. A Dzsenifer Marozsán corner got a sliver of a touch from the leaping Henry before flying past Berger to bounce on the line and in. Chelsea instantly had the chance to reply, Bachmann’s cross finding Carney who slipped past Bouhaddi but her shot was blocked by a recovering defender. On the stroke of half-time Chelsea again had a gilt-edged moment to get a desperately needed away goal when they were awarded a penalty after Le Sommer tripped Bachmann just inside the box on the left. Kirby stepped up – and stuttered her run – but her tame shot was palmed away by Bouhaddi. Just two minutes after the restart and again the Blues should have scored. Mjelde found herself on the end of a long pass before beating both Selma Bacha and Renard but, again, Bouhaddi made the save, this time with her feet. From there it was all Lyon. Hegerberg fired wide before Berger dealt well with efforts from Le Sommer and Renard. But the introduction of Beth England had an immediate impact, back to goal, she headed the ball powerfully down at the feet of Cuthbert, who fired delightfully past Bouhaddi. Arsenal moved within a victory of the Women’s Super League title with a 2-1 victory against Everton at Meadow Park on Sunday. They took full advantage of their game in hand on second-placed Manchester City, moving four points clear at the top with two matches remaining. Louise Quinn and Vivianne Miedema put Arsenal in control before Chantelle Boye-Hlorkah reduced Everton’s deficit.