Arsenal were crowned WSL champions with a game to spare after beating Brighton 4-0 in front of a record 5,265 crowd at the Amex. Arsenal flew out of the traps this season and have not relented, although they have had to overcome a few challenges, not least only being able to name three substitutes in their first game of the campaign and losing Jordan Nobbs to a cruciate ligament injury. Vivianne Miedema was named the PFA Player of the Year on Sunday night and I think the key to it all has been keeping her fit, which didn’t happen last season. She had a few problems that kept niggling at her and she certainly didn’t play as much, but her being in the team and making sure there’s been someone to feed her has been crucial. Having Danielle van de Donk there makes them reminiscent of the Netherlands side that won Euro 2017, supplemented by Beth Mead, who has really come to prominence this season. • Match report: Brighton 0-4 Arsenal Stop what you're doing and watch this 😳Look at the power on this strike from @VivianneMiedema 💥@ArsenalWFC are on course for the #FAWSL title! pic.twitter.com/MzOHlFngGx An early goal from Eugénie Le Sommer dampened Chelsea’s hopes of overturning the first leg result in their Champions League semi-final against Lyon, and despite Ji So-yun’s stunning free-kick to level things on the day, the reigning champions were too much and Chelsea lost 3-2 on aggregate. But they have made progress this season. Yes, they haven’t won anything and are currently fourth in the WSL, but the way Emma Hayes has been able to deal with the congested fixture list has been exceptional. The strength of their squad is second to none, and the way she has shifted her team around – both rotated her team to keep players fresh and also adapted her tactics to suit some opponents - has been very successful. It’s not too unexpected to lose to Lyon, and by fine margins too, given how successful they’ve been in the Champions League. They’ve made a step in the right direction in terms of wanting to become almost like the men’s Manchester City side: I can see them targeting all three trophies next season and I think how they’ve dealt with this season will help that. • Match report: Chelsea 1-1 Lyon (2-3 on agg) Manchester City conceding in the first minute to Yeovil this weekend just shows how they haven’t been quite on it mentally this season. They won eventually but that sort of thing usually points to a lack of concentration, against a team that have lost 15 of their 18 games so far and have been like shooting practice for a lot of sides. City have just been wasteful, and against the better teams that’s not been good enough this season. I don’t for a minute believe it’s a lack of quality - Nikita Parris has had a stunning season and was probably the biggest rival to Miedema for the player of the year - but they’ve just lost some confidence and conviction. They have had the same core group of players for a long time, which can have a lot of advantages, but when that’s not getting the results, is it time for things to change? Do they need a bit of a shake-up in the summer? The methods and tactics have been the same ever since they were introduced to the WSL but it’s become less effective as other sides have improved. • Nikita Parris and Raheem Sterling voted FWA Footballers of the Year Play it around, wait for your opportunity... then STRIKE!Fantastic direction on this header from Lauren Hemp ⚽️#FAWSL @ManCityWomen pic.twitter.com/dy4LMFiATE Birmingham beat Liverpool 2-0 and have finished the season strongly under Marta Tejedor, who replaced Marc Skinner after he left midway through the season. The players have made sure a change of manager during the season hasn’t been disruptive, and Tejedor has built on the excellent work Skinner did, giving a team that were often stubborn and defensively-minded more attacking flair. They were always so difficult to break down, but they used the opportunity of Skinner leaving to build on those foundations and bring in more of a license to open up a bit, and add another dimension. They may finish third this season, but it will be interesting to see what they view as the difference between them and the likes of Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester City, and whether they have the resources to be able to bridge it. They’re such a consistent team with a lot of young talent, and you feel they might not want to rock the boat and bring in a ‘superstar’: they have Ellen White, but their strength is being such an efficient team that doesn’t really have standout players. Chaney Boye-Hlorkah is emerging as the shining light in a rather dismal season for Everton, who collected just their third win of the campaign by beating Reading 3-2. They are currently second-bottom but at the start of the season might have aspired to at least mid-table, maybe even where Birmingham are now. They’ve just been so inconsistent – they lost twice to rock-bottom Yeovil, and their end of season autopsy will be interesting. Is Willie Kirk the right man for the job? I’m not completely convinced. They need to have someone in with a vision and a long-term strategy that matches the ambitions of the football club. They just don’t feel particularly organised on the pitch, right from the front to the back. I feel Kirk should be getting more out of this team, but maybe these last few weeks have shown he is getting there. BT Sport has coverage of women’s football all season. Watch Arsenal v Man City in the WSL on 11 May, and, the SSE Women’s FA Cup final on 4 May.