“One of the things with people is they’re always watching. They’re watching to see ‘have you got what it takes to be a leader? Can you make the hard decisions? Can you make the tough calls?’ And I think I can.” Talking to Johanna Wood, the recently-elected first woman president of New Zealand Football, you quickly learn that she is used to defying expectations in male environments. “My background is in education,” she says. “When I was appointed principal of a co-ed high school it wasn’t common for women. My husband and I are farmers, so people often wouldn’t speak to me on the telephone because I’m a woman. “It’s not that long ago, when you start putting it into perspective. And I grew up in an era in which we were told that ‘girls could do anything’. That they’re expecting an audience of one billion with the coming World Cup, there’s lots happening. It just feels that this is the right time for women.” The right time indeed. Recent months have seen the profile and popularity of the women’s game explode. New Zealand was gripped by the exploits of the Under-17 team at the end of last year, when they won World Cup bronze in Uruguay to make them the country’s most successful football team of any age group or gender. The winning penalty in their quarter final shootout win was publicly voted as the country’s favourite sporting moment of 2018. Walk past any large gathering of kids and count the football shirts on display – they vastly outnumber those of any other sport. Football is very much capturing New Zealand’s hearts, possibly by stealth. As Wood puts it, “We’ve got to get people to realise that football is our biggest sport in New Zealand, not rugby.” In New Zealand there has been a concerted effort to increase the presence of women in sports governance; a government target has been set to see 40% of boards made up of women by 2020. Presently, the only other governing body of a major sport in New Zealand led by a woman is New Zealand Cricket. While acknowledging there is still some way to go before these targets are met by NZF, Wood says that “to have someone who is female and in the role of president says that we’re actually taking these quite seriously”. “As you have a rotating executive, with people coming on and coming off, you have to look at the skillsets, but also the diversity in gender, as well as other diversities.” Wood’s election to the helm of NZF comes at a time when, in addition to the heightened visibility of women’s football around the world for events on the pitch, national governing bodies have also tended to make headlines for all the wrong reasons. NZF is perhaps more acutely aware than most of how vital it is to have effective governance and diversity, after being subject to an extensive review in 2018 into the national women’s team, the Football Ferns, and the organisation’s culture. But this isn’t a situation isolated to New Zealand, with an allegedly “toxic team culture” contributing to the sacking of Australia’s head coach Alen Stacjic, and, just last month the US women’s national team announced it was suing US Soccer for “institutionalised gender discrimination”. “If you think about what happened with the Ferns last year,” says Wood, “we’re just a little bit ahead of the game in that way, we’ve identified it a little bit earlier, and started to work and deal with the issues, whereas some of the other countries are just coming on board with some of the same issues.” While the recommendations have been swiftly addressed by NZF in the months since the review, Wood emphasises that change is ongoing and not simply a ‘tick box’ exercise. “One of the things that I’ve been quite vocal about around the table is that, because a number of those recommendations relate to culture, you cannot say ‘I’ve ticked the box it’s all done’,” she says. “We need to continually ‘sense test’. Are we still doing what we said we were doing as a result of the Muir Report? So we have to have processes in place to review that we are, and I’m using an education term here, ‘continually improving’.” Wood’s forthrightness and willingness to engage in questions and conversation about the game is clearly a hallmark of her leadership style, which marked her entry into football governance over a decade ago when she joined the board of Central Football Federation. “I remember going to a meeting and I asked some pretty pointed questions of NZF at that time, back in probably 2005, and so I got shoulder tapped by the [Central] chair at the time. We shouldn’t be afraid of questions, we shouldn’t have that default system which says ‘oh they’re asking questions of me, well they’ve got it wrong, so I’m going to tell them that’.” Increasing the presence of women in decision-making capacities in turn helps to challenge what the game looks like. Wood points to the fact that NZF has a requirement for a women’s football committee “to keep a watching brief over all things to do with women’s football”. While at this point in time the committee is necessary, she notes that success will come when such committees aren’t needed, and when high performance sport, irrespective of whether the athletes are male or female, is seen as the pinnacle. “I had an interesting experience with our accountant the other day, talking about my roles, talking about about going to the Women’s World Cup, because we’ve got the Fifa congress at the same time. And then he said ‘Oh, so what are you going to do when you go to the real World Cup?’” “I just said, ‘Excuse me?’. So that’s the mental shift we’ve got to get within our country really. Maybe if there are more women around the sporting governance boards, then we will get rid of that ‘them and us’ sort of culture. But it will take a lot of work.”