Hundreds of neo-fascists, far-right activists and local residents took to the streets of a Rome suburb on Tuesday in a violent protest against 70 Roma people, including 33 children and 22 women, who were to be temporarily transferred to a reception centre in the area. Demonstrators set fire to cars and bins, destroyed food that was meant for Roma and prevented their entry into a shelter for vulnerable people. The protesters also included members of the neo-fascist  CasaPound party and the far-right Forza Nuova, who finally forced the municipality of Rome to transfer the Roma women and children to another neighbourhood. Prosecutors are opening an investigation into the violent protests, according to reports, and whether criminal damage and threats with racial hatred an aggravating factor were committed The protests started on Tuesday afternoon when the municipality announced that a bus would transfer 70 Roma to a reception centre in Torre Maura, a suburb to the east of the capital. Within a few hours, about 300 protesters gathered in front of the entrance of the building, setting fire to cars and bins. In the afternoon, Forza Nuova said in a statement: “We are ready to raise black flags and the Italian flag against the invasion and ethnic substitution.” The protesters then stormed a van containing sandwiches and water destined for Roma and destroyed the food. In a video published by the newspaper la Repubblica, protesters are seen trampling on food, while someone shouts: “They must die of hunger.” On Wednesday, the Five Star Movement-run municipality of Rome ruled by the populists of the Five Star Movement, surrendered to the protests and informed the press it had decided to relocate the Roma in another area. “We have all lost,” Roberto Romanella, a representative of the municipality of Rome in Torre Maura, told the media. Giuseppe Di Silvestre, the leader of CasaPound, speaking for the extreme right protesters, said to La Republica, “For us, the municipality’s decision is a great victory. If they do not keep their word, we will return to the streets with the citizens.” In June last year, the far-right interior minister Matteo Salvini vowed to turn “words into action” in his drive to root out and expel thousands of nomadic Roma from Italy, as he shrugged off critics who said he was adopting illegal policies reminiscent of the country’s fascist past. Salvini had called for a new census of Roma and for all non-Italian Roma to be expelled from the country. The following month, in July, police in Rome cleared nearly 400 people, including dozens of children, from the River Roma camp in the capital inhabited for years by members of the minority Roma community, despite an EU court ruling halting demolition. Last February, Italy’s intelligence agency had warned in a briefing to the country’s parliament that attacks on migrants and minorities could rise in the run up to May’s European elections. The number of racially motivated attacks have risen sharply in Italy, tripling between 2017 and 2018, when the far-right League entered government in coalition with the anti-establishment Five Star Movement. The report from the security intelligence department, which coordinates and submits information collected by the Italian secret services to the prime minister, said racism and xenophobia were among the threats the country could face in 2019. It said there was “a real risk of an increase in episodes of intolerance towards foreigners”.