Danny Rose has called on the Tottenham hierarchy to ensure Christian Eriksen remains at the club next season and for many more thereafter, describing the midfielder as fundamental to how the team functions. Eriksen is out of contract in June 2020 and there has been no suggestion he is close to agreeing fresh terms. Mauricio Pochettino said on Tuesday that there would be plenty of opportunity after the end of the season to discuss a new deal and that Eriksen’s situation is “special”. The manager said: “The timing for him or for the club to be agreeing something is maybe different to another player.” But the reality is that the situation is fast approaching crunch time because, with stadium debts to repay, the club can ill afford to allow a player as gifted as Eriksen to leave as a free agent. Daniel Levy, the chairman, has let it be known the 27-year-old Dane would cost £130m, which sounds fanciful but, then again, this is Levy and, moreover, it offers an indication of how the battle lines are being drawn. Real Madrid have been mentioned among Eriksen’s suitors. Rose correctly highlighted the fact that no player had made more Spurs appearances under Pochettino than Eriksen and the left-back did not mince his words about the importance of his teammate. “It’s obviously vital [that Eriksen re-signs],” the full-back said. “If you look over the five years that the manager’s been here, Christian has played the most games and that says a lot. When Christian doesn’t play, there are questions that we don’t look the same. He links everything up for us. The lads in the changing room trust the people upstairs to hopefully get him to sign.” Rose did not mention money but it is plain that the level of Spurs’s offer will be a deciding factor. Equally obvious is that Rose would like the club to make Eriksen an offer he cannot refuse, as they look to build on their recent on-field progress. Spurs sit third in the Premier League and are in the Champions League semi-finals, where they face Eriksen’s previous club, Ajax. “We have every possible foundation at the club – the training ground, the stadium now, the fanbase, the players,” Rose said. “But it’s not just the foundations that attract players and make players want to stay. It’s out of the players’ control. We just have to trust that the people upstairs are going to do whatever they see fit to help us make that next step. We know that our manager is a winner. He demands the best from us and he wants to win something, as well. So while everybody is on the same page, we can just look forward to next season and see what it brings.” Eriksen scored the only goal of the 1-0 home victory against Brighton on Tuesday in the 88th minute – his third late winner of the season, following those in the home fixtures against Internazionale in the Champions League and Burnley in the league. Spurs have won eight matches in total this season with goals in or after the 80th minute. “Once upon a time it might have been surprising for Tottenham to keep fighting, keep going and never know when they are beaten, but I wasn’t surprised against Brighton,” Rose added. “We’ve done it quite a few times this season.” Spurs will face a well-rested Ajax team in the home first leg next Tuesday, after the Dutch Football Association chose not only to postpone their game against De Graafschap on Sunday but also the entire Eredivisie weekend programme. Spurs entertain West Ham on Saturday lunchtime. “I couldn’t believe it when I heard that’s what the Dutch were doing,” Rose said. “It would be nice if the people in England took a similar stance and helped us out because ultimately it’s not Tottenham against Ajax. We’re England. And we want to bring the Champions League to England.”