Bridie Monds-Watson, known as Soak – a phonetic portmanteau of “soul” and “folk” – is a Northern Irish singer born in 1996. She was longlisted for the BBC Sound of 2015, and later that year released her debut album Before We Forgot How to Dream. It was nominated for the Mercury prize and won the RTÉ Choice Music prize. Her second album, Grim Town, is released on 26 April via Rough Trade; she tours from Liverpool (3 May) to Dublin (30 May). New York Times Popcast This does what it says on the tin: it’s a podcast about pop culture. There was one episode about the Ryan Adams allegations, and they brought in two people who wrote the huge New York Times article about him recently. There was one on Michael Jackson, and one about the Fyre festival. It’s a really thorough almost lecture on certain topics by experts, and you feel very educated – you don’t have any questions by the end. I run quite a lot, so I listen to this while I run. I like that it makes me feel like I know things. Reasons to Stay Alive, by Matt Haig I’m dyslexic, so to read for me feels like a chore, but I read this book in a day. Matt Haig had a breakdown in his 20s, and the book is about his journey from there to coming to terms with it. He talks about his own struggle, while also giving factual information about anxiety and depression and statistics. He has a beautiful way with words and is honest about his vulnerability. The whole book made me feel really understood – I just wanted to buy 50 copies and have them on hand, to give to people going through hard times. Beautiful Boy (dir Felix van Groeningen, 2018) This is about a family in which the child is a heroin addict. I watched it on a plane recently – I don’t cry in public usually, but I just couldn’t help it with this movie. It’s devastating. The acting by Steve Carell and Timothée Chalamet is unbelievable. It’s hard to look away when Chalamet is acting – everything he feels transfers so accurately to you. What I thought was so amazing was how the movie finds a way of making you almost a family member, in the way you feel denial over the situation too. The Office (US) There’s nothing more comforting to me than watching this show. Recently I’ve been doing a lot of travelling and I’ve been proper binge-watching it on Netflix over in America. I don’t know if I chose it also because of Steve Carell – it could have been subconscious – but there’s nothing comparable to his character, Michael Scott, in terms of unpredictability. There’s an episode in which he turns into Hannibal Lecter: he’s in a swivel chair with ham on his face, and really weirdly saying “Clarice”. It’s the funniest thing I’ve ever seen. SSAM, Berlin I have always loved Korean barbecue since I was introduced to it. I was in Berlin last month with my girlfriend, so we went to this place. You get a big tray of meat and some sort of fire grill in front of you – you do all of the work for yourself, basically. They tell you what to do and you get instructions, but you’re typically too excited to be looking at them. So if it looks right, it’s ready, that’s my rule. There’s something so fun about the really long, drawn-out process of eating that drags it out to be a three-hour thing. It feels worthwhile, money-wise. The Japanese House I went to see the Japanese House at Manchester Academy with a couple of friends the other week. I’ve always been a big fan and her new album Good at Falling is incredible: it’s a really honest collection of songs. Right now my favourite song on the album is Lilo – it’s a bit of a heart-hurter, but it’s really good. Also, they sell Red Stripe at the venue, and because I’m Irish and we don’t ever have Red Stripe at any of our bars in Ireland it still feels like a novelty to buy that at gigs.