Like many 11-year-olds, Shakira Rahman enjoys gymnastics and singing. But what sets her apart from her peers is she is also the mini-CEO of an international charity. Shakira, who is still at primary school, was recently appointed as “kid boss” of Penny Appeal after the charity’s founder and chair, Adeem Younis, was bowled over by her youthful enthusiasm and idealism. After teaching her new colleagues how to make slime at her first company meeting – “wonderful team building,” said Younis – it was down to serious business. She has travelled to the Gambia to visit an orphanage built by the charity and interviewed the Tory peer Sayeeda Warsi and the Labour MP Naz Shah. Dressed for business in a suit and tie at the West Yorkshire-based charity’s London office, Shakira told the Guardian: “It’s really cool, it’s an amazing opportunity that I have been given. It’s really fun, I’ve never done these kind of things, like meeting and speaking to famous people. I think you should just be into charity and be aware of what’s happening in the world. My mum and dad always encouraged me to give.” Her appointment was partly a response to the Charity Commission warning that without young people as trustees – 18-24-year-olds made up just 0.5% of trustees in England and Wales in 2010 – charity boards risk lacking diversity and being unrepresentative of their beneficiaries. But both Shakira and Younis are adamant that she is not just there as a PR exercise. “It’s about knowing you’re helping people, not just doing it for the attention,” said Shakira. “They [the other Penny Appeal staff] really do listen to me, I feel important, like the boss.” With a broad grin, the schoolgirl from Walthamstow, north-east London, added: “I’m taking over from Adeem.” She confidently rattled off a list of topics she wants to address, including poverty, body image and bullying, describing the latter as “the biggest thing [of concern] in schools”. Asked how she fits in her responsibilities at Penny Appeal with everything else in a busy 11-year-old’s life, Shakira gave an answer befitting the CEO of a charity that raised £24.5m in 2017-18. “I like to do my homework as soon as I get it, I like to be organised,” she said. Younis first met Shakira at Penny Appeal’s Islamic pantomime and thought she was a perfect fit for the Muslim charity, given a lot of its activities, abroad and in the UK, relate to children. He said he had been so impressed by her impact that he was planning to employ a whole board of children. “When I first started Penny Appeal 10 years go, I was in my mid-20s,” Younis said. “Shakira brings to the table things which we had back then, the idea that we were going to change the world: the corny, cheesy things. Over time you become a bit cynical because of the real-world obstacles. Meeting Shakira, she wants to change the world and help people, she’s got that positive can-do attitude. It’s a real role that we believe will make a genuine difference to the charity and the campaigns we run.” If Shakira is very much the boss in the office, her parents still rule the roost at home – although she is working on that, using the perks of the job. “When I’m in the house they’re still the boss,” she said. “But all I’ve got to say to my dad if he’s rude to me or annoys me, is: ‘You get no merch from Penny Appeal,’ and then he listens to me.”