There was nothing imperious about it but Altior won the Celebration Chase for the third time, setting a world record for consecutive wins by a jumps racehorse at 19. To have gone unbeaten through four complete seasons is an astonishing achievement, bearing in mind that most jumpers have a hard time staying sound enough to compete for that long. Two enormous leaps graced this performance, one of them at the open ditch in front of the stands, where he has a known tendency to show off. But there were also things to worry about, as he jumped markedly to the left through the final mile and required stern driving at the turn for home. Briefly it seemed that this might become a contest, given how smoothly Sceau Royal was cruising along a couple of strides behind. But Alan King’s challenger walked into the second-last, ending any chance he might have had and allowing Altior to win by just over two lengths. “He’s very good at telling you things,” Nicky Henderson said. “He told you one thing today: ‘Go further!’” How much further, the trainer was asked. “There’s not really much point in doing it, just to switch him to the Ryanair. So you’ve got to go King George.” That sound you hear is Michael O’Leary grinding his teeth on behalf of the slighted Ryanair. Henderson’s comment is the more interesting for its suggestion that the Gold Cup might feature in Altior’s next campaign, although it would be no surprise if the horse was back at two miles by the time of the Cheltenham Festival. In the meantime he is 3-1 favourite for the King George at Kempton on Boxing Day, half the price of Cyrname, who is next in the betting. The pair could meet in their prep race, since Ascot’s 1965 Chase in November is being considered for both. The planned step up in distance will reduce the threat posed by the flat spot Altior always hits at a late stage in his races. Perhaps it will stop him jumping to the left, if the pressure to race at speed has been contributing to that problem. Can such an exuberant racer sustain his effort for an extra mile in a top-class contest? “He’ll switch off,” Henderson said. “That’s going to be the beauty of it. He’s no tearaway. Nico [de Boinville] said he was having to boot him the whole way today.” Almost as popular was the comeback success achieved by Bryony Frost, whose first ride back from a broken collar bone was aboard Black Corton, an easy winner of the Oaksey Chase. Frost stepped straight back into the job, delivering an excellent ride followed by her usual idiosyncratic reflections: “I gave him a little breather before we turned in and said, ‘Blackie, it’s a long way up this hill but we’ve got to go, sunshine.’ ” Anyone tempted to pity Frost for her enforced absence should know that she spent most of the time with friends in Antigua, though it seems to have been a working holiday. Her routine each day was to run along the beach, swim back for half a mile across the bay, then do it again, then hit the gym. Black Corton was one of two winners on the season’s final day for Paul Nicholls, champion trainer for the 11th time. It is easy to imagine him getting the four more titles he needs to match the record set by Martin Pipe. Salisbury 2.00 Love Love 2.30 Real Smooth 3.00 Songkran 3.35 Htilom inlo (nb) 4.05 Isolate 4.40 Quloob 5.10 Strict Tempo (nap) 5.40 Letmestopyouthere Wetherby 2.15 Regular 2.45 King Shamardal 3.20 Fanny Logan 3.50 Warning Fire 4.25 Velvet Vista 4.55 Twin Appeal 5.25 George Ridsdale 5.55 Hic Bibi