A 29-year-old woman has died after shots were fired in Londonderry, with police in Northern Ireland treating the death as a “terrorist incident”. Police have launched a murder inquiry after the death in the Creggan area of the city amid unrest on Thursday evening. Petrol bombs were thrown and images from the scene show vehicles alight and others burnt out. Assistant chief constable Mark Hamilton, from the Police Service of Northern Ireland, said a murder inquiry had been launched. He said: “Sadly I can confirm that following shots being fired tonight in Creggan, a 29-year-old woman has been killed. We are treating this as a terrorist incident and we have launched a murder inquiry.” The Northern Ireland Policing Board said the killing was “utterly shocking” and appealed for witnesses or anyone with information to contact the police or Crimestoppers. The unrest comes ahead of the Easter weekend where republicans mark the anniversary of the 1916 Easter Rising and a time when dissidents are traditionally active. The Sinn Fein deputy leader Michelle O’Neill said the killing in Derry was a “senseless loss of life”. She said: “I am shocked and saddened at the tragic news that a young woman has been shot dead by so-called dissidents in the Creggan estate tonight. “The murder of this young woman is a human tragedy for her family, but it is also an attack on all the people of this community, an attack on our peace process and an attack on the Good Friday Agreement. I unreservedly condemn those responsible for killing this young woman. “We will remain resolute in our opposition to the pointless actions of these people who care nothing for the people of Derry. We remain united in our determination to building a better and peaceful future for all.” O’Neill added: “Those responsible should listen to the people, they should disband immediately and end their pointless actions against the community which tonight has tragically claimed the life of a young woman. “I am appealing for calm and I urge anyone with any information about this killing to bring it forward immediately to the police and assist their inquiries.” Mark H Durkan, the SDLP MLA for Foyle, said: “Just leaving Creggan, heartbroken and angry at the senseless loss of a young life. “Violence only creates victims, that’s all it ever has done. The thoughts and prayers of our city are with the young woman’s family and friends, may she rest in peace.” The Democratic Unionist party leader, Arlene Foster, tweeted: “Heartbreaking news. A senseless act. A family has been torn apart. Those who brought guns onto our streets in the 70s, 80s and 90s were wrong. It is equally wrong in 2019. No one wants to go back. My thoughts are also with the brave officers who stood in defence of their community.”