Pete Buttigieg was ready to officially launch his run for the White House on Sunday, against a backdrop of improving poll numbers and increasing national interest. The 37-year-old mayor of South Bend, the fourth-largest city in Indiana, was to make the announcement at an afternoon rally in his hometown. A big day for the openly gay Rhodes scholar Afghanistan veteran broke with a new campaign website, peteforamerica.com, a New York magazine cover – headline, “Wonder Boy” – and an interview with the tabloid website TMZ in which he revealed a love for “classic rock” like Creedence Clearwater Revival and was duly given a guitar. “Mayor Pete didn’t disappoint,” TMZ said, “as he started riffin’ Hey Joe by Hendrix!” On a more serious note, Buttigieg was asked what he would do if he made it to a presidential campaign against Donald Trump, no longer a wildly unlikely scenario, in which homophobia became a factor. “I’m kind of used to that by now,” Buttigieg said. “I’m from Indiana, I’m gay as a … I don’t know, think of something really gay, that’s how gay I am. So I’m used to bullying. I think you confront it initially and then you move on. I’m from Indiana, I’m gay as a… I don’t know, think of something really gay, that’s how gay I am “So when [Trump] does something, not just targeting the LGBT community but all the things about immigrants, putting down working people, people of colour, whoever’s being attacked at that moment, you’ve gotta confront that but you can’t let that be the end of the story. “When he lies or does something wrong you confront that and then you change the channel, change the subject back to you.” Such is the buzz Buttigieg has generated since forming an exploratory committee in January, he has rarely had to change the subject back to himself, unless it has been about his husband Chasten. In a successful effort to stand out from a crowded Democratic field, he has published a well-received memoir, toured TV studios and early voting states and performed impressively as a fundraiser, sailing past the number of donors needed to make the debates. Such success brings with it a merciless spotlight. Some observers point out that third-place polling in Iowa and New Hampshire – behind Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden but ahead of heavyweights like Kamala Harris, Elizabeth Warren and Beto O’Rourke – means little a year away from the primary. Others are beginning to focus on Buttigieg’s record in office: on Saturday CNN published a report headlined: “Pete Buttigieg pushed an aggressive plan to revitalize South Bend. Not everyone felt its benefits.” Also up for debate is whether the mayor’s mix of a strong personal story, hazily expressed progressive priorities and faith-based appeal to middle America may prove too good – or lightweight – to be true. In an interview published on Sunday, Buttigieg told the New York Times he was “focused on the interaction of ‘narrative and politics’ and how parties connect with people beyond policy decrees”. “The story that we tell,” the Times quoted him as saying, “not just about government but about ourselves, and the story we tell people about themselves and how they fit in, really grounds our politics.” The Times found approving voices. Dan Glickman, a secretary of agriculture under Bill Clinton who taught at Harvard when Buttigieg was there in the mid-2000s, said the mayor had developed a “way of articulating a vision which is progressive but not off-putting”. George Lakoff, a Berkeley linguist with whom the young Buttigieg corresponded, said: “He knows how to talk plainly. Usually, Democrats are saying: What are your 10 most important policy areas? And he doesn’t do that.” Buttigieg is undoubtedly having a moment. That meant that in the days before his big launch his expression of support for Ilhan Omar, the Minnesota congresswoman targeted by Trump and Republicans for her remarks about 9/11, was feverishly parsed and debated. “After 9/11,” Buttigieg wrote, “we all said we were changed. That we were stronger and more united … Now, a president uses that dark day to incite his base against a member of Congress, as if for sport. As if we learned nothing that day about the workings of hate.” He added: “The president today made America smaller. It is not enough to condemn him; we must model something better.” The campaign launch in South Bend was meant to begin that process, to present Buttigieg as a young president – he would be the youngest ever, at 39, if he were to win in 2020 – who might bridge America’s deep partisan divide. This week, the Guardian canvassed attitudes to Buttigieg in his home state, particularly among people of similar sincerely held faith, among them supporters of Mike Pence, Trump’s vice-president who is also from Indiana. Buttigieg is an Episcopalian. Pence is an evangelical with Catholic roots. The mayor has been critical of the vice-president’s support for the not notably religious Trump, for the way his Christianity shapes his politics. Curt Smith, president of the Indiana Family Institute and an opponent of same-sex marriage, said of Buttigieg: “I wish he would stop attacking the vice-president’s faith. I think that’s dangerous. But I welcome this conversation about the so-called Christian left. “It’s not a very active force in American public life and I think he could make a major contribution to the discourse in our country … I’d love to open the scriptures and do moral reasoning with people on the other side of the aisle. There hasn’t been anyone to talk to for a very long time.”