I am first in the queue for the charred and the roasted; for skin crisped and branded by the grill; flesh with edges sticky with notes of sugar and smoke; shells and bones that demand to be cracked and sucked. But life shouldn’t be all about sizzle and spice. I like delicate treatments, too: snow-white fish that has edged slowly towards tenderness in a calm, herb-scented broth or a cloud of aromatic steam. Shellfish in a bowl of dill-freckled stock or steamed in a pan with white wine, shallots and parsley, the warm liquor to be sponged up with crusty bread. Life shouldn’t be all about sizzle and spice, I like delicate treatments too Sometimes fish doesn’t need to meet the heat at all, its texture changed by citrus juices or vinegar, firming up, its colour becoming clean and white. For the chemistry to work you need the more acidic fruits, the lemon and the lime. If you use blood oranges, as I have this week, then you need to upgrade its acid notes with a splash of lime and rice- or white-wine vinegar. You can push the recipe in the direction of Mexico by adding very finely sliced or chopped chillies and a tuft of coriander leaves. Introduce some crisp greens in the form of samphire or chicory and some segments of citrus and you have a dish that dazzles and refreshes. Scallops, sliced horizontally into coins, and prawns, shelled and halved lengthways, make a change from white fish. You can arrange it artfully, but I prefer it as a tumbling salad of carnival colours. Fiery flavours, such as ginger and pepper, take on a gentler note when not sizzled in a pan but used to flavour a broth. Fish poached in stock, just long enough to turn its flesh pearly white, makes a pleasing change from the charred notes it would pick up from the unrelenting heat of a grill or oven. The meat firms up, intensely sweet and juicy, each mouthful accompanied by a spoonful of warmly spiced liquor. Once you have finished the meat of the dish, you have golden soup to lap up, warm on the tongue with ginger, spring onions and black pepper. The variety of fish is up to you. Something firm and white will work, and should be about 2cm thick. I used hake for this, but also worth considering is haddock and cod. Serves 2 fish stock 500mlkombu 1 sheetsoy sauce 1 tbsp, or to tasteginger 50gchilli 1, medium-sized spring onions 4black peppercorns 8white fish steaks 2 x 250g pieces, such as hakecoriander a small handful of leaves Pour the fish stock into a deep, medium-sized saucepan. Add the sheet of kombu and the soy sauce and bring to the boil. Peel the ginger, slice it thinly, cut each slice into matchsticks, then add to the stock. Thinly slice the chilli into rounds and add to the stock. Trim the spring onions, discarding the roots and the darkest tip of the stems. Put the onions into the stock, together with the peppercorns and simmer for a minute or two until they have started to wilt. Place a large steamer basket over a pan of boiling water. Put a large, shallow-sided, heatproof dish into the steamer basket then pour over the hot, seasoned liquor. Place the 2 pieces of fish into the stock and cover with a lid. Steam until the fish has turned opaque and will pull cleanly from the bone – a matter of 10-15 minutes. Lift the fish into 2 shallow bowls or deep plates. Add the coriander leaves to the broth then spoon, together with the aromatics, over the fish and serve. Prawns take slightly longer than white fish to cure in citrus juice and vinegar. I like to leave them overnight in their marinade of orange and lime juice, rather than the couple of hours I would give to a white fish, giving time for the flesh to become tender. I have used samphire to introduce some green to the dish, for its crisp, salt notes, but cucumber or raw carrot, shredded mangetout or very crisp iceberg lettuce are worth considering, too. Serves 2 red onion 1, smallprawns 8, large blood orange 1lime juice of 1rice vinegar 2 tbspsamphire 50g Peel and finely dice the red onion. Peel the prawns, then cut each one in half and put in a mixing bowl with the onion. Slice away the orange peel, taking care to remove all the white pith, then cut the orange into segments. Keep all the juice, then pour it over the prawns. Squeeze the lime juice into the prawns and add the rice vinegar. Cover the bowl, place in the fridge then leave for at least 4 hours, preferably overnight. The prawns are ready when they turn opaque. Trim the samphire, removing any tough stalks. Put the samphire into a bowl of iced water and set aside for 30 minutes, then drain and put the samphire in with the prawns, tossing the ingredients together gently. Divide the ceviche between 2 plates or shallow bowls and serve. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US