International Gay Rugby has welcomed the swift action taken by the authorities after last week’s homophobic Instagram post by the Australia full-back Israel Folau was liked by the England No 8 Billy Vunipola. Folau has been given notice by Rugby Australia and will not play for the Wallabies again while Vunipola was carpeted by his club, Saracens, this week and then served with an official warning by the Rugby Football Union. “We are really pleased with how quickly the unions responded,” said Ben Owen, the chair of IGR, an organisation of primarily gay and inclusive rugby clubs. “The reaction of the whole rugby community shows that discriminatory views have no place in the sport. A number of people in the LGBT community are vulnerable because of the discrimination they have had to face. Reading what was put up last week is harmful enough, but it is far worse when it comes from top stars who are well-paid ambassadors for the sport.” Folau had form after a similar outburst last year earned him a warning from Rugby Australia. The 30-year old included homosexuals among his list of “sinners”, but in 2014 he had helped promote the Bingham Cup, the biennial world championship of gay and inclusive rugby, which that year was held in Sydney. “Folau was on the front of the best known gay magazine in Australia promoting the cup,” Owen said. “It was a big surprise when he came out with his remarks last year. He may have been expressing his beliefs, but posts can have consequences. It was only last November that Gareth Thomas [the former Wales captain] was attacked in the street because of his homosexuality. “The rugby world reacted brilliantly then with 10 international teams wearing rainbow laces that weekend in solidarity with him. Last week’s posts may not have been advocating violence but because they came from such high-profile players, their words could have led to intolerance. “A number of people who come to our clubs have, at some point, contemplated suicide because of the discrimination they have faced. Rugby offers them a family, a sense of belonging where people accept you for who you are. That is why last week was so hugely damaging. “Over the last five years, IGR and World Rugby have worked together with unions and clubs across the globe to ensure that our sport is for everyone. We have a very clear set of values that celebrate diversity, understanding and inclusiveness. It’s up to everyone involved in rugby, whether a spectator, player or a coach to promote these values, on and off the field. Even more so for those members of our community who have influence.”