Tributes have been paid to a “devoted” young British couple who died while on holiday on the Greek island of Santorini when the buggy they were driving plunged 200 metres into a ravine. Teachers Milly and Toby Savill – both in their twenties – died in the accident on Sunday afternoon, according to local media reports. They were using the hired buggy to explore the 567-metre tall Profitis Ilias mountain, the highest point on the island, which has a monastery at its peak. Steve Coulson, father of 25-year-old Milly, said the couple were “utterly devoted to one another” and that their families were devastated at their deaths. Coulson, vicar of St Mark’s church in Kennington, south London, added: “Their families are so proud of them, and although devastated, we are comforted by having shared so many wonderful times of love and joy together. “Toby and Milly were passionate about their Christian faith, and we are being sustained by the same sure hope of Easter resurrection.” Tim Dainty, principal at Ark Evelyn Grace Academy in Brixton, where Toby taught history, also paid tribute to the couple. “Everyone here is deeply saddened by the tragic loss,” he said. “Understandably, this news has come as a real shock to us all and so we will be working with counsellors to support those staff and students who require it at this difficult time.” He added: “Toby joined our school in September 2018 as a newly qualified teacher of history and quickly established himself as a very dedicated and passionate educator. “His enthusiasm was infectious. He had a very strong relationship with his students and was extremely well-respected by his fellow staff members. He will be greatly missed by one and all.” Milly, who studied at Durham University, taught at St Anne’s Catholic primary school in Vauxhall. The school’s headteacher, Catherine Davis, said Milly was a “much loved teacher and member of staff”. She added: “Lives cut short when so young can’t be understood, apart from maybe the belief that Milly and Toby’s share of God’s work had, in his eyes, been completed and he was ready to welcome them into his kingdom.” The couple, from south London, married in August 2017 and pictures on their Facebook pages show them enjoying life together. In one snap the pair are both wearing England shirts celebrating the team’s success in last summer’s World Cup with crowds at Borough Market, south London. Toby’s brother Jacob Savill paid tribute on Twitter by sharing a picture of the couple, writing: “On Sunday, my best friend died alongside his beautiful wife. We are crushed with inconceivable pain.” He shared a psalm, adding: “We will see them soon in glory x.” One friend replied: “Milly and Toby were so precious to us and two of our most treasured friends. We will miss them terribly and can only imagine the immense pain your families will be experiencing.” The island, popular with holidaymakers, is in the southern Aegean Sea. Eight firefighters and two vehicles attended the scene at 2.27pm on Sunday, according to a spokesman at the fire service’s headquarters in Athens. The Foreign Office said it was assisting the couple’s families. 