Easter, like Christmas, can be a magical time of year, with two bank holidays giving a good chunk of time to relax and hang out with friends and family. But for the cook, this can be stressful, with so many different tastes to cater for. I serve this fragrant, exotic lamb with a pile of steaming rice, asparagus and crisp onions, with the same spicing as the lamb for vegans and vegetarians. It should keep everyone happy. Marinate the lamb in advance: on the day, it will take care of itself in a slow oven. All you’ll be left to do is throw together the simple but resplendent rice for a proper Easter feast. Prep 15 minMarinate OvernightCook 4 hrServes 6-8 2 fat garlic cloves, peeled and crushed500g Greek-style yoghurtSalt and black pepper1 x 2kg lamb shoulder, bone in450ml vegetable oil For the spice mix2 tbsp cumin seeds1 large or 2 small cinnamon sticks1 tbsp coriander seeds1 tbsp turmeric For the rice3 large onions, halved and finely sliced200g green lentils300g basmati rice, washed thoroughly100g currants400g asparagus, cut into 2-3cm spears1 bunch dill, roughly chopped Start by making the spice mix. Toast the cumin, cinnamon and coriander in a dry, hot frying pan for 30-40 seconds, until fragrant. Grind to a powder in a mortar or spice grinder, then mix in the turmeric. Mix the garlic and yoghurt, season to taste, then mix half of this with half the spice mix. Rub the lamb shoulder with a tablespoon of the oil, season well with salt and pepper, then baste with the yoghurt and spice marinade. Leave in the fridge for at least four hours, and preferably overnight. When you’re ready to cook, heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5, roast the lamb for 20 minutes, turn down the oven to 160C (140C fan)/325F/gas 3 and roast for a further three to four hours, until the meat is falling apart and soft. An hour before it’s ready, heat the remaining oil in a medium saucepan with a lid. Fry the onions in batches until golden brown – seven to eight minutes – then remove with a slotted spoon and drain on kitchen paper. In a separate pan, cook the lentils in lots of salted boiling water until just tender – about 15 minutes – then drain. Pour out all but a tablespoon of oil from the onion pan (you can reuse this another time). Put the pan on a medium heat, add the rice, currants and remaining spices, and stir-fry for two minutes in the remaining oil. Pour in 600ml water and a generous teaspoon of flaky sea salt (less if the salt is fine), bring to a boil, turn down the heat to low, cover and simmer for 10 minutes. Spread the lentils on top of the rice and top with asparagus. Cover, cook for another 10 minutes, turn off the heat and let everything steam with the lid on for 10 minutes. When the lamb is ready, fluff up the rice and lentils, then stir in three-quarters of the onions and dill. Serve on a big plate and scatter the remaining onion and dill on top. Serve with the lamb and the rest of the garlicky yoghurt. Slice the cucumber and dress with the garlicky yoghurt and dill for a delicious side to both the lamb and rice. Any leftover lamb will make an amazing shepherd’s pie with a sweet potato crust. Leftover dill is delicious stuffed into a jacket potato with soured cream and some smoked salmon or mackerel.