Trevor Noah continued to process the Mueller report on Monday’s Daily Show, as attention shifts to different, unredacted revelations in the 448-page text. For instance, Noah turned to the headline-grabbing detail that upon learning of the Mueller investigation, President Trump slumped in his chair and said: “This is the end of my presidency. I’m fucked.” Noah couldn’t help but laugh. “You know why I like that? Because he always acts like nothing fazes him – chin up, shoulders back, tummy out – but it turns out that Trump panics about his presidency as much as the rest of us,” he said. “That’s nice to know.” Trump’s concern is “like we’re on a plane with crazy turbulence and we’re all thinking we’re in this alone, but the pilot is like ‘Ah, I’m f-ed, I’m f-ed, I’m f-ed,’” Noah joked. “You don’t get mad when you’re doing something good and someone takes notes.”The Mueller report reveals that Trump doesn’t like his lawyers taking notes in meetings. Full piece: https://t.co/RdG3FOCyWX pic.twitter.com/afHrLse06W Notably, this detail about Trump worrying over what Mueller’s team would find was left out of Attorney General William Barr’s summary of the report, which also absolved the president of obstruction of justice. “What it didn’t mention is that for two years, Trump was constantly trying to stop the investigation,” Noah explained, and “the only thing that prevented him from doing that is that the White House is baby-proof”. According to the Mueller report, at least seven different members of the Trump administration, including former attorney general Jeff Sessions, campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, and chief White House counsel Don McGahn, ignored the president’s direction to derail the Mueller investigation at various stages. “Trump was constantly telling his aides to do obstruction-y things and they just ignored him,” Noah summarized. “So that was basically obstruction of obstruction of justice. And in a way, this is almost comforting, because you realize that yes, Trump is corrupt enough to want to abuse his powers, but he’s also too lazy to follow through.” It would be easy to skim these damning details, Noah continued, because Attorney General and “gummy bear lawyer” Barr put a positive spin on the report’s characterization of Trump. Before releasing the redacted report, Barr gave a press conference where he said Trump was fully cooperative with the Mueller probe. “And once again, the Mueller report tells a very different story,” Noah explained, noting that in fact, Trump refused to sit for an interview with the special counsel and replied with a version of “I don’t recall” 37 times in his written responses. “And remember, all of this craziness is just the stuff we can see in the report, because there are still tons of redactions,” Noah noted. “This document was covered in so much ink that it looked like Adam Levine’s torso.”