People living in shared ownership homes are being denied access to open spaces, car parks, gymnasiums and swimming pools, fuelling complaints of housing segregation. Residents who own homes outright enjoy access to the facilities in complexes that often feature side or rear entrances for shared owners, like “poor doors” used in social housing. But householders who own only a part of their homes have complained of the daily frustration and discrimination they feel at the practices. Segregation is often achieved through electronic key fobs that are programmed to deny access to parts of complexes. Examples include: A family denied a space in a parking garage – a large part of which is occupied by a single collection of sports cars under dustsheets, including a Lamborghini, Ferrari and Alfa Romeo. Shared ownership residents refused access to the only gym in the area even though it is part of “a contemporary village hall” that the developers had touted as “where individuals become communities”. A landlord refusing to allow shared ownership residents to use the main entrance when their door was broken. “You can’t mix with other people and it feels segregated,” said Gautama Payment, 35, who lives with his wife and three children at the Vista development in Battersea, west London. “We never had the option to be able to access the gym, the pool, the concierge or the sunken garden.” At the Lighterman development on the Greenwich peninsula, Ken MacArthur, a 53-year-old NHS worker, lives in one of about 20 shared ownership flats that have a separate, more spartan entrance to the private flats, where a suited concierge sits behind a marble desk, there are soft furnishings and smart lighting. MacArthur and his neighbours are denied access to the rooftop garden enjoyed by the private flats and the gym which on one day last week were only used by one person. “We want to build a community here and things have to be inclusive,” he said. “There shouldn’t be discrimination based on what building you are in. They are talking about building 15,000 homes here. It’s a lot of people and they all have to get on with each other and they all have to have their needs met. This is a form of discrimination.” The cases come amid outrage at social housing tenants being banned from using playgrounds reserved for private owners. It has prompted dozens of social tenants and private owners to highlight similar practices where they live. In one case in Hackney Wick, east London, pregnant and disabled social housing tenants in a block called Legacy House, dominated by privately owned flats, have been made to use stairs to access their floor because the lift was designed to stop only on private floors. Thomas Reames, a 42-year-old social tenant, said they were being treated like “lesser beings”. “We have to go through seven doors to our front door of our home,” he said. “There are five residents on this floor and all five have young children.” Following pressure from residents and a ruling that the decision breached planning rules, the block’s developer, the Anderson Group, said last week it would make alterations so the lift stopped at the first floor. Shared ownership can involve householders paying hundreds of thousands of pounds to buy a percentage of their home while paying the rest in rent to a registered social landlord. At least 200,000 households have bought into the system nationwide in order to get on to the housing ladder, according to the Council of Mortgage Lenders. The Payments own 40% of their flat but the concierge does not take parcels for them, couriers are not allowed to leave them in the separate entrance to their flats and there is no loading zone. They park their family car 10 minutes away. The entrance to their flats is around the back of the building facing the railway tracks, while the entrance to the fully owned flats fronts on to a landscaped garden. The developer, Berkeley Homes, said it “supports diverse communities and opposes segregation”. It said a new public park was due to open this summer “for every child to enjoy”. The social landlord, Peabody, said it had “reduced rents significantly to ensure they are genuinely affordable for working Londoners” and said that increasing service charges would only prevent people moving on to the housing ladder. The developer at the Lighterman, Knight Dragon, said the affordable housing provider, L&Q, decides what services are offered to residents, with affordability being key. L&Q said it would consider residents’ “strong views” about amenities in future “whilst ensuring there is adequate provision of affordable housing”. At New Providence Wharf, a development by Ballymore in Tower Hamlets, a solicitor in the social housing block, which includes shared ownership and has its own rear entrance backing on to a dual carriageway, said: “We are made to feel like second-class citizens.” They are not allowed to use the gym or the swimming pool and are not allowed to use the car park that is directly beneath their building. “The idea that there is a poor door is horrible,” he said. “It doesn’t create a nice atmosphere to live in and there’s a feeling of them and us.” People in the shared ownership flats pay an annual service charge of over £3,000, most of which covers the whole complex and part of which is understood to fund the upkeep of a grand water feature by the main door which they are not allowed to use to get to their homes. Ballymore said the firm had no policy on restricting access to residents of any tenure and decisions about setting service charges at a level that includes access to gyms, pools or other amenities lies with their housing association. Polly Neate, the chief executive of the housing charity Shelter, said: “Segregation and discrimination are entrenched within our broken housing system whether against social tenants in the state sector or benefit recipients in private renting. We hear countless stories from parents and families who feel stigmatised just because they don’t have the luxury of owning their home. Yet everyone should have the right to a safe and secure place to raise their children and call home as part of a thriving, inclusive community.” 