Early on Thursday evening, six Tory grandees who have been on opposing sides during more than 40 years of Tory civil war on Europe crammed on to a red leather bench in the House of Lords and sat shoulder to shoulder as peers debated a bill on delaying Brexit. At one end was former chancellor Lord Lawson, who resigned from Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet in 1989 over the Exchange Rate Mechanism and is a now a hardline Brexiter. Next to him was another former chancellor, Lord Lamont, who took the UK out of the ERM on Black Wednesday under John Major in September 1992 and is a lifelong Eurosceptic. At the other end of both the bench and the Conservatives’ ideological divide sat former deputy prime minister Lord Heseltine, a career Europhile and now a leading grandee in the campaign for another referendum. Between them were Lord Maclean, a former Tory chief whip with years of experience of managing the party’s splits on Europe, Lord Howard, the pro-Brexit ex-Tory leader, and the Leave-supporting former Conservative party chairman Lord Baker. A Labour peer who looked on from the opposite benches said: “It was an extraordinary sight, a glimpse back over decades of Tory division on Europe. And pure Spitting Image.” Somehow, despite the deep differences on Europe, which helped end the premierships of Margaret Thatcher, John Major and David Cameron, and will soon curtail that of Theresa May, the Conservative party has just about held together as a fighting force, during the long careers of these grandees. But for how much longer? Down the corridor, as the Lords voted and debated, MPs in the Commons had had to abandon their afternoon sitting a couple of hours earlier as water poured into part of the chamber, the result of blocked gutters in a building in desperate need of renovation. The symbolism was lost on no one. The Brexit crisis had caused its own blockage in British politics, and deadlock within and between the main parties that only deepened as deadlines approached. So paralysed was parliament that May had, on Tuesday, made an effort to bridge the divides and finally deliver a Brexit solution. She offered to sit down with Jeremy Corbyn to find a way forward. The only way was consensus. Or was it? Within hours of May making her grand offer to the Labour leader, Tory MPs were fulminating. Yes, their own party might be split – but the idea of consensus with Labour was even more unthinkable than agreeing among themselves. At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, before May and Corbyn had even started a first round of discussions, May faced more hostile questions from her own side than from Labour. Caroline Johnson, Tory MP for Sleaford and North Hykeham, asked why she could not countenance a no-deal Brexit – rather than talk to the despicable enemy. “When we have to balance the risk of a no-deal Brexit versus letting down the country and ushering in a Marxist, antisemite-led government, what does she think at that point is the lowest risk?” The former Brexit minister David Jones asked: “Does it remain the Prime Minister’s position that the Leader of the Opposition is not fit to govern?” If so, why was she involving him in determining the shape of Brexit? Jacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the hardline, pro-Brexit European Research Group, was equally, contemptuous saying the PM seemed to want to “do a deal with a socialist who doesn’t want Brexit.” It was not only the Tories who were finding it impossible to find compromise with their political opponents or among themselves. On Wednesday evening Corbyn, a lifelong Eurosceptic leading a mainly Remain-inclined party, called a special meeting of his shadow cabinet to debrief it on progress in the cross-party talks. Labour’s internal tensions and divisions on Brexit policy boiled over. Corbyn told the meeting that talks had been constructive but there had been no breakthrough, and said the idea of a confirmatory referendum, demanded by most party members, was part of the discussion. At the end of the meeting – after Tom Watson, the deputy leader and Diane Abbott, the shadow home secretary, had spoken strongly in favour of a confirmatory ballot – the party chairman Ian Lavery, who is against the idea, blew a fuse. “He was very angry and wagged his finger at Jeremy, telling him that if he backed a referendum he would go down in history as the Labour leader who split the party,” said one shadow cabinet member. “Jeremy just sat there.” Another who was present said Lavery’s outburst was “extraordinary and very hostile”. Lavery added that he knew his comments would be leaked. Another member of the shadow cabinet, health spokesman Jon Ashworth, had warned Corbyn in the meeting that all previous experiments in cooperation with the Tories had ended in disaster for Labour and that Corbyn should heed history’s lessons. Colleagues thought he had in mind the party’s first prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, who is still regarded by many as a traitor for running a government with the Conservatives during the great depression. What makes it impossible in practice is that neither leader can afford to give any real ground. If they do, they know they the consequences would be to split their parties irreparably Ever since the 2016 referendum put the UK on course to leave the EU, both May and Corbyn have tried to manage the deep divides on Europe in their own parties over Brexit. But managing division by avoiding hard choices is no longer possible if a consensus is to be reached. The UK is due to leave the EU without a deal on 12 April unless the House of Commons reaches agreement. It is decision time. But the moment of choosing what sort of Brexit the country should have has brought internal divisions even more to the fore. As one former Tory minister who resigned recently over Brexit said on Wednesday: “A cross-party solution to Brexit should be possible – in theory. What makes it impossible in practice is that neither leader can afford to give any real ground. If they do, they know the consequences would be to split their parties irreparably. Take the issue of a permanent customs union which Labour is demanding. If May endorses that half her cabinet resigns. Corbyn is trapped too. If he is seen to have helped get a Tory Brexit over the line, he will never be forgiven by most of his own party who are against Brexit and want a second referendum. We’re all just screwed.” If there is agreement on one thing at Westminster these days, it is that the two main parties almost certainly cannot survive Brexit in their current forms. Neither the Conservatives nor Labour offers a comfortable home either for convinced Brexiters or ardent Remainers. Conversations with MPs and ministers about the future of politics post-Brexit increasingly move towards a conclusion that Brexit will accelerate a realignment. Two-thirds of the Tory party is made up of hardline Brexiters and the other third comprises soft and hard Remainers. As one Remainer Tory MP put it: “After all this, it is impossible to see the likes of Dominic Grieve [strongly Remain] sitting in the same party as Jacob Rees-Mogg or Boris Johnson. A split is coming.” For Labour, the divide is more than just about Brexit, but has been bought into sharper focus by it. It is also about what kind of party Labour is – a Corbynite leftwing force or a social democratic, strongly internationalist one. The former Labour cabinet minister Lord Adonis said: “Brexit is the dominating issue for Labour’s social democrats. Labour will split if Britain leaves the EU and the party is complicit in Brexit, because there is no viable policy for prosperity and equality while pursuing a Thatcherite Brexit.” Already eight Labour MPs have quit the party to join the pro-EU Independent Group. Three Tory MPs have joined them. More could soon follow. Last week the Tory MP Nick Boles said he could no longer sit as a Conservative MP after his compromise plan on Brexit was rejected by many of his colleagues. Slowly, the old order is changing. Corbyn’s deputy Watson is forming a group of around 100 MPs from the non-Corbynite wing of the party. The group’s backers say it is a “non-Marxist, social democratic” grouping “within Labour”. Soon after Easter it will begin work on its own policy ideas, separate from Corbyn’s team. As new alliances form, there are signs that voters are deserting the two main parties as a result of their Brexit divisions. On Friday, Labour retained the seat of Newport West but both Labour and the Tories saw their share of the vote fall as smaller parties, including Ukip and the pro-EU Greens, benefited. Political polling expert David Cowling says the conditions are ripe for change. “The Conservative-Labour vote share in 2017 was 84%. In the 15 polls last month it was an average 71%. Political realignment had been prophesied before but realigning MPs has proved easier than realigning voters. However, although our electoral system is heavily stacked against change, the public mood has seldom been more fertile for new political growth.” If, as seems increasingly likely, Brexit is delayed and the UK is forced to take part in European elections, they could provide opportunities for new forces in British politics. The Independent Group of MPs hopes to field candidates for all 73 seats in the 12 UK regions under the name Change UK and will use the elections to make the case for remaining in the EU. From the other side of the Brexit debate, Nigel Farage will lead his new Brexit party. On Friday, Farage put out two tweets looking forward to the European elections. “This is an exciting moment. We have arrived at a tipping point. The splits affecting the Conservatives and Labour have become so significant they begin to fall apart,” was one. In another he said: “I will lead @brexitparty_uk into the European elections. The fightback to save Brexit has begun.” And so, perhaps, have profound changes in British politics.