When rhubarb is in season, you have to use it to the utmost advantage. Like in this rhubarb jelly and honey panna cotta, standing proudly on an amaretti blondie base. Oh, and make sure you get a few pictures of the terrine cut into slices – it’s the best. Prep 1 hrCook 40 minServes 8-10 For the blondie base250g unsalted butter420g light soft brown sugar3 large eggs1½ tbsp vanilla extract330g plain flour 1½ tsp baking powder1 tsp salt200g amaretti biscuits, roughly chopped For the jelly500g rhubarb4 tbsp water100g caster sugar4 gelatine leaves For the panna cotta100ml whole milk100ml double cream40g runny honeySeeds from 1 vanilla pod3 gelatine leaves100g caster sugar300g Greek yoghurt For the white chocolate shards (optional)200g white chocolate For the French kisses200ml double cream2 tbsp caster sugar½ tsp almond extract Keep any leftover amaretti biscuits to crush and sprinkle over the top of the terrine, to finish. Heat the oven to 170C (150C fan)/335F/gas 3½. Grease a large loaf tin and line it with clingfilm. Make the base: heat the butter in a saucepan until it turns a deep amber. Set aside in a bowl to cool. Line a 28cm x 33cm baking tin with parchment. Mix the sugar into the butter, add the eggs one by one, then the vanilla extract, flour, baking powder and salt, then fold together. Add the amaretti biscuits, fold again, then tip the mix into the tin and smooth the top. Bake for 25-30 minutes, until golden brown. Leave in the tin to cool completely. Make the jelly: gently heat the rhubarb, water and sugar in a saucepan until the juice starts to turn into a syrup. Cook the rhubarb until tender, then blitz the fruit in a food processor. Pass through a sieve, then return the rhubarb to the pan. Soak the gelatine leaves in cold water, until soft. Remove, squeeze out the excess water from the gelatine, add to the rhubarb and stir. Pour into the loaf tin and in the fridge to set – I put this in the freezer first for 20 minutes before transferring to the fridge for about an hour and a half. For the panna cotta, heat the milk and double cream in a medium-sized saucepan with the honey and seeds scraped from the vanilla pod. Bring to a gentle simmer, then set aside for a couple of minutes. Soak the gelatine leaves in cold water, until soft. Return the honey and milk mix to the heat, then add the caster sugar, stirring until just dissolved. Once the gelatine is softened, drain and stir into the milk mix. Set aside for 10 minutes. Tip the yoghurt into a large bowl, whisk in the milk mix, pour on to the rhubarb jelly and leave to set in the fridge – about an hour and a half, but check from time to time. Trim the blondie into a rectangle large enough to cover the terrine, then gently put on top of the almost-set panna cotta. Wrap in more clingfilm and leave to chill in the fridge. Now’s the time to make the white chocolate shards if you’re using them. Melt the chocolate in the microwave in 30-second bursts, stirring in between. Pour the chocolate into a baking tray and put in the fridge to set. Once set, break the chocolate slabs into triangular shards. To make the French kisses, whip the double cream, sugar and almond extract in a bowl, then transfer to a piping bag with a nozzle attachment. Once the terrine has set, unwrap, put a serving board on top of the tin and flip it upside down. Carefully remove the tin, peel off the clingfilm. Pipe a few French kisses on top of the jelly and arrange the chocolate shards around them. To finish, crush a handful of biscuits and sprinkle on top, if you like.