Uefa has ordered Montenegro to play one match behind closed doors after England players were racially abused during a European Championships qualifier. Danny Rose, Raheem Sterling and Callum Hudson-Odoi were particularly targeted by groups of home fans within the Gradski Stadion in Podgorica, as the Three Lions won 5-1 on 25 March. Sterling celebrated his goal in the game in front of the Montenegrin fans, who were heard directing monkey chants to England’s black players. The Football Association of Montenegro announced on Friday that Uefa has ordered Montenegro to play their 7 June qualifier at home to Kosovo in an empty stadium as a result. In the aftermath of the game, Uefa president Alexander Ceferin said the racism was “a disaster”, while attending the European Club Association’s general assembly in Amsterdam. “I cannot say any more because it is now a matter for our disciplinary committee, but I cannot believe these people still exist.” During the match some of the England players’ families – including those of Jadon Sancho and Declan Rice – were sitting behind the home dugout and had complained about the abuse to stewards, with one local fan apologising only to continue his abuse of those on the pitch. The English Football Association said in a statement following the announcement of the ban: “The FA acknowledges Uefa’s decision to sanction the Football Association of Montenegro. We hope that their next home match being played behind closed doors sends out a message that racism has no place in football or in wider society. “We will continue to work with the relevant authorities in football to ensure that all players are able to enjoy the game in a discrimination-free environment.” Meanwhile, Uefa has given the Paris Saint-Germain forward Neymar a three-match ban for insulting match officials on Instagram following his side’s defeat to Manchester United in the Champions League. The Brazilian posted a message after Marcus Rashford scored a late penalty to send United through after the video assistant referee ruled a PSG defender had handballed a Diogo Dalot shot. The message read: “This is a disgrace, they put four people that know nothing about football in charge of looking at the replay for VAR. There is no penalty. How can it be a handball when it hits his back?! Go fuck yourselves!” The punishment means Neymar would miss the first three matches of next season’s Champions League group stage.