The Fiver’s heart sang when we realised we would at last get to tell a good news story. Too often it has been our sad duty to report on outbreaks of malice, ineptitude and, yes, despicable drunken buffoonery that we always say we regret. But today we are happy to relay the tale of Wayne Hennessey, a very lucky man who managed to reach the age of 32 without ever being made aware of one of the most depressing episodes of human history. And we’re not talking about the time Kenny Jackett asked him to play against Gillingham away. In a development that gives hope to everyone who wishes to exist for more than three decades in a state of child-like innocence, it emerged that Mr Hennessey succeeded in becoming a fully-formed adult without becoming acquainted with the most basic details of the life and times of some moustachioed character called Adolf Hitler and his band, the Nazis. “Don’t mention the war” is an instruction that appears to have been followed to a tee by everyone Mr Hennessey has ever met in his whole life. Until last January, that is, when it was pointed out to the seasoned international that a gesture he was captured making in a team photograph bore an unfortunate resemblance to one popularised by the aforementioned Hitler. All Mr Hennessey could do was apologise for any misunderstanding and explain to an FA disciplinary commission that Nazi salutes were all Greek to him. “Improbable as that may seem to those of us of an older generation, we do not reject that assertion as untrue,” wrote the commission in a 20-page document giving the reasons for the decision to dismiss the charge of improper conduct brought against the goalkeeper. Mr Hennessey explained that if the photo (which was taken on a night out arranged by Crystal Palace players to commemorate a victory over Grimsby Town, lest that historic event be forgotten) showed him with his right arm raised at a 45-degree angle and his left arm over his mouth, that was because he was trying to catch the attention of the person taking the shot, a French waiter named Jordan Bussolini. “Absolutely coincidental,” is how Hennessey described the sinister connotations that were later spelt out to him. The goalkeeper was upset to be accused of mimicking Hitler when all he was trying to do was put the hurry up on Bussolini (“It was not challenged that Mr Hennessey does have rather a loud voice and tends to be impatient,” found the commission.) After thorough consideration of the facts available, the commission felt obliged to conclude the charge against Mr Hennessey was unproven. “In fact, when cross-examined about this Mr Hennessey displayed a very considerable – one might even say lamentable – degree of ignorance about anything to do with Hitler, fascism and the Nazi regime. All we would say (at the risk of sounding patronising) is that Mr Hennessey would be well advised to familiarise himself with events which continue to have great significance to those who live in a free country.” It is worth noting that the commission did consider the possibility that Mr Hennessey might have knowingly made his salute in the hallowed name of b@nter but dismissed this theory on the grounds that: a) the player had not been on the sauce and; b) “no one else recalls Mr Hennessey playing the fool”. This was a reference to the gathering at the restaurant and not to displays on a pitch or anywhere else. Join Daniel Harris from 8pm BST for hot MBM coverage of Barcelona 3-1 Manchester United (agg: 4-1), while Paul Doyle will be on hand for Juventus 2-3 Ajax (agg: 3-4). “Nights like this can happen, when you don’t finish it off … in any case, we picked up a point and that allows us to keep clear of the teams behind us” – Atalanta boss Gian Piero Gasperini somehow manages to remain cool after seeing his side register a record-breaking 47 shots on goal without scoring in the 0-0 draw with Empoli that may have jiggered their chances of qualifying for Big Cup. Those stats in full: 47 shots, 18 on target, 11 blocked, 14 from outside the box, 33 from inside the box. David Squires on the Premier League’s game of thrones. A belter. Which you can buy. Here’s the latest Football Weekly podcast, while Jacob Steinberg joined Today in Focus to discuss if English football is taking racism seriously. “It came as a surprise to learn that Manchester City are only one point behind Liverpool with a game in hand (yesterday’s Fiver). I know that goal difference is often said to be worth an extra point, but still” – Graeme Whillis (and 1,056 others). “Ivor Broadis is revered in his adopted home town of Carlisle. Apart from that, Brian Granville’s tribute is notable for two things. The transfer fees that Broadis, a top-notch player, commanded are miniscule, even allowing for inflation. Many players today have pocketed as much for the mere act of swinging legs over the edge of the bed and padding to the bathroom in the morning. Then, the other English greats in the piece, note the teams they played for: Nat Lofthouse, Bolton; Stanley Matthews, Stoke and Blackpool; Tom Finney, Preston; Billy Wright, Wolves. OK, the last are doing quite nicely now, but the rest: sic transit gloria. So watch out, it’s all gonna end some day” – Maurice Mandale. “Please can you stop calling my beloved team Blackeye Rovers? That name was earned under Ailsa from Home and Away who left us 11 years ago” – Jonathan Shutt [Thoughts? – Fiver Ed]. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Maurice Mandale. Chelsea have launched a groundbreaking legal campaign to stamp out touts in a move expected to herald a wider crackdown by other Premier League clubs. Former Liverpool and Newcastle defender José Enrique has been given the all-clear after having surgery to remove a brain tumour last May. “The area is clean and looking amazing,” he said. “So now onwards and upwards.” FA suits have charged Paul Scholes with misconduct for allegedly placing 140 bets on football matches between 2015 and 2019. Pep Guardiola has questioned how much Manchester City supporters want to see their team reach the semi-finals of Big Cup. “I’m really curious how our fans will be,” he tooted. And Javi Gracia isn’t best pleased after Troy Deeney and his hubristic cojones got themselves sent off for whacking Lucas Torreira in the head during Watford’s 1-0 defeat to Arsenal. “I don’t agree [it was a red card],” he sniffed. “Troy put his arm there but there was no contact with his elbow. I never saw an aggressive movement.” What if Lord Ferg had joined Spurs? Nick Miller picks half-a-dozen sporting ‘sliding doors’ moments for your enjoyment, dear reader, in this Joy of Six. The feelgood vibes in women’s football do not extend to finances, warns Suzanne Wrack. Fifteen reasons for Manchester United to feel cheerful about their Big Cup hopes, courtesy of Niall McVeigh trawling through the archives. Liverpool and City’s race to the line? Pah! The best title race ever happened 95 years ago between Cardiff and Huddersfield, toots Simon Burnton. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!