Lil Nas X, the musician whose track was pulled from the Billboard country chart for not being “country enough”, rides again. The strange story of the 19-year-old’s hit, Old Town Road, a song that traversed the line between country and trap, has taken another twist that further exposes the fractures of race in the country music scene. Yesterday, Lil Nas X was joined on a remix of the song by Billy Ray Cyrus, the 90s country music legend, who added his vocals and guitar. Could this new iteration be deemed country enough? Though the original song sampled the banjo and contained references to horses and tractors, Billboard said it did not “embrace enough elements of today’s country music to chart in its current version”. That decision led many listeners and musicians to assert that there was a a racial dimension to the removal. Moses Sumney, a self-described “genre-agnostic” musician, said on Twitter that “much of the music on the country chart barely possesses associating qualities of the genre”, and the only “difference is race”. A music writer from Nashville, Shane Morris, went further, and argued that Lil Nas X was targeted because he “is a black man, from black Hollywood, AKA Atlanta”. Lil Nas X dodged the question when asked if he thought race played a role in the affair, but stated that he believed the song should have stayed on the chart. Since Billy Ray Cyrus tweeted his support two days ago, the collaboration wasn’t entirely unexpected. Lil Nas X had also previously expressed interest in working with the country star. After a studio session, that according to Lil Nas X made him emotional , the song dropped to much fanfare with many praising Billy Ray Cyrus’s bars and narrative. The new song sits at #1 on the Apple Music Hip-Hop chart, but the question remains: will Billboard reconsider its decision? This wouldn’t be the first time the charts enforced segregation. In an Al-Jazeera Plus video released this week, Dom Flemons, a Grammy-winning Americana folk musician and historian, explained that in the early 20th century, “record labels came up with two categories, race records, which was for African-American southern, working-class people followed by hillbilly music which was the white, southern working class music.” White dominated country charts show that the divide is still extant. Currently, the remix is not on Billboard’s country music chart. “Country music fans decide what they like. Not critics or anyone else,” Billy Ray Cyrus said in a statement accompanying the remix. He added: “I’ve always said, don’t think inside the box, don’t think outside the box. Think like there is no box.” When Lil Nas X addressed the controversy in Time magazine, he said: “The song is country trap. It’s not one, it’s not the other. It’s both. It should be on both.” The positive response to the remix appears to confirm this.