In front of the military headquarters in Khartoum, where protesters have refused to leave following the ousting of president Omar al-Bashir, came an extraordinary show of support. In stifling heat, a group of Coptic Christians – a minority and persecuted group in Sudan – set up shelters to allow their fellow Muslim protesters to pray away from the glare of the Friday morning sun, and without leaving the spot they’ve occupied since Saturday. Faisal Salih, a political analyst, described their actions as “a historic moment in Sudanese politics”. “It has a human and emotional impact and it draws a patriotic image Sudanese people long missed,” he said. “Most importantly it shows a transformation in the position of the Coptics, who have always been a religious and cultural minority, avoiding getting involved in politics, except for a few of them.” Protesters outside the HQ have refused to obey a curfew introduced by the military, who have assumed power following Bashir’s downfall in a move many view as a threat to ambitions of democracy. Scenes of jubilation greeted the army’s removal of Bashir on Thursday, but the sense remains of a job only partially done – and the message of defiance is clear. “We’re still here because the regime is still here, and it’s not dismantled, they have no interest in dismantling it,” says Ahmad Mahmoud, 31, an activist who has been protesting since the start of the uprising with his wife and sister-in-law. “We spilled blood for a civil transitional government, not anther old man in military uniform. We took care of one, [are] now taking care of the second, and if they give us a third, we’ll take care of him too, until they’re all behind bars answering for their crimes,” says Mahmoud, who spent a week in custody after being arrested by the National Intelligence and Security Service during the protest. “We want the Freedom and Change Declaration [parties that spearheaded the protests] to be in charge, and the mutinied army officers and soldiers to protect us from the militias of the National Congress party and National Islamic Front, and they all must be disarmed immediately.” Among the crowds, people hold up signs with the names of friends or loved ones who are abroad and could not make it to the protests. That way they too are represented in the protests, say the demonstrators. One young man was holding a sign yesterday that read: “For the ones left us by the small boats, just fall, I represent you,” a reference to the Sudanese people who have been killed in the Mediterranean while attempting to cross the sea to Europe. “We are still protesting because, from the beginning, we went out to change the whole regime and to have a civil government,” said Alaa Salah, the woman who became an emblem of the demonstrations when a video of her addressing crowds in Khartoum went viral this week. Fellow protester Seraj Omer said: “We will continue to protest until the forces behind the Freedom and Change Declaration declare that we have got the power from the army.” After Friday prayers, protesters from across the city took to the streets demanding regime change. Salma Elhaj, who has almost lost her voice from chanting, is defiant: “I will not go back home unless we have a civil government.”