“Women and non-binary people, come to the front,” Janey Starling, lead singer of the feminist punk group Dream Nails, shouts to a thumping beat. The crowd at the Solace Women’s Aid fundraiser at a pub in north London oblige, with women moving closer to the stage and a few sheepish-looking men shuffling out of the way. “What we’re trying to say is, men at the back,” Starling continues. “Make some space for once in your life.” Dream Nails, who describe themselves as “punk witches”, formed in 2015, shortly after the Conservative government won a majority in parliament. They are one of many bands to explode on to the DIY punk scene in the UK, led and dominated by women demanding to be seen and heard. The scene is not just about picking up an instrument and performing, it’s also tied to feminist action groups such as Sisters Uncut. Bands are creating their own merchandise, including t-shirts and badges, and producing zines that tackle issues from violence against women to masturbation. According to Dream Nails guitarist Anya Pearson, groups like hers come from a long line of brilliant feminist punk bands that have been contributing to the culture for the last four decades. The Sex Pistols and the Ramones brought a lot of attention to punk, then largely an underground movement, in the 1970s, inspiring a wide range of other people who had something to say to pick up any instrument and form a band. But female-fronted bands, such as the Slits, X-Ray Spex and Siouxsie and the Banshees, were also making their mark. A decade later, the Riot Grrrl movement burst on to the scene, featuring songs about rape, domestic violence and political activism. With nearly a decade of austerity and the rise of the #MeToo movement, Dream Nails say it is no surprise that there’s a resurgence of women in punk as the anger on the streets has spilled on to the stage. “It’s come from a place where women are saying ‘fuck it’ because the stakes are so high. I’ve got all this rage that I need to let out or I’m going to explode. Once you create spaces where that can happen, it’s contagious and others want to do it, too,” Starling said. James Sherry, who set up Division PR, which promotes many punk bands and the Rebellion Festival, says: “There’s definitely a resurgence of really angry female punk bands. We’re starting to see, with austerity and Brexit, a lot more younger bands coming in and talking about politics. “While bands like Dream Nails are currently bubbling underground, there’s a lot of potential for them to hit the mainstream.” Several musicians credit the DIY space for London and First Timers, a two-day festival that supports people from marginalised communities to form bands, in bringing new life and diversity to the DIY punk scene. Rhianydd Yorkwilliams, a guitarist for the band Charmpit who also helps organise First Timers, said that since 2013, nearly 90 bands will have debuted through the festival. As well as help forming a band, Nadia Vogel, a bassist and singer at Jelly Rolls, said First Timers helped foster a strong community, where people share instruments, contacts for promoters and the press, and help each other negotiate pay. Most established bands also invite newer ones to be supporting acts in their gigs. Nadia Javed, the frontwoman of the band The Tuts, which formed in 2012, said the feminist punk scene was non-existent when they started, but there were now plenty of gigs catering to the scene every month. She added the DIY spirit is a form of necessity for bands like hers. “Nobody gave a fuck about us at first,” Javed said, “even till this day, we still do everything in-house because, if you want a job done properly, you’ve got to do it yourself.” For Steph Phillips, the singer and guitarist of the black feminist punk band Big Joanie, the DIY punk scene is about taking back power. “People don’t listen to you in society. I’d be playing to a room of white people, but because I have a mic, they have to look at you, they have to listen to you. It’s interesting to have that dynamic turn around because of music, because of punk,” she said. Big Joanie, who formed in 2013, usually start their gigs with Token, a tongue-in-cheek song about white people who only have one black friend and never interrogate why that is. Phillips says while punk music has always been political, it’s long ignored its lack of racial diversity. “There wasn’t really a conversation about race. People kind of alluded to being political and being leftist, but ignored this big elephant in the room,” she said. Her bandmate, bass player Estella Adeyeri, said: “Britain has never been that comfortable discussing race. I like we start with that [Token] and you can’t get away from it.” The scene is not without its issues, and each band member has their own story of sexist male sound engineers or belittling fans. It’s the anger and frustration that draws many women to the scene, Starling adds, but it’s the joy on fans’ faces that keeps her coming back.