On Last Week Tonight, John Oliver turned to Japan, “the country that gave us Pokémon”. He discussed Japan’s mascot-mania, and focused on one particularly “amazing” character known for tearing up the town. Chiitan, the unofficial mascot of the coastal town of Susaki, has found his way into the hearts of millions through its rogue bad-behavior and internet antics. Chiitan is an otter who wears a turtle as a hat, and is not to be confused with the town’s official mascot, an otter called Shinjo-kun who wears a ramen dish for a hat. Until recently, Susaki also had an honorary tourism ambassador, an actual otter also called Chiitan. I'm in a public beef with an unsanctioned Japanese otter. I needed this. https://t.co/z7Yd7izRxY Oliver said: “The point is, there are three otters, two of which are named Chiitan, and the mascot Chiitan was never formally affiliated with the city of Susaki. It’s that simple.” The unofficial Chiitan, a “0-year-old fairy baby” who is verified on Twitter as @ogecebel, has more than 1 million followers and has been producing some bizarre videos of its hijinks – such as dancing on a stripper pole and flipping a car with its bare paws. While millions online enjoy Chiitan’s tomfoolery, officials in Susaki have reportedly received more than 100 critical calls about its bad behavior. The town has now distanced itself from its real otter – the official Chiitan – by declining to renew it as its tourism ambassador. “Basically, the city cut ties with the real otter because of the things the fake otter did,” explained Oliver. He continued: “Which is a real shame, because Chiitan has been a lot of fun. Its Twitter account is full of crazy shit like this” – segueing into a slew of absurdist videos of Chiitan kicking and punching and generally causing mayhem. Oliver said: “Now, you might be wanting to ask: how does an umbrella-wielding coked-up otter being assaulted in a windowless room encourage tourism to the small Japanese port city of Susaki? Well, I’m on TV and I’m talking about the small Japanese port city of Susaki, so that should answer your stupid fucking question.” Describing every Chiitan video as “a work of art”, Oliver showed several ridiculous videos, including one of Chiitan and an unnamed mascot-cat beating up an inflatable pole. Oliver said: “It’s understandable to have a lot of questions after watching that, like, ‘What am I watching?’ ‘Who’s the karate cat?’ and ‘Why’s Chiitan angry with that inflatable pole?’ But you’ll notice that ‘Am I bored?’ is not one of the questions you’re asking.” He continued: “As good as these videos are, Chiitan is somehow even better at Twitter, with a virtuosic deployment of memes. Here’s [another] magnificent example: ‘Don’t ever talk to my son, or my son’s son, or my son’s son’s son, or my son’s son’s son’s son ever again.’” Don't ever talk to my son or my son's son or my son's son's son or my son's son's son's son ever again pic.twitter.com/cEIGgrlMDW Oliver said: “Just try saying that without laughing – it’s physiologically impossible.” However, the true loser of the situation, Oliver explained, is Shinjo-kun, the city’s official mascot. He said: “Shinjo-kun was clearly overshadowed by an unhinged psychotic unsanctioned otter, and while I’m sure that there’s an element of relief there for Shinjo-kun, there’s also going a massive Chiitan-shaped hole in its life now. The two mascots were together a lot. “It’s clear that Shinjo-kun needs a new friend. And if you don’t already know where this is heading, you’ve clearly never watched this fucking show before. Of course we made our own mascot: please meet Chiijohn!” Introducing Last Week Tonight’s new mascot, Oliver described Chiijohn as a “41-year-old nearsighted English fairy baby. We made Chiijohn with the sole intention that he locate and comfort Shinjo-kun, and fill the hole Chiitan left in his heart.” Oliver then showed a short video of Chiijohn’s antics in Japan with Shinjo-kun. The two went on an adventure around town, accompanied by a soft narration of their feelings toward each other. They explored, ate fish and spread some of their characteristic chaos. “They saw their path, and felt their breeze, and saw their sun,” the voiceover said. “‘Where is our sun going,’ Chiijohn asked? ‘Do not worry,’ said Shinjo-kun. ‘We’ll have our sun back tomorrow. And our sun’s sun. And our sun’s sun’s sun. And our sun’s sun’s sun’s sun …’” Oliver finished by confirming that Chiijohn has been officially adopted by the town of Susaki.