The head of the Metropolitan police, Cressida Dick, has urged Extinction Rebellion activists to protest lawfully as officers continued a large-scale operation to clear environmental campaigners from sites at Oxford Circus and Waterloo Bridge in central London. With more than 1,500 officers now on duty at the protests, Dick has asked demonstrators to move to an officially designated site in Marble Arch or go home. On Saturday evening, hundreds of police officers were clearing activists from a blockade on Waterloo Bridge, where protesters have been since the Extinction Rebellion disruption campaign started five days ago. Quite the scene on Waterloo Bridge. Hundreds of police are here to clear the #extinctionrebellion protest camp. pic.twitter.com/7mCuOZnLs1 Earlier, crowds clapped and cheered as activists who had been chained to the road at Oxford Circus were lifted into police vans. Police drafted in 200 extra officers to deal with the protests, which began on Monday and have resulted in more than 750 arrests. Officers said they would try to clear Oxford Circus by the end of the Saturday. Speaking to Sky News, Cressida Dick said that “lots of people have had miserable disruption to their lives” because of the anti-climate change movement. “I’ve got one message for the protesters: please, go to Marble Arch where you can protest lawfully, stop your unlawful protests, and if you don’t want to go to Marble Arch then go home.” An Extinction Rebellion spokesman at Waterloo Bridge said there were more than 100 officers on the bridge, with 14 police vans and a large tow truck at its south end and more vans at the north. “It looks like they are making a concerted effort to clear the bridge,” the spokesman said. A video of police dragging demonstrators along the ground in an operation to remove a pink boat from Oxford Circus on Friday prompted concerns about police tactics against protesters, who have been belligerently polite and apologetic throughout. Officers used angle grinders to cut through the bars below the hull of the Berta Cáceres boat, named after the murdered Honduran environmental activist, to which protesters had chained and glued themselves. Extinction Rebellion is an international protest group that uses non-violent civil disobedience to campaign on environmental issues. Demonstration have included blocking bridges to traffic in London and a semi-naked protest inside the House of Commons. The group says climate breakdown threatens all life on Earth, and so it is rebelling against politicians who 'have failed us', to provoke radical change that will stave off a climate emergency. The intersection was calm on Saturday as bank holiday shoppers mingled with protesters, asking questions about the movement and its tactics. Of the 750 people arrested in connection with the campaign as of 4pm on Saturday, which has included protests at Marble Arch and Parliament Square, 28 have been charged. The Met said most of the arrests had been for breaching section 14 orders, which are in place in all the protest areas except Marble Arch. The force announced that on Friday it had renewed the order requiring protesters to clear Waterloo Bridge for a further three days. #ExtinctionRebellion pic.twitter.com/pWgEpLQZaJ Extinction Rebellion designated Oxford Circus a place to discuss the campaign with members of the public who have questions. On Saturday, bank holiday shoppers were keen to engage. Michelle, 30, and Lee, 31, from St Helens in Merseyside, were eager to speak to activists during an Easter break in London after watching the campaign unfold on TV during the week. “I agree with some of the points but I disagree with the methods,” Michelle said after a lengthy discussion with an activist, adding that the movement appeared quite London-centric. “It wouldn’t happen in St Helens,” added her partner. Milo, seven, was in Oxford Circus with his father and said he thought the protests were a good thing. If climate change is not avoided, “it’s going to get so hot like Venus. Everyone is going to die and there’s going to be a total extinction. If the government listens, they might fly less planes and drive less cars,” he said. Nick, a 56-year-old civil servant who was chained to the road at Oxford Circus, said it was “an unusual way to spend his annual leave”. He said he was not happy to be there and he did not take the possibility of being arrested lightly “but I’m going to be here as long as it takes”.