Sajid Javid has been criticised by community leaders, business owners and residents of a multicultural road in Bristol where he lived as a boy for describing it as Britain’s most dangerous street. People who live and work on Stapleton Road claimed the home secretary, a frontrunner to replace Theresa May as prime minister, was perpetuating an outdated, unfair and unhelpful image of the area. Javid told an audience of youth workers in London this week: “I grew up on what one tabloid dubbed Britain’s most dangerous street. It’s not so difficult to see how, instead of being in cabinet, I could have turned out to have a life of crime myself. “There were drug addicts who stood near my school gates and told me if I joined in I could make some easy money.” Former pupils of that school said they did not recognise the picture he painted of drug addicts trying to tempt children to become dealers. “There’s no justification for him to refer to Stapleton Road as the most dangerous in Britain,” said Abdul Malik, who owns a number of butchers’ shops on and around Stapleton Road and is a mosque chairperson, school governor and magistrate. “There has been a huge effort in the community for many years after he left to improve things. “He needs to wake up to the things that have happened that have taken this area forward. Every chance I get, I plug this as an area people should visit, grow fond of. He chooses to use it to show how he struggled.” Javid was born in Greater Manchester but the family moved to Bristol when he was a child and lived for a few years in a flat above their clothes shop on Stapleton Road. Javid left Bristol for a successful career in the City of London before becoming the MP for Bromsgrove, in Worcestershire, and climbing the Tory ranks. Malik said he knew Javid’s late father because he used his butcher’s shops. “He was a very good uncle of ours but Sajid has never been involved in the community at all. I find what he says quite offensive.” Afzal Shah, a Labour councillor, said Stapleton Road was one of Bristol’s most vibrant places. “We talk about 91 languages being spoken in Bristol. You can hear most of them here. There is great energy and great potential.” Shah went to the same school as Javid and also knows members of his family. “When I went [shortly after the home secretary] there were no drug dealers hanging around the school gates.” The councillor walked down the street pointing out thriving businesses – a car dealership that turns over £5m a year, a successful healthcare tech company, the lively cafes and shops. There is a gleaming new yoga studio on the road. “I think it’s very disappointing,” Shah said. “We have incredible talent here. I’d implore people to come and walk along the street. The area has changed beyond recognition.” Javid did not mention the street by name in his speech but many people in Bristol knew where he was talking about. The road, to the north-east of the city centre, hit the headlines in 2002 when one of Javid’s predecessors as home secretary, David Blunkett, announced it was one of the five high-crime areas where police would receive specialist help. Blunkett was heckled during a visit to the road by residents who regarded it as a government stunt. In 2011, the Sunday People wrote that Stapleton Road was Britain’s worst street, describing it as “a lawless hellhole where murder, rape, shootings, drug-pushing, prostitution, knifings and violent robbery are commonplace”. As Javid’s star rose, he spoke about his Stapleton Road roots. In 2016 he visited the two-bedroom flat above the family shop where he lived with his parents and four brothers, the Sun’s political editor in tow. The tabloid described Javid, then secretary of state for media, culture and sport, arriving in the “mean streets” in a chauffeur-driven government Jaguar. He went back again for the Times last October, by which time he was home secretary, and posed for glossy pictures in the Monte Carlo cafe where he used to play pinball. People began to feel Javid was using the road to bolster his back story as he angled for the top job. The owner of the Monte Carlo, Shahin Amani, who is originally from Afghanistan and took over the business from the Greek family that ran it in Javid’s boyhood, admitted he had been wary about moving to the area. “It has a reputation. It’s a place where if you look for trouble people will give you trouble but if you get on with your life people will leave you alone.” “It’s such a load of bullshit,” said Clare Mobley, a florist who has worked on the road since the mid 1990s. Her children have grown up walking up and down Stapleton Road and never had a problem. “The place has moved on,” she said. Jason Summerhill, whose family has run a newsagent’s on the road for 35 years, said it was a warm, friendly community. “We like it here. The people are wonderful.” No one says Stapleton Road and the streets around it are crime free. There have been problems with gang violence and sexual grooming here. In February, 158 crimes – including 45 that were violent or sexual – were reported in the Trinity police neighbourhood which includes the flat where Javid lived. But many happened in the streets off the main drag, and there were 249 crimes reported in the same month in the city centre. “You do see some trouble,” said Mutethya Wa Mutunga, who was sitting in the sunshine drumming up trade for a Caribbean restaurant. “But you see that in any inner city. This is a good place.” The point people make is that they are trying to do something about it. When an 18-year-old man was stabbed on Stapleton Road in January, the Bristol Horn Youth Concern group, which mainly works with the Somali community, arranged a sports tournament to bring people together. As part of a series on knife crime called Beyond the Blade, the Guardian spoke to support workers about the raft of services being offered for young people in places like Stapleton Road. The argument is that comments like Javid’s hinder the efforts. Rayan Wilson, who runs Back2Action, a company that supports elite athletes, said Javid’s comments were “out of order, irresponsible”. He said: “When people are in a position of power they have to have care over the language they use. If we stoke the fire of negativity, people listen. It disempowers you. “For me, Stapleton Road is a mini England. There are so many different cultures that have come together to make a success of one street. They are all next to each other, complementing each other, bouncing off each other to create a community.”