Rugby Australia’s move to sack star play Israel Folau for anti-gay social media posts sends a clear message to players, fans and punters across the country: homophobia is not welcome in the code. As a lesbian deeply involved in campaigns for LGBTIQ rights, Rugby Australia’s condemnation of Folau’s promotion of anti-gay views is heartening and reassuring. But I know what happens next: Folau’s impending sacking (or perhaps just public shellacking) will inevitably whip up hysteria from some who declare freedom of speech and freedom of expression at risk. You’ll recall it was just 18 months ago that the country held an excruciatingly expensive and heartbreakingly costly public “debate” on whether same-sex relationships were equal under the law. Views like Folau’s were given legitimacy and a platform every single day. In the name of those views, many people went on to tick a box on a piece of paper sent to them by the government in the hope of maintaining state discrimination against us. It is simply not the case that people aren’t free to hold the view in this country that gay people are destined for hell. I understand the importance of freedom of expression. I’m the executive director of Change.org, which is an open platform that allows anyone to start a campaign to about an issue that matters to them. I deeply disagree with many of the petitions on the platform but, within some policy guidelines, remain committed to the right of those I disagree with to express their views and access the tools of organising and protest. At the time of writing, there are already two Change.org campaigns calling for Folau’s reinstatement. One is called #IstandwithIzzy and I can see a comment from an old sparring partner, the Marriage Alliance’s Sophie York, who spent years of her life campaigning against marriage equality. Those petitions have a right to be there and over the day will no doubt give people who want to express their disagreement with Rugby Australia’s decision a digital point to rally around. Israel Folau is free to hold the view that people like me are bound for hell. He is free to express that view, as we see in the post still on his Instagram page calling for people like me to “repent”. But freedom of speech and freedom of expression is not freedom from consequence, and Rugby Australia has enacted a consequence for Folau’s repeated use of his social media to vilify gay people. There is certainly room for a discussion in 2019 about whether our speech should be beholden to social media policies and how far the HR department can reach into the public square. But Folau isn’t an 18-year-old working in the food court at your local Westfield complaining that his fast-food chain sucks; he is an international sports star and an ambassador for rugby. And he is remunerated accordingly. It’s not so hard. My Instagram is private because, understanding how my job intersects with my (small) public profile and the influence that would hold, I take my despair at the petitions I disagree with on Change.org there. Rugby Australia’s swift action to condemn Folau would be partly commercially driven, and I note with sincere happiness that commercial homophobia has become a brand risk. It’s also a powerful demonstration of solidarity and allyship with gay people and the broader LGBTIQ community, and will have enormous social impact. I’m a millennial, but people my age and older than me grew up hearing that homosexuality was an illness, a crime and a sin against God. Because of this stigma, discovering who we were and who we would one day love was, for some, an insurmountable terror. For me, when I realised as a teenager I was a lesbian I felt like I had cancer. That stigma isn’t just internalised. It wraps itself around the bodies that write public policy and commercial practice, clasping decision-makers hands. It surfaces in cartoons and columns, talkback radio and late night television, fuelling a polarised public discourse. Anti-gay and anti-LGBTIQ stigma impacts our lives every day. Yes, we can marry our partners now, but is our employment safe? Can we attend the religious school our parents sent us to, knowing that if the school finds out we’re gay we could be expelled? Can we see a counsellor and be sure we won’t be subjected to “conversion” practices? As I brace for the bin fire that is the “culture wars” around political correctness, its flames now fanned by the those who simultaneously shout “freedom of speech!” for Folau and threaten to kill young women for social media posts about Anzac day and no doubt a government for whom this fight is politically expedient, I remain grateful for Rugby Australia showing the country exactly where homophobia is bound for.