The scene of some dramatic racing for the past two seasons, this year’s Azerbaijan Grand Prix fell with barely a whimper to the flawless perfection of what appears to be an unstoppable Mercedes juggernaut. For winner Valtteri Bottas, there was pleasing redemption after a puncture cruelly denied him last year and with teammate Lewis Hamilton taking second, Mercedes have now secured four successive one-two finishes. It is the most successful start to a season in the sport’s history, concluded with flawless control to tame the streets of Baku. Sebastian Vettel was third for Ferrari with Max Verstappen in fourth for Red Bull. Vettel’s teammate Charles Leclerc, who had started from eighth after crashing in qualifying, made a valiant effort on an alternate strategy to come though to take fifth. The Monegasque driver’s run caught the attention as Bottas, Hamilton and Vettel were unable to challenge one another out front but it is the bigger picture that Ferrari must consider as Mercedes leave Azerbaijan having now proved untouchable in three of the four races this season. In Bahrain, Leclerc was set to win before a mechanical problem pushed him down the field. Having surpassed Williams’ record of three one-twos in opening the 1992 season, Bottas praised Mercedes. “It means a lot to win,” he said. “It’s incredible the level we’re performing at as a team, that’s why I was saying to the guys I’m so proud to be part of that. We’re all performing really, really well. It’s only my fifth win and it feels good and payback from last year.” Ferrari had appeared to be the form of the field in pre-season testing but have since been overwhelmed as their pace has not re-materialised and Mercedes have repeatedly had the advantage. Hamilton confirmed he felt Ferrari had yet to really compete. “We are delivering on a very, very high percentage,” he said. “Both Valtteri and I are both delivering on the laps. Our team are pumping on all cylinders, they [Ferrari] are not. If they start pumping on all cylinders and start delivering then we will have much more of a fight.” Bottas’s fifth career victory, after his win at the opening round in Australia and two second places in Bahrain and China continues what has been the strongest start to a season of his career. He has issued stern notice to Hamilton that he will face a real fight and that he intends to take a shot at the title. Indeed, it was enough for the Finn to retake the championship lead from Hamilton over whom he now has a one-point advantage. Unfortunately it looks increasingly in danger of turning into a two-horse race as Vettel dropped further back, now 35 points behind Bottas. Ferrari had brought aerodynamic upgrades to Azerbaijan and with a straight-line speed advantage had expected to be strong here. But as they have done so many times before, Mercedes were able to find extra in qualifying and the race. With F1 now set to return to Europe where Mercedes will bring upgrades of their own, they are very much on the front foot, while Ferrari need to find a step forward. They are confident the car has the capability but if it is not unlocked soon the championship will have gone. Vettel believes the difference between them was largely down to making the tyres work and remarked on the frustration at not being able to challenge. “It’s boring isn’t it?” he said. “We have to work harder, work better, they are doing phenomenally well. I know we can improve, I think we have a good car we just haven’t managed yet to put it where it belongs, I am sure it is going to turn around.” Baku had produced dramatic qualifying but the race proved to be an uneventful battle at the front, the key moment coming at the start. Bottas and Hamilton went wheel to wheel with inches to spare through the first two corners but the Finn held his nerve and his line to maintain his lead. It was breathless stuff and while Hamilton said he might have been more aggressive in squeezing his teammate, both drivers kept it clean as the walls loomed over them. Having held his place from pole, Bottas put in a confident drive to secure victory. Hamilton stayed with him throughout, as largely did Vettel but neither had a shot at the lead. Crucially once again Mercedes executed flawlessly. The team are operationally at an exceptional level and, with the habit of winning, show no sign of dropping the ball. Having expected to be chasing Ferrari, to conclude the opening four flyaway races with two victories apiece for Bottas and Hamilton is an opening Mercedes could not have imagined. All that separates their drivers is the single point for fastest lap the Finn scored in Australia. Their fight is finely poised but Ferrari simply must find their way into the fray at the next round in Barcelona. Sergio Pérez took a strong sixth for Racing Point with his teammate Lance Stroll doing well in ninth. McLaren’s Carlos Sainz and Lando Norris also turned in impressive runs for seventh and eighth, with Kimi Raikkonen in the Alfa Romeo in tenth.