Even before news of the horrendous Sri Lanka bombings, which killed Christian worshippers, tourists and locals from many faiths, Theresa May had already focused this year’s Easter message on the global persecution of Christians. The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, sent letters to faith leaders saying he was “appalled” that 245 million Christians worldwide faced discrimination. It is appalling. And so is the hypocrisy of a government that has itself poured scorn on Christians in recent years. People seeking asylum – a tradition well-known from the Bible – have been denied by Home Office officials for reasons including that if an applicant really believed in Jesus, they would not have needed asylum in the UK in the first place. “You affirmed … that Jesus is your saviour, but then claimed that He would not be able to save you from the Iranian regime,” the Home Office told an Iranian woman in a particularly nightmarish example of circular reasoning. “Your belief in Jesus is halfhearted.” A separate Iranian applicant was denied asylum, with quotes from Leviticus – “you will pursue your enemies, and they will fall by the sword before you” – used to argue that Christianity was a religion of “violence, rage and revenge” and “inconsistent” with a desire for peace. These decisions might seem evidence of a particularly enthusiastic hostility towards Christianity in the Home Office, but they really reveal something else. Because the relationship between Christianity and Britain’s sense of its role in the world is very old terrain. I wasn’t going to bring up empire, but the man actually tasked by Jeremy Hunt with reviewing British foreign policy towards Christians has already gone there. The Right Rev Philip Mountstephen, the bishop of Truro, has said, quite rightly, in an interview published over the Easter weekend, that one of the reasons for Britain’s flawed thinking about Christians around the world has to do with its imperial past. But then he manages to diagnose the problem as too much “postcolonial guilt”. There is, he said, “a residual sense that the Christian faith is an expression of white western privilege … whereas actually the Christian faith is overwhelmingly a phenomenon of the … global poor and people who, by their very socioeconomic status, are vulnerable”. If Mountstephen is peering into the annals of British history and finding too much introspection, he must truly have been blessed with a miracle. Anyone with a basic knowledge of empire knows that there are millions of Christians struggling with poverty around the world, and that British missionaries played no small role in creating that condition. As the Kenyan independence leader, Jomo Kenyatta, so aptly said: “When the missionaries arrived, the Africans had the land and the missionaries had the Bible. They taught us how to pray with our eyes closed. When we opened them, they had the land and we had the Bible.” One of the most searing analyses of this history I have encountered recently is The Convert – a play written by Danai Gurira, the Zimbabwean actor and star of the movie Black Panther. It tells the story of a young Zimbabwean woman, Jekesai – played when I saw it at the Young Vic by another Black Panther star Letitia Wright – who enthusiastically converts to Christianity during Britain’s colonial rule before awakening to its role in murdering her people, plundering their land, desecrating their traditions and encouraging them to internalise a belief in their own inferiority as “savages” who were saved. If this sounds simplistic, it’s not. The play’s strength was that it avoided attempting to reduce the complex history of Christian missionaries’ role in empire-building into a simplistic, binary opposition of good and bad. Among other legacies, missionaries also served to educate and equip pan-Africanist revolutionaries and independence leaders, and this has become a proud part of many African identities today. Bearers of this identity – including Gurira herself, who is a Christian – are unafraid to scrutinise the complicity of the church in their countries’ darkest historic episodes. In Britain, the opposite is true. While African scholars are deconstructing the role of missionaries such as Robert Moffat, whose translations of the Bible into local languages created a lasting legacy of “defilement”, British texts still describe the father-in-law of David Livingstone as a harmless, if “paternalist”, friend to the natives. Far from postcolonial guilt, we are still deep in the era of erasure. Most of the Christians I know – including those in the UK – have low incomes and are of African heritage. They don’t have the luxury of feeling guilty about British Christianity’s role in imperial wrongdoing. They are still living with its consequences. • Afua Hirsch is a Guardian columnist