Anna BoghiguianLast chance to see the Egyptian-Canadian artist’s response to the industrial history of Cornwall with Marxist papier-mache, artist’s books and paintings.• Tate St Ives until 6 May. Edvard MunchSymbols of sorrow and anguish that have beauty in their truth.• British Museum, London, until 21 July. The Renaissance NudeSensual depictions of bodies by some of the greatest artists of all time – what’s not to like?• Royal Academy, London, until 2 June. Sean ScullyThoughtful dialogue with JMW Turner by an abstract artist whose every brushmark feels hard won.• National Gallery, London, until 11 August. Mary QuantTime travel to London’s King’s Road circa 1965 and experience the thrill of the new as it was defined by this revolutionary designer.• V&A, London, until 16 February. The Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian, completed 1475, by Antonio and Piero del PollaiuoloA handsome near-naked youth looks dreamily heavenward as arrows and crossbow bolts are fired into his flesh. The story of Saint Sebastian has long been a homoerotic theme in art. This early Christian refused to recant his faith, so Roman soldiers shot him full of arrows. Miraculously, he survived the ordeal. In this version of the story painted for one of the most prestigious churches in Renaissance Florence when the young Botticelli and Leonardo da Vinci were also working there, the elegance of Sebastian’s pose contrasts with the cruel work of the soldiers as they load and fire meticulously depicted weapons. They too reveal fine muscular frames as they bend and stretch. The landscape beyond looks like the Arno valley where Florence lies. A Roman ruin pays homage to the classical world while foretelling its doom. Christian martyrdom has rarely been painted with such cool curiosity about bodies and weapons.• National Gallery, London. Notre Dame Cathedral, ParisFrance’s principal place of worship, and one of the world’s top tourist attractions, was devastated by a fire that started in the early evening of 15 April. The roof and spire were destroyed, but initial fears that the entire building might collapse were allayed by extraordinary efforts by massed fire-fighters. Our writers assessed Notre Dame’s impact on all aspects of culture. And France suggested there will be a competition to redesign its spire. Meanwhile, the makers of video game Assassin’s Creed Unity, set in the cathedral, have pledged €500,000 and their expertise in reconstruction efforts and archaeologists are sharing digital 3D models of other heritage sites in case of future disaster. Sony announced the winners of its world photography awards … … with the top prize going to Federico Borella A new Bauhaus Museum has opened in Weimar to celebrate the design school’s centenary The great artists might have mastered Instagram Kirsha Kaechele served a strange feast to gallery-goers The V&A is revving up to celebrate cars … … and will name a gallery after Sir Elton John and David Furnish TV is on the trail of an art forger Pål Hansen dug deep for the Windrush legacy We took a closer look at the extinction logo Nepal turned a bright shade of red … … while Australia went pink Andres Serrano has created a Donald Trump museum in New York Spanish sculptor Eduardo Chillida has a new museum in San Sebastián Decca record covers were groovy Stolen Van Gogh paintings are back on display Richard Jones captured the face of Welsh mining Michelle Sank’s image of a muscle man in a rabbit onesie is visual anthropology Ellen Gallagher’s Bird in Hand painting contains torn-up maps and beauty ads Basquiat and Haring are heading to Melbourne Erwin Olaf, photography’s Dutch master, is turning 60 Photographer Nat Finkelstein wasn’t all that bad Carlos Javier Ortiz looked deeper at Chicago We remembered photographer Graham Keen … … and Icelandic painter Karólína Lárusdóttir To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign In accordance with the UK’s GDPR data protection laws, if you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please confirm here