Artists, curators and other members of the arts community have challenged a decision by the Tate to resume links with the influential art patron Anthony d’Offay a year after allegations of sexual harassment were made against him. Both the Tate and the National Galleries of Scotland suspended contact with D’Offay in January 2018 after it was revealed that he faced allegations of sexual harassment and inappropriate behaviour from three women with whom he had worked. However, after it emerged that both bodies have resumed links with him, the Tate is coming under pressure to clarify what steps it took to investigate the allegations. In an open letter, signed by figures from the arts community including those who have worked with the Tate, the institution is urged to cut ties with D’Offay and carry out a full internal investigation. The letter states that there are two questions for the Tate organisation: “Has it carried out an internal investigation into the allegations and into its own conduct? Has its ethics committee considered the allegations?” A link to the letter was tweeted on Thursday by Jane Lawson, a Manchester-based artist who said there was a disconnect between values espoused by the Tate and its decision to resume communication with D’Offay while allegations of sexual harassment remained unresolved. Lawson discussed the letter - which she wrote in collaboration with the artists’ collective GIRLFORUM and others – on Thursday at Tate Modern during a programme of Tate-sponsored events. It had 47 signatories by late Friday morning. They included number of artists who have exhibited at Tate. Lawson and those involved intend to present it to Tate at a later date. The Tate and National Galleries of Scotland have shared a prestigious programme known as the Artist Rooms, which was created after D’Offay sold them much of his multimillion-pound collection 10 years ago. Text bearing the former art dealer’s name also looms large on the wall of the Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall. Separately from the allegations against D’Offay by two women, police are also investigating a complaint alleging that he sent a woman malicious messages. D’Offay has consistently said he is unaware of a police investigation and categorically denies all allegations against him. A spokesperson for D’Offay said on Friday that he was unaware of any police investigation and has never been contacted by the police. A spokesperson for the Tate said it had not received a letter, so would not wish to comment until it had done so. They said the Tate had observed the relevant due diligence and all such internal processes were confidential, and the matter was considered by both the ethics committee and trustees. They said D’Offay had retired and the Tate was working with the trustees of the Artist Rooms foundation. The Tate and the National Galleries said in a statement this month: “Over a year ago we were made aware of allegations against Anthony d’Offay. The trustees of Tate and NGS took appropriate time to consider these. “We have not been informed of any formal police investigation and trustees have since resumed contact with him.”