I meet James O’Brien in the LBC offices, straight after his three-hour show on a Thursday morning. It is the day after the UK parliament has voted on its series of Brexit alternatives and said “no” to all of them, and I have a feeling he will have a thing or two to say. Since 2010, really, O’Brien’s has been a voice of reason in an ever-madder pool. While his colleagues at LBC were wondering why we can’t just leave Europe already, and what do young people need houses for anyway, and his erstwhile colleagues at Newsnight were fawning over the far right, O’Brien reminded us who we used to be: passionate yet reasonable, caustic yet kind, apparently genuinely committed to equality and all the Scandi values of tolerance, generosity and respect that went with it. Yet, because the clips of O’Brien that go viral are always the most explosive or playful ones – most recently, it was his skewering of Dominic Raab – his gravity sneaks up on you. Right now, he is deadly serious. He will not predict what happens with Brexit, he says, not in that jocular media abnegation of responsibility, but because: “You can’t make valid predictions in an environment of such utter madness and hypocrisy. Right up until Christmas, it was almost all predictable. When red lines collided with the Good Friday agreement, the result could only be chaos and denial. But then, when it moves away from the realm of things that you can understand by reading and listening, it becomes impossible to call.” He is a bit like Matthew Parris, the Times columnist and former Tory MP, not in his politics or at all in his manner, but in his palpable outrage at what we have been brought to. “It still surprises me, even today, we’ve got sitting MPs talking about WTO terms as if that was even a thing, as opposed to an international safety net, designed to rescue countries that have been turned into basket cases by circumstances beyond their control from complete economic collapse. It’s not something you would ever choose.” He divides Brexiters into four discrete categories, because “it’s impossible to cultivate a theory that applies to them all”. In the Nadine Dorries set are the ones who “just don’t get it. There’s a sort of Dunning-Kruger effect going on where they really aren’t bright enough to understand.” (Dorries famously asked her ERG-ish WhatsApp group to explain what a customs union was, after she got hammered about it repeatedly on Twitter.) “It’s a miracle they’ve ended up in the House of Commons.” (O’Brien retains quite an old-school respect for the institutions of democracy.) The Mark Francoises of this world, meanwhile, are fogged by an “English exceptionalism – this sense that Europe would somehow buckle, and do the opposite of all the things they’ve said they’re going to do, because we’re English. That might mean because we’re economically strong, or it might mean because we’re culturally enriched, but essentially, it’s a Commando comic, second world war revivalism.” Then there are MPs who just made the wrong call: who thought that the pressure from British and European manufacturers who wanted to continue selling things to one another would assure a reasonable and mutually profitable outcome. “Because they didn’t understand the indivisibility of the four freedoms [movement, capital, goods, services], and didn’t fully grasp the relationship between membership and access. I’m very forgiving of MPs who may have gone down that road – but, of course, less forgiving when they don’t put their hands up and admit that they made a terrible mistake and have misled voters.” Finally, there are the Bill Cashes. “The honourable Brexiter, who is profoundly wrong, but for sympathetic reasons. [Cash] hardly knew his dad, because he died in the last years of the second world war [after the D-day landings in Normandy], and someone like that has grown up with an impression of Germany that is now dated. But you’re not going to hear any castigation from me of someone who still blames the Germans for growing up without his dad.” The funny thing is, LBC never hired O’Brien to be a leftie firebrand: when he joined the station in 2003, it was still owned by Chrysalis, a former media group much more interested in music than in anything else, and was trying to keep away from current affairs. He was the former showbiz editor of the Daily Express, a nice, easy-going lad from a nice family, maybe a bit of a mockney – but at the end of the last century, everyone was (he went to Ampleforth College, the Catholic boarding school, but emphatically doesn’t sound RP). “I was really political when I was a kid,” he says (born in 1972, he is now 47 – so the years when he came of political age would have been the grindingly awful last gasp of the Tory government in the early 1990s, when they were clean out of even bad ideas). “That period of Blairism – well, I was still selling suits in 97 [in the Aquascutum store on Regent Street in central London], but getting shifts on gossip columns. Before the Gulf war, there was just so much consensus in politics. There didn’t seem to be any hills worth dying on.” Rosie Boycott, his editor when he was at the Express, reacts with bafflement to his current incarnation, not remembering him as interested in politics at all. “The line I always use,” O’Brien comments, “is what would you rather have done: hang out with Norman Lamont or hang out with Norman Cook?” Essentially, he was radicalised by the coalition government. “It’s probably only since 2010 that I’ve felt fear about what politicians were either preparing to do or were accidentally doing. Austerity was a big thing for me.” The cliche of talk radio is that it leans heavily towards the right, the US shock jock style exported here, often resulting in a stream of unmediated sub Ayn Randian bilge that you would never get on TV. But actually, if you introduce someone who is genuinely listening to the phone-in format, it can tell a story about the state of the nation that not many people are telling. “The call I always remember,” O’Brien says, “was two police officers, husband and wife, and to them it was quite matter-of-fact, although they wouldn’t have told me the story if they hadn’t felt that it was significant. Their childcare costs, coupled with their shift patterns, coupled with their pay freeze, meant that they were now meeting in a cul-de-sac between shifts, and as they crossed, handing their baby from one car to the other. I don’t know where I got this slightly sentimental attitude to the public sector. I went to public school. My late grandad was a copper, but not when I knew him; I certainly didn’t grow up with a proper appreciation of their importance. But something about that really stuck in my craw.” It is hard to say whether or not this is just because he is talking to a journalist, but his ire tends much more naturally towards print media than it does to any named politician (although we swoop back, periodically, to Jacob Rees-Mogg and Boris Johnson just to touch base with how bad things have become, as so many conversations do). “There was a round of industrial action by firefighters, and that was a big wake-up moment for me. The Fleet Street line was: ‘They all commute from Ibiza’, ‘They’ve all got eight jobs’, and I couldn’t quite believe that people I’d known when I was on newspapers, people I’d liked and sat on panels with, were writing columns about how the firefighters didn’t deserve our trust and support. I remember thinking: ‘Crikey, this is a really ugly business that I’m in.’ Journalists, particularly on Murdoch titles, were queuing up to tell the public not to trust and support firefighters, then teachers, then junior doctors. And that, of course, leads inexorably to Brexit.” I am sceptical – the red tops have always been foaming at the mouth about something. He rattles off a quick and polished list of Islamophobic articles and I concede that it is worse, now, than it has been in my lifetime. But I still think something far stranger has happened to broadcast media, which has mistaken its neutrality duty for a blanket ban on any kind of judgment or moral compass. O’Brien’s greatest regret, where Brexit is concerned, is that he was filling in on Newsnight at the time of the EU referendum, “and their impartiality requirements leached into my other world”. He gave Newsnight up for that reason. “I loved doing both. People sometimes kindly suggest that it was an act of epic principle when I walked away, so I could carry on saying what I wanted to say about Trump and Brexit. But if I’d been paying my mortgage with my Newsnight money, and doing LBC for shits and giggles, it would have been a different tension, a different dynamic.” He was one of the speakers at the people’s vote march last month, and introduced Sadiq Khan, who he knows quite well from his LBC programme, but isn’t touting as a future Labour leader. “Sadiq says he has no ambitions beyond City Hall, and I’m comfortable with that. For my taste, he’s too lawyerly.” He then launches into a surprising paean to the courage of Tom Watson, though it’s only surprising on Thursday – by last Friday, everyone was talking about Tom Watson in the context of some fantasy government of national unity, which suggests manoeuvres are going on somewhere, and O’Brien knows people who know stuff. He’s no friend of the opposition, however, and is considered the ultimate centrist dad, as much of a hate figure for Corbyn loyalists as he is for fans of Rees-Mogg. “I can live with ‘centrist dad’. So many words that shouldn’t be insults have become insults. Liberal? Yeah. Do-gooder? I try. Virtue signaller? What do you want people to do; try to do the right thing in secret?” I am not sure that he is a classic centrist: he doesn’t have that surrendered, late-Blairite fatalism, that sense that capitalism is as capitalism does, and the nice people will try to make it better for the poor people. And I am not sure he is a classic radio polemicist either: even though he is fabled for his trenchant opinions, he remains genuinely interested in his callers – they are never just meat for his narrative. He is an instinctive egalitarian – you can hear it in the respect he has for his callers, not in a focus group/vox pop/specimen way, but as equals, who he is actually listening to and prepared to engage with. It’s quite unusual in public life. “I was getting bored with ‘What do you think? Thanks, John; now we’ll go to Brenda’, never asking them to justify their position,” he says. His Damascene moment was with a caller called John, who thought you couldn’t say anything these days without being called a racist. “I said: ‘Say whatever you want, mate. I promise I won’t call you a racist.’ And he said: ‘All right, I live in Hounslow; it’s full of Pakistanis and they all smell.’ There was a long pause as I pondered this astonishing contribution to the programme. I was searching for the question that would pick it all to pieces like pulling on a thread, and the whole jumper falls apart. ‘What do they smell of, John?’ ‘Curry.’ ‘Do you like curry, John?’ And he said: ‘Yes.’ And that’s why I still love my job.” It’s a story he tells a lot - it’s in his book, How to be Right … In a World Gone Wrong. And he likes it, I think, because it gets to the heart of his work: part of listening to people with respect is challenging them, without hostility, as you would a friend. “Everything changed for me when I started asking people ‘Why?’ rather than ‘What?’,” he says.