Part multimedia lecture, part concert, I Fagiolini and their director Robert Hollingworth have joined forces with Prof Martin Kemp for Leonardo da Vinci: Shaping the Invisible to mark the 500th anniversary of Leonardo’s death. Leonardo expert Kemp talks about the artist’s work in often fascinating detail, and Hollingworth and his singers perform music suggested by the art that we see displayed on a screen at the back of the platform. The links between sound and image are sometimes clearcut, sometimes more oblique. Salvator Mundi is accompanied by motets of the same name by Tallis and Herbert Howells, and The Annunciation by Victoria’s Alma Redemptoris Mater. Hollingworth chose the latter, he tells us, not so much because of its associations with the Virgin Mary, but because he found its overlapping phrases suggestive of the folds in the drapery worn by the figures in the painting. It’s in such attention to detail, asking us to listen and look afresh at the familiar, that the evening’s insights rest. The wider theme, meanwhile, is the exploration of the idea of a divinely ordered universe, in which beauty and sensuousness afford access to philosophical and theological truth in ways drawn from Plato’s theory of forms. Vitruvian Man, perfect in his proportions, is equated with a vocal version of the opening of Bach’s Art of Fugue, while the Mona Lisa’s enigmatic beauty is aligned with Monteverdi’s Era l’Anima Mia, in which body and soul are viewed as lovers locked in an amorous colloquy. Leonardo’s sexy, androgynous John the Baptist, meanwhile, finds his musical equivalent in Daniel-Lesur’s mystico-erotic settings of extracts from the Song of Songs. The end result is engrossing, sometimes profound and sometimes witty – particularly when I Fagiolini launch themselves into Janequin’s gung-ho La Guerre, an outrageously tongue-in-cheek survey of François I’s military exploits. Whether phrasing the Agnus Dei from Josquin’s Missa L’Homme Armé with exquisite purity, or tackling the intricacies of Adrian Williams’s beautiful if slightly overlong Shaping the Invisible, specially commissioned for the project, Hollingworth and his singers remain a superb ensemble, outstanding in their range and versatility. • Touring until 5 December.