Coronation Street is not just a saga of families living in the shadow of a knicker factory, it’s a bona fide launchpad to an A-list career. Sarah Lancashire, Suranne Jones, Katherine Kelly, Sally Lindsay, Julie Hesmondhalgh, Joanne Froggatt, Michelle Keegan, Siobhan Finneran, Angela Griffin and Anne Reid (plus Joanna Lumley, if we’re being completist) all got their big break on the Street. Far from being held back by the soap, these women are taking the best roles on TV. If things carry on as they are, every show could soon be presided over by a former Saturday girl from Audrey’s hair salon. Lancashire, who played Raquel Watts nee Wolstenhulme between 1991 and 1996, and again in 2000, kickstarted the trend, leaving Corrie with a golden handcuffs deal from ITV worth £2.6m over two years, making her the highest-paid British actress on television. The Happy Valley star has since traded up from Curly Watts to Richard Gere, her co-star in the BBC’s MotherFatherSon and gained a Bafta and an OBE. If she were a one-off it would be a remarkable story – but our screens are plastered with former Corrie actors. The Coronation Street writer and playwright Jonathan Harvey is well aware of the phenomenon. “I’ve got a friend, a British actress who is very successful in America, and if she goes up for anything in Britain she gets beaten by someone from Coronation Street,” he laughs. It wasn’t always this way, says Harvey: soap stars have historically faced industry prejudice. “Sarah Lancashire broke out at a time when there was still a snobbery around how soap actors were perceived. But that seems to have disappeared.” Is there something in the water in Weatherfield? “Coronation Street is a brilliant environment for a young actor starting out, learning their craft beyond drama school in a professional arena,” says the Corrie casting director Gennie Radcliffe, adding that Lancashire and many others were in their 20s when they joined the show. Sally Lindsay (Shelley Unwin) agrees: “Coronation Street is a northern powerhouse training ground, if you take it as it is and you learn from it. I remember doing 18 scenes in one day – I’d be dead now. I’ll never have a character as deep as that. It was like living another life.” For Lucy Fallon, who plays Bethany Platt, it has been her only training. When she failed to get into drama school and couldn’t afford the £13,000 foundation course, she almost gave up. “I was going to pack it all in to become a midwife, but somebody forced me to audition. Four years later, I’ve learned so much and I’m not in debt.” When Fallon won a slew of best actress awards and the 2018 National Television Award for best serial drama performance, it felt like a graduation, she says. Keegan, who played Tina McIntyre, believes watching Corrie stalwarts such as Helen Worth (Gail McIntyre) and Sue Nicholls (Audrey Roberts) at such close quarters was invaluable: “I remember being given an abortion storyline where it was written that I had to cry and because I was working myself up, trying my hardest to cry, I couldn’t do it. I remember Helen taking me to one side saying: ‘Listen, if you don’t cry, you don’t cry, just act truthful in the scene.’ I took that with me through my whole career.” Lindsay found “the magic of Coronation Street” in working with Betty Driver (Betty Turpin): “She could waltz in at midday, put her glasses on and steal the scene. Her comic timing was sublime.” “Corrie scripts can have comedy as good as you get in a sitcom,” says Harvey, giving one of his favourite-ever lines from Lancashire’s Raquel, responding to a compliment on her cooking: “You can’t go wrong with boil-in-the-bag.” More than adultery and cobbles, Coronation Street was famous for its strong female characters such as Turpin, Ena Sharples, Elsie Tanner and Bet Lynch. “It was a matriarchal show right from the start,” says Harvey. “The blueprint from Tony Warren’s original script was one of feisty women, and that has carried on for generations. The women get the biggest stories, they’re the ones we’re interested in – and you couldn’t say that for every drama series.” “The females on the street wear the trousers, definitely,” says Keegan. And they’re thrown in at the deep end. “I was working five days a week and I had to go through all the emotions: happiness, comedy, death, murder, court cases,” she says. “It was never-ending. And it’s so fast paced – we had four directors in at a time. Your mind has to be so sharp.” With 18 writers on the show, every soap actor serves as their character’s gatekeeper. “Often they’re the only person who knows their character’s history completely,” says Radcliffe, “because producers, directors and writers come and go.” Katherine Kelly (Becky McDonald) likens it to “jumping on a speeding train”: “You are given the script and off you go. I found great freedom in that.” Harvey says the actors have to be at the top of their game: “They can cope with a schedule and learn rewrites in minutes – which saves a production company a lot.” When it does come time to move on from the Street, the first project you take on is crucial to the public’s perception. Lindsay says she was offered a big TV role that was a rerun of her Corrie character but she didn’t see the point, so went to the Edinburgh festival instead and “got into theatre massively”, playing Beatrice in Much Ado About Nothing and doing The Vagina Monologues. (She has returned to the small screen since having children.) When Kelly left Corrie, Harvey says, she “very cleverly” played a posh character, even though she had been told at drama school to expect a career of playing maids because of her background. That has proved manifestly false. “I have always been contemptuous of people who make distinctions between high art and low art,” says Kelly. “I feel it’s elitist and lazy. I don’t make the distinction between a lead at the National theatre and a lead on Coronation Street.” Why else might ex-Corrie stars be killing it? “I do think that being northern – no offence to people from the south – gives you something different,” says Fallon. “There’s a warmth there.” Or it may be their familiarity. As ITV’s flagship soap, Corrie is on the box six times a week, and the BBC and other networks know to capitalise on anticipation to see what its breakout stars do next. “They’re not stupid, are they? They know what gets the ratings,” says Harvey. “They want as many people watching their shows as possible, and if they think a certain performer is going to help them do that, of course they’re going to use them.” Plus, he adds, “it’s easy to get a good show reel” out of Coronation Street: “I can’t imagine any casting director watches every episode avidly, but if they are considering Julie Hesmondhalgh for the lead in something, there are plenty of clips on YouTube of her dying beautifully, or being really funny, on Corrie.” Doctor Who is so fond of using Street stars that Twitter has dubbed it “Coronation Street in space”. Kelly played the otherworldly teacher Miss Quill in the Who spin-off Class, Lancashire was super nanny to the adorable Adipose aliens and Suranne Jones played the actual Tardis made flesh. The last series alone was a virtual Rovers reunion, with Bradley Walsh, Shobna Gulati, Hesmondhalgh, Finneran and Jonathan Dixon. By ’eck – it’s an invasion not even the Ood saw coming. The impact of the master TV creator Sally Wainwright cannot be underestimated, either. Scott and Bailey, Last Tango in Halifax, Happy Valley and the forthcoming Suranne Jones-fronted drama Gentleman Jack are all teeming with Corrie alumnae. Wainwright has said in the past that she wanted to write for Coronation Street from the age of 13, and did so from 1994 to 1999: “When I got to Coronation Street, seeing how stories evolve and develop, and the amount of work that goes into them, that was fascinating. I couldn’t be doing now what I do on my own had I not been through that apprenticeship.” Could this be why so many Corrie stars turn up in her shows? Harvey, for one, says he would hire a Corrie star for any extracurriculars – and, as a graduate of the training ground, Lindsay agrees it would be a no-brainer: “I know they’ll turn up on time and their lines will be learned.” She was moved to develop the idea for Scott and Bailey with Jones because of the chauvinism of TV casting in the early 00s. “Me and Suranne were sitting in the pub after work – I was still in Coronation Street – and she said: ‘I just get the rubbish lines and run after people with a gun.’ I said I was obsessed with Cagney and Lacey growing up, and said: ‘Why don’t we take elements of that concept of two women best friends in high-powered jobs, and create something for me and you?’” It took six years to get made. “It kept getting rejected. One commissioner said: ‘Nobody’s going to watch a programme with two female leads.’” When it was greenlit, Lindsay could not take part – she had already signed on to be the lead in the Sky dramedy Mount Pleasant, although she did make an appearance in every season to play Jones’s sister, Alison Bailey. Do she and Jones reminisce over the Street? “Oh God yeah, we had the time of our lives. We were young and we were mental and this was, thankfully, before cameraphones. It was brilliant. We became best friends. Still are.” It’s just as well – as Radcliffe notes, the Street is something its stars “may never shake off”, even if they leave. Culturally, being in Coronation Street up north is huge, agrees Lindsay. “Whatever I do, I’ll always be that girl from Corrie – same for Suranne. It bugs you for the first few years, then you start to feel nostalgic. It was a great job. I nailed it. I don’t think I’d be where I am without it. It’s something to be proud of, it really is.”