The chancellor, Philip Hammond, has said the inquiry into the leak of the controversial decision to allow the Chinese telecoms company Huawei to help build the UK’s 5G telecoms network had to “get to the bottom of what happened”. Speaking at an investment forum in China, Hammond said he believed there had never before been a leak from the National Security Council – a secret meeting of senior cabinet members and military and security chiefs – and that it needed to be dealt with. “My understanding from London [is] that an investigation has been announced,” he said. “I think it is very important that we get to the bottom of what happened here.” On Thursday it emerged that the cabinet secretary, Sir Mark Sedwill, had written to the senior ministers present at the meeting to demand that they and their aides cooperate with the inquiry and state whether they were aware of the leak. Hammond is the first minister to formally confirm the existence of the high-stakes inquiry, a process that could see phone and email records examined and politicians and aides interviewed by investigators appointed by Sedwill. There have been calls for the leaker, once identified, to be sacked. Some Conservative backbenchers want the police or MI5 to be called in to help with the investigation, which could become a criminal prosecution under the Official Secrets Act. The hunt for the leaker has focused on five cabinet ministers who opposed the decision to allow Huawei, a Chinese telecommunications company, the right to sell “non core” equipment into the UK’s 5G mobile phone networks. All five have categorically denied they were involved. The objectors were: Sajid Javid, the home secretary; Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary; Gavin Williamson, the defence secretary; Penny Mordaunt, the development secretary; and Liam Fox, the trade secretary. Allies of Hammond say he also categorically denies being involved in any leaks from the meeting. The chancellor was one of five other ministers present who were in favour of allowing Huawei limited access, in line with recommendations from the spy agency GCHQ. The others were Theresa May, the prime minister; David Lidington, her effective deputy; Greg Clark, the business secretary; and Jeremy Wright, the culture secretary, who is ultimately responsible for the security of the UK’s telecoms networks. Hammond is in China to participate in the Belt and Road investment forum in Beijing. On Thursday he met Hu Chunhua, the country’s vice-premier, but it is understood the subject of Huawei was not raised by either side. It also emerged on Friday that the Dutch telecoms giant KPN will select a “western company” to work on the core of its 5G rollout across the Netherlands after the US ambassador criticised its apparent plans to give the contract to Huawei. The company’s chief executive, Jan Kees de Jager, told a press conference the decision was in line with that of the British government. “We are not blind to the political discussion about the security of our networks and we do see various potential suppliers for the 5G network in the Europe and US,” he said. KPN had said its decision took into account “the evolving assessment of the protection of vital infrastructure and the influence this may have on future Dutch policy” and that it now intended “to select a western vendor for the construction of the new mobile core network for 5G”. Separate contracts with Huawei on modernising the company’s mobile radio and antenna network were said to be open to being “adjusted or reversed to align it with future Dutch government policy”. The US ambassador to the Netherlands, Pete Hoekstra, had previously said it was “very important” for there to be limits on Huawei’s role due to a perceived security threat.