At the time this was written, Sri Lankan authorities had confirmed that 321 people were killed in a wave of suicide bombings on the island on Easter Sunday. This list does not include all the victims, the vast majority of whom were Sri Lankans. Nisanga Mayadunne and Shantha Mayadunne Sri Lankan TV chef Shantha Mayadunne and her daughter Nisanga were killed in the blast at the Shangri-La hotel in Colombo. Nisanga posted a picture on Facebook shortly before the explosion with the title “Easter breakfast with my family”. Anita Nicholson, Alex Nicholson and Annabel Nicholson Anita Nicholson, a 42-year-old lawyer based in Singapore, her son, Alex, 14, and daughter, Annabel, 11, died when a suicide bomber detonated a device in the breakfast queue at the Shangri-La hotel in Colombo. Ben Nicholson, 43, was the only person in his family to survive the attack. Auto-rickshaw driver K Pirathap, his wife, Anashdi, 35, and daughters Antinaa, 7, and Abriyaana, 1 The whole family were among the dead at St Anthony’s Shrine; they had gone to worship in a celebratory mood after he had bought a new vehicle, the New York Times reported. His brother got a call about a loud explosion and went to look for his relatives. Hours later he found their bodies lined up at the church. Zayan Chowdhury The eight-year-old relative of the Bangladeshi prime minister was killed while having breakfast with his father at a hotel in Colombo when a suicide bomber detonated his device. Sally Bradley and Bill Harrop GP Sally Bradley and her husband, Bill Harrop, a retired firefighter, who are from Manchester but were living in Perth, Australia, died in the Cinnamon Grand hotel bombing. Rangana Fernando, his wife Danadiri, Biola, 6, Leona, 4, and Seth, 11 months The family were all killed in the attack on St Sebastian’s church in Negombo, north of the capital, the BBC reported. “Farewell Danadiri and family, we will remember you all in our prayers,” read a tribute from her colleagues. “She was a dedicated and diligent worker, but above all a kind and caring soul. She will be dearly missed.” Amelie Linsey and Daniel Linsey Amelie, 15, and her brother, Daniel, 19, were killed at the Shangri-La hotel on the final day of their holiday while trying to escape the first blast, according to family members. Godolphin and Latymer school in west London, where Amelie studied, said: “We’re obviously devastated and shocked … our priority is supporting her family and the students here.” Westminster Kingsway College, where Daniel was studying business, said it was “shocked and saddened”, and was offering counselling to students and staff who knew him. Three unnamed children of Danish billionaire Anders Holch Povlsen Three children of the billionaire fashion tycoon behind Asos also died. Anders Holch Povlsen, Denmark’s wealthiest man and one of the largest landowners in Scotland, lost three of his four children. A spokesman for his company declined to give further details. BADN Shantha, 50, TAA Yaheya, 36, GMD Sanjeewani, 35, MHM Ibrahim, 23, and MNM Nisthar, 21 Five of the victims in the attack at the Cinnamon Grand hotel were employees, killed when the bomber targeted the hotel’s restaurant, a spokeswoman said. “It’s Sunday morning during buffet breakfast so it’s one of our busiest periods,” the Cinnamon Grand hotel spokesman told the BBC. “They were servers at the restaurant. One of them was working at the live food stations making hoppers [a Sri Lankan pancake].” Three of the victims — Yaheya, Ibrahim and Nisthar — were Muslims. Shantha was a Sinhalese Catholic and Sanjeewani was a Sinhalese Buddhist, the spokeswoman said. Manik Suriaaratchi and Alexendria Suriaaratchi Manik Suriaaratchi and her 10-year-old daughter, Alexendria, were killed in a blast at St Sebastian Catholic church in Negombo. Rui Lucas The Portuguese citizen, an electrical engineer aged 31, was on his honeymoon with Sílvia Ramos when he was killed. He had gone to get some more food from the buffet when the bomber struck, Portuguese newspaper Correio da manhã reported. “She told me that it was all very fast. He got up and soon after there was an explosion and the room filled with smoke. After she managed to see Rui. He was in front of her, dead,” a family friend who had spoken with the widow told the paper. Mary Otricia Johnson Johnson was among the victims at St Anthony’s Shrine in Colombo, the New York Times reported. She was at mass with her family; her eldest daughter, Sharon Silviya, survived after taking her son to see a fish tank at the front of the church just before the blast. Ravindran Fernando Fernando worked at a restaurant close to St Anthony’s Shrine, and was killed while attending mass with his wife, Delicia, son and two daughters. Father and son were at the back of the church, the women at the front. After the explosion, and the collapse of the church ceiling, the son went running for his mother, “Father is there! Father is there!” he yelled. Fernando was covered in dust and debris; he made it to hospital but died inside, the New York Times reported. Kieran Shafritz de Zoysa A fifth grader at the prestigious Sidwell Friends School in Washington DC, Kieran Shafritz de Zoysa had been on leave of absence from the school for a year, living in Sri Lanka, the New York Times reported. Sidwell Friends is a Quaker private school that has educated the daughters of Bill Clinton and Barack Obama. Parents and students were informed on Monday. Lakshmana Gowda Ramesh, KM Lakshminarayan, M Rangappa, KG Hanumantharayappa, Sri Hanumaiah Shivakumar At least five members of an Indian political party from southern Karnataka, who had gone to Sri Lanka to take a break after the end of the general election in their state, were among those killed at the Shangri-La. Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy, who is also leader of the Janata Dal Secular party, named the dead on Twitter and said two others were missing. “I am deeply pained at the loss of their lives in the heinous attack,” he said. “They were also committed workers of our party and their death has brought immense sorrow to us.” Razeena Khader Kukkady An Indian citizen, aged 68, originally from Kerala but currently living in Dubai, Razeena Khader Kukkady had travelled to Colombo to meet relatives. Her husband had left for Dubai on the morning of the attacks but she was taking a later flight to India. She was killed just after checking out of the Shangri-La. “Her life was just snubbed out in a few hours,” her brother-in-law Usman Kukkady told the New Indian Express. Vemurai Tulsiram, SR Nagaraj and two unnamed Indian citizens The Indian high commission in Sri Lanka named two other Indian citizens who were killed, without giving further details, and said there were two further victims who have not yet been named. Serhan Selcuk Narici and Yigit Ali Cavus Narici was an engineer from Turkey and had moved to Colombo in 2017. The BBC reported he had been working at the US embassy in Sri Lanka. “He sent me a WhatsApp message this morning at 5am saying ‘Good Morning’. That was the last I heard from him,” his father, Baba Mehmet Narici, told the Andalou state news agency. “He was a brilliant child. He graduated with honours from the Istanbul Technical University and spoke two languages.” The other Turkish victim – Yigit Ali Cavus – was also an engineer. Kaori Takahashi Japanese citizen Takahashi, 39, had been living in Sri Lanka with her husband and their two young children, according to NHK, a Japanese broadcaster. They were having breakfast at one of the hotels that was attacked. Her husband and one child were among the injured, the Asahi Shimbun newspaper reported. She had been due to return to Japan in May, the newspaper added. Ahmed Zain al-Jaafari and Hani Majed Othman The Saudi embassy in Sri Lanka named two citizens but gave no other details, the BBC reported. Saudi Arabia’s airline had earlier said two crew members were unaccounted for and another had been taken to hospital with minor injuries, but the statement didn’t mention their nationalities. Reports said the crew members were staying at the Cinnamon Grand hotel. Maria Gonzalez Vincente and Alberto Chaves The couple came from a small town in Galicia in north-west Spain. Chaves, 31, worked for a frozen food company in India and had met up with Vincente, 32, in Sri Lanka for a holiday, El Pais newspaper reported. They were staying at the Kingsbury hotel. Dieter Kowalski The 40-year-old Denver resident was killed during a business trip for the publisher Pearson. “Let the fun begin”, he wrote on his Facebook page before he left, CBS Denver reported. John Fallon, Pearson’s CEO, said Kowalski had just arrived at his hotel when he was killed in an explosion. “We’re angry that a good man, who took simple pleasure in fixing things, has been killed, along with many others, by evil men and women who know only how to destroy,” Fallon wrote in a note to staff. Monique Allen Dutch citizen Allen, 54, was on holiday in Sri Lanka with her husband and three sons. She had gone down for breakfast with one son, while her husband and other sons stayed upstairs. While they were eating, the bomber attacked, a Dutch paper reported. “My son Jason and my wife were sitting right next to each other. And then the explosion happened,” her husband, Lewis Allen, told the BBC. “My son blacked out for a few minutes. And he woke up and he saw his mother with a big head wound and lots of blood.” Two Swiss citizens Switzerland said two of its citizens, one with dual nationality, had been killed in the attacks, the BBC reported. It did not name them. One Chinese citizen China’s embassy said that one Chinese national had been killed, and five others wounded in the attacks. Five other Chinese nationals were missing, the BBC reported. It did not name them.