The littlest birds, so they say, sing the prettiest songs and Tiger Roll could not have proved the point with any more of a flourish on Saturday. For the second year running the smallest horse in the field found a path through the tumult to win the Grand National, and Aintree had its first great hero of the race’s modern era. There is enough in Tiger Roll’s story already to make it worthy of a film or even the full-on Disney treatment: the pint-sized hero who wins against the odds; the wilderness years when he seemed to have lost his zest for the game; the devoted trainer who turned him around; and the cartoon-villain businessman who owns him, whose granite heart is melted by the little horse that never gives up … Perhaps that is taking things a little too far. But there was genuine warmth and feeling in Michael O’Leary’s tributes to Tiger Roll after Saturday’s success, as he talked of being “greedy in business but not greedy in racing”, and the depth of the affection his four children feel for the best Aintree horse since Red Rum in the 1970s. Even the Ryanair chief executive’s famous reluctance to give away anything for free was suspended on the flight back to Dublin, when his fellow passengers were treated to two free drinks, twice as many as last year. O’Leary followed up his post-race comments on Sunday morning, telling Racing TV’s Luck On Sunday programme that Tiger Roll is “very unlikely” to return to Aintree next year. “He will be carrying top weight and he is a small horse,” he said. “Every time he runs now I’m getting nervous and would hate for anything unfortunate to happen while he is racing. There’s huge public affection and we’re duty-bound to mind him now.” It is clearly quite possible that, though its hero is still only a nine-year-old, the Tiger Roll story is already well into its final reel. “I would be strongly of the view,” O’Leary said, “that, if he was to win the Cross Country next year for the third time, which would be his fifth win at Cheltenham, I would see no reason not to retire him at that point and let him go out on a high.” This is not what many fans of the horse and the National were hoping to hear, and it is likely to disappoint ITV’s senior executives too, since there was surely at least an element of “Tiger Factor” on Saturday in the positive viewing figures, up by 12% to a peak of 9.6m after a couple of lacklustre years. Tiger Roll is already the only horse in training that is anywhere close to being a household name. How much higher could the audience figures go on the back of a media blitz in the weeks before his attempt at a feat that eluded even Red Rum? Tiger Roll is a four-legged embodiment of the enduring fascination of racing and breeding. He was bred for the Flat and he is, in his way, a Frankel-esque freak, capable of feats above and beyond what seemed possible before he appeared. Tiger Roll’s enthusiasm for what he was bred and trained to do is also palpable, all of which makes him as fine an advertisement for the sport as one could ever hope to see. If he scoots up in next year’s Cross Country in similar style to this season’s success, the clamour for a tilt at a third Grand National will be deafening. But while O’Leary has amassed a huge fortune by making hard-nosed choices involving risk and reward – and also getting it right more often than not – his emotional ties to Tiger Roll would make this particular decision much more difficult. The risk factor at the modern, modified Aintree is much lower than it was in Red Rum’s day but the death of Up For Review in a fall at the first on Saturday, the first fatal injury to a National runner since 2012, was a reminder that it remains ever present. If it comes down to a choice between retirement for a fit, healthy and relatively young racehorse or a tilt at Grand National immortality, O’Leary can expect criticism from armchair owners if he decides to play it safe. But, though the risk of a serious injury, or worse, for any individual runner in the National is very small, the potential loss involved, not just for O’Leary but also for the sport as a whole, is immense. Who could really blame the hard-headed businessman if he went with his heart? Tiger Roll, after all, is already a horse in a million. Redcar 2.00 Great Dame 2.30 Private Secretary 3.00 International Man 3.30 Sameem 4.00 Reloaded 4.30 Duke Of Alba (nap) 5.00 Champagne Rules  5.30 Paradise Papers Kelso 2.10 Elvis Mail 2.40 Benny’s Secret 3.10 Charlie Snow Angel 3.40 Another Venture 4.10 Sporting Press (nb) 4.40 Hardrock Davis 5.10 Royal Reserve Windsor 2.20 The Defiant 2.50 Dorchester Dom 3.20 Days Of Glory 3.50 Pilot Wings 4.20 Beyond Equal 4.50 Nezar 5.20 Lethal Missile