Absent from the stage for 12 years, Maggie Smith returns in triumph. But this is no barnstorming performance. She plays, with just the right verbal hesitancy and moral evasiveness, a woman who worked in Joseph Goebbels’ ministry of propaganda during the second world war. Based by Christopher Hampton on a German TV documentary shot when the woman in question, Brunhilde Pomsel, was 102, the play is a record of a life rather than a form of judicial enquiry. Pomsel found herself at the centre of events almost by chance. Through her shorthand skills, she quickly moved from work with an insurance broker to a job at the German Broadcasting Corporation before becoming part of Goebbels’ propaganda machine. What comes across is her apolitical naivety. Instructed by the radio company to become a member of the party, she takes a Jewish female chum along to the requisite office. Even when she was a secretary in Goebbels’ office, she suggests that she had no notion of the horrors being perpetrated by the Nazis. But, in a revealing moment, she says of the terrible things that were happening “we didn’t want to know about them, we really didn’t”. What Smith captures brilliantly is the way, in old age, vagueness of memory co-exists with moments of piercing clarity. Rather than sit in judgement on the character, Smith also presents her from her own point of view. She is unapologetic about her delight in Weimar Berlin or about her initial impression that Goebbels was “damn good looking”. At the same time, Smith’s voice chokes as she recalls Kristallnacht and her features pale as she searches, in the post-war world, for information about her Jewish female friend. Above all, Smith suppresses her irony as, seated for 100 minutes, she relives one woman’s extraordinary experience. But, as always, those expressive Smith hands do their work whether tugging at a scarf in moments of grief or ramming home points with firmly clasped spectacles. It is left to the audience to decide whether there is something culpable about Pomsel’s innocence. But, while watching Jonathan Kent’s production and Smith’s superb performance, we surrender to the power of the moment and the evocation of a time when lies became truth.