One of the many pleasures of a crossword in a local paper is the regional detail, where some well-loved place name – Elverton-cum-Latterly, say – is as worthy of inclusion as Glasgow, say, or Manchester. Nowhere is this truer than in the Crosby Courier, as seen in a few recent clues: 1d A French Bill, his sword beheaded many (9)[ wordplay: French version of the name Bill ][ definition: his sword beheaded many ] Most solvers only have one way in here: recalling that any William is known in France as GUILLAUME. You need to be a bit of a history buff to recognise Richard of Guillaume, but any Courier reader will remember from the local news that his tomb was raided for a sword which was used to decapitate a property developer during a ride at an amusement park. Here’s another example: 3d A village whose black and white inhabitants migrate (7,5)[ wordplay: creatures coloured black and white + synonym for “migrate” ][ definition: a village ] The answer here, BADGER’S DRIFT, was probably obscure even for many Courier solvers until 1997, when it first appeared in the paper’s court reports. In an era of underfunding for local reporting, the Crosby Courier has been admirably thorough – and Badger’s Drift has been home to, among other crimes, a malicious electrocution, a poisoning and another decapitation: surely enough to make it memorable to the paper’s solvers. Likewise the flower in this clue: 1ac Fast choir ails the poisonous flower (6,7)[ wordplay: anagram of “fast choir ails” ][ definition: poisonous flower ] ORCHIS FATALIS is not to be found in any mainstream botanical dictionary, but I suspect that no Courier reader or solver has forgotten the trio of murders in 2005, one involving hemlock, another a pitchfork and a third a staged suicide, all related to the illegal import of a deadly strain of orchid. Finally, one more village: 2d Five between ­soldier (5)[ wordplay: Roman numeral for five inside (“between”) abbrev. for a soldier ][ V inside PARA ] PARVA is probably the best example of a locally specific clue. This would, of course, be unfair as an answer in a puzzle in a national paper, but a Crosby Courier solver would immediately recognise the name, especially if the clue were extended to refer to the decapitation above (the first one, that is), the murder of multiple spies, a mysterious death during a school’s running race, a murder with a pistol from the first world war, an attempted bombing, a clergyman being burned alive inside a straw effigy, an impaled pig’s head or, at least, a collection of naked corpses appearing in crop circles. Yes, Midsomer Parva is an unlucky village, and all of the above Crosby Courier clues can be enjoyed in ITV’s recent programme about the area.