The Conservative party has told potential local election candidates it is preparing to fight in the European elections in May, and asked potential MEPs to put themselves forward. An email to prospective Conservative candidates, seen by the Guardian, says the party “will be contesting the European elections on May 23” and formally opened applications, asking would-be candidates to return their CVs before nominations close on 24 April. Conservative MEPs were warned in a meeting last week that they faced “annihilation” in European polls, igniting fury among some at the prospect of having to spend money and time on standing again to either lose their seats or spend an unclear length of time in post, with a number considering whether they want to bother at all. “We will be absolutely annihilated. That’s what was said in the meeting,” one Tory MEP said. “We are probably looking at about half the current number of MEPs. It is going to cost all of us to stand again as the party has very little money for it at the moment. “Many of us are asking: what’s the point? Everybody is going to have to make up their mind soon whether it is worth taking part.” Theresa May has repeatedly insisted the UK will not be taking part in European elections. In her request to the EU for an article 50 extension until 30 June she has said the UK should be able to withdraw from the poll if a Brexit deal was passed by 22 May. Legal preparations are under way for the elections. On Monday, the Cabinet Office laid a “Day of Poll order” in parliament to give notice to returning officers. A Cabinet Office spokeswoman said that it remained the intention to pass the necessary legislation so the UK did not need to participate in European parliamentary elections. “As a responsible government today we have taken the necessary steps required by law should we have to participate,” she said. “It does not make these elections inevitable as leaving the EU before the date of election automatically removes our obligation to take part.” Labour and the Lib Dems have said they have also begun their candidate selections. The Lib Dem Brexit spokesman, Tom Brake, said: “We are raring to go to the polls with a clear offer; every Liberal Democrat elected is another voice fighting for our country’s place in the European Union.” The Conservative party has been repeatedly warned it could face a looming grassroots meltdown because of Brexit, yet new data ahead of next month’s local elections suggests the party is fielding candidates in more than 96% of the 8,374 English council seats being contested on 2 May. Elections guru Robert Hayward said this was the highest proportion seen for this four-year cycle of seats. It does not, however, mean that the Tories will have an easy time of it in the vote, with the party expected to suffer a notable net loss in seats, even if this would be in the context of good results the last time they were contested, in 2015. The Conservatives could also receive a “Brexit benefit” if May agreed a departure deal before the local elections, according to Hayward, who is a Conservative peer as well as being a noted psephologist. The Conservatives’ 96% candidate rate is up from the 93% in 2015. Labour is fielding people in 77% of seats – many of the contested areas are Tory heartlands – and the Lib Dems 53%. The big change is with Ukip, which stood in 44% of seats in 2015, now down to just 16%. “Considering there is this general perception that the grassroots of the Tory party are in total despair, and immobile, 96% is the highest figure in this four-year cycle that’s ever been achieved,” Hayward said. Hayward said some general trends could be forecast, including possible Lib Dem gains in areas represented by strongly pro-Brexit Tory MPs, such as the Somerset constituency of Jacob Rees-Mogg and Wokingham, which is represented by John Redwood. But divining the possible impact of Brexit was very tricky, he said: “The problem is that these things are so fluid at the moment. I have no doubt in my own mind that there is a Brexit benefit to the government if there is a deal. The corollary of that is that there is clearly a dis-benefit to the Tory party to not having a deal. “There’s no question about it, and if you talk to most MPs they will say exactly the same thing. They want a deal so they can go out on the doorsteps and say, ‘We’ve got a deal’.”