Manchester City (89 points) are a point clear of Liverpool (88) after victory in the Manchester derby. Pep Guardiola’s side now need three wins from their last three games – against Burnley, Leicester and Brighton – to retain the title. Liverpool can still finish on 97 points with three more wins, and must hope for a City slip-up. The latest TV fixture changes mean that Jürgen Klopp’s side will play before City over the next two weekends. Manchester City fixtures28 April, 2.05pm Burnley (A)6 May, 8pm Leicester (H)12 May, 3pm Brighton (A) Liverpool fixtures26 Apr, 8pm Huddersfield (H)4 May, 7.45pm Newcastle (A) 12 May, 3pm Wolves (H) Tottenham (70pts) lead Chelsea (67pts), who hold a one-point advantage over Arsenal (66pts) after the Gunners were well beaten at Wolves. Maurizio Sarri’s side face Manchester United (64pts) next Sunday. The three London clubs are all in European semi-finals. A maximum of five English clubs can qualify for the Champions League, so if (for example) Spurs and Chelsea win European trophies but finish fifth and sixth, then the fourth-placed side would drop into the Europa League. Tottenham fixtures: 27 Apr West Ham (H); 4 May Bournemouth (A); 12 May Everton (H) Arsenal: 28 Apr Leicester (A); 5 May Brighton (H); 12 May Burnley (A) Chelsea: 28 Apr Man Utd (A); 5 May Watford (H); 12 May Leicester (A) Manchester United: 28 Apr Chelsea (H); 5 May Huddersfield (A); 12 May Cardiff (H) Watford can claim the third Europa League spot by winning the FA Cup – and are also firmly in the race for seventh place. Their next game is at home to Wolves, who lead the way after beating Arsenal. Javi Gracia. Everton and Leicester could also still grab a place in Europe for next season. Wolves (51pts) Watford (A), Fulham (H), Liverpool (A). Watford (50pts) Wolves (H), Chelsea (A), West Ham (H). Everton (49pts) Crystal Palace (A), Burnley (H), Tottenham (A). Leicester (48pts) Arsenal (H), Man City (A), Chelsea (H). Fulham and Huddersfield are already relegated, with Cardiff (31pts) hoping to overtake Brighton (34), and Southampton (37) still looking over their shoulders. Cardiff fixtures: 27 Apr Fulham (A); 4 May Palace (H); 12 May Man Utd (A) Brighton: 27 Apr Newcastle (H); 5 May Arsenal (A); 12 May Man City (H) Southampton: 27 Apr Bournemouth (H); 4 May West Ham (A); 12 May Huddersfield (H). Norwich are six points clear of Leeds and as good as guaranteed promotion due to their superior goal difference. Sheffield United will all but secure their Premier League place with a home win over Ipswich, with Leeds destined for the play-offs after their defeat at Brentford. Norwich (88 pts, +34) Blackburn (H), Aston Villa (A).Sheffield Utd (85pts, +35) Ipswich (H), Stoke (A).Leeds Utd (82pts, +25) Aston Villa (H), Ipswich (A). West Brom (77) and Aston Villa (75) are destined for the play-offs, with one of Derby (67), Middlesbrough (67) and Bristol City (66) set to join them – although Sheffield Wednesday (63) and Swansea (62, game in hand) are not completely out of contention. Derby and Bristol City have a game in hand on Boro, and play each other on Saturday. Ipswich and Bolton are already condemned to the third tier – and Rotherham (40pts) are favourites to join them. The Millers are three points behind Millwall, who have a game in hand. Luton (91pts) lead the race for promotion to the second tier. Barnsley (88) are ahead of Portsmouth (86) in the race for second, with Sunderland (84) now four points off automatic promotion after drawing at Peterborough. Pompey travel to Sunderland next Saturday, while Charlton are heading for the play-offs. Doncaster (69pts) and Peterborough (66pts) are battling for sixth place. Bradford City are down but above them there is an almighty scramble to avoid the drop. Walsall (43pts), Wimbledon (46) and Scunthorpe (46) are in the drop zone but Plymouth, Southend, Wycombe, Shrewsbury and Bristol Rovers are all still within four points of danger. Lincoln City have sealed the title and automatic promotion in their second season back in the league. Bury (77pts) have taken advantage of slip-ups from Mansfield and MK Dons (both 76) to move second – and Mansfield visit stadium:mk on the final day. Forest Green (73pts) and Tranmere (72) and still have an outside chance at the top three, with Exeter (66) leading a crowded race for the last play-off spot. Colchester, Carlisle and Stevenage are in contention, as are Newport and Oldham, who both have a game in hand. Two from Macclesfield (40pts), Yeovil (38) and Notts County (38) will go down. On the final day, Macclesfield host Cambridge, Yeovil face Carlisle and Notts County go to Swindon. Leyton Orient are surely heading back to the Football League; they go into their final game three points clear of Salford and Solihull Moors, and with a superior goal difference. A point at home to Braintree on the final day will make certain. Wrexham, AFC Fylde, Harrogate and Eastleigh have sealed the other play-off spots. Celtic are nine points clear at the top of the Premiership with Rangers set for second and a place in Europe. Aberdeen lead Kilmarnock by three points in the battle for third. At the bottom, Dundee are six points adrift. Ross County are all but guaranteed promotion from the Championship with Dundee United, Ayr and Inverness set for the play-offs alongside St Mirren or Hamilton from the top flight. Arbroath have sealed the League One title, and Peterhead are four points clear of Clyde in League Two. Berwick Rangers look set to face a play-off with East Kilbride or Cove Rangers to save their place in the league. Arsenal and Manchester City have sealed Champions League places, and the Gunners lead by four points in the league. Arsenal will hope to seal their first title since 2012 with a win at Brighton – before City visit on the final day. Yeovil are relegated, with Manchester United coming up as Championship winners. Tottenham lead the race for second, but have to visit Durham and Charlton, both four points behind. • All information correct as of Tuesday 23 April