Harry Nuriev likes to compare his passion for colour to a relationship. Eventually it sours. For a long time, the Russian architect and interior designer favoured a soft Cadillac pink, before switching to a blue halfway between Picasso and Yves Klein. Last year, for influential New York boutique Opening Ceremony, he created a range of furniture in ultraviolet. That has since ceded to red. Nuriev’s eye for colour has made him one of the few Russian designers to become a big name in the world of interiors. His work is a mix of Bauhaus, 80s art deco and Scandinavian mid-century, all rendered in vivid hues. It’s a common style in cool hotels and restaurants, neatly dubbed “global minimalism” by the New York Times – but Nuriev’s subtle but distinct Russian flavour makes his work stand out. He founded Crosby Studios in Moscow in 2014, straight out of the Moscow Architectural Institute, where he studied for six years. After an effusive response to his debut furniture collection at New York design week in 2016, Nuriev moved to Williamsburg and opened another office; now he skips between these two bases. He’s collaborated with Rem Koolhaas’s OMA, found representation with New York’s Patrick Parrish gallery and has enjoyed rave reviews for his work. His most recent hit, The Office, is a set of retro furniture, which delighted Art Basel Miami in December. The installation features a wooden air conditioner emblazoned with the logo of Parisian fashion house Balenciaga, a wooden photocopier (both are actually storage units) and a lace-covered swivel chair. Nuriev, 35, grew up in Stavropol, in the North Caucasus. His mother was a homemaker, his father a handyman. Even then, he rebelled against conformity: “I always tried to make an alternative world, not crazy, but more emotional, more honest, less painful. People are scared to be different, because it’s what we learn from school: that we have to be the same.” In his teens, Nuriev developed a style that might be considered gender-fluid, before he understood that term, or even what fashion was. “On the street, in school, they’d ask, ‘What is that?’” he recalls. It was the 90s, the end of the Soviet Union, when life in Russia suddenly became more open and a greater influx of international influences rolled in. “We created avant garde in Russia,” Nuriev says. A touch of bravado, perhaps, but he is one of an influential handful of ex-Soviet bloc creatives who’ve had an impact on international style in recent years, among them stylists and designers such as Demna Gvasalia, Gosha Rubchinskiy and Lotta Volkova, and photographers Hassan Kurbanbaev and Dima Komarov. There’s certainly a synergy between these young creatives. Gvasalia is creative director of Balenciaga, the label emblazoned across Nuriev’s Art Basel Miami furniture – a wish fulfilment of fantasies hatched when Nuriev interned in a dreary government office while studying in Moscow. It’s fun, elegant and self-referential, and that spirit is also reminiscent of Vetements, Gvasalia’s fashion collective. The label’s last collection featured a sweatshirt printed with “It’s my birthday and all I got was this overpriced hoodie from Vetements”. There’s a self-mockery that echoes in Nuriev’s work, especially items such as a pendant light made of 300 Bic pens or a furry chair that would look at home on the set of Sesame Street. Although hailed as a leading light of the new generation of minimalist designers, Nuriev blanches at being codified. “I personally think that minimalism is dead,” he says with a shrug. “We have such a boring, miserable life, why should we live with an aesthetic that makes our life more miserable?” There is certainly a Marie Kondo-esque prohibition on clutter in his work, but particular to him are references to Russian culture and his memories of life there. Take the Bic light: it is playful and witty, but also redolent of his childhood when the pens were ubiquitous at his school. It’s a reminder that good design is less about expensive materials than about ideas. He recently showed a sculpture called Carousel at a Dallas art gallery, inspired by Russian playgrounds. What other things excited him as a child? He thinks for a moment. “It could be artificial flowers or plastic curtains or an expensive crystal vase. It’s hard to divide beautiful and ugly.” He is excited by what he considers a renaissance for Russian culture. “For a long time, Russians were simply focused on what was going on in Europe or America. They forgot about their heritage.” At Design Miami in 2017, he worked with Russian tinsmiths to create floor lamps that emulated the rococo embellishments that adorn chimneys and drainpipes on otherwise simple log cabins, or izbas, so ubiquitous in his homeland. “Russian people didn’t get it,” he recalls. “They were, like, ‘Why are you using these chimneys? They’re everywhere in Russia.’ Of course, that was the point. If you don’t respect your heritage, I will.” He smiles. Nuriev has the smooth complexion of someone much younger. “I drink a lot of water,” he says. But he looks weary when we meet in the residents’ lounge of the 16-storey Williamsburg apartment building in which he lives, the result of a hectic schedule that takes him back and forth to Russia. He recently completed the interior for a new Moscow restaurant, in which unfinished plaster walls were juxtaposed with powder-pink furnishings, a combination of gloss and rough that has become a trademark. The space is bathed in natural light to evoke Venice Beach, LA. For another Moscow commission, he exiled the Buddha from a yoga centre and set Shaker-inspired simplicity against calming mint green. “It’s a weird reference, but Shakers are super organised and clear, like your spirit after practising yoga.” Though these monochromatic schemes earned Nuriev his reputation as a minimalist, his flair has more in common with Ettore Sottsass, one of his idols and the creator of, among other things, Olivetti’s lipstick-red plastic typewriter. But while Nuriev’s work shares an emotional register with Sottsass’s, it’s his own grandmother whom he describes as his greatest influence. “I had no idea at six what was fashionable or unfashionable,” he says. “She was just my grandma and I loved her, how she looked, how she smelt, it was all about personality.” He believes this ineffable quality of connection is the hallmark of “honest” design. “At the end of the day, we are all like nine-year-olds and we need something colourful, funny and, most of all, honest.” Nuriev’s next move is into fashion, with his first collection out in May. “I’m starting with jewellery, then handbags,” he says. “It’s luxury, a mix of low-income Russia and middle America.” As always, he is rooting around in his past for inspiration. “We live in New York and interact with the fashion world every day, even if you don’t pay attention,” he says. “But when you live in Stavropol with no Vogue or Bazaar, you have no idea what’s good or bad, but you still have to dress yourself, you can’t go naked, so you have to make your own choice, and this is a very emotional choice – how to dress outside of influence.” Architecture, art, interiors, furniture, clothes, jewellery – is there anything Nuriev can’t do? He doesn’t seem to think so. He calls himself a nomad – his grandmother was descended from Romas – and exhibits a restless energy. As a child, he says, he looked at the world and realised he didn’t see what he wanted to. “I thought, OK, I can create my own language. I have something to show this world.” By six, he was rearranging his grandparents’ furniture, pulling the sofa into the middle of the room. “I loved to play with the layout, but I couldn’t move walls until I was 20-ish,” he says. He loves knocking down divides, expanding the world. When I ask if it took courage to start his own business straight out of university, he looks perplexed. “For me it would be a more relevant question if you asked how I found confidence to go and work for someone else,” he says. “To go to a huge bureau would have required a bravery I didn’t have.” This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.