It is another week where Theresa May must make seemingly impossible demands of her cabinet, her party, Labour MPs and EU negotiators. By Wednesday the prime minister must present the European council with a credible reason for extending the UK’s Brexit negotiating period once more – and every reason she could give is also one that could split her party at home. Unless a new date is signed off at an emergency EU summit on Wednesday, Britain is due to leave without a deal on 12 April. May has written to the European council’s president, Donald Tusk, to request a short extension to 30 June, preferably with a deal reached by 23 May, in order to cancel EU elections. The date would mean Britain could exit before the new European parliament officially sits. The PM’s letter suggested she hoped to convince the EU that there is indeed a plan for this extension period – it gives time for negotiations with Labour to continue in earnest and reach a cross-party agreement. There are just two problems with this approach: Labour and the EU. The chances of May and Jeremy Corbyn emerging hand-in-hand into the Downing Street rose garden having signed a pact to pass a Brexit deal are close to zero. Labour sources are insistent they have not walked out of the negotiations, but those close to the talks were amazed at how little appeared to actually be on offer from the government. Briefing over the weekend suggested more will be on the table next week, but there is little politically to be gained for Labour from doing a deal anyway. As one Labour shadow minister in a heavily leave seat put it: “I’ve got Momentum and my remain-heavy membership telling me to vote against the deal, and I’ve got my local Ukip branch and Brexit campaigners telling me to vote against the deal. Tell me exactly how we’re going to be rewarded electorally for helping the Tories pass their Brexit deal?” The second problem is May’s credibility in Brussels. The EU has already rejected May’s suggestion of 30 June as a plausible exit date once and it remains unappealing, though not impossible. The reason goes beyond the obvious difficulties of a potential cliff-edge during the changeover in the EU parliament. The terms of Jean-Claude Juncker, the European commission president, and Tusk himself would also be coming to an end. Despite all the difficulties, the EU could still agree to the 30 June deadline – or come up with its own timetable, as it did at the last EU summit. Tusk is in favour of a “flextension”, a longer time period with an option to leave earlier once the withdrawal agreement is ratified by parliament. Yet this could also encounter difficulties from member states. In particular, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, who has ambitious plans for EU reform, does not want to see other EU priorities scuppered by a year of endless re-runs of the Brexit cliff-edge. More palatable, according to En Marche MP Alexandre Holroyd on BBC Radio 5 Live, would be a much longer reset period for Britain to give the UK “time to reflect” on leaving the bloc – perhaps at all. There is unease about this approach, too. What if the UK becomes a highly disruptive member state? Holroyd was clear: as a departing member, the UK should not be able to play a full role in determining the future EU budget or its future leadership during any lengthy extension. Such a situation is likely to be highly unpalatable to most cabinet ministers and to even the most moderate Conservative MPs. They are another problem for May, one she must confront if a long extension is all that is on offer from the EU. Cabinet sources have been keen to stress May only has the support of the majority of her cabinet for a short extension to article 50. Even soft-middle ministers like Matt Hancock and James Brokenshire made it clear that was all they would countenance. Brandon Lewis, the party’s chair, has been giving dire warnings about the hammering the Tories could expect at the local and EU elections, should they be held, and Tory activists over the weekend vowed to go on strike. In the end, like so many times before, May could be forced to outsource the decision to parliament. If Yvette Cooper’s bill on extending article 50 passes its final hurdles in the House of Lords on Monday and gains royal assent, parliament will be given time to decide what length of extension May should request. By the time May arrives to meet EU leaders in Brussels on Wednesday, the prime minister may no longer be in charge of her own demands.