When Game of Thrones arrived on the scene, all fire and ice and petite exposed breasts, I thought: I will have to get into this one day. Everyone is tweeting about it and thinkpiecing about it and talking about it at parties. Anyway, reader, I’m sorry to tell you, I have been saying “I gotta get into Game of Thrones” since 2011, and have yet to do so. From what I can tell, the show is one long, bleak hike on which everyone is upset and sometimes horny. Once in a while, a boat, and other times: dragon. But total ignorance on the subject did NOT stop me from forming opinions about Mad Men when that was on the air (just because Don failed to invent Post-its at the end of the series does not mean it was a wasted exercise), and it shall not stop me now. So: here’s how I think Game of Thrones will wrap up. It seems as if it has probably already come a bit (see: army of ice boys, some kind of enormous ice lizard?), but my cultural critic’s expert guess is that winter will probably come more before the season wraps up entirely. Will it last, or will it give way to a confusing 21-degree day where everyone has a picnic but is very concerned about what this means for Westeros’s carbon levels? Will winter recede to a soggy fantasy spring, leaving everyone’s big fur capes and complicated braid hairdos sopping and unwieldy? Only time will tell. From what I’ve gathered, the “Red Wedding” and “someone’s head on a stick” were both key signs that this show is ruthless about killing its darlings, its villains, and everyone else. For this reason, the only fitting end for the series is a climactic bloodbath where everyone kills each other in a way that is very gross and also somehow an act of incest. Speaking of which … Incest is to Game of Thrones the TV show as incest with underage girls is to the Game of Thrones novels. It’s constant! If the big finale isn’t a no-holds-barred, human-creature battle that leaves thousands dead, the only other option is an all-cousin orgy. I simply cannot imagine becoming a passionate fan of a high-budget, prestige show, spending years watching its creators craft a world, immersing myself in the lore of this imagined land, growing to love and hate the rich characters with which it is populated, then one day turning the TV on at the usual time, ready for another hour of gorgeous, carefully constructed television to find: Ed Sheeran singing in a tunic. If the show’s creators were foolish enough to make this decision once, who’s to say they won’t do it again? At least make it worth it, this time by teaming him up with the beautiful old hag priest Melissantander (?) for some kind of ginger magic that brings about the End Times. In conclusion: a Lannister always pays his debts. Thank you for your time.