New Zealand’s department of corrections has been criticised for spending more than NZ$1m (£500,000) on slushie machines in a bid to reduce tensions with inmates during last year’s heatwave. Information obtained by the opposition National party revealed that 193 of the machines were bought as a preventative measure after a record-breaking 2017/2018 summer. An increase in prison numbers meant the risk of violent incidents increased in hot conditions, the department said, and measures had to be taken to try to keep staff and prisoners safe. The sugary frozen drinks were more effective at keeping staff cool than chilled water, the department said, and had been used alongside other items such as wet face cloths and personal fans. Acting national commissioner of police Andy Milne defended the purchase, saying: “The situation had the potential for significantly increased prisoner tension and aggression, and the real risk that prisoners or staff would be seriously hurt as a result.” There are 9,000 corrections staff working in New Zealand’s prisons, and a similar number of prisoners. But National party leader Simon Bridges described the spend as “irresponsible” and an “extraordinary waste of taxpayers’ money”. “This kind of spending shows the government doesn’t need to be taxing Kiwis more, as they clearly don’t know how to spend what they’re already taking,” Bridges said. Corrections minister Kelvin Davis made no apology and said corrections staff worked in conditions reaching more than 30 degrees, whilst carrying around 6kg of protective equipment. Neil Beales, the chief custodial officer at corrections, said the slushie machines, along with other cooling measures, were a success because there had been no major incidents between staff and prisoners during the 2018/2019 summer, despite the hot conditions. “Research shows that the machines offer an immediate and effective means of significantly reducing core body temperature in excessive heat conditions, up to three times more effective when compared to drinking water,” Beales said in a statement. “The feedback I’ve had is that the investment in the machines has been appreciated by our staff.” On social media New Zealanders expressed some surprise at the high price tag, though many said any spending to make a difficult job easier was worth it. A number of people raised concerns about the high sugar content of slushie machine drinks, and wondered if there was a healthier alternative to keep staff cool.