Patience is not an attribute that often springs to mind when thinking of rugby league players but it is a trait Cory Aston possesses in abundance. To suggest the 24-year-old has had to bide his time waiting for an opportunity in Super League would be an understatement; after making his long-awaited debut on Thursday night the sense of relief in Aston’s voice was almost palpable. “There were times when I wondered if this would ever actually happen,” the half-back said minutes after his try-scoring debut for Castleford in their 28-26 win against Wakefield. It was not supposed to be this difficult for Aston who emerged at his home-town club, Sheffield, as a highly rated teenager tipped to follow in his famous father’s footsteps. Cory’s father, Mark, is synonymous with Sheffield Eagles. He has coached the Championship side in more than 500 games and as a player is most famous for his man-of-the-match performance in their famous 1998 Challenge Cup final win over Wigan. This created a significant shadow that, until now, has proven difficult for Aston Jr to step out of. His form in the Championship landed him a move to Leeds in 2017 but he failed to feature for the Rhinos. The following year he moved across West Yorkshire to Castleford, but could not break into their side either, even returning on loan to Sheffield in pursuit of regular first-team rugby. “I wouldn’t say I nearly gave up at that point but you do begin to wonder if anyone was going to chuck me into a game,” Aston said. “There have been some tough days and some real low points. Now I’ve had that chance and I can’t thank Daryl [Powell, the Castleford coach] enough, but it’s certainly been a difficult couple of years.” With injuries mounting among the halves at Castleford in recent weeks Aston got his chance and wasted no time in seizing it on Thursday, excelling at half-back and showing signs he can thrive in Super League. However, he almost missed his big break. “I was having a Sunday roast with my dad and the rest of the family and missed the call from Daryl twice!” Aston remains grounded, perhaps a sign of the maturity he has accrued from his formative years in the Championship. “I can close this door now having finally made my Super League debut, but it’s the start of another challenge now to show I can stay in this team. It’s been tough, but the Championship really does make players. It’s a brutally tough competition but you’ve seen the players who have come through that level, and having played 100 games there I think it’s toughened me up and given me the platform to build from. I am actually proud of doing it this way, the way I’ve got to the top flight.” Aston’s try produced understandably emotional celebrations from the player, as well as from his father, who was watching in the stands. Should the half-back retain his place for the trip to Catalans on Easter Monday – which, given the calibre of his performance on debut, should be a formality – it could be the start of a prolonged run in the first team. “I’ve played a lot of rugby in the Championship, lots for a 24-year-old, actually,” he said. “I have always believed I was ready for this opportunity and now I’ve been given it the onus is on me to keep it going.” Since he burst on to the scene in 2013 the half-back has constantly been referred to as Mark Aston’s son, rather than his own man. Now, having finally made his breakthrough, perhaps he can begin to craft his own path at long last.