Mauricio Pochettino promised that Tottenham would finish in the Premier League’s top four and qualify for the Champions League, after he watched his team open their new stadium with a 2-0 victory against Crystal Palace. The manager described it as one of the best moments of his life and he said it vindicated the club’s decision to move into the 62,062-capacity ground as soon as it was ready – rather than play out the final games of the season at Wembley, which has been their temporary home since the beginning of last season. Spurs moved up into third place in the Premier League after a first victory in six games, secured thanks to second-half goals from Son Heung‑min and Christian Eriksen. “We were right to move here now,” Pochettino said afterwards. “There were risks, of course, but in football, if you want to achieve, you need to be brave. We were brave to move and play here this season. It was a bit of pressure but the excitement and motivation from our fans made everything possible. We start to feel that this is home. “I am confident we are going to finish in the top four – no doubt. I believe in my players and trust in them. This group of players and staff and everyone at the club deserves to be in the Champions League next season. We have worked so hard to try to deliver the move to the stadium and we are here now.” Pochettino added: “For our opponents, it is going to be so difficult here. If I am playing for Tottenham, I am so quick and fast in that atmosphere. It was impossible not to be affected by the energy. If you are not motivated to play in this atmosphere, something is not right in your head.” Like the Spurs chairman, Daniel Levy, Pochettino was overcome by pride. “It’s difficult to describe the emotions,” he said. “I felt so happy to see the face of Daniel before the game. For him, it’s one of the best moments in his life. He built one of the best stadiums in the world. To be here as the manager, I am a lucky man. I want to say thank you to him. I will always keep this day in my heart. It’s one of the best moments of my life.” Pochettino said Spurs were now “World Cup winners in terms of facilities; now the team has to be on the same level.” He added: “To win tonight was so important to us. Tonight, we touched the glory. Now we need to touch the glory of lifting trophies.”