Seesawing through three decades, Pierre Jarawan’s first novel – a bestseller on its original publication in Germany, where he moved from Lebanon as a boy in the 80s – is a multilayered mystery of family secrets set against the turmoil of Middle Eastern politics. It turns on a disappearance. The narrator, Samir, begins by recalling how his father, Brahim, who fled Lebanon to settle in West Berlin in 1982, left their house one night never to be seen again. Before he vanished, the telephone would ring, only for the caller to stay silent. Brahim, claiming it was a sick relative in Lebanon, would dash to a phone box, saying it was too expensive to call from home – but making Samir promise not to tell his mother. Why? The question shadows Samir’s life, as he wonders whether he was right to keep his promise. His early years are characterised by guilt, heartache and crushing loneliness. In one especially painful scene, the boy – unpopular at school – is delighted to find himself invited to a classmate’s birthday party, only to fall victim to a cruel prank during a treasure hunt when, blindfolded, he’s led to a copy of his father’s missing person photo. As Samir’s narrative darts back and forth between his memories and the moment of remembering, we see that time doesn’t heal. Blaming his mother for carrying on with her life, he messes up relationships, ditching a would-be girlfriend to watch the news about the assassination of Lebanese president Rafik Hariri. He gets sacked from his job at a library when he’s caught pilfering old newspapers in an increasingly unhinged bid to make sense of his loss. Samir’s emotional stasis leaves him feeling he has no option but to try to track his father down in Lebanon, undeterred by the violence spilling over from neighbouring Syria. “Lebanon had become a refuge for so many millions. Why not for me as well?” As he embarks on a road trip around the country – in 2005, the novel’s narrative present – we see that Brahim’s story is also the story of a nation and a region. Yet while Jarawan guides us through Lebanon’s history of sectarian conflict, embedding political context in ever-so-slighty hokey dialogue, he’s ultimately concerned with affairs of the heart; when an old photograph emerges of Brahim standing in military uniform next to Bashir Gemayel, one of Hariri’s predecessors, it’s pivotal, but for reasons we don’t expect. Translated by Sinéad Crowe and Rachel McNicholl, Jarawan’s style is pacy and unadorned, with a narrative design that urges you on. Samir’s hopes of uncovering the truth are raised, dashed and revived over and again: his grandmother in Lebanon is one of several interlocutors to tell him they have no useful information before suddenly remembering that they do, just as a chapter ends. As the sense grows that Brahim’s fantastical bedtime tales were a kind of veiled confession, Jarawan skilfully reconciles the novel’s potentially competing goals of educating his readers as well as entertaining them. • The Storyteller by Pierre Jarawan (translation by Sinéad Crowe and Rachel McNicholl) is published by World Editions (£11.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99