On Wednesday in Belfast, the funeral of journalist Lyra McKee took place, following her murder in Derry last week. She was a steadfast activist and writer who had, at just 29, been doing award-winning, hard-hitting and empathetic journalism for many years. She captured the experiences of LGBTI people in Northern Ireland, her own included, and portrayed the struggles of all people in the province regardless of age, class, orientation or politics. She had only recently moved to Derry to live with her partner, a native of the city. Responsibility for her death was claimed by the New IRA, a dissident paramilitary grouping mostly considered a fringe movement of dissolute men, now held in contempt by all but the most craven extremists. On Monday, it released a statement “apologising” for the killing, itself such a repulsive piece of self-serving cowardice that no further mention of its contents is warranted here. As someone born and bred in Derry, I can scarcely remember the city being more united in revulsion. To see the DUP leader, Arlene Foster, applauded on stage at a vigil for McKee in the staunchly nationalist Creggan estate, is testament to that. The imposition of a boundary with Donegal would be economically ruinous, socially disastrous and politically reckless Police arrested two men over the killing, an 18-year-old and a 19-year-old, but both have been released without charge. Whatever the age of the perpetrator, the rioting that preceded the tragedy was, as is so often the case, undertaken by teenagers and even young children. We are seeing evidence of the breakdown of Derry’s social fabric – something that the city’s inhabitants have been warning of for many years. To be blunt, McKee’s murder makes it difficult to summon even a modicum of curiosity about how we got here – there is simply a feeling of disgust that we are in this position. But this murder is not merely a breakdown of law and order. To dismantle the environment that birthed this chaos, we will need to do more than pick off the rank-and-file youths within a nascent paramilitary death cult. All teenagers in Northern Ireland were born after the Good Friday agreement was signed. They are exactly those people whose stories McKee so adroitly captured in her writing; young people left economically and socially deprived, in a time of greater uncertainty for the province than any point in the last two decades. “The Ceasefire Babies was what they called us,” she wrote three years ago, in an article on suicide in Northern Ireland, which suffers from the highest rates in the UK. “Those too young to remember the worst of the terror because we were either in nappies or just out of them when the Provisional IRA ceasefire was called.” It would be asinine to discuss knife crime in England without referring to the effects that austerity, deprivation and social alienation have on young people. Doing so doesn’t exonerate individual youths, but illuminates the pipeline by which they become inducted into the cyclical grind of futile violence. So too, must we recognise the issues that have created Derry’s disaffected youth, and handed recruiting tools to those who seek to use that for their own ends. For young people in Derry, the economic outlook is bleak. While the Good Friday agreement brought peace, the so-called “peace dividend” of economic growth materialised only piecemeal in the province as a whole, and remains wholly absent in overwhelmingly nationalist Derry. In 2017, the city was listed bottom of 57 cities in PWC’s Good Growth for Cities report. Of youths surveyed that same year, 95% claimed they saw no future for themselves in the city. Writing in the Derry Journal last year, journalist and activist Eamonn McCann reported that, while Belfast’s economy has grown by 14% in the years since the agreement was signed, Derry’s has contracted by 7%. Belfast’s per capita income in 2015 was £31,000, while the comparable figure for Derry was less than half that. It is hard not to see this as a result of civic neglect, and the starkness of these economic realities is used by dissident republicans as evidence of indifference to nationalist suffering, tied to longstanding persecution from the unionist, and British, authorities. At 19 years old, a Derry citizen will never have voted for their local legislative assembly, as the collapse of Stormont – and apparent total lack of enthusiasm for negotiating its reinstatement – has now rumbled on for more than two years. Nor will they have voted in the EU referendum, during which 78.3% of their constituency (Foyle) voted to remain, the third highest such vote in the country (after Lambeth and Hackney). Contrary to much of the, perhaps well-meaning, international coverage of dissident republicanism, I find it hard to believe that the Brexit vote radicalised anyone not already down for the cause. The same can’t be said of the near constant agitation for a hard border in the event of a no-deal Brexit, and anti-Irish rhetoric from hard Brexit enthusiasts was exactly the kind of corrosive, divisive politics that plays into the hands of dissident republicans. Derry’s westerly border with Donegal is where I grew up, and the imposition of a boundary there would be economically ruinous, socially disastrous and politically reckless. It would not only radically affect the economy and quality of life of almost every single person in Northern Ireland, but the separation it would entrench for citizens, north and south, would also contravene the Good Friday agreement, undermining the self-determination of all Irish-identifying citizens. In the three years since the referendum, many prominent Brexiters who categorically ruled out undermining the agreement during their campaigns are now saying that contravening it would be no big deal. If this was the case, why was this hard-won pact that ushered peace into Northern Ireland after 30 years of violence, ever thought necessary to sign in the first place? In a depressed economy, in the absence of any local political authority, and with widespread uncertainty surrounding central pillars of the peace treaty that gave Derry two decades of relative calm, organisations like the New IRA are free to peddle their confected, violent, clip art republicanism as a false solution to the city’s ills. They wish to bring violence back to Derry’s streets for their own ends. If we want to stifle their ambitions, we must crush the middle-aged masterminds, but also start listening to the ceasefire babies. • Séamas O’Reilly is a writer from Derry