Nigel Farage’s Brexit party will win the EU elections unless Labour can portray itself as the natural home for remain voters, Margaret Beckett has claimed. Polling commissioned by the People’s Vote campaign suggested the former Ukip leader’s new party was on course for a five-point lead, with remain voters split between Labour, the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish National party, the Green party and Change UK. “These elections have proven to be rich hunting grounds for Nigel Farage’s brand of extreme rightwing politics before and may be again,” Beckett said. “But the message of this poll is loud and clear: it suggests that if anyone can stop Farage winning, it is Labour – and only if we back [a] people’s vote.” Beckett, a former foreign secretary, said that if Labour hedged its bets and backed “another form of Brexit, [then] Labour loses voters and Farage will storm to first place”. The YouGov poll of 1,855 voters on Monday and Tuesday puts Farage’s Brexit party on 27%, followed by Labour on 22% and the Conservatives on 15%, though a high proportion of people said they did not know who they would vote for or that they would not vote. The polling suggested Labour would lose votes to the Lib Dems if its manifesto for the European parliament elections – which are due to take place on 23 May unless parliament can pass a withdrawal deal – supported going ahead with Brexit, even with different terms such as a customs union. Labour has selected the majority of its MEP candidates this week, but faces an internal battle over the highly prized London seats after a selection panel suggested two new candidates, one of them the national coordinator of Momentum, should take priority over a sitting MEP, Seb Dance. Dance, a vociferous anti-Brexit campaigner who shot to prominence for holding a sign behind Farage in the European Parliament reading “he’s lying to you”, has a large following on social media, who expressed outrage at the prospect he could be effectively deselected, with the party unsure of winning four seats in London. The panel, which included the Momentum founder Jon Lansman, had reportedly wanted to place Dance fourth on the list, behind the more leftwing candidates Laura Parker of Momentum and the GMB’s Taranjit Chana, though senior party figures are understood to be likely to intervene to ensure Dance is placed higher. “The leftwingers on the panel just want to take every single scrap of ground and every tiny battle and Seb is not seen as a Corbynista,” one NEC source said. “But the agreement we have had is that sitting MEPs take priority, which is the rule that has been followed in every other region.” Labour sources suggested they were unsure that the party would experience a surge in support for European elections, warning of a threat from Brexit parties in north-east England as well as pro-remain parties in the south and London. “If you go out canvassing at the moment, most people will say, ‘You’re all a shambles,’” one party source said. “There is some genuine concern from staff about how safe it will be in some areas.” On Wednesday, the Lib Dems announced their MEP candidate list. The party’s leader, Vince Cable, said: “We will fight these elections on a clear message: a Liberal Democrat vote is a vote to stop Brexit. From local communities to the EU institutions, Liberal Democrats are determined to give a voice to the millions of people who demand better than Brexit Britain.” Cable said the campaign would be transformed if Labour came out in favour of remaining in the EU in a second referendum, although he doubted the party would. “I find it difficult to see they could do that given that Jeremy Corbyn has said repeatedly he is there to deliver Brexit, but it certainly would change the nature of the argument,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.