A decision by the US government to deny entry to Omar Barghouti, a prominent Palestinian activist and the cofounder of the controversial Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel, has drawn accusations that the move is an attack on freedom of expression. While others spoke out in favor of the ban, Barghouti has condemned the decision as “politically motivated” and part of Israel’s “escalating repression against Palestinian, Israeli and international human rights defenders”. Barghouti was traveling to the US for a speaking tour but on Wednesday was barred from boarding his flight from Israel’s Ben Gurion airport, near Tel Aviv, according to a statement from the BDS movement, and the Arab American Institute (AAI), a Washington-based advocacy group that arranged the trip. Barghouti said he was told his valid US visa was revoked for “immigration reasons”. He was planning to meet with journalists and policymakers in Washington, New York, Philadelphia and Chicago, and attend his daughter’s wedding. “I am hurt but I am not deterred,” he said about missing that ceremony. In a statement, AAI said: “Barghouti was not provided an explanation for his denial of entry beyond ‘immigration matter’.” “Visa records are confidential under US law. Therefore, we cannot discuss the details of individual visa cases,” the state department spokesman Robert Palladino told reporters. “US law does not authorize the refusal of visas based solely on political statements or views if those statements or views would be lawful in the United States, no matter how distasteful or objectionable some may find those statements or views.” During his US trip, Barghouti was scheduled to speak at public events at New York University and Harvard University. The ban lit up social media with arguments against the ban and in favor. One critic tweeted: “Whether you support or oppose the BDS movement, if you do believe that non-violent political struggles and freedom of expression are important values, you should be concerned.” The New York congressman Lee Zeldin, a Republican, tweeted: “This foreigner is filled w/anti-Israel & anti-Semitic hatred. We should reject Omar Barghouti’s hate, reject the BDS movement, & reject his many examples of blatant anti-Semitism.” A joint petition by AAI and the Jewish American campaign group Jewish Voice for Peace is demanding the reinstatement of Barghouti’s ability to travel to the US. At least 27 states in the US have introduced laws to combat BDS activism, according to Palestine Legal. Earlier this year, the US Senate passed an anti-BDS bill that would allow state and city governments to terminate contracts with US entities that support the BDS movement. The Trump administration has taken steps to demonstrate strong support for Israel and, specifically, the prime ministership of Benjamin Netanyahu, who was just re-elected, most recently recognizing Israel’s claim to the disputed Golan Heights.