Towards the final stretch of Drake’s The Assassination Vacation show, the stage in the centre of the O2 transforms into a laser-etched basketball court. Like some kind of hip-hop Jim Bowen, Drake invites a plucky audience member to shoot hoops for cash, with a £20,000 bonanza if he can score from the halfway line. When tonight’s contestant becomes the latest to fail to land a difficult shot in front of 20,000 strangers, Drake is in a bind. “I’ve still got £20,000 to give away,” he frets theatrically. “I might just have to find a pretty lady and take her to Harrods.” For the biggest pop star in the world, this is the equivalent of putting small change into a collection tin. With his relentless output and memeable videos, the Canadian rapper and singer has dominated the attention economy of the streaming era in the same way that Madonna commanded the MTV age, but for even longer. Apart from a brief interregnum in 2017, Drake has had at least one song in the Billboard Hot 100 every week for the past 10 years, including three No 1 hits from his latest album, Scorpion. Passages of his Wikipedia entry read like a corporation’s report to its stockholders. By any criteria, the 32-year-old reigns supreme, hence seven sold-out nights at the O2, which has been temporarily rebranded the O3 in reference to a lyric from one of those chart-toppers, God’s Plan. God’s Plan, which closes the set, is preceded by a story-so-far montage of home video clips in which the young Drake has a laugh with Rihanna, sips champagne from a Grammy and so on. It’s striking how skinny and boyish he looks up there on the video screens; how obviously delighted he is by his good fortune. On the stage below, the corporeal Drake is a brawny hulk clad in the kind of black, militaristic gear you might choose if you needed to unload a crate of contraband assault rifles from a helicopter in a failed state, but he still seems exceedingly happy to be here, on a Monday night in London, England, and cannot stop saying so. He compresses several early tracks into a whistlestop medley like someone clicking through a Spotify playlist Compared with the crackling intensity of Kanye West or Kendrick Lamar, Drake is a showbiz kid. After Nigerian singer Wizkid has popped in to perform a couple of high-energy songs (previous nights’ surprise guests include Future, Giggs and J Hus), Drake chases after him to give him a final hug before he leaves the stage, like a conscientious party host. It’s an endearingly awkward moment for such an athletic performer. He really wants everyone to have a good time. To this end, Drake tirelessly circles the stage so as not to short-change any sector of the arena. That stage is an impressive oblong of LED tiles, which enables the ground beneath his feet to turn in a heartbeat into a swimming pool, a lava field, a colossal iPhone Instagram feed or a writhing scorpion. What’s missing from this state-of-the-art spectacle is the narrative structure that anchors most modern arena shows, and you could say the same of Drake’s unusually steady career. His upbringing wasn’t that tough, his struggle not too arduous, his success uninterrupted. While he’s adept at assimilating new styles, from Afrobeats to New Orleans bounce, his lyrics remain fairly static, with each album dwelling on the familiar themes of sex, relationships and the rewards and drawbacks of fame. That clearly hasn’t done him any harm, but it doesn’t provide an arc for a show. The result is a hiccuping set with boundless energy but no governing idea. Things just happen. Occasionally, six women appear, to dance in formation. During Yes Indeed, a drone-powered model of Drake’s favourite yellow Ferrari weaves drunkenly through the air. A constellation of glowing orbs swirl like will-o’-the-wisps around his head for Elevate. There are lasers and pyrotechnics and Wizkid and that peculiar basketball challenge. Most of the time it’s just Drake: rapping, occasionally crooning, and lovebombing his fans, but throwing away some of his best songs. Compressing several early tracks into a whistlestop medley, like someone impatiently clicking through a Spotify playlist, might be a necessary evil for a man with a record-breaking 95 US top 40 hits, but halting his sinuous 2015 smash Hotline Bling after a minute feels perverse. The set sacrifices rhythm to momentum. By the time Drake reaches a gushing final monologue that’s longer than any of his songs, the charm of his patter has waned as well. This could be the best audience of the tour! (He always says that.) This could all end tomorrow! (It won’t.) He could play all night! (Please exit the venue promptly.) No pop star should be penalised for an ingratiating shtick – that’s showbusiness – but Drake offers no flash of spontaneity to distinguish this show from the previous night or the next. I wrote down many of the things he said, only to realise later that almost none was worth quoting. The fireworks were good though. It must be said that the diverse crowd is royally entertained. Not every arena show can keep people on their feet from the first song to the last, or successfully climax with a run of recent hits (Nice for What, Nonstop) rather than old favourites. Still, there is something missing: that crucial sense, which usually attends a multi-night arena residency, that you have been in the presence of someone exceptional, rather than just a nice guy with a lot of stamina. It’s a strange feeling to leave a show by pop’s unrivalled megastar thinking more about the stage than about the man who stood on it.