Carlos Ghosn has said he is “getting ready to tell the truth” about the scandal that resulted in his arrest on charges of financial misconduct, as the former Nissan chairman prepares to talk to the media for the first time since he was freed on bail last month. On Wednesday, a post on a newly created Twitter account under Ghosn’s name said: “I’m getting ready to tell the truth about what’s happening. Press conference on Thursday, April 11.” I'm getting ready to tell the truth about what's happening. Press conference on Thursday, April 11. It was not immediately possible to confirm whether Ghosn was behind the account, whose 8,000-plus followers appeared to include his son Anthony. The account, apparently verified by Twitter, also tweeted the statement in Japanese. Under his bail conditions, Ghosn is not allowed to access the internet and his offline use of computers is restricted to business hours on weekdays at his lawyer’s office. The 65-year-old Frenchman, who was born in Brazil and is of Lebanese descent, has repeatedly denied allegations he deliberately under-reported his salary by tens of millions of dollars and used company funds to cover personal investment losses. His 108-day detention in Tokyo attracted international criticism that some speculated was behind a shock court decision to release him on bail in early March, set at $1bn (£760m) and with strict conditions. Aside from restrictions on mobile phone and computer use, Ghosn, who left detention disguised as a workman, must remain in Japan and a security camera was installed at the entrance of his home in Tokyo to monitor him. He is also banned from having any contact with other people connected to the case, including executives at Nissan and his co-defendant, the former Nissan representative director Greg Kelly. On Wednesday, Japanese media reported that prosecutors were considering a new charge against Ghosn, in addition to the three he already faces. The potential aggravated breach of trust charge relates to at least $32m in Nissan funds that were transferred to a distributor in Oman, according to the Jiji news agency. Some of the money is believed to have been used to buy a luxury boat allegedly used by Ghosn and his family.