How surreal must it be for George RR Martin right now, to see Game of Thrones viewers cavorting with exultation about this week’s epic battle of Winterfell while his own version of the story of the Starks , Lannisters and Targaryens continues to stagnate in plotlines the TV show covered three seasons ago. However, Martin – who has frequently admitted that he is finding the sixth and penultimate novel in his fantasy series The Winds of Winter “challenging” to write – is keeping us hanging on for his final two books with promises that his version of the story will have its own surprises. And in an interview with Neil DeGrasse Tyson this week, he revealed that he’s bringing in unicorns. “I tried to be very accurate, for example, with horses. A lot of fantasy writers get horses all wrong. They make them these tireless beasts that can go anywhere and gallop for seven days straight,” said Martin. “You don’t give the horses wings on their backs, like Pegasus,” responded Tyson. “I have an interesting take on unicorns coming up in the new books,” said Martin, who then smiled. “Oops.” Now, as any fule kno, this isn’t Martin’s first mention of unicorn-like creatures. In A Dance with Dragons, Jon Snow dreams of Rickon’s direwolf Shaggydog tearing at the flesh of a unicorn-like beast – “an enormous goat, washing the blood from his side where the goat’s long horn had raked him”. Later, the wildlings hand over “a helm made from a unicorn’s head, complete with horn” (along with an “ivory phallus”, just in case you’d forgotten). Digging deeper, The World of Ice and Fire locates such horns on Skagos, a mountainous island inhabited by the potentially cannibalistic Skagosi. According to the compendium, “those seafarers brave enough to trade on Skagos have glimpsed the stoneborn lords riding great, shaggy, horned beasts, monstrous mounts so sure-footed they have been known to climb the sides of mountains”. As the fansite Winter is Coming points out, in the books we assume that Osha has taken Rickon to Skagos after Winterfell burns, and Davos Seaworth has been sent to fetch him back – so might Martin drop in a unicorn or two here? He’s already admitted, in an old interview with a French paper, that he’s happy to break JK Rowling’s “ironclad” rule that “you don’t have sex near unicorns”. So: unicorns. Hurrah. Keep going, George: we’re all rooting for you. There are a number of storylines that never made the show: Lady Stoneheart, Mance Rayder escaping his death in disguise, or the Dragonbinder horn, but as the poor writer has HBO literally spoiling his series for him on a weekly basis, I can’t blame him for chucking in a few unicorn-shaped surprises. What I’d really like to see, though, is Martin’s take on a kraken.