Hugo Lloris Outfoxed on the goal. Saved smartly from van de Beek on 25 minutes. Otherwise quiet. 6/10 Toby Alderweireld Had work cut out, particularly in first-half. Few loose moments, including missed headed chance. 6 Davidson Sánchez Nervous start. Did not look happy on ball. Fortunate to get away with a couple of mistakes. 4 Jan Vertonghen Appeared to convulse after coming off, following head clash, which was horrible to see. Warrior spirit. 6 Kieran Trippier A threat with his free-kick deliveries in first half but crosses in open play too often poor. 5 Victor Wanyama First movement in possession was often backwards, uncomfortable when Ajax pressed him. Unreliable. 4 Danny Rose Caught out on de Beek’s goal, another to feel frustrated when Ajax hustled. Fought to keep temper in check. 5 Christian Eriksen One of his quietest games in memory. Simply could not get anything going. 4 Dele Alli Stifled in first half, he showed up after the interval to nearly make something happen. 5 Fernando Llorente Missed first-half header. Enjoyed some nice moments in build-up play. Second best against De Ligt. 5 Lucas Moura Looked a decent bet to stretch Ajax with his pace and dancing feet. Where was the end product? 5 Substitutes Moussa Sissoko Changed the game. Gave Spurs a different way to press. Powerful surges. 8 Ben Davies 6 Juan Foyth 6 André Onana Solid performance, though fortunate some time-wasting went unpunished. 7/10 Joël Veltman Steadying defensive presence, did not give Rose any change. One error led to yellow card foul. 8 Matthijs de Ligt Built like a tank, relished the physical battle with Llorente. Radiated assurance. Towering performance. 9 Daley Blind Did not like it when isolated in the air against Llorente. Tidy on the ball. Calming presence. 7 Nicolás Tagliafico Mistimed one tackle on Eriksen to be booked but did not miss many others. 7 Lasse Schöne Made a few loose passes early on but soon found his rhythm and range. Made way for energy of Mazraoui. 7 Frenkie de Jong Total command of the space around him. Never lost possession. Always made the right choices. 8 Hakim Ziyech The touch and fizzed pass for the goal was lovely. Oozed class on ball. 8 Donny van de Beek Untouchable for first 30 minutes, when he dummied, shimmied and scored. Complete performance at just 22. 9 David Neres Threatened with his pace. Movement inside off flank intelligent. Should have scored rather than hit post. 7 Dusan Tadic The most unconventional of No9s, he roamed wide and deep to link up the play. Team player. 7 Substitutes Noussair Mazraoui 7 Klaas-Jan Huntelaar 6