James Cracknell, drained by a test that had pushed his body once more to the limit, still ensured he had the energy to congratulate every member of his Cambridge crew after they won the 165th Boat Race. He was, however, a very singular element of this successful nine. At 46 Cracknell is the oldest man to compete in the race. Already a double Olympic gold medallist and six-times world champion, just making the Light Blue boat was a remarkable achievement, emerging victorious a personal triumph. For Cambridge it was a notable double, with their women’s crew also securing victory on the Thames. The win is Cambridge’s 84th, they are now four ahead of their rivals and it is the first time they have won two races in a row since their dominance between 1993 and 1999. They looked in control after a strong start and, although Oxford stayed close, the victory in 16min 57sec had not looked in doubt. Cracknell took gold at the Sydney and Athens Games but retired from elite rowing 13 years ago. He is eight years senior to Andy Probert, who in 1992 became the oldest competitor, and it is a spectacular comeback from adversity. He fractured his skull when knocked off his bike in Arizona in 2010, suffering bruising of the brain and memory loss, and has spoken about how it affected his personality. The Boat Race was one of the greatest challenges of his life, he has said, one perhaps compounded when he recently split from his wife, Beverley Turner, with whom he has three children. Challenge complete, Cracknell suggested he was ready to move on. “If I pass my course I am done, so I had better catch up now,” he said. “The last two weeks this and studying is something I have had to focus on. Tomorrow is going to be hard. It’s going to be empty and that’s when real life starts. I’ll enjoy a celebration now and then tomorrow I have to make sure I am there for the three most important people in my life.” Cambridge had the Surrey station and made the stronger start, their high rate putting half a length on Oxford in the first minute and half on the outside line. It was a declaration of intent but Oxford were in no mood to capitulate and, as the Light Blues looked to squeeze their opponents, there was a brief clash of oars. They held almost a length by the halfway point but could not shake off Oxford. By Barnes Bridge the Cambridge cox, Matthew Holland, wanted more and they responded as he urged his men to “finish it”. They did so with finality and a length. The Cambridge women also savoured jubilation in victory after what had been expected to be a tough fight turned into almost a rout. Their dominant win was the 44th to Oxford’s 30 and the third in a row for the Light Blues. Tricia Smith first competed on Boat Race day in the lightweight race in 2015; she was then with the Blondie crew in 2017 before being part of the winning Cambridge crew last year, and was the only one of them to return. She relished a highly successful conclusion to a new challenge. “A pleasure as always –a different crew, a different year but still enjoyable and really rewarding,” she said. “It was challenging and taught me a lot. With new people it is enjoyable, everyone brings something. It’s four for me and maybe I will come back for a fifth.” Oxford had come into the race optimistic, with the crews looking evenly matched, but it was potential that failed to materialise. Cambridge, on the Surrey station, made a powerful start and edged ahead despite not holding the advantage of the opening bend. They quickly turned it into an insurmountable lead. With a lively stroke they had clear water and by Hammersmith Bridge the advantage was two lengths and Oxford had no extra gear. Under the guidance of Hugh Spaughton at cox the pressure was maintained and by Barnes the two boats appeared to be in separate races. Cambridge took the line in 18min 47sec, 14 seconds off the record, with a five-length margin of victory, having watched the opposition adrift of their stern almost throughout.