Something unusual happened in a debate in the European parliament this week. The arch-European federalist Guy Verhofstadt was applauded by Ukip MEPs as he laid into Donald Tusk for enabling the extension of Britain’s Brexit deadline until Halloween. No such extension should have been allowed, said Verhofstadt, to the evident joy of the Brexiters. The rift between Tusk, the president of the European council (the meeting of the 28 prime ministers or presidents of EU countries) and Verhofstadt, the chair of the European parliament’s Brexit steering group, was a public sign of the first major division on the EU side in the Brexit process. But Verhofstadt’s rant should be taken with a pinch of salt. He was speaking as leader of the Alde group of liberals in the European parliament, not on behalf of the parliament. He was no doubt thinking that a new batch of UK MEPs is likely to include many Labour MEPs but few Liberal Democrats. The centre-right EPP group has similar concerns. They both dislike the reinforcement of the Socialist and Democrats group in the European parliament that Labour is likely to bring in the elections, coming just as the new parliament elects the next president of the European commission, in which the socialist candidate, the Anglophile Dutchman Frans Timmermans, has every chance of being elected. Some MEPs have a different fear: that Nigel Farage might return with phalanx of MEPs intent upon sabotaging the work of the parliament. In practice, that is unlikely. The 24 MEPs elected as Ukip in the last elections have made little impact on the parliament. When they bother to attend at all, they can often be found in the bars. But even if they were more organised and intent on preventing the parliament from working, the latter’s rules of procedure make it possible to deal with organised disruption. Then, of course, there are the UK Conservative MEPs, terrified of a catastrophic election result for their party as they pay the price for their government’s divisions and incompetence. But most MEPs do not share this apprehension about extending the Brexit deadline. In their view, tails shouldn’t wag dogs. The issue of Brexit – the EU losing a member state for the first time in its history, the negative economic impact, the implications for security, the many and the many practical inconveniences – are far more important and long term than the exact balance between the parliamentary groups after one particular election. All the more so in the event of a catastrophic, no-deal Brexit. And similarly within the European council, only the French president, Emmanuel Macron, pressed for a short extension that would not have given Britain time to reconsider Brexit to find an alternative deal or to hold a new referendum. That brings us back to Verhofstadt. He is trying to curry favour with Macron because he wants any MEPs elected for Macron’s La REM (La République En Marche) party to join the Alde group in the parliament. Such a focus on narrow, short-term, partisan interests does a disservice to all. It is far better to take as much time as necessary to solve Britain’s Brexit crisis – even if that is inconvenient for a few short-term party political calculations either in the European parliament or in Britain. • Richard Corbett MEP represents Yorkshire and the Humber, and is the leader of the European Parliamentary Labour Party