The human heart has hidden treasuresIn secret kept, in silence sealed;The thoughts, the hopes, the dreams, the pleasures,Whose charms were broken if revealed. Charlotte Brontë, Evening Solace Blond, good set of boobs, blue eyes, good figure, good personality. Stevie, 23, Just One Night (BBC Three) Some human hearts are simpler than others. And a good thing too: living in a world full of Brontës would be exhausting. On the other hand, the premise of BBC Three’s new series is so awful that you do yearn to flee across the moors, screaming your agony to the heavens before immuring yourself for life in the nearest forbidding stone farmhouse. You take one couple at “a commitment crossroads” (loosely translated “who, like everyone else in the history of ever are wondering if, in an ideal world, they could do better, but who are too young to know that the answer lies anywhere but a reality show”). You introduce each of them to their “perfect on-paper partner” and send them off on separate date nights to see what happens. It reminds me of the Pendle witch trials – if you duck the suspect and she drowns, she was innocent; if she survives, she’s guilty and gets burned at the stake. Nothing good can come of it. Stevie meets a knockout in a red dress. Her name is Shannon. “My friends would describe me as the life of the party, maybe.” “Homewrecker!” I hear the shades of a hundred bosom-hitching nanas whisper as Stevie’s eyes come out on stalks. Stevie’s girlfriend of four years, Bonnie, 22, is introduced to Moses, 25. “I’m here to test the waters, be a bit of a menace to this relationship.” He was – mainly by listening to Bonnie talk about her relationship, then therapising the shit out of her. “I feel like a lot of this is based on what makes him happy. You should take control … I feel like my role here is to tell you what a catch you are … You should know your own worth.” At the end of dinner they go dutch and their separate ways. Bonnie muses on her experience. “It made me realise I don’t need to be with Stevie to be happy. I need to realise what I’m worth without Stevie.” “Also,” I cry, as I give my own bosom a good hitch, “you’re both CHILDREN! Lord ABOVE!” Meanwhile, Stevie and Shannon have discovered they share a favourite pizza topping (“ham and pineapple!”), city (“New York!”) and dream car (“Lamborghini!”) and have gone on for more drinks. As the evening wears on, you can see him warming as much to her easygoing nature as to her red dress. “Bonnie had a few not-nice exes,” he says thoughtfully. “And I think she takes it out on me a little bit.” Decision time and it’s all shaping up nicely. Until they actually meet and matters take a sharp right turn, then a hard left, then a U and then – well, the upshot is: they love each other to bits. Stevie just wants her to “release that leash a little bit and let me live my life – with you! – and you will see a much different side to me. I’ll be a much more honest and approachable person.” He wants, now, what Bonnie has been wanting all along – for them to move in together. He talks about being with each other “30, 40 years down the line, have lots of little Bevies running about”. She is delighted and he is, too. Interviewed afterwards he says, beaming: “No doubts. I feel like a new man. I couldn’t have hoped for a better ending.” It’s all lovely, but it makes no sense. Possibly because the human heart contains multitudes, all madder than the last, but the overwhelming sensation you are left with is the artificiality of it all. So much has evidently been lost in the edit – particularly in the final section – that the shaping (or in this case very poorly shaping) hand becomes ridiculously apparent. Which is at least all of a contemptuous piece with a series conceived in such bad faith.