Kate Faithfull-Williams The formula for peaceful sleep is so closely guarded that only 20 people in the world know it. This groundbreaking development was pioneered by Nasa in the 1970s, as space scientists developed a viscoelastic foam to support and cushion astronauts during enormous G-forces at lift off. Designed to respond to every individual’s body, this remarkable foam distributes weight and pressure evenly for complete comfort. Which is no mean feat when gravity is forcing every sinew of your body earthbound. So how has technology from the space programme found its way into our bedrooms? That giant foam step for mankind led to the creation of a mattress – involving 10 years of research and development – that makes you feel almost weightless. I’ve slept on my Tempur mattress for years, long before I sat down to write about it here (#authentic). When I’m away on holiday I look forward to coming back home to my foam. To confess that I am in love with that mattress is no exaggeration at all. And honestly, in my slightly out of this world moments when I’m just on the cusp of sleep, I feel as if I’m floating among the stars, free from worries about work and family and whether I turned the dishwasher on. Though, of course, I am not an astronaut, I am the mother of two small children who like to wake up at weird hours, so sleep is basically heaven for me. There is no greater luxury in life. “It takes a couple of seconds before you sink into the material,” says Tempur senior research chemist Simon Simonsen. “We call it the Tempur ride, or the Tempur melt.” Then comes that feeling when you lie back and the tension sinks away from every muscle – the “Houston, we have a solution,” moment. We have the miracle of pressure-relieving weight distribution to thank for this, apparently. Our sleeping styles are as individual as our fingerprints, so it makes sense that we each need a personally optimised mattress. Uniquely, Tempur material is highly adaptable. The foam gently moulds to support your hips, back and other pressure points, to help you sleep in complete comfort. The mattress is clinically proven to significantly reduce pressure points. Result: less tossing and turning, and fewer aches and pains. And if you share a bed, it means you’re less disturbed by your partner tossing and turning too. Flat out on my foam, I forget the knots in my shoulders and the ache in my back, and for the first time in my day I feel completely at rest. My husband was sceptical at first, but now he’s a complete convert and claims every other mattress gives him backache. So what sets Tempur apart? “The name ‘Tempur’ comes from ‘temperature’ and polyurethane,” explains Niels Julksjær, director of product innovation and product management at Tempur. “The material has an open cell viscoelastic structure that adjusts to your body’s unique shape, weight and temperature.” Yes, temperature. Fine-tuning your thermal impact is absolutely crucial to a good night’s sleep. Sleep scientists agree that around 18C – probably cooler than you think – is the optimum room temperature, while your bed should feel comfortably warm. The trouble is, our bodies naturally give off heat during the night, as do the bodies of our partners, and if we get too hot we wake up. Don’t get me started on a 3am headspin, or I’ll be up all night. But here’s where the uniquely sensitive Tempur foam comes in: its open-cell structure helps air flow through the mattress, and thus helps to regulate body temperature. Now, 28 years since launch, Tempur is still the only mattress product recognised by Nasa and certified by the Space Foundation. But the technology is still evolving. There are seven variations of foam in Tempur mattresses and pillows. You can play with firmness and cushiness to find one that suits. Really, the best thing to do is sleep on it – you might just wake up refreshed, energised and ready for lift off. (Too far? Too far.) Comfort conceived in space at the core of every mattressTEMPUR material lies at the core of all of our mattresses and pillows, and is still the only mattress product recognised by Nasa and certified by the Space Foundation. Find out more about TEMPUR’s mattresses and pillows at uk.tempur.com.