Where did all those hobbits, ents and orcs really spring from? And what inspired the powerful bond of fellowship that carries little Bilbo and Frodo along their paths? The many fans of the work of JRR Tolkien will soon have a fresh answer to ponder because the new biopic about the author’s young life, starring Nicholas Hoult, suggests his schoolboy experiences were the source of all that creativity. The argument of the film, directed by a Finn, Dome Karukoski, has not gone down well with the Tolkien family or with his literary estate. They have stated they “did not approve of, authorise or participate in the making of this film” and do not endorse it. So that is clear. Whether this will make Tolkien a better or worse film, though, is less clear. There is a growing thirst in the entertainment industry for films that promise to tell “the truth” about major cultural figures, from Rami Malek’s recent Oscar-winning performance as Freddie Mercury and Keira Knightley’s portrayal of Colette, to upcoming films about Elton John and Morrissey. But the biopic boom has also exposed a public tug of war over the ownership of these notable life stories. “On the whole, it is easier putting together a good biopic about someone who is already dead,” says British film producer Stephen Woolley, who has made a string of biopics including 1996’s Michael Collins, 2005’s Stoned, about Brian Jones of The Rolling Stones, and last year’s Colette. “On the other hand, although you know you should have a big audience, the more famous someone is, the more of a minefield it becomes.” For film critic and screenwriter Jonathan Romney, a wise biopic director should probably choose a subject slightly to the edge of popular mainstream consciousness. “There is a sweet spot to hit, somewhere between making a film about someone really obscure and about someone who is so well known that there is little to add,” he says. “In that case you can end up warming-over the myths that are already out there and having your audience simply waiting for the arrival of the ‘eureka moments’ they already know about in a life.” Romney cites Genius, a film made by Michael Grandage in 2016, as one that walked too far off the beaten path in its subject matter to find much of an audience. “It is about the author Thomas Wolfe and his editor Maxwell Perkins. But how many people now really want to know about that? And of those that do care, are they going to go out to the cinema to see Jude Law and Colin Firth in the roles?” Biographical films often provide golden opportunities for actors to win plaudits: Kirk Douglas’s Oscar-nominated portrayal of Van Gogh in Lust for Life set a high bar in 1956, as more recently did Eddie Redmayne’s emotional and physical transformations as Stephen Hawking in The Theory of Everything and Daniel Day-Lewis’s rendition of Abraham Lincoln. But the renewed interest in bringing “true-life” depictions to the big screen also seems to be driven by a misguided wish to avoid fiction and its flights of misleading fancy and stick to what we know has really happened. This is something that no film-maker can possibly deliver. “When it comes to the biopic of someone very famous, you are supposedly making a film because you have a big potential audience out there, something that works in terms of box office,” says Woolley. “But with Bohemian Rhapsody, for example, the film delivered in lots of ways for fans and seemed credible, but was that really Freddie Mercury? There was no family involved to steer it, but Queen’s members were involved and they are like family.” Woolley believes a fine line is walked in the development stage: “As a producer doing research you will find out lots of interesting facts that people don’t know about someone, and ideally you want some of that in the film to prompt people to find out more. But it can be hard if you are making a film about someone best known for something, say like making a certain kind of fun music, yet you find they are not like that. If they turn out to be someone dark and strange and a little bit off, what do you do?” When Woolley was making Stoned, it was hard, he explains, to get anyone to say anything “all that nice” about Brian Jones: “The danger then is being accused of attacking a star that people love. People just don’t want to hear that story.” Last year’s Laurel and Hardy film, Stan and Ollie, is an example of such a compromise, he thinks. “It must have been tricky for them, because Stan Laurel seems to have been a more difficult character than the one Steve Coogan played, and Hardy’s gambling was perhaps worse than was shown. But audiences don’t want that.” So, far from a temptation to sensationalise and demonise, the real creative peril for a director is hagiography, or at least doing a bit of a whitewash. And particularly if the film has been endorsed by its subject or by the family. Going on an all-out attack, as the 2018 biopic Vice did, can be more fruitful, especially if the whole dodgy process of biography itself is placed centre stage, as it was in this lively portrayal of the American politician Dick Cheney. Christian Bale’s performance was compelling, but the intention of the film-makers was also refreshingly clear. This was a hatchet job. And in the end intention is key. Does a biopic intend to celebrate or to denigrate, or is it purely aiming to be a good film? According to Romney, many of the movies that dispense with workmanlike verisimilitude are all the better for it: “The Wim Wenders film Hammett, about the thriller writer Dashiell Hammett, made him a detective within the story, working on his own life, while David Cronenberg’s Naked Lunch, about the author William Burroughs, was in no way a straight biopic, yet it told us much more about the mind of the man than another approach might have done.” Van Gogh has made a good subject for biopics, Romney notes: “There was Lust for Life, which is fantastic, [Robert] Altman’s Vincent and Theo, and then the recent Julian Schnabel film At Eternity’s Gate, starring Willem Dafoe, which is really said more about the director and his beliefs about creativity than it did about the artist.” Both families and literary estates cause problems for biographical truth-seekers even before a film is being made, of course. Sylvia Plath’s husband, Ted Hughes, destroyed one of her journals, limiting the perspective of the 2003 film about the poet with Gwyneth Paltrow. The literary executors of TS Eliot, George Orwell and Lawrence Durrell have also held back letters and diaries from would-be biographers. The neatest solution may have been found by Thomas Hardy, who secretly composed his own biography to be published on his death as if written by his widow. When it comes to the publicity war, a film can win and lose both ways. Family support is a useful endorsement, but a good protest, such as the one about Tolkien, often kickstarts a promotional push. “To some extent producers are quite happy to have someone involved with a real story say something critical about it, because it means there is a row,” admits Woolley. “It gets people interested. But PR advice is rather sophisticated, now so the famous are often advised to keep quiet, rather than speak out and increase the level of publicity. It all depends how big a “brand” they have to protect.” If the guardians of a creative legacy do speak out, it is often not simply to protect a reputation of an individual, but to defend a body of creative work against damaging revision or trivialisation. But all attempts to safeguard a sacred truth are doomed to failure when a story is significant enough to be retold. After all, “artistic licence” is not just a naughty habit of the entertainment industry, it is essential to condensing and retelling any story. Lust for LifeKirk Douglas plays Vincent Van Gogh for director Vincente Minnelli in 1956. The Paris Review said: “They have sent tumbling toward us, in a steady stream of primary color and emotion, the whole tempestuous truth of a career that vibrated from the black coal pits and sky blues of Holland to the voluptuous yellows of Aries and the red and ready lips of Moulin Rouge and Montmartre...” Raging BullMartin Scorsese directs Robert de Niro in 1980 as champion boxer Jake LaMotta. The Observer’s Philip French: “De Niro is the greatest screen actor of his generation, and his impersonation of the brutal prizefighter Jake LaMotta is a physical and dramatic tour de force.” La Vie en RoseMarion Cotillard stars in the 2007 story of Edith Piaf.“One of the best biopics I’ve seen,” wrote veteran American critic Roger Ebert. LincolnDaniel Day-Lewis inhabits the 16th president of the US in Steven Spielberg’s 2012 study. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw: “It was a gaunt, wintry, wounded but determined Lincoln that Day-Lewis created for the screen; a wonderful, humanist leap of imagination, finding a way into a historical figure who is otherwise dauntingly legendary, like something marble or granite. Day-Lewis found a Lincoln of flesh and blood.”