Almost every meal I cook these days comes in at under 30 minutes. A side effect of my impatience perhaps, but more likely it’s the reality of being one of a pair of working parents. Dinner is a quick, post-work family meal, or something cookable in the time it takes the other to do bathtime. Kids or not, we are all short on time to shop and cook. The potato traybake packs in lots of flavour for the time it takes to prepare, thanks to the quick romesco. The other is a spring favourite and a perfect way to make a meal of seasonal asparagus, though it’d be good with broccoli too. Now, I’d better get on with dinner. You can mix up the herbs you use here; thyme or rosemary would work instead of oregano, but you’ll need a little less – and be sure to chop it finely. Polenta packet instructions vary, so check the cooking time on yours and adjust accordingly. Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 4 125g slightly salted butter, plus 50g for frying the sage8 sage leaves200g instant polenta75g freshly grated parmesan or pecorino (I use a vegetarian one)2 sprigs oregano, leaves picked and roughly chopped1 small bunch parsley, leaves picked and finely chopped1 small bunch basil, picked and shredded200g asparagus, woody ends snapped offOlive oil, to drizzle4 eggs Bring two litres of water to a boil in a large pan. Heat a small frying pan over a medium heat and, once hot, add 50g butter, then fry the sage leaves until crisp. Tip the leaves and butter into a bowl. Remove the large pan from the heat and slowly pour in the polenta, whisking all the time, so that no lumps form. Return to the heat and cook gently, stirring, for eight minutes (see note above on timing). Add the parmesan (for added flavour, cut off the rind and add this, too), the rest of the butter, plenty of seasoning and more just-boiled water if you think it needs loosening (remember it will thicken a little as it sits). Stir gently until combined, then add the oregano, parsley and basil, stir again, and keep warm over a low heat. Meanwhile, bring a medium saucepan of salted water to a boil, add the asparagus and cook for one minute. Remove with tongs, put in a bowl, season with salt and drizzle with olive oil. Reduce the heat, crack an egg into a glass, tip the egg in and slowly lower it into the water to cover. Repeat with the rest of the eggs. Cook for three and a half minutes, or until the white is firm but the yolk still soft. While the eggs are cooking, spoon the cooked polenta (avoiding the rind) on to warm plates and top with the asparagus. When the eggs are cooked, scoop them out, drain well, then place carefully on top of the polenta. Spoon over the crisp sage and butter, and serve. Prep 15 minCook 25 minServes 4 500g baby new potatoes, large ones halved2 large leeks, halved and sliced into 2cm pieces1 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained2 garlic cloves, bashed4 sprigs fresh oregano or thyme, leaves pickedZest of ½ orangeOlive oil, to drizzleSalt and black pepper1 small bunch parsley, roughly chopped For the romesco50g ground almonds25g hazelnuts1 thick slice of stale sourdough or good white bread, torn into chunks 1 tsp sweet smoked paprika 150g jarred roasted red peppers, drained1 tbsp sherry or red-wine vinegar4 tbsp olive oil Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/ 390F/ gas 6. Toss the potatoes, leeks and chickpeas with the garlic, oregano or thyme, orange zest, olive oil and plenty of salt and pepper on your largest roasting tray – you might want to spread them on two trays so the vegetables have enough space to crisp. Roast for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, start on the romesco: in the same oven, toast the nuts and bread on a baking tray for roughly six to seven minutes, until they are a little coloured. Whizz the nuts and bread with the smoked paprika in a food processor, until you have a rough crumb. Add the peppers, vinegar, oil and a tablespoon of water, then season and blitz again, until you have a slightly textured but silky sauce. Once the vegetables have had their 20 minutes, take them out of the oven and toss them with half the romesco. Return them to the oven for a further five minutes, or until golden and beginning to crisp. Serve with extra romesco, if you like, and sprinkle with parsley leaves.