These are banner times for the education system across Australia and North America. The New York Times has revealed that out of almost 900 students admitted into the top selective public school in New York City, only seven were black. In Australia, the racial segregation of students in our schools is hardly, if ever, openly discussed. Rarer still, is the racial demographic among our teachers. The latest figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics showed there were just under 300,000 teachers in Australia’s primary and secondary schools. Historically, the ethnic imbalance of students in selective schools has been pitted against the Anglocentric population of elite private schools. And yet, when it comes to the teaching cohort, there is very little data on the racial and ethnic demographic. In the past few years, the lack of cultural diversity in mainstream media, sports and government has been a contentious topic of discussion. Young people need a healthy variety of role models and representation across a range of multimedia platforms to encourage a wide spectrum of career choices. But what about the individuals who stand in front of them, day in day out? What about the individuals who guide them through their curriculum, deliver information, skills, perspectives, world views and ideologies? What about the teachers? How diverse are they? I graduated high school in 2005. I’ve never been asked to reflect on the type of education I received, how it has influenced my position in society, how it has affected the career trajectories and opportunities I’ve had. Least of all, I have never been asked, “Were all your teachers white?” In December last year, I attended a workshop on race awareness at the University of Sydney delivered by visiting professor Robin DiAngelo from the University of Washington. The most confronting slide during her presentation listed the following statistics on “the halls of power”: Chief executives: 97% white. Senior leaders: 95% white. Prime ministers: 100% white. Senators: 97% white. Parliament: 97% white. High court judges: 100% white. The top-grossing television shows and films cast white actors. Billboards and magazine advertisements feature, almost exclusively, white faces. “And who were your teachers?” DiAngelo asked. I thought back to all the teachers I’d had at Carlingford high school. None of them looked like me. So what are the statistics on the racial diversity of school teachers in Australia? My research did not go far. To date, there has been no substantial study measuring the racial and ethnic demographic of Australia’s teaching staff in primary and secondary schools. In the US, just under 20% of school teachers identified as non-white. The figures are most likely similar, or worse, here in Australia. If we’re going to have a diverse, multicultural Australia in the future, is this not concerning? As feminist writer Michelle Dean says, there is always intellectual value in not being like everyone else: not being a man, not being white, not being upper class, not being from the right school. In my 10 years as a teacher in Sydney, I’ve moved across the most elite private schools this nation has to offer. At each school, the student demographic is overwhelmingly Anglo, and this trend is reflected in the teacher population. At many schools I am the only Asian teacher. My first teaching placement was at James Ruse agricultural high school, where up to 97% of students speak a language other than English at home. And yet, I, along with my supervisor, who was of Asian heritage, were the only teachers who racially represented the majority cohort of students. When the teaching population does not reflect the racial diversity of our schools, what impact does this have on the future of education in this country? What perspectives, stories and diversity of attitudes are our young people missing out on? DiAngelo pressed a further point that brought me to tears – in the elite, predominately Anglo-private schools, a child can go through 12 years of education, and then into a career of affluence, without ever developing a significant or substantial relationship with a person of colour, or without any professional engagement with an individual from a marginalised or racially diverse community. As a country that prides itself on celebrating its diverse multiculturalism, this plain fact was crushing to hear. It made me feel invalid in the country I’ve spent most of my life. Do I have no value? Does my life, my parents’ struggles, my grandparents poverty, and their rise out out it, have no cultural credit in this country? My father came to this country to be freed from the oppressive ideologies of Taiwan in the early 90s. Australia liberated people. Language and stories have power, and that power does not begin in the boardrooms or in parliament. It begins in the classrooms. Jessie Tu is a journalist and writer based between Taipei and Sydney whose recent work examines gender, race and culture across east Asia and Australia