Jürgen Klopp has admitted Liverpool will not be able to dazzle their way to the title in the style of Pep Guardiola’s Manchester City but praised his players’ fighting spirit after their late rally at Southampton re-established a two-point advantage at the top of the table. Late goals from Mohamed Salah, who had not scored since mid-February, and a first since the autumn of 2017 for Jordan Henderson secured a critical victory against organised and impressive opponents, who had led earlier in the match, to take the visitors back to the summit. City have a game in hand but will go into their next league game, at Crystal Palace next weekend, playing catch-up. “It was brilliant,” said a delighted Klopp, whose side have now retrieved 16 points this season from losing positions. “I told the boys we have a good mentality among us. We were well organised, we pressed high and were everywhere on the pitch. “They deserved their early goal but we adjusted to the situation, stayed calm and waited for our moment. The performance was not at the top level but at this stage it is about fighting. People want us to play like Manchester City but we are unable to do that, so we play our own football. He added: “We have 82 points now, that is massive in this crazy league and everyone is waiting for us (to slip up). It is a difficult year for everybody: you’ll need to have 70 to75 points to qualify for the Champions League and 90-something to win the title. But we are still in the race and that is nice.” Salah’s goal ended an eight-match scoreless sequence but was a 50th in 69 Premier League games, establishing a club record in the process. “It was never in doubt that he is a great player in my side,” added Klopp. “What a goal... It was goal No50 for Liverpool, an incredible number in such a short time, even if it was a first goal after a while. But there were lots of positives for us. “We had to be more lively in the second half, when Trent Alexander-Arnold and Georginio Wijnaldum were struggling with the intensity of the season. But James Milner and Jordan Henderson came on and brought aggressiveness – verbal aggressiveness – and we had direction again after that.”