Bernardine Evaristo is the award-winning British-Nigerian author of eight books. Born in London in 1959, she is professor of creative writing at Brunel University London and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. Her new novel Girl, Woman, Other spans 20th- and 21st-century Britain and features 12 interconnected characters, mostly women, black and British. Your new novel focuses closely on people who are often ‘othered’. What were your motivations?I wanted to put presence into absence. I was very frustrated that black British women weren’t visible in literature. I whittled it down to 12 characters – I wanted them to span from a teenager to someone in their 90s, and see their trajectory from birth, though not linear. There are many ways in which otherness can be interpreted in the novel – the women are othered in so many ways and sometimes by each other. I wanted it to be identified as a novel about women as well. One character recalls her days of theatre-based activism in the 1980s… did you draw on your own memories?Yes, her experience is modelled on my own – I co-founded Theatre of Black Women in the 80s. Activist heritage is not widely known. We’re all standing on the shoulders of the people who came before – in the 1980s we were inspired by African American women writers. We were proud black feminists, absolutely intersectional before it became a phrase. It’s up to us to talk about the heritage and lineage of activism and understand that generations have paved the way for where we are today. You’re also a literary activist…People might not think I’m an outsider if they look at my CV and the organisations I’m associated with. But I feel that I’m still an uncompromising person and writer. I work within the systems to change them, because I think there is a limit to what you can do when you are outside the power structures. You explore heritage to shed new light on what it means to be British…With all of my books I’m interested in where people come from in relation to who they are. I explored my own family history in Lara, which was semi-autobiographical. I was the only black girl at school in Woolwich. My father was Nigerian but he didn’t pass on anything about his history; they didn’t in those days – you wanted your children to fit in, in order to survive. When I was in my 20s and started discovering more about my own history, it was mind-blowing to discover there had been Africans in Britain during the Roman occupation, which I wrote about in The Emperor’s Babe – a black girl in Roman London. It’s very important to know the alternatives to mainstream history, as we’re not represented in it. To discover how deep our roots are is important. Those of us who are older are living history, and I feel we have a duty to share it. Tell me about the innovative form of Girl, Woman, Other…I have a term I came up with called fusion fiction – that’s what it felt like, with the absence of full stops, the long sentences. The form is very free-flowing and it allowed me to be inside the characters’ heads and go all over the place – the past, the present. For me, there’s always a level of experimentation – I’m not happy writing what we might call traditional novels. There’s a part of me that is always oppositional to convention – not only counter-cultural and disruptive of people’s expectations of me, but also of form. That goes back to my theatre days, when we would write very experimentally, as we did not want to, as we saw it, imprison our creativity in traditional forms. Now there are more people of colour on television in a single day than there were in my entire childhood Do you have a writing routine?I plan as I go along. Each paragraph goes through multiple revisions and that’s probably because my background’s in poetry, which is absolutely about finding the right language. Writing is the main focus of my life, but I would go mad sitting at my desk, writing nonstop. I need to be engaging with society – I judge prizes, I teach, I’m communicating and collaborating with other people. I feel like I’m part of a community and that sustains me and feeds my writing. Were any writers an influence?Toni Morrison – the beauty of her language, her profundity of vision, the complexity of her storytelling. Derek Walcott is my favourite poet – he came from a tiny Caribbean island and through his perspective on humanity spoke across divides to people all over the world. Toni Morrison said: ‘If there’s a book you want to read, but it hasn’t been written yet, then you must write it.’ Did you feel that?Absolutely. Now there are more people of colour on television in a single day than there were in my entire childhood. Making the work happen, rather than waiting for other people to offer you opportunities – that’s very much the job of the writer. It’s about creating those characters and stories that need to be told, rather than waiting for someone else to tell them. Which writers working today do you admire?Sometimes you hear guys talking about the novel being dead, but the novel is one of the most interesting forms. I love Ali Smith. I’m a big fan of Diana Evans. I set up the Complete Works mentoring scheme for poets of colour and all those poets are doing amazing things. What books are on your bedside table?I love Citizen by Claudia Rankine, Heads of the Colored People by Nafissa Thompson-Spires. I’m reading so many good nonfiction books by black British writers – Johny Pitts’s Afropean is out soon; it’s groundbreaking. What kind of reader were you as a child?I went to the library, as we couldn’t afford to buy books. As a teenager I discovered James Baldwin and Audre Lorde – it’s so wonderful that a new generation are connecting to them. I read Thor Heyerdahl about his travels in the South Pacific – I was a child growing up in boring suburban Woolwich; we never had any money and didn’t go on holiday, so to read about these places and adventures was mind-opening. Books opened the world to me. • Girl, Woman, Other by Bernardine Evaristo is published by Hamish Hamilton (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99