Conservative MPs have said they are now unhappily resigned to a long extension to the date for leaving the EU, with several expressing distress at the party’s paralysis and the lack of appetite for cabinet resignations. While Eurosceptic Conservative MPs are furious about the delay to Brexit, many Tories now believe the tipping point for May’s leadership is more likely to come if she were to sign up to a customs union with Labour, with many now speculating that she might not be able to get such a deal through parliament even with opposition votes. As Theresa May met EU leaders in Brussels, plans by backbench MPs to present the prime minister with a departure timetable appeared to hit a roadblock and Tories meeting in parliament deflected the blame for extension on Brexiters who had refused to vote for May’s deal. At a brief meeting of Tory MPs on Wednesday night, the veteran Brexiter John Redwood demanded to know why more Tory MPs had not voted against extension on Tuesday night – saying they had missed the chance to send a message to the government. In turn, the solicitor general, Robert Buckland, turned his fire on Redwood, blaming him for not voting for May’s deal, and then walking out of the room in disgust, according to sources in the room. “There is resignation that the prime minister will not be forced out, that could only happen if half the cabinet resign,” one moderate MP said. “That scenario hinges on what happens with Labour.” A Eurosceptic cabinet source said that the extension was not in itself a resigning matter for cabinet ministers. “Nobody wants this but it’s the reality. She will never go for a no deal. So Brexiters stay and live with a long extension, but they could not live with a locked-down, inflexible customs union, where you cannot get out of it.” Simon Hart, a Conservative MP who leads the loyalist Brexit Delivery Group, insisted there was still appetite among many in the party for May to come up with a negotiated deal but many could not stomach a permanent customs union. “We remain loyal to our ambition to see a negotiated outcome above all else. But I think there is a big difference between a customs union and a temporary customs union,” he said. “Some people would settle for anything as long as it had an end date and others would be hard pushed to support that. Personally I wouldn’t want to put that to the test. We know that it splits people.” One moderate pro-Brexit MP said it seemed clear that a longer extension would hasten May’s departure – and could bring some benefits. “This could be a chance for everyone to sober up and have a proper think,” the MP said. “With a new PM in place, particularly one the DUP might trust more, there would be time to reset and then get the deal through. No criticism of Geoffrey Cox, but a new attorney general who was willing to give different legal advice wouldn’t hurt either.” Cabinet sources said it was problematic that the prime minister had said she could not personally countenance delaying Brexit beyond 30 June, but believed she would not feel bound to resign by that commitment. “It doesn’t mean anything anymore, she knows that if it goes beyond that the reality is – what can anyone do?” one source said. “She can do whatever she wants. Her decision to go at the next stage of the negotiations seems a very long way away now.” Under party rules, no mechanism exists to force May’s departure until December at the earliest as she was given a year’s grace by winning the no-confidence vote against her before Christmas. Iain Duncan Smith, who led the party between 2001 and 2003, urged May not to wait until she was ousted by a second vote of confidence in December and said she should make it clear she would leave office before the autumn party conference. “My recommendation to the prime minister is: don’t go to second vote of confidence because it is almost certain that will be lost and it would be a humiliation for her,” he said. One of May’s most vocal critics, Steve Baker, said that MPs were not yet prepared to take the kamikaze step of voting with Labour in a no-confidence motion against the government, in the hope of forcing May’s resignation. He said he believed the prime minister would resist any pressure to step down – a stance he said that was “verging towards tyranny”. “I’m just really not convinced the prime minister would go if she lost a confidence motion,” Baker told Bloomberg. “She would probably stay and dare us to vote against a second time, causing a general election.” Tory MPs leaving the meeting of the backbench 1922 Committee on Wednesday night appeared resigned that there was little they could do to force a change. No cabinet minister responded to the invitation to address the meeting – despite the prime minister traditionally attending the last meeting before recess. Sir Graham Brady, the chair, ruled that party rules could not be changed to allow an indicative ballot on her leadership at this point – after almost an hour of debate among members of the committee. Brexiter MPs on the 1922 Committee’s executive, including Nigel Evans and Sir Bernard Jenkin, are understood to have been taking the toughest line on May’s future. Instead, MPs have been encouraged to begin again the processing of submitting letters of no confidence to quantify the extent of discontent within the party. Conservative MPs including Andrea Jenkyns, Mark Francois and Lee Rowley have publicly stated that they have sent fresh letters of no confidence to Brady. MPs also suggested they could boycott campaigning in the EU elections. “I will not do a thing, not in a million years,” one MP in a heavily leave seat said. “I do not want us to waste any local party finances on it, whatever way you look at it, it’s a disaster.”