How could a book that took 15 years to write, on and off, seem to have arrived at exactly the right time? “I really thought: ‘Let me just get this off my desk, people are probably done with the 90s and done with talking about gender,’ and I’m delighted to find out that those things are not true,” says its author, Andrea Lawlor. The novel, Paul Takes the Form of a Mortal Girl, is a picaresque romp that sees its 23-year-old titular hero shag his way across the queer subcultures of early 1990s America. The omnivorous Paul’s sexual options are widened further by his secret power – he’s a shape-shifter who can change body and sex at will, acquiring breasts or a penis, which take him from the all-male backrooms of Chicago leather bars to the strictly single-sex Michigan Womyn’s Music Festival. Playful and sexy, Lawlor’s novel is a hymn to the pleasures of gender fluidity – but also a tribute to queer theory, LGBT communities and to reading itself. A typical moment: Paul realises he needs to dump his backpack before his leather bar adventures, “so he rifled through the contents and extracted only the paperback copy of Discipline and Punish he was reading for school. He could fit it in his pocket, and any guy who saw it would assume it was porn.” The book is also punctuated by sex scenes, which none other than Maggie Nelson has described as “HOT”. “Sex is a part of life,” Lawlor tells me at the Bureau of General Services Queer Division bookstore, upstairs at New York’s LGBT centre. “I think pleasure’s really important. I feel that our queer and trans cultural heritage is to prioritise pleasure and self-fulfilment, self-knowledge and art and humour – those seem like really good things to me.” Lawlor, who is non-binary and takes the pronouns they/them, knows the building we’re in well: they spent their formative years in New York. Lawlor went to Fordham university in the early 90s, and became involved with a lot of activism, from starting the first lesbian and gay group on campus, which earned them and their friends death threats, to participating in the “pink panther patrol”, which protected gay people in the Village at a time when it was infested with queerbashers. Meanwhile, the Aids crisis was raging. “Things were very heightened, sex and death were intertwined … I thought that affected people who came out in that time,” Lawlor remembers. Nonetheless, their main memory of the period is the thrilling camaraderie the city’s queer community offered: “I was so excited to find my people.” Coolness is a big problem in queer life – always being attracted to the shiny thing and not always necessarily being kind In the novel New York itself is largely off stage, existing as the backdrop for Paul’s memories of his dead lover Tony Pinto; instead he roves from Iowa to Chicago, Provincetown to San Francisco, all places Lawlor has also lived, moving from schools to jobs in bars, a web developing company and NYU’s publishing house. The 90s are sharply evoked, from the many outfits donned and discarded by Paul (burgundy cords, a Runaways T-shirt, engineer’s boots and stripy tube socks) to the supermodels whose images he pastes in his wardrobe (“Linda the Artemis to Christie’s Aphrodite and Naomi’s Athena”). The book also delves into pre-internet fanzine culture – Lawlor had a zine called Judy!, dedicated to Judith Butler – and above all the mixtapes sent to lovers and friends in the days before Spotify, with songs such as “Rid of Me” by PJ Harvey and “Kool Thing” by Sonic Youth. “Mixtapes were such an important artform of my youth and I do miss them. I’ve got a couple of people in my life who made me the kinds of mixtapes that you’d then go and get every album off the tape and that’s how you build your record collection.” Then there’s the queer theory that thrums away in the background, informing the book but also dusted with irony (“Paul arranged his copy of A Lover’s Discourse on the table … Someday he would actually read the book all the way through, not just skim sections until he found a pretty idea which then overwhelmed him.”) “At 18, 19 queer theory felt really glamorous and the place to get answers, and I feel like I understood about 1% of what I was reading,” Lawlor says. “Barthes really spoke to me, Judith Butler’s work felt highly important and I’m sure I still don’t really understand it and that’s become OK with me over the years. Queer theory was just really cool.” That said, Lawlor is now rather ambivalent about the concept of cool. “Coolness is a big problem in queer life,” they ponder, “always being attracted to the shiny thing and not always necessarily being kind.” Certainly, Paul isn’t all that kind, for instance when he says of one conquest, a white hippy in a rasta hat, “He knew he shouldn’t be rewarding the guy’s fashion with sex.” “Paul’s an asshole in many ways, yes,” Lawlor agrees. “I tried not to hold back. Most of his flaws are my flaws. He does many things that are actually kind of terrible from my perspective now.” Lawlor turned 48 today; Paul is their first novel. “I talked to the guy doing publicity for my book, and I said: ‘Should I write some terrible essays about being later in life with the first novel?’ He said: ‘It’s not a story any more, it’s so common.’ And that was really great for me to remember. When I think about the people I know, often it’s queer people, trans people, people of colour, people with kids, who are making work later and it’s [due to] capitalism and hetero patriarchy. I love hearing from younger people, but there’s a lot of exciting stuff happening made by people who are older right now.” Of course, there is nothing new about gender swapping in literature – it goes back (at least) to Ovid’s Metamorphoses. Originally, Lawlor says, “I was retelling Greek myths as a way to figure out how to write a story without having to make up a plot. I was trying to write Tiresias” – the blind prophet who was turned into a woman for seven years – “and to work out some kind of autobiographical material. In Greek and Roman mythology, gods are always taking the forms of mortals.” Orlando, Virginia Woolf’s gender-swapping hero, is also a palpable presence amid the drag queens and riot grrls. “That book was transformative to me as a young person,” says Lawlor. “I read it around the same time as The Well of Loneliness, Rubyfruit Jungle and A Boy’s Own Story: here’s a tortured trans narrative, and here are all these coming out stories. And Orlando did feel very queer, and that was always really, really exciting to me. As a writer I think one of the things I learned from Orlando is that Woolf had that kind of entitlement to just say: ‘This is the story I’m telling, I’m not going to explain it.’ There’s something freeing about her just saying: ‘Hey, it happened.’” Octavia Butler’s Wild Seed, which also has shape-shifting characters, was another inspiration. “It’s not fun or playful, she’s always dealing with the legacies of the transatlantic slave trade and her themes are really painful, but it was so thrilling when I read it.” Paul Takes the Form of a Mortal Girl arrives at a point when trans and queer literature has rarely been so exciting and multifaceted. Lawlor teaches writing at Mount Holyoke College, including a trans and queer writing class, and reels off a list of peers they are excited by, including Kai Cheng Thom, author of Fierce Femmes and Notorious Liars; Rivers Solomon, who wrote the science fiction book An Unkindness of Ghosts; and Hal Schrieve, whose book Out of Salem Lawlor describes as “full of werewolves and zombies and witches, really fun and super trans”. They are especially inspired by trans SF and speculative fiction, which seems to be a particularly fertile area. Lawlor’s next book may well be “a series of prose poems” about a land run by anarchist queers which has seceded from the rest of the world, completely different from Paul. There’s a value to just rejecting everything that you’re told is important and impossible to deviate from “I’m excited about what’s happening,” Lawlor says of the boom in trans fiction. “It’s a flowering with deep roots. A lot of writers have been here for a long time, and now people are paying more attention. The thing that’s exciting about books is there’s not just one. I hate to be the one, I don’t ever want to be a representative of a type. Because I can’t live on one book, I need a book a day.” Lawlor has now settled in western Massachusetts with their partner, Bernardine Mellis, who is a film-maker, and five-year-old child. “My best friend Jody Rosenberg, who wrote Confessions of the Fox” – another trans novelist – “is also our housemate and he is constantly giving me shit about being a normcore dad. And I’m like ‘essentially that is correct’.” For all the gender fluidity in Lawlor’s novels, they add, “at this point in my adult life, [gender] feels fairly non-fluid, it feels fairly stagnant. Fairly static.” Nevertheless, Lawlor’s gender identity is still not easily categorised. After reading Leslie Feinberg’s seminal trans novel Stone Butch Blues Lawlor identified as butch (though not a butch woman or a butch lesbian); in their teens, Lawlor says, they simply regarded themselves as queer. “Finding a word that fits right is not my biggest concern, but I think it’s a valuable thing and non-binary is useful. For me I say ‘trans-ish’. Transmasculine works for me, if trans is a real umbrella term. I’ve got a number of friends my age or older who have a similar gender situation, who are using they/them pronouns or have switched recently. I’m just really grateful to young people for making that a viable thing. Pronouns have not been a place where I’ve put my energy and yet I’ve benefited from other people’s energy.” That spirit extends to bringing up their child. “My kid’s still pretty young, but my partner and I feel strongly about trying to make as much room as possible for liberation in terms of gender and socialisation, so that our kid doesn’t have to essentially have their spirit crushed at this early age,” Lawlor says. “I think there’s all these ways in which little kids get boxed in. Maybe it’s a gift of being in a queer family, that you get a little more space to just be a person or a creature for longer. And it’s all going to come in, we’re not bigger than socialisation, we know it. But trying to make that space feels like a part of parenting.” Lawlor’s life is a lot more domesticated than that of Paul, who at one point in the novel declares “heterosexuality = marriage = death”. “Paul would judge so hard,” smiles Lawlor. “When I was Paul’s age, 23, I was constantly in this very building going on about ‘fucking breeders’ … There’s a value to just rejecting everything that you’re told is important and impossible to deviate from.” That said, Lawlor adds: “I feel really excited to have found a way to have an adult queer life that feels great and rich, really different from what I thought was possible and also specifically queer. Chosen family, kinship, living arrangements, parenting roles, it all feels like, ‘So this is one thing you can do and you can do it in a queer way.’ And that’s kind of amazing. I feel that every good thing that has happened in my life has come from being queer.” • Paul Takes the Form of a Mortal Girl is published by Picador (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.