Late-night hosts discussed Joe Biden’s presidential campaign and spoiler etiquette after the release of Avengers: Endgame. After a week-long vacation, Stephen Colbert returned to cover the political news that occurred in his absence. Introducing the newest candidate to join the Democratic presidential race, he said: “Well, enter a plucky young up-and-comer, a full 14 months younger than Bernie: former vice-president, man pointing at the next woman he wants to sniff, Joe Biden.” Following coverage of Biden’s first rally in Pittsburgh, Colbert observed: “As far as rallies go, it seemed a little bit off. The crowd didn’t chant to lock anyone up. Not one journalist was threatened. And there were no unifying hats!” At the same rally, Biden said he didn’t believe Trump represented the whole country, to which Colbert agreed: “I’m not even sure he can name all the states in the country.” In response to Biden’s first campaign ad, where he quoted from the Declaration of Independence, Colbert said: “That was inspiring. It makes you want to stand up for American values. And maybe buy a reverse mortgage.” Colbert went on: “Biden is appealing to his core demo: people alive in the 1930s.” He did, however, praise Biden’s campaign ad for mentioning Trump’s response to Charlottesville, noting that it put Trump on the defensive. Colbert said Biden forced Trump to “answer for his Charlottesville response” and showed a clip of him trying to justify his “very fine people” remark. Trump said in the clip: “If you look at what I said, you will see that that question was answered perfectly. I was talking about people that went because they felt very strongly about the monument to Robert E Lee, a great general.” Trump then repeated the fib on the radio, pushing him over 10,000 false and misleading claims, according to the Washington Post. Colbert celebrated by saying: “Trump has passed 10,000 lies! I gotta tell you, if Trump had a dollar for every lie he’s told, he would say he had a billion dollars.” On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah concentrated not on politics but the big American cultural event: the new Avengers film. Taking aim at the NFL player LeSean McCoy, who tweeted out the ending to Endgame, Noah said: “Who does that? How would you like it if I tweeted out the ending of your football season? ‘Spoiler alert: the Bills don’t make the playoffs.’ You see? Not cool!” He continued: “If you have to talk about a movie, just do what black people do and talk during the movie. That’s what I love about black cinemas. Black people do spoilers in real time.” Spoiler alert: @roywoodjr is here to help you protect yourself from “Endgame” spoilers. pic.twitter.com/PrzAOIH0L4 Noah roped in correspondent Roy Wood Jr to talk about movie spoilers. Wood suggested that people introduce themselves to new people by revealing their progress in a show they were watching, right after the gender pronoun. Wood said: “Here’s an idea. When you introduce yourself to somebody, tell them how far along you are in your favorite shows.” He said: “Hello. I am Roy. He/him. Game of Thrones, season six.” Noah responded by revealing he was on Breaking Bad season twoWood then spoiled the ending, prompting protests from Noah. But Wood argued: “If it’s been more than five years, I didn’t spoil it! You took too long! You can’t expect me to keep quiet on some shit you should have known by now.” Running through a few movies like Star Wars and The Godfather, Wood spoiled each of the endings, ending with The Usual Suspects: “And Kevin Spacey was the bad guy all along.” When Noah admonished him for this, Wood countered: “Oh, no, I’m talking about Kevin Spacey in real life.” Wood did concede one point, however. “If you’ve seen the movie, don’t be a dick about it. And if you are a dick, be ready for the consequences.” Finishing off with a report of a man in Hong Kong who was assaulted after yelling out spoilers. Wood said: “If I was there, I would have pulled the dude to the side and said, ‘Hey man, spoiler alert: you about to get your ass beat!’”