If you love apple pie and you love turtles, you will turtally love these individual pies. They are made with rough puff pastry to speed things up (but still so flaky and buttery!). You can use shop-bought puff pastry if in a rush, but the rough puff pastry is so worth it. The key is to keep it cool. To make them vegan, you can use shop-bought vegan puff pastry, agave nectar instead of honey, dairy-free spread instead of butter and soy milk instead of egg wash. Prep time: 15 mins for pastry, 30 mins to fill, 30 mins to shape Baking: 30-40 mins Serves: 6 For the pastry: 300g plain flour 250g salted butter, frozen 150-200g ice-cold water For the filling: 2 tbsp salted butter 3 1/2 tbsp honey 600g roughly chopped apple 2 tsp ground cinnamon 1 tsp ground cardamon 1/2 tsp ground ginger 1 tsp vanilla bean paste Plus: 1 egg for egg wash Caster sugar to sprinkle For the pastry, grate the butter and stir through the flour in a bowl. Gradually add cold water to combine into a ball. On a lightly floured surface, roll the pastry into a long rectangle, then bring the two short ends together so they meet in the centre, then fold like a book. Chill. For the filling, heat the butter with the honey in a pan until melted, then add the chopped apple. Mix to coat with butter, then add all the spices and mix again. Stir intermittently on a low to medium heat until the mixture is no longer liquidy – 20-30 minutes. Leave to cool. Preheat the oven to 180C (fan)/200C/400F/gas mark 6. Roll out the pastry on a lightly floured surface. With a 9cm round cutter, stamp out the circles that form the bottom of each pie, then place on a baking tray lined with baking paper. Fill each with about 2 tbsp of the apple mixture, leaving a gap at the edges. Use a 10.5cm round cutter to stamp out the lids, then press down firmly round the edges to seal. Use a fork to crimp. Shape four turtle legs by wrapping chunks of apple in small squares of pastry. Press edges firmly to seal. Shape a head in the same way, just larger. If you like, paint on a mouth and eyes using edible food dye. Tuck the head and legs under a turtle body and press to stick together. Use a sharp knife to lightly score the “shell”. Repeat to make six. Brush the tops with beaten egg, then sprinkle with caster sugar. Bake for 30-40 minutes or until golden brown and crispy (top and bottom). You can Follow Kim-Joy on Twitter and Instagram at @kimjoyskitchen