As Crystal Palace’s players and staff exchanged a series of high fives that surely signified the banishment of any lingering relegation worries, the drizzle intensified and the Tyneside sky darkened. It all felt rather emblematic of Newcastle’s frustration at the end of an afternoon when they created the better chances yet came undone on the counterattack and were left ruing the defensive error that led to DeAndre Yedlin conceding the decisive penalty and the serious knee injury that saw Florian Lejeune dispatched to hospital. When the final whistle blew Geordie frustration reigned; Newcastle were still not quite immune from the dreaded prospect of Championship football next season and conclusive talks over the potential extension of their manager’s soon to be expired contract were once again postponed until safety is assured. It was Rafael Benítez’s by-now hallmark 3-4-3 system against Roy Hodgson’s 4-3-3 and, at first, Newcastle found Palace’s configuration extremely difficult to fathom. As the dangerous Andros Townsend, Wilfried Zaha and friends moved the ball fast and fluently, alarming gaps kept opening up in areas the home side seemed unable to defend but then, almost imperceptibly, the balance of power shifted slightly. Indeed in the course of a high tempo 10-minute spell Newcastle missed three decent chances while, in the process, highlighting Vicente Guaita’s goalkeeping vulnerabilities. When Guaita looked uncertain coming off his line and flapped unconvincingly at the ball Matt Ritchie should probably have scored but instead miscued a shot which ended up being deflected wide. After that, Fabian Schär missed another chance before Palace’s defence failed to mop up the fall-out from a cross and Salomón Rondón was able to bundle the ball into the net only to be, rightly, flagged offside. That disallowed goal served to wake Palace up a bit and Zaha promptly subdued the Gallowgate End courtesy of some audacious, and electric, defender-disorientating skill. Yet bewitching as such cameos were, Martin Dubravka was not exactly being stretched in goal and it was Newcastle who continued to create the more clearcut chances, most notably when James Tomkins lost his footing at the wrong time, Rondón turned sharply and Guaita saved smartly. Then there was the moment when Rondón connected with Yedlin’s inviting cross only to direct his header over the bar. Tomkins thought he had scored himself when the ball found him unmarked following a corner and his fine low shot squirmed beneath Dubravka’s body but that “goal” too was disallowed for another offside - this time, against James McArthur. Once again the decision looked correct. Few Newcastle fans would disagree with the rationale behind their manager’s enduring desire to bring Townsend back to Tyneside. Like Zaha, he offered Hodgson’s side real edge and menace, provided an exhaustive test of the defensive resilience Benítez has instilled at St James’ Park. The arrival of Miguel Almirón from Atlanta in January has offered Newcastle a new dimension and, although the Paraguayan’s influence on the game was fitful his darting runs and tricky movement helped ensure Palace never assumed control of the game. Indeed Benítez’s side would have been ahead had either Yedlin’s eye-catching shot not whizzed fractionally off target or Lejeune not headed straight at Guaita. Shortly afterwards Lejeune was take off on a stretcher with his left leg heavily braced and an oxygen mask clamped to his face. The central defender – only fairly recently returned from pioneering fast-track surgery in Italy to repair a ruptured cruciate ligament – appeared to injure himself in the act of tackling Townsend and immediately fell to the floor, his left knee having apparently given way. He was taken straight to hospital with what was described as a “serious” injury. The incident seemed to be cause Newcastle to lose concentration and Christian Benteke, newly on for Michy Batshuayi, somehow missed a sitter after being adroitly set up by Townsend. It appeared that an afternoon of multiple chances might end goalless but then a naive, and reckless, intervention from Yedlin sent Zaha crashing to ground in the area and Hodgson’s captain, Luka Milivojevic, converted the penalty, sending Dubravka the wrong way. The irony that, until then, his defence had succeeded in drawing Zaha’s early sting will not have been lost on Benítez. Or proved any consolation.