As painful as it is to admit, Jacob Rees-Mogg did, once, have his uses. Or one, at least. It emerged during one of his earlier Question Time appearances (when the BBC could still, just about, pretend ignorance of the then embryo demagogue’s tendresse for racists). Responding to a question about Heathrow, Rees-Mogg volunteered that he hadn’t minded the planes when he lived in Slough. “Eton,” chaffed the host, David Dimbleby. “I was at school with your son,” said Rees-Mogg. Anyway, thanks to this contribution (along with other BBC-presenter-on-BBC-presenter squabbles about who is or is not “posh”), it can be demonstrated that Sky News’ Adam Boulton is not the only mature white male TV presenter to suffer from pot-kettle syndrome, to the possibly debilitating extent of wanting – although not for the purposes of satire – to belittle others for enjoying the same social capital and privileges as himself. You’re like the incompetent middle-class, self-indulgent people and you want to tell us how to live our lives Last week Boulton was interviewing an Extinction Rebellion organiser, Robin Boardman, when the spirit of Marx, or Momentum – unless it was a ministering socialite, Nicky Haslam, say, or Nancy Mitford – seemed to come upon him. “You’re like the incompetent middle-class, self-indulgent people and you want to tell us how to live our lives,” he told Boardman. “That’s what you are, aren’t you?” Even if you didn’t know that Boulton went to Westminster school you could see, straight off, that this was like a Waitrose shopper turning to the next person at the Waitrose checkout and hissing: “Waitrose shopper, that’s what you are, aren’t you?” Indeed, as previously demonstrated by the misleadingly bourgeois-sounding vicar Giles Fraser (Uppingham), Waitrose slurs as signifiers are now as commonplace in episodes of intra-middle-class othering as “vegan”, “latte” and the increasingly popular in more snobbish parts of the far left “pearl clutching”. Irked by the first people’s vote march last year, Fraser tweeted: “Less a demo, more a Waitrose queue.” As ever, the vicar of Lidl knows whereof he speaks. Prior to his (undated) supermarket schism, he’d tweeted of a trip to Clerkenwell Waitrose: “Everyone being really nice and chatty to each other.” Has there ever been a better description of the vileness that is the people’s vote marches? In Boulton’s case, his interviewee chose, understandably – how long before the out-of-control news anchor got on to the emancipation of the proletariat, or worse, the question of fish knives? – to walk out. Without so much as a “pardon”. (His persecutor said: “Jolly good.”) So we will probably never hear, from Boulton, how an environmental movement that has successfully inconvenienced a person as majestic as himself, and, incidentally, dominated the news agenda for a week, could also be described as “incompetent”. How many bridges in central London would Extinction Rebellion need to occupy, for how long, before Boulton admitted that, in fact, its “incompetent” organisers have shown themselves to be dramatically effective disrupters – if distinctly less successful in selling their remedial proposals? Given current enthusiasm for “middle class” as an insult (including from politicians and newspapers traditionally associated with middle-class values) it would have been yet more valuable if Boardman had stayed to ask his host to expand on the second taunt. What makes “middle class” so obviously offensive to people such as Thomas Adam Babington Boulton? Would he have forgiven disruption by agitators who were less, as the Mail has been reporting, “well spoken”, who have never, unlike one “eco-mob” member, “owned a home in the Dordogne”? How many C2s would have swung it for him? Or does expert Sky proletarian profiling guarantee he’ll never need to challenge a bona fide person of toil: “You’re like the incompetent working-class self-indulgent people etc etc”? Possibly, of course, inspired by Haslam’s line in corrective tea towels (“Things Nicky Haslam Finds Common”), he’s simply planning one of his own: “Things Adam Boulton finds middle class: Yoga in the street; David Attenborough; Unmelted glaciers”. It won’t help, though, that parts of this vast and heterogeneous social group can be so unlike his own people, at the far, public-school, end of the middle classes. Who, out of Britain’s middle classes should we, in fact, hold responsible for the recent nuisance? The ones who contributed to the Brexit vote? Or their children? As of last week, the “middle-class zombie tossers” (as a middle-class Sun columnist depicted protesters) and “delusional middle-class climate warriors” (according to a middle-class Mail writer) can be seen to have acquired powerful tosser zombie allies within the Bank of England. In fairness to a fellow member – very broadly, and many alpha male ranks up – of my own caste, Boulton-like accusations against similarly privileged people are neither new – didn’t Mick Jagger once denounce private property? – nor significantly lazier than the almost-as-popular insult, when uttered by a Farage, or affluent contrarian: “elite”. Moreover, the belief that “middle class” doubles as an argument for disregarding the opinions of any fellow citizens thus effortlessly categorised, undoubtedly unites everyone from boy Corbynistas on the alert for cushiness and elitism, to the hereditary peer and landowner Matt Ridley. He called the peaceful protests “a temper tantrum by mostly middle-class protesters”. Things this column finds common: lectures on responsibility from viscounts who crashed banks. For young eco-idealists, the next step in changing hearts and minds is, at least, clear: a tremendous, bourgeoisie-free protest composed instead of carnivorous working- and upper-class Waitrose avoiders possessing either little or incalculably extensive private wealth. A repurposed Countryside March, basically. Except, as working-class Extinction Rebellion – and Brexit – activists have indignantly discovered, some habits are likely to lead, regardless of an individual’s wishes, to class reassignment. Attend protests for a purpose that is unarguably divorced from immediate personal gain? You might as well, for the Ridleys and Boultons of this world, be overheard saying “toilet”. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist