Dear Sir Graham Brady Sir, I am wrITing to you in a perSONal capacity as the aNGRiest member of parlyment. I am very very very AnGry with Theresa May. Or in her case, TheRESa Maybenot, if you Get my drift. It has come to my attenshun that when we had a no confidence vote last DeCember many of uz were not in possession of all the facts. So it was not a truly deMCRratic vote like the 2016 referendum wuz. Back Then we knew everythink about wot we were doing and 17.4 million heroically voted to be poorer in a no deal Brexit so that GREAT!! Britain never never shall be slaves to the hated eU. So now we want anuvver go to get rid of the prime minister pleeze. Nothing less than the future of our beloved Country rests on you saying YES. We are livining in a world GONe mad. One where idiots Like me get to go on TV loads and loads. So it’s not all bad. But sUM things are very very bad and there is nothing worse than a Conservative prime minister – Propped Up by a Ssinister Remainiaciacal caBBAL in the caBINet – trying to keep us locked into a dreaded CUSToms unION foreffer. That wOUld mean under EU law I would never be able to change my name bak to Mark Frank. At least that’s what Andrew BridGIng told me and he knos everyFink. And hes my Frend so there. So THank God, who is ENGLISH through and THREw, for the unelected Lords for standing up against the democratically elected House of ComMUns and trying to keep No Deal on the table. Or TABle as the fRench call it. And wot you Might Ask are all the so-called Brexiteers in the govenmint doing? I’ll tell you what they are DOing. Absolutely bloody nothing. They are just sitting around on their Fat Arses eating pizza with prOSHooto topping. Typical. They can’t even order in a proper British Pizza with ham and pineapple. PatriotISMism is going to the dogs. So since the “OFFFicer Class” has let us down so badly, it’s left to the Poor Bloody Infantry to lead the fightback. Private MArc Francis of the UninteLLigents Corp reporting for DUTY sir, Sir Graham Brady Sir. Which brings me on to my Next Point. It is an outrage to every normal red-FACed Englishman that the prime minister is actively CONSorting with a known Marxist. The loyal Spartins of the EUropean Reseach Group did not nobly vote down Theresa MayHEM’s – see what I did vere? – deal to take us out of the dreaded EU three times only for hur to cosy up with Jereyours CorBIN a man who has been on holiday to Cuba and eats more than his fair share of vegEATables in order to take us out of the dreaded EU. And another FINg. That letter the prime minister Rote to the EU Council about the extenTION. Total fuckin liberty, if you’ll excuse my languidge, Mr Sir Graham Brady Sir. I’m just at the end of my tether. I reeLLY am. First she hopes to fool parlyment wiv a bill that is so long that most orDINErry MPs wont be able to read it proply. Then she only GOES and commits us to taking part in European elections that might even turn out to be a total waste of time as we MIte have left and lets hope they are as if THEres one thing worse than fighting European eleCTions it’s having MEPs. It’s a totul shambles. I would also like to remind you I was once Junior Europe Monitor in the school cadet force. A TOUR of DUTY in which I was happy to serve with exTINction. What I learned dURing that time was the EU doesn’t like it up em. So it’s time for us to stop being such COWARDS. We need to tell Johnny Forriner where to get off and then he will cave in and tell us to sod off without a deal. sPeshully if we as a Conservtive party have given the prime minister the push on the wEndsday afternoon before she TAKES her begging bowl to Brussils. The future of the WHOLE Country is now in the hands of just 313 Conservative MPs. If we get this Write, we happy few can reright the course of history and make our Country a failed state and the LAUGHING stock it deserves to be. But only you Sir, Sir Graham Brady Sir Sir, can make this Happen. So I am bEGGing you, begging you on my hands and Nees – no mean feet as I’m not sure if I’ll be able to get back up again – to rethink. In the nAME of God, give us a second vote. Democracy demands NO less. Yours ever, Mark Francois. And you can shove the cedilla where the son dont shine.