Maurizio Sarri has pledged to transform Chelsea back into title contenders over the next two years – if granted that opportunity – regardless of whether the club fail in their attempts to overturn Fifa’s two-window transfer ban. The Italian has come under huge pressure over his first campaign in charge, despite Chelsea currently occupying a top-four place before Sunday’s trip to Manchester United. They were also beaten on penalties by Manchester City in the League Cup final, and play the first leg of their Europa League semi-final against Eintracht Frankfurt on Thursday. Winning that competition would also offer a route back into the Champions League. Sarri has freely admitted there have been teething troubles during this campaign, and the overall impression of their progress has been tainted by some flimsy performances away from home since the turn of the year. But, having inherited a side who finished fifth and 30 points off the top, the Italian has trimmed the gap to the leaders to 22 points and is confident that, if given time, he will be able to emulate what he achieved while at Napoli. “I am sure that, in two seasons, we will be able to be close to them,” he said when asked about narrowing the gap to City and Liverpool at the top. “But I am not sure, in two seasons, we’ll be able to be better than them. “When I arrived in Naples, Napoli had finished 24 points from Juventus. In the first season we ended up nine points from Juventus. In the second season it was five points and, in the third season, four points. For us it was impossible for us to cover completely the gap but we were very close to doing it.” That work would be trickier if players cannot be purchased, with Fifa’s appeals committee still considering Chelsea’s case against the two-window ban imposed for breaches relating to the recruitment of minors. If the appeal is rejected, the club would have the option to take their case to the Court of Arbitration for Sport. “Of course, with the market, it’s better,” said Sarri. “But we can improve without the market too.”