Donald Trump announced on Monday that he will remove Secret Service director Randolph “Tex” Alles from his position, as one anonymous official described “a near-systematic purge” at the Department of Homeland Security. The president’s move against Alles came a day after homeland security secretary Kirstjen Nielsen, who oversaw the Secret Service, was forced to resign. In a statement, White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said Alles had “done a great job at the agency over the last two years, and the president is thankful for his over 40 years of service to the country. “Mr Alles will be leaving shortly and President Trump has selected James M Murray, a career member of the [Secret Service], to take over as director beginning in May.” Alles, a former US Marines general, was recommended to lead the Secret Service by former White House chief of staff John Kelly, also a former Marine general. Kelly, who left the White House at the end of last year, also supported Kirstjen Nielsen when she succeeded him at homeland security. In a report that said Trump told the acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, to fire Alles, an unidentified official told CNN: “There is a near-systematic purge happening at the nation’s second-largest national security agency.” Speaking anonymously, three administration officials told the Associated Press Alles’ departure stemmed from a personality conflict within the agency. The officials said it was unrelated to both the resignation of Nielsen and a recent security breach at the president’s private Mar-a-Lago club in Florida, in which a Chinese national gained entrance by saying she wanted to use the pool. In Florida on Monday, prosecutors said Yujing Zhang had multiple electronic devices in her nearby hotel room, including a signal detector that can detect hidden cameras. She also had thousands of dollars in cash. Alles’ departure comes at a time of high turnover across the department which began last week when Trump withdrew his Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) director’s nomination to stay on permanently. An empowered Stephen Miller, the immigration hawk and White House senior adviser, is also eyeing the removal of Lee Francis Cissna, according to two officials who spoke to the Associated Press. Cissna is director of US citizenship and immigration services, which runs the legal immigration system. Department of Homeland Security’s general counsel, John Mitnick, is expected to depart as well, CBS News reported. Last week, Trump abruptly withdrew the nomination of Ron Vitiello to lead Ice, saying he wanted to go in a “tougher direction”. Miller played a key part in that move as well, several news outlets reported. Trump has given Miller the go-ahead to run the administration’s border policy “and he’s executing his plan”, the unnamed official told CNN.