Walking into Rosie Lowe’s south London flat – a converted workshop, no less – is like stepping into a Kevin McCloud fantasy. On the hallway ceiling hangs a pulley clothes dryer Lowe whittled, while the second bedroom, complete with hidden pull-out bed, wasn’t part of the original structure – Lowe erected the partition wall herself, the space doubling up as an office for her director partner, Jake. The living room, meanwhile, houses a piano (she gives lessons in her spare time) and an assortment of mismatched furniture heaving under the weight of various house plants. Next to an artfully battered brown leather sofa, a clump of sage burns, I assume to replicate the heady atmosphere that permeates Lowe’s music: an intoxicating mix of jazz, soul and downtempo R&B that, on her second album YU, wraps itself round lyrics exploring love, religion and fidelity. “Sorry, that’s to mask the bin smell,” Lowe laughs, the spell broken. “I put them out just before you arrived.” You sense that Lowe, 29, quite enjoys challenging people’s expectations. While she’s aware that the three-year gap since 2016’s debut Control doesn’t chime with music’s voracious appetite for the new, she’s unbothered by the wait. “My favourite artists take 10 years between albums, so I’m always like, pfft,” she says, shuffling into a cross-legged position on the sofa, a pose that, along with her thick elasticated headband and approachable, earth-mother vibe, makes her look like an off-duty yoga instructor. She’s also adamant about crushing any gendered assumptions about who’s in charge of her creativity. In fact, YU’s artwork, which crops most of her face, is a statement of intent. “I didn’t want a pretty black-and-white beauty shot because then I’d be trapped, and it would be less about the music.” On that debut, which did feature a pretty black-and-white beauty shot, she dodged her major label’s attempts to put her with other songwriters, writing everything herself and co-producing it alongside the Invisible’s Dave Okumu (the pair reunite on YU). On its release, Control missed the Top 75, and it soon became clear that the major label structure wasn’t for Lowe, who eventually moved to an independent. “It was all amicable,” she says of the split with Polydor. “I just needed to find another family.” “As soon as I feel like I have to come up with something like a single, I’m just like, ugh,” she says when I ask about commercial aspirations. “It feels like a creative block.” At a time when genre barriers are disappearing, now could be the perfect time for Lowe’s musical shape-shifting, with her textured sound reaching back through Motown, neo-soul and the spacious heartache of early James Blake. Lowe herself, however, is a curious pop star, one unwilling even to read the rules of the game let alone take part. “I’ve always wanted to be a musician, but I never planned on this,” she says, before correcting herself slightly. “Actually, it was always there. Like, I would say I wanted to be a singer when I was five, but at that point I wanted to be the biggest singer in the world – I don’t want to be that any more.” Music isn’t Lowe’s only passion; she has also started training as a psychotherapist, part of a very small trend no one’s calling Pop Psychology that has also seen Marina (formerly of … and the Diamonds fame) enrol in a psychology course at London’s Birkbeck University. “I’ve always been obsessed with the mind,” Lowe says. She started seeing a therapist in her early 20s after an undiagnosed stomach illness meant she was in and out of hospital. “No one knew what was going on, then this doctor said: ‘You should go and get some therapy, because it’s often linked.’ So I did. It shifted everything.” It also means her language is often peppered with therapy speak – words like “trauma”, “manifesting”, and the Instagram-friendly self-help classic “journey”. In fact, at times she reminds me of Gillian Anderson’s serious but sensitive character in Netflix’s Sex Education, about a teenager coping with a sex therapist mother. “I love that show!” she laughs. “I’m training to be a relationship and sex therapist, so I found it really interesting.” She and Jake have been doing relationship therapy together for four years. Love, she says, mystified her, having had no real role models. “My parents split up when I was young, and none of my friends’ parents were together either. I don’t know if I ever believed that monogamy was fulfilling, but after realising that the love changes, it made me feel it was possible if you’re willing to work.” There are also some pretty fundamental differences between the couple’s backgrounds. “Mine was liberal, atheist, pretty abnormal and his was very religious,” she says. “The new album’s about me exploring his beliefs a bit more.” “Like Fleabag?” I say. “Yes!” she exclaims, “although he’s not a priest.” Her eyes glaze over slightly. “I love that priest.” As well as touching on love and religion, YU also continues Control’s focus on feminism (Lowe’s debut featured the excellent Woman, an analysis of unfair standards), with Mango redressing the dynamic in the story of Adam and Eve. She says her feminism was influenced growing up by her mother and sisters, and has developed as she’s got older. “What I think has been prevalent in the last few years is that there’s not one version of feminism,” she says. “I’ve learned my feminism is not the ‘right’ feminism, it’s just my experience of misogyny. Or equality. I think it’s important to remind ourselves of that. A white feminist is going to have a very different experience to a woman of colour because they have to deal with different versions.” Lowe’s remote upbringing in Devon has been subject to some fairly hefty mythologising, painting a picture of her as a feral child with only sticks for friends. “I’m quite wary of romanticising it,” she says. “I feel like what it suggests was that me and my five siblings were like the Von Trapps.” While there is some element of truth in that – Lowe would gather the family round to play them her violin pieces at the age of five – she was also “wearing tracksuits and sipping vodka in the park”. In a house with no TV, music was her entertainment, fuelled by the education she’d received from her siblings who played her everything from the Be Good Tanyas to Erykah Badu and TLC. A musical prodigy, Lowe sat her GCSE music exams aged 13. The original songs she’d written for her tests found their way into the hands of a manager, who flew her by herself to the United States for writing sessions. What sort of themes was she writing about at such a young age? “One song was called Elegant Slumming and it was about how I liked to clean with heels and a dress on,” she laughs. “I must have done that in real life, but I can’t remember.” Later, after moving to London to do a popular music studies course at Goldsmiths, she had a wobble about her abilities. “Everyone [on the course] had their sound defined, but I didn’t know who I was.” Lowe eventually stripped everything back to its core and discovered that sound, something that’s evolved through the years, but she maintains a complex elegance. YU – pronounced “you” but also the more combative “why you” – finds her coming to terms with who she is even more. Where Control was introspective, with lots of the songs written at 3am, YU is warmer. The Way, for example, is a mushy, sun-drenched ode to falling head over heels in love. “I found myself resisting that song,” she says. “I was like: ‘I can’t write a positive love song, who the fuck do I think I am?’ But I love the cheesy stuff, too.” The song also features a head-spinning verse from rapper Jay Electronica, who, it turns out, is psychic. “He went in deep on those lyrics,” Lowe smiles. “He mentions other songs on the album and some lyrics that he wouldn’t have even heard.” She shakes her head in disbelief. “Total coincidence.” As our time comes to an end, Lowe mentions her siblings again. She has been thinking about how being the youngest has defined her. “It made me fiercely determined because I was always trying to be accepted,” she says. “The one thing it did that I’m less happy about is that I grew up really quickly. I always wanted to be older and now I want to be younger.” There’s a brief pause, her brain whirring through pages and pages of psychoanalytic theory. “Is that just how life works?” she asks herself. “Probably.” YU is out on 10 May