On Monday’s Daily Show, Trevor Noah provided an update on the crowded Democratic presidential field, which is fronted in many polls by former vice-president Joe Biden. Though still not officially running, Biden has been “putting out feelers to see where he stands, and apparently the answer is: too close to women,” Noah said. He referred to a viral essay released over the weekend in which former Nevada state assemblywoman Lucy Flores recounted how Biden made her uncomfortable at an event by smelling her hair and kissing, very slowly, the top of her head. “It’s definitely not OK, I mean, smelling hair is always weird,” Noah said of Flores’s account. “Like honestly, smelling hair is one of the creepiest things you can do. It’s on the list of creepy things – right after collecting doll parts and sneezing with your eyes open.” Where does Joe Biden stand in the 2020 presidential race? Apparently, too close to women. pic.twitter.com/0ZrzAEhnJD The account of Biden’s oft-joked weird uncle behavior brought up an important question for Noah: “What is it with America’s vice-presidents? None of them are normal. One guy is smelling women’s hair, the other one refuses to be near a woman without a chaperone,” he said in reference to Mike Pence. “Isn’t there a middle ground? There’s no Vice Middle President? There’s nowhere between MeToo and Handmaid’s Tale?” Following the Flores essay, a second woman came forward with another account of Biden’s weird, inappropriate behavior with women, claiming he rubbed noses with her. And for the critics who dismissed the story as Biden just being, again, America’s Uncle, Noah chided “Let me put it this way: if rubbing noses was just Biden being cute and being a harmless grandpa, how come you’ve never seen him do it with men?” Following this weekend’s “sniff-kiss-gate,” Biden’s unofficial campaign may be grounded. “And people are freaking out, because if he doesn’t run, the Democrats would only have 16 candidates to choose from, and only six of them would be white – an absolute disaster,” Noah panned. President Trump has evidently moved on from the drama of the Mueller report and, just in time for spring break, has threatened to close the US border with Mexico entirely, Stephen Colbert said on the Late Show. In an “epic three-part policy tweet” that took a water bottle and towel for Colbert to read aloud, the president laid out his non-rational for shutting the border town, claiming it would ultimately be a good thing for America. Colbert was having none of it. “Closing the border would not be a good thing,” he said. “According to the US Chamber of Commerce, the US and Mexico trade about $1.7bn in goods daily and the decision would threaten 5 million American jobs,” which is why they called it “an unmitigated economic debacle”. “Thanks so much, I’ve always said – America’s economy has too much –bacle,’” Colbert said in the president’s voice. “It is our job to de-bacle it.” Trump also prepared to cut off aid to the Central American countries of Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras – or, as reported in a mistaken chyron on Fox News, “Trump cuts aid to 3 Mexican countries”. The error explained a lot, Colbert observed. “Now we know why Mexico didn’t pay for the wall – Trump only asked one of the Mexicos.” Seth Meyers caught up on an eventful news cycle missed during Late Night’s vacation last week – most notably, the conclusion of Robert Mueller’s special investigation. To briefly recap, Mueller submitted his final report, the culmination of a two-year investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election, to attorney general William Barr. Barr, in turn, released a summary of the report that cleared Trump of collusion allegations, though he declined to rule on whether or not the president obstructed justice. The collusion clearance was “good news for Trump”, Meyers recapped. “I’d say he’s had a pep in his step ever since but he doesn’t really take steps. If he had a Fitbit, the only thing his Fitbit would ever display is, ‘You up?’” This week, though, Barr has disputed what many described as his “summary”, insisting that his four-page brief was not and was never intended to be a summary of Mueller’s 300-page report. “Wait, so it wasn’t supposed to be a summary? That’s kinda an important detail to leave out,” Meyers said. “That’s like reading the line ‘The prince and princess lived happily ever after’ in the fairytale, and then you turn the page and there’s a note saying, ‘That was not, and should not be mischaracterized as, the ending. They got divorced the next day.’” Furthermore, Meyers continued, “you can’t boil a 300-page document down to four pages. It’s like when you try to cram for a test by reading the cliff notes for The Great Gatsby and then you end up writing, ‘Wealthy man enjoys consequence-free summer in the Hamptons.’” In sum, Meyers concluded, “we have no idea what’s in the report”.