The UN secretary general, António Guterres, has expressed concern about the risk of a fresh military confrontation in Libya after Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar announced troop movements before a planned assault on Tripoli, the capital and stronghold of the UN-backed government of Fayez al-Serraj. Haftar, backed diplomatically and sometimes militarily by Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and France, has seized ground across the south of the country in recent weeks and has announced plans for an assault on terrorists he claims are based in the capital. Guterres made a rare visit to Libya to try to drum up support for a UN-sponsored national reconciliation conference that is supposed to lead to elections by the end of the year. Haftar has so far refused to attend the event, adding to concerns that he is not a democratic pluralist and instead is intent on imposing an authoritarian government in which the military is not under any civilian rule. Guterres tweeted: “I am deeply concerned by the military movement taking place in Libya and the risk of confrontation. There is no military solution. Only intra-Libyan dialogue can solve Libyan problems. I call for calm and restraint as I prepare to meet the Libyan leaders in the country.” A range of countries including Saudi Arabia have been urging Haftar to show restraint, but under the guise of eradicating terrorism he seems to be intent on taking control of the whole country. Libya’s civil war since the fall of Muammar Gaddafi in 2011 has largely been a contest between forces in the east led by Haftar and the UN-backed government in Tripoli. Successive UN-led efforts to unify Libya’s key institutions, including the central bank and political bodies, have failed and the country’s key oil installations have frequently been held to ransom by a variety of militia groups. Critics claim Haftar’s self-styled Libyan National Army (LNA) is an amalgam of militias including some Islamist groups, which Haftar claims to be determined to root out. Although Haftar has threatened the capital before, the current preparations look more advanced. Clashes were reported on Wednesday evening near a town 50 miles south of the capital. The LNA’s media centre said on Facebook that several units had headed “to the western region to cleanse it of the remaining terrorist groups”. The statement gave no further details. The main assault appears to be on the coastal road linking the eastern city of Benghazi, the LNA’s main current base, with Tripoli. Serraj has urged Haftar to stop making threats. In a statement on Wednesday, he said: “We have issued instructions and declared a general alert to all military and security forces from military and army belonging to us to be prepared.” Libyan experts have often questioned whether Haftar has the military forces to seize the capital, but he may be working to persuade some of the militias to defect to him in return for future preferment. Across many of the towns in Libya’s west there would be deep resistance to Haftar or any effort to impose military rule, partly because they would fear reprisals by Haftar forces and because they do not want to return to the authoritarian rule of the Gaddafi era.