I have never been a campaigner or activist before, but I have been worrying about the environment for decades. For 20 years I have written letters, signed petitions, ridden a bike – I have done everything that is “polite” – but the situation has, if anything, gone backwards. I came across Extinction Rebellion (XR) in October last year, through George Monbiot, and joined up straight away. I have become totally absorbed. I came down to London with one of four groups from Sheffield. We were in Parliament Square, blocking the roads. Some people had glued or locked themselves to objects using tubes or chains. The police picked off the people not locked on first. We have been trained in non-violent direct action, so I knew what to do: you go floppy. It was my second time being arrested – I was also arrested in November, when XR closed five London bridges. When you have your watch taken off, your belt and shoelaces removed and the door goes kerplunk, you have nothing to stare at in a cell but a stainless steel toilet. You do empathise with people who are disenfranchised. It’s salutary. But the climate emergency is so real and intense – it’s a privilege to feel you are doing something. Our great success this week is to show there is a large number of people willing to suffer the indignity and uncertainty of being arrested. Would I be willing to go to prison for this? The short answer is yes. I would do more; I would do a hunger strike. I have been a countryside ranger for 10 years and nature has always been my passion. I took personal action – a plant-based diet, trying not to fly, taking the bus, shopping and banking ethically – but I had given up signing petitions or writing letters to MPs about the environment because I felt like nothing was happening. Then last year when I met people from XR I finally felt inspired. I like the way they look at history and how the suffragette and civil rights movements worked, to see how to change policy. My first time being arrested was in November last year at the five bridges protest. This week I have been arrested a couple of times. On Monday I was arrested on Waterloo Bridge – I was holding the road with other protesters, singing, and I put a thumb cuff on me and my friend. The police thought they would have to cut it off, but they used a little handcuff key. I was in for 16 hours. Then I went to Oxford Circus and became a “barnacle” on the pink boat XR had there, locked on with a tube. The police cut us out and I spent 24 hours in a cell. The custody officer said we were the nicest detainees he had met and that he agreed with our cause. Being arrested shows the sacrifices people are willing to make. It is massively regrettable we have to disrupt people, but is the only way to get people in power to listen. Before I was in a cell for 24 hours, I thought I could go to prison for this cause, but when I was sitting there I realised I missed the hills, I missed the trees, I missed my dog. Could I really go to prison? I don’t know – but I do feel really passionate, so I have to see where the journey goes. We are not going to stop here. I have worked, since the age of 16, for all the major oil companies – BP, Shell, Esso. In 1986 I first heard about climate change through my Friends of the Earth group. As climate change and global warming moved up the agenda I thought it was inevitable that oil and gas companies would change because the consequences were so serious. But by the late 90s it was clear they had no intention of changing. So then you start to rationalise – how can I stay in this industry? And I started trade-offs – upping my donations to Greenpeace to balance things out. I got laid off when I was 62 and I was keen to get into direct action. I have been travelling around to fracking sites for the past six years. The anti-fracking campaign has been so effective – it has shown we can make a difference. When I first heard about XR, it seemed very extreme, but it’s an extreme situation. XR has to succeed or we all go down the tubes. I have been here for just over a week with the Southampton XR group, holding the blockade on Edgware Road. The police are always polite – maybe because I look a bit fragile at 71. This is my fourth time being arrested: twice for fracking and twice for Extinction Rebellion. If you are a person of colour being arrested there are a lot more implications, but if you are white, retired, with no career to think about ... as long as I can pay the fines I can take these actions without too much concern for the consequences, although I don’t take it lightly. I do feel bad about causing disruption to people. But I’ve been talking to motorists and 80% to 90% have a rant at you, then you give them the leaflet and they say, well, OK, I’ve got kids as well, you have a point. I never expected to be doing this, but I can’t think of anything more worthwhile. I would never have called myself an activist before. This has changed me. Let me put it like this: I would tattoo their symbol on my chest and I have never wanted to get a tattoo. I started camping on Waterloo Bridge. We were able to protest, but also to just live there for a week. It was incredible. It proved that when human beings come together in a common cause, magic happens. As a young black woman I never want to be arrested. That is a very valid fear for me. But now I am definitely considering it. This protest has degraded what the term “arrested” means because people have had so little fear about something we are taught can derail your whole future. People used it as a gift so that others could keep fighting. I am willing for this to be my life and career and to wake up everyday to think about what I am doing to help the environment. But we need everyone to act. I first got involved in climate activism in 2015 but felt a bit frustrated with the movement; it seemed as if there was very little traction. But I felt XR understood the complexity of the issue, and the fact that changing the climate involves so many other topics: poverty, inequality, minority rights. I arrived last Sunday and was assigned to Oxford Circus, where we put up our tents. I have never been arrested before, apart from spending the night in a cell as a teenager for getting into a fight. I need a DBS [Disclosure and Barring Service] background check for my job so I spoke to a legal information service for activists beforehand. I sat down at the roadblock and they arrested me within five minutes. If it didn’t affect my job I would go to prison on remand for this cause. We have to continue – it’s either this or extinction. I got involved because I am passionate about food sustainability, which is a big part of this. I like the fact there is no hierarchy in XR and everyone is doing their part. We are getting so many donations of food that we have spent very little money. I took time off from my job to help out and I have been here for three weeks, organising the food for everyone. I would be willing to be arrested for this cause, but someone needs to make sure the people sitting on the blockades get fed. It’s like feeding soldiers. The world is on fire and we need to do something about it. I have been involved in non-violent direct action for about 25 years; I’m overwhelmed now by the number of people who are willing to step through that fear barrier and be arrested. A lot of people are told that if you get arrested you’ll lose your job, your house, your mortgage. Over the years I have been arrested more than 100 times and have been charged 18 times for environmental campaigning. It’s not something I usually aim to do – but there’s a tree, there’s a chainsaw, so you get yourself in front of it ... what else can you do? But here it is a strategy and the cells are filling – it’s becoming an administrative nightmare. How far am I willing to go? All the way. We don’t want to be here dancing around Marble Arch, but I would be willing to go to prison, go on a hunger strike or strap myself to something. If I thought it would work, I would do it. It’s hard not to hear about XR. I have friends who are heavily involved. I am here with a group of tribal musicians called Oneness Jam. Any cause that needs attention, we come and bring some noise and entertainment – we need to keep things entertaining so people will stick around. I haven’t been able to stay here because of my job, but I have been coming as much as I can. I had four hours’ sleep last night and only a few more before that. I feel guilty about not staying, but it’s about whether I sacrifice my job. I have never seen a campaign like this in my life. I work with Greenpeace a lot and I have seen some really cool protests and events, but this is fantastic. This is the first time I have had so much purpose in my life. I’m sleeping in a tent on Park Lane – I have been here for eight days. I am the youngest of four siblings and they are all here. We have been blocking one of the busiest streets in the capital. I was sitting down on Waterloo Bridge, singing, when I was arrested. From a young age you are told: get a degree, get a good job, toe the line – and that prison is the worst thing. But when you are trying to bring awareness about one of the most devastating things the human mind can conceive of, you feel calm. I wasn’t frightened in the cell. I was sitting next to a heroin addict, so I was frightened for his safety, but not my own. If in 10 years’ time I looked back and I had just been sitting on my bum, not doing anything, I don’t think I would forgive myself. I think a criminal record in 10 years’ time might be obsolete anyway, because the environment is breaking down.