Manchester City did what they desired, a 26th Premier League win of the season taking the champions ahead of Liverpool by a point with each title challenger having six matches to play. Pep Guardiola’s team cantered to victory, though the manager may be unhappy at the slew of chances they spurned. Still, with the FA Cup semi‑final against Brighton on Saturday in mind, the manager can be content at having come through the game while resting several players. Yet Oleksandr Zinchenko was forced off and with Fabian Delph already injured Guardiola may consider Benjamin Mendy at left-back for the semi-final. Of the Frenchman who was filmed on a night out until 3.30am on Saturday Guardiola said: “We’ll see tomorrow how he trains. Danilo [another option], it’s not his natural position. We’ll see the decision we will take for the Cup.” Guardiola retained only Ederson, Kevin De Bruyne, Aymeric Laporte and Zinchenko from the win at Fulham on Saturday, making seven changes which included handing Phil Foden a debut Premier League start. Neil Warnock went the other way, retaining all but Harry Arter – who was replaced by Joe Ralls – from the defeat against Chelsea on Sunday. Cardiff had been quoted as the longest of long outsiders at 30-1 to win this game and within six minutes City showed why. De Bruyne had already opened up the visitors when crossing from the right – Gabriel Jesus should have scored – as he collected along the left and from the tightest of angles smashed the ball past Neil Etheridge. Cardiff’s goalkeeper may have been disappointed to concede from that position but for De Bruyne there was joy in his first league goal of 2019. Against the champions this was the nightmare start for Warnock’s men and it would have been 2-0 if Jesus had anticipated Leroy Sané’s clever pass. It took out Etheridge but the Brazilian was left sliding along the turf rather than connecting. Jesus last started a league game on 14 January and it was showing. With a little extra sharpness the 22‑year‑old might also have scored when presented with the ball in front of goal; this time he struck over. By the 18th minute Zinchenko’s evening was over, which brought Kyle Walker into the fray. Jesus did better when he broke at the Cardiff defence only for Riyad Mahrez to take over and run into traffic. Guardiola, as he often does, threw his arms in despair. There was a similar gesture from the manager when Jesus – again – missed from close range following De Bruyne’s pull-back from the byline. City were in firm control but still only one ahead as the half hour came and went. Their lack of ruthlessness continued: both Foden and Sané took aim and found their radar awry, their efforts missing wide and high. Foden, though, could be pleased with his creative contribution, alongside De Bruyne in central midfield. The 18-year-old decorated his performance with clever touches, sharp passing, driving runs and a willingness to look forward first. However It was Sané who doubled the lead with a lethal first-time finish after Jesus atoned for his profligacy by chesting the ball into his path. Manchester City lead Liverpool by a point, but have played one game more – and games in Europe and the FA Cup could still be a factor 5 Apr Southampton (a)9 Apr Porto (h) – CL14 Apr Chelsea (h)17 Apr Porto (a) – CL21 Apr Cardiff (a) 26 Apr Huddersfield (h)**30 Apr & 7 May Potential CL semis4 May Newcastle (a) 12 May Wolves (h) 6 Apr Brighton (n) – FA Cup9 Apr Tottenham (a) – CL14 Apr Crystal Palace (a)17 Apr Tottenham (h) - CL20 Apr Tottenham (h) 24 Apr Man Utd (a)28 Apr Burnley (a)**30 Apr & 7 May Potential CL semis4 May Leicester (h)12 May Brighton (a) **Subject to change depending on Champions League progress When the second half started the question was whether City would pull away from Cardiff as they often do to visiting teams. Laporte was the first to suggest they might, the centre-back racing along the inside-left channel before finding he lacked support from any teammate. This left Guardiola chuntering at Sané and there was further disappointment when Fernandinho slipped in Foden, although this time Etheridge did at least have to make a save. Another plus for Guardiola was how sharp De Bruyne looked in his second game back since injury. The Belgian was involved in most of the questions City posed Cardiff, on one occasion swinging a ball on to Fernandinho’s head which the midfielder only just failed to finish. Laporte was next to miss with a header, failing to convert Walker’s diagonal from the right when unmarked. If a City man could not find the net maybe a Cardiff one could: when De Bruyne drove a cross from the left Sean Morrison nearly stabbed the ball in at the near post. Mahrez, Sané and Foden lined up to take pot-shots but Etheridge made a series of stunning saves, and his right post did the business from a Foden attempt that careered off his shin. Cardiff – briefly – threatened with an Oumar Niasse shot that drew sarcastic cheers from the away fans. Late on the same player raced clear but Ederson saved well. “I don’t think they could’ve given us any more,” Warnock said of his team.