Kevin De Bruyne believes his injury-blighted season means he will not be at his best for the rest of Manchester City’s campaign. The Belgian has suffered two serious knee injuries and was then ruled out at the start of March by a hamstring problem, limiting the midfielder to 25 appearances. City play Brighton & Hove Albion in Saturday’s FA Cup semi-final, are in the Champions League quarter-finals and competing to win the Premier League, having claimed the Carabao Cup. Yet De Bruyne admits he will likely not be at his best as City pursue an unprecedented quadruple. “No, probably not,” he said. “Not compared with last year. I don’t know what my level is going to be but to be fair I don’t really care. Now it’s the business end [of the year], I just need to do what I can do to help the team win games. If that means playing five games or 10 games, I’ll take it all. It’s been that kind of season.” Despite his extended layoffs De Bruyne does not feel fresh. “No, not really,” he said. “I feel sometimes my season had double the length of other players because every time you need to be in, you need to make almost double the hours, you never have a day off because you need to work on your recovery. It’s more draining than to play in the end. A lot of the time you’re alone but you have to do it. I did it and I’m happy I’m back.” De Bruyne is excited at the challenge ahead but warned City could lose out on the three trophies they are chasing. “It’s like 12 or 13 cup games. It makes it exciting. In the end maybe we lose everything but at least we are here at this stage. It’s been incredible, so just keep on going, try to win Saturday and hopefully go to another final. For me personally I’ve not been there [to an FA Cup final] yet, I’ve not won it.” Pep Guardiola has said he will not take a risk with Sergio Agüero’s fitness against Brighton after the striker suffered a muscle injury at Fulham. “Sergio is going to play when he’s really, really fit,” the manager said. “The doctors are going to tell me tomorrow [Saturday] if he’s a risk of being injured and after that whether it could be three or four weeks out. If that is the case I’m sure he’s not going to play. It’s a semi-final. It’s an important game and we’ll play with the best side possible.” The manager defended Benjamin Mendy after the full-back was filmed in a club at 3.30am last week. “Of course I am happy [with him],” Guardiola said. “He’s a nice guy, he has an incredible heart. Sometimes, I have to understand his own culture, where he has come from … It’s not the first time, and will not be the last one, so it is what it is. What we want to do is work with him to protect his knee, his condition, to help us, because we need him.” Guardiola, asked whether dancing in a club was good for Mendy’s knee, said: “I don’t know if he danced. I was not there. But from what I saw sometimes with his celebrations in the Premier League, he’s not a bad dancer.”