“Let’s have a big shout out for the man in the fifth row who has come all the way from Barrow,” said Anna Soubry excitedly, as she and Chris Leslie took the stage. A few people whooped politely. “Has anyone come further than Barrow?” Silence. “Now we’ve got the juices flowing, I want you all to have a fantastic event when it gets under way. We’ve got some great speeches coming up.” Leslie merely looked a bit awkward. “I just want to say how wonderful Anna is,” he said eventually. Having worked the crowd into if not a frenzy, then at least the faintest signs of life, Soubry and Leslie quickly legged it. Change UK, aka the Tiggers, certainly like to do things differently. Not every political party chooses to send out two of its MPs disguised as warmup acts for a daytime TV chat show. And not every political party would describe a gathering of 150 activists in an overheated room of Church House in Westminster as a major national rally. But anything to break the mould. Ten minutes later, Soubry, along with a selection of Change UK MPs and MEP candidates, reappeared and the event proper started. Chuka Umunna declared he was overwhelmed that the party had already received 15,000 donations. Though as a recent opinion poll has revealed that only 38% of voters know that Change UK wants to remain in the EU, it is possible some donors will be asking for their money back once they realise how it is being spent. Umunna went on to announce that Change UK was now in third place, ahead of the Tories, in London. He somehow forgot that the Brexit party was in second place. Inconvenient truths and all that. The only way to make sure that Labour eventually supported a people’s vote, he continued, was by voting for Change UK. If enough people were to back the Tiggers, then Labour would be forced to come off the fence. After that, the rally morphed into a very polite episode of The Apprentice, with every contestant given five minutes to make their pitch. The interim leader, Heidi Allen, reclaimed patriotism for remainers, the former Polish deputy prime minister Jan Rostowski catalogued the leavers’ lies and Jessica Simor QC pleaded on behalf of the young. The former BBC presenter Gavin Esler, who had clearly identified himself as the star turn, went on a long, and not entirely convincing, ramble about how he had taken to calling his dog Farage. The only slightly bum note came from Mike Gapes, who was introduced to the audience as Iron Mike. A nickname that literally no one has ever used to describe him. Metal Mickey clearly hadn’t been listening to a word Umunna had been saying as he happily insisted that Labour would never change its position whatever Change UK did. The event limped to a close with a few questions from party activists. No journalists were offered the chance to get a word in edgeways. It was all a little underwhelming. Esler’s declaration that “We are in it to win it” had the faint air of desperation. As if he was trying to convince himself as much as the people in the room. The reality is that, with four weeks to go until the European elections, Change UK still has the feel of a party that is talking mainly to itself. Not for want of trying or because there is anything wrong with its core messages; more that no one is listening and it all feels a bit disorganised and amateur hour compared with the slick professionalism of the Brexit party. As yet the Tiggers have no answer to a party that has made a virtue of wanting a Brexit it is in no hurry to define. But at least they can be said to be doing something. The Labour party’s national executive committee wasted an entire day coming to a meaningless fudge over the inclusion of a second referendum in its election manifesto. A referendum that would only happen if at least 12 impossible things were to take place first. Whether Labour voters would be as easily fooled as some of the party’s MPs was doubtful. Meanwhile, the Tories carried on doing exactly what they have been doing ever since the article 50 extension. Nothing whatsoever. There was so little going on in the Commons that not even an adjournment debate attended by less than 10 MPs could raise a pulse and everyone packed up and went home well before 4.30pm. Crisis? What crisis?