Investigations are under way after a huge explosion at the UK’s largest steelworks left two night-shift workers with burns injuries. The explosion and fire at the Tata Steel site lit up the town of Port Talbot in south Wales and could be heard up to 15 miles away. Residents said the blast in the early hours of Friday shook houses and led many to initially fear a repeat of a tragedy in 2001 in which three men died. The two injured men are believed to have been on a train carrying molten metal. Both suffered superficial burns, one to the back of his head, the other to his chest. They were taken to hospital but discharged. Experts from the Health and Safety Executive have been to the site to begin an investigation and Tata will carry out its own inquiry. Stephen Davies, a Unite union representative for the site, said: “We’re working closely with management to find out exactly the issues that have take place. “This was totally out of the blue. Our safety record down there has been excellent. So it’s disappointing to hear what happened.” Davies said the use of the railway line had been put on hold. A spokesman for Tata said: “Shortly after 3.30am there was an incident at our Port Talbot site involving a spillage of molten iron. “Two of our employees suffered minor injuries and both have been released following treatment. The spillage led to a number of fires which were extinguished by our own emergency services supported by members of the Mid and West Wales fire and rescue service. Police and ambulance also attended. “We are currently investigating the cause of the incident and are looking to minimise any impact on production.” Work at the site recommenced around 7am. The Aberavon MP, Stephen Kinnock, said: “The men and women at our Port Talbot steelworks do an absolutely fantastic job, often in challenging and dangerous circumstances. “With this in mind I’m pleased that Tata are conducting an investigation into the causes of last night’s incident. It is important we understand the causes of the blast, to reassure workers and local residents that the highest standards of safety are being upheld.” The Welsh secretary, Alun Cairns, said: “It is important that Tata Steel Europe addresses safety concerns that could arise as a result of this incident to ensure the wellbeing of staff and residents in the local and wider community.” Lance Davies, who witnessed the explosion, said it was a miracle no one was killed. He added: “I was woken up by what sounded like thunder. I went to the window and could see the results of the first explosion, then I called my partner and saw the other two. “It was like a scene from Independence Day. A big ball of flame, followed by a massive mushroom of smoke. It was unbelievable.” Sharon Freeguard, a Neath Port Talbot councillor, said: “I thought I heard about two to three explosions. It was extremely frightening and very, very scary. “The house just shook, so it was quite alarming. We’re just all relieved that there are no fatalities.” In 2001, three men were killed and 12 injured in a blast at the plant, then owned by Corus. 