It took a genius to see the genius of Dan Robbins, the inventor of painting-by-numbers who has died aged 93. For art critics, painting-by-numbers was, and is, a byword for robotic repetition and unoriginality – and that was exactly what Andy Warhol adored about it. In 1962, when he was searching for a mechanical artistic process, he painted a series of homages to Robbins. His Do it Yourself paintings mimic painting-by-numbers landscapes, with blocky areas of flat colour guided by a grid of numbers visible through the paint. Warhol recognised a great piece of pop culture when he saw it. He and Robbins were both bringing art to the people. In the 50s, the American art world took itself extremely seriously. Abstract painters such as Barnett Newman and Mark Rothko painted sublime slabs that were praised in hushed voices. Painting-by-numbers may not have been intended as a parody of this modernist reverence – but it sure looked that way. Robbins designed quaint scenes of farmhouses and mountain valleys that anyone could complete – they were good, solid pictures for good, solid middle-American homes. Yet the relationship between painting-by-numbers and modern art is more complicated than it looks. The earliest kit Robbins devised was a cubist still life in the style of Picasso, for the sharp planes of colour were, he said, easy to adapt. He called it Abstract No 1. It was his boss at the Palmer paint company in Detroit, where he worked as a package designer, who insisted he create homely American scenes instead. Robbins was thrilled when, as he remembered: “Someone entered a completed Abstract No 1 in an art show and won. The judges were quite embarrassed, but the prize resulted in lots of debate about the concept of art …” Even the most apparently old fashioned scene becomes abstract when you paint it by numbers – after all, you are reducing it to an arrangement of numbered colours. Warhol reveals this in his 1962 masterpiece, Do It Yourself (Seascape). Is it dumb or clever? An orange boathouse seems to sway in the breeze against a sky laden with grey and white clouds. Through them you see numbers. It is oddly moving. If Warhol was the only famous artist who dared associate himself with this hobby, its secret influence can be seen right through 60s American art. Pop artists and minimalists set out to simplify their colours and shapes just like a painting-by-numbers kit. “I tried to keep the paint as good as it was in the can,” said Frank Stella of his minimal paintings in strips of unmixed colour. Ultimately, the simplified art begun by Robbins evolved into Carl Andre creating an abstract masterpiece by arranging bricks. Robbins didn’t just invent an entertaining hobby. He helped to change what art is. It was a revolution by numbers.