As the European parliamentary elections approach, there’s a widespread sense that the idea of Europe as a union has been lost. We see an almost daily disintegration of a project that was underpinned by a utopian vision. This vision reread a thousand years of conflict into the possibility of an integrated Europe, and it foresaw Europe as an irreversible unit, the construction of which was believed to be the end of history. But in the wake of earlier crises, Brexit forces us to recognise that Europe as a union is no longer an unalterable project. Instead it is in grave danger. One factor is the tilt of the United States away from treating Europe as an automatic ally. Life in Europe is no longer so sheltered. Europeans feel vulnerable, and they now face questions they have too long avoided. Staring into this abyss, there have been many attempts to construct a simplistic history of Europe versus others. One could perhaps flash a knowing smile at symbolic reconstructions of a “fortress Europe”: this is a continent that not long ago dominated the world. And it is not as if this domination left no marks on others, across centuries of colonial or commercial encounters. But among the rightwing, the history of Europe can still be celebrated as a narrative of a white Christian civilisation – a mighty past to be looked back on with pride and self-assurance. We strongly condemn such views, which entirely set aside the cultural, religious and political diversity so characteristic of our continent and the responsibilities inherited from our past. We see them as simply displacing on to some “other” our own feelings of frustration and helplessness – whether directed domestically at the Muslim, Jew, immigrant or refugee, or internationally towards other powers and their competing interests. We also see no value in dwelling on national histories as a litany of sufferings, wars and genocides, or in adopting an exclusively accusatory stance where Europe is held collectively guilty. It’s time to abandon such self-defeating binaries and face the world, acknowledging both the light and the shade of our European past – in short, to rethink Europe through the prism of its opposites. Let’s give up compressing Europe into a single story. Rather than clinging to nostalgic linear narratives that imply a pre-established unity (“one” heritage, “one” history, “one” memory), let’s recover memories that are polyphonic. Master narratives are no longer viable as they once were for nation states. We should instead recognise our multiplicity without giving up our sense of unity, since we still feel that we share things in common: a past and a present – and a future if we want it. Let’s be honest. Europe is a patchwork of invisible and imagined borders that divide Europeans from one another in all countries and regions. There is an Atlantic Europe, whose gaze is transatlantic at the cost of its links closer to home. There is the rich north-western Europe, which lectures “club Med” countries under the guise of good governance. Western Europe cultivates an old disdain towards central and eastern European states, with their new and flawed democratic cultures. There is a Christian Europe that excludes or ignores the religious and atheistic minorities that for centuries helped shape its history. There is the Europe of large countries that don’t hear the legitimate fears of smaller ones, while the latter retain bitter memories of prolonged foreign domination. There is the Europe of immigrants, who are too often regarded as unreliable, second-class citizens. The list goes on. Europe is riven by fault lines, many of them all too easy to reopen. Without looking at our pasts, what future can we build? There are two possible paths, each of which may help construct more clear-eyed narratives from our history. First, to embrace the notion that Europe is all the richer for its divisions. As we get better at recognising the division generated by our incessant conflicts, we become more adept at developing the kind of shared narrative we need. And we need it precisely because this is an era of dangerous competition, and we are seeing the return of political, economic, social and cultural models from another age. That history of divisions, considered as a common heritage, is yet to be written. But it can be written precisely because we know how such divisions were overcome in our recent past, particularly after 1945 and after 1989. This did not happen because we were ordered to reconcile from the top down. Instead it emerged from the bottom up, through us Europeans engaging in a process of genuine “memory work”, which, as the philosopher Paul Ricoeur once said, is always a “plural memory” work. A second path comes from the fact that Europe is a continent of law, which protects us in the expression of our diversity. Many voices pit state sovereignty against an allegedly overstaffed, anti-democratic European Union system centred in Brussels. That may well be a fair complaint. But that same union has guaranteed national sovereignties by protecting and even organising their differences. The European project is the direct opposite of past imperial ambitions. And it runs counter to any vision of a “prison of peoples” that would be conceived and enforced by global elites. Instead “Europe” is an unprecedented project of solidarity backed by the will of peoples who have abolished war between themselves and who share a desire for freedom. This surely is a story worth telling and defending. To reconstruct Europe, it is vital to reconstruct its history. It seems crucial that this unique and fragile European experience be given a fuller meaning. By reflecting on our divided memories and engaging in renewed forms of “shared memory” work, we believe it is possible to tell the story of a Europe struggling against all odds towards building a new kind of relation with itself, and with the rest of the world. • Thomas Serrier and Stephane Michonneau are French historians; more than 100 other historians from across Europe have added their signatures to this text. They are Joaquim Albareda, Pompeu Fabra University of Barcelona; Timothy Garton Ash, Oxford University; Justin Bisanswa, Université Laval Québec/IAS Nantes; Alain Blum, EHESS/INED France; Felipe Brandi, EHESS Paris; Marco Bresciani, University of Florence; Neven Budak, University of Zagreb; Jose Burucua, National Academy of History, Buenos Aires/IAS Nantes; Antonio Castillo Gomez, University of Alcala; Johann Chapoutot, Sorbonne University, Paris; Abdessalam Cheddadi, Mohammed V University, Rabat/IAS Nantes; Josefina Cuesta, University of Salamanca; Antonio De Almeida Mendes, University of Nantes; Sofia Dyak, Center for Urban History of East Central Europe, Lviv; Andreas Eckert, Humboldt University of Berlin; Alan Forrest, University of York; Josep Maria Fradera, Pompeu Fabra University of Barcelona; Etienne François, University of Paris 1/Free University of Berlin; Robert Gildea, Oxford University; Maciej Górny, German Historical Institute Warsaw; Catherine Gousseff, EHESS Paris, PIASt Warsaw; Hannes Grandits, Humboldt University of Berlin; Heinz-Gerard Haupt, University of Bielefeld/EUI Florence; Béatrice von Hirschhausen, CNRS Paris/Centre Marc Bloch Berlin; Ton Hoenselaars, Utrecht University; John Horne, Trinity College, Dublin; Keith Hoskin, University of Birmingham/IAS Nantes; Dagmara Jajeśniak-Quast, European University Viadrina Frankfurt-Oder; Bogumił Jewsiewicki, Université Laval Québec; Basil Kerski, European Solidarity Center Gdańsk; Gábor Klaniczay, Central European University Budapest; Svetla Koleva, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences Sofia/IAS Nantes; Kornelia Kończal, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich; Kazmer Kovacs, Sapientia Hungarian University of Transylvania; Claudia Kraft, University of Vienna; Roman Krakovsky, University of Geneva; Todor Kuljic, University of Belgrade; Audrey Kichelewski, University of Strasbourg; Jörn Leonhard, University of Freiburg; Paweł Machcewicz, Polish Academy of Sciences Warsaw/Imre Kertesz Kolleg Jena; Benoît Majerus, University of Luxemburg; Caroline Morel, European Association of History Educators EUROCLIO; Javier Moreno Luzon, Complutense University of Madrid; Ekaterina Makhotina, University of Bonn; Diana Mishkova, Center for Advanced Study Sofia; Suleiman Mourad, Smith College, USA/IAS Nantes; Akiyoshi Nishiyama, Kiurytsu University Tokyo; Teresa Pinheiro, Technical University of Chemnitz; Juan Pro, Autonomous University of Madrid; Anna Reading, King’s College London; Ofelia Rey, University of Santiago de Compostella; Valérie Rosoux, Catholic University of Louvain; Henry Rousso, CNRS Paris; Krzysztof Ruchniewicz, Willy Brandt Centrum Wrocław; Luule Sakkeus, Estonian Institute for Population Studies, Tallinn University; Magdalena Saryusz-Wolska, German Historical Institute Warsaw; Irina Sherbakowa, Memorial International; Steven Stegers, EUROCLIO European Association of History Educators; Bo Stråth, University of Helsinki; Lakshmi Subramaniam, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, India/IAS Nantes; Philipp Ther, University of Vienna; John Tolan, University of Nantes; Robert Traba, Polish Academy of Sciences Warsaw; Balazs Trencsenyi, CEU Budapest; Laurence Van Ypersele, Catholic University of Louvain; Jakob Vogel, Sciences Po Paris/Centre Marc Bloch in Berlin; Pierre-F Weber, University of Szczecin; Jay Winter, Yale University; Sergei Zakharov, Higher School of Economics, Russia/IAS Nantes; Paul Zalewski, European University Viadrina Frankfurt-Oder; Robert Żurek, „Krzyżowa“ Foundation for Mutual Understanding in Europe; Carlo Ginzburg, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa; Andrea Graziosi, University of Naples; Daniela Luigia Caglioti, University of Naples; Mario Del Pero, Sciences Politiques, Paris; Guri Schwarz, University of Genoa; Francesco Cassata, University of Genoa; Carlotta Ferrata degli Uberti, University College London; Mila Orlić, University of Rijeka; Stefano Petrungaro, University of Venice; Simone Neri Serneri, Università of Florence; Fulvio Conti, University of Florence; Simone Attilio Bellezza, University of Naples; Emanuele Felice, University of Chieti-Pescara; Gabor Egry, Institute of Political History, Budapest; Pieter Judson, European University Institute; John Paul Newman, National University of Ireland, Maynooth; Rok Stergar, University of Ljubljana; Marta Verginella, University of Ljubljana; Laura Downs, European University Institute, Florence; Tvrtko Jakovina, University of Zagreb; Klaus Richter, University of Birmingham; Arturo Marzano, University of Pisa; Michele Battini, University of Pisa; Antonella Salomoni, University of Calabria/University of Bologna; Ann Thomson, European University Institute, Florence; Alexander Etkind, European University Institute, Florence; Lucy Riall, European University Institute, Florence; Stephane Van Damme, European University Institute, Florence; Federico Romero, European University Institute, Florence; Regina Grafe, European University Institute, Florence; Giorgio Riello, European University Institute, Florence; Ilaria Pavan, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa; Joanna Wawrzyniak, University of Warsaw; Valeria Galimi, University of Florence; Alessandro Giacone, University of Bologna; Martin Aust, University of Bonn; Laurent Brassart, University of Lille; Anne Couderc, University of Paris Pantheon-Sorbonne; Anne Deighton, University of Oxford; Beata Halicka, Adam Mickiewicz University of Poznań; Sandrine Kott, Université of Geneva; Christina Koulouri, Panteion University of Athens; Ondřej Matějka, Institute for the Study of Totalitarian Regimes, Prague; Ełżbieta Opiłowska, University of Wrocław; Jiři Pešek, Charles University of Prague; Judith Rainhort, University of Paris-Sorbonne; Jessica Reinisch, Birkbeck, University of London; Martin Schulze Wessel, Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich; Nenad Stefanov, Humboldt University of Berlin; Clément Thibaud, EHESS in Paris