I have been called out so many times online that it’s just white noise now. For my various sins I have been blocked, deleted and “cancelled” on social media, which doesn’t resemble real life at all. In real life, one may break bread with beings who think differently from you and, weirdly, no one dies. There are lists of what can and cannot be said now, but I am from a generation that derides trigger warnings and micro-aggressions, because we are harder than hard. I recognise myself in the rantings of the writer Bret Easton Ellis, whom I adore. His new book, White, is a long whinge about woke young people. He happens to be in love with one, but wonders about who they really are, with their multiple allergies and support badgers. These thin-skinned, super-woke millennials seem to be a product of fear and uncertainty. My empathy waxes and wanes. I can go from “There, there …” to “Get a grip” in under three seconds. But something has happened lately. I finally feel properly called out. And I like it. The new climate change protest movements have challenged me. Sure, I knew about the issue, but vaguely hoped that science would swoop in and sort it all out. I also find it hard to imagine that any life will continue after my death and right now I fancy a burger. How does anything I do really affect the big stuff: that’s for corporations and governments, isn’t it? Pass the ketchup. Then along comes Extinction Rebellion, whose existence I have been aware of for a while, as I live with an eco-warrior – albeit one who, like many teenagers, never switches the lights out. The movement’s smartly designed stickers have been proliferating, as has the energy. I have watched Greta Thunberg and wondered where her extraordinary power comes from, before realising it is in her total refusal to reassure us that everything is going to be all right. It’s a very feminine thing, an infantile thing, to want to please, and yet here is a 16-year-old girl telling grownups that it is not fine. That we have destroyed her hopes and dreams and must act. For days now, there have been grumblings about the protests. Arguments over style versus substance, the suggestion the campaigners are just middle-class, souped-up crusties, elderly hippy women and clueless posh teenagers. When I was at Greenham Common in the 1980s, Michael Heseltine called us “woolly minds in woolly hats”. Anti-apartheid protesters were considered both middle-class fools and an imminent threat. During the last civil war – the miners’ strike – there were already rumblings about fossil fuels. We would defend a class only to close their mines and import coal from elsewhere. The attacks on Extinction Rebellion come thick as smog: do these people not understand that they need to overthrow capitalism itself? How can they chant “We love the police” when the police have taken black lives? Why are they enjoying themselves? Do they have phones and do they travel? The hypocrites. How dull. We can indeed call them out as hypocrites, as though doing so is itself a political action. It isn’t. It’s just more denial. Or we can all do more in our own lives, while pressuring the government to act. Civil disobedience and small changes matter. These protests show us how. They remind us that Brexit is one issue among many. When the government stalls, of course people will take to the streets and they are always inventive. This is to be celebrated. The media grumps tell us that the kids and campaigners have got the science wrong, got their feelings wrong, got the country wrong and, well ... you can smell their fear. Has David Attenborough got it all wrong too, then? Should you ignore the floods and forest fires and carry on embracing your own powerlessness? This is all being called out loudly and it has woken me up; here I am, a little late and bleary, but here. A friend accused me of loving these protests because of nostalgia for my youth, but it is the exact opposite. I have no longing for the past. What I have is simple: a longing for the future.