Cast aside the traditional smoky eye for a second and consider this option. It’s an otherworldly but beautifully pared-down punk aesthetic, as seen at Dries van Noten SS19 (right). There’s none of that blending a million shades together malarkey that takes a decade to achieve. No, this is quick and simple – a swipe of black pigment across the eyes, nude lips and makeup-free skin. Actually, ignore that last bit; fine if you’re a supermodel, but the rest of us are better off cheating with a bit of tinted moisturiser. 1. Illamasqua Powder Eye Shadow in Obsidian £17, lookfantastic.com2. Too Faced Peach Puff Matte Lip Color in Stoked £17, toofaced.com3. Shiseido Controlled Chaos Mascara Ink in Black Pulse £25, johnlewis.com4. Charlotte Tilbury Airbrush Flawless Finish £34, cultbeauty.com 5. Kat Von D Cake Pencil in Trooper £17, debenhams.com ‘Is this a good foundation?’ is a question I am constantly asked because the market is flooded with bases, many indistinguishable from the next. Brands are playing a tiresome one-upmanship game regarding wide shade range, which is fine, but not enough; the formulation also has to be on point. That’s why I found this from Uoma Beauty interesting. The 51-shade range takes various undertones into consideration, but this is nothing new. The formulation, however, is. In fact, it is quite genius. Using the Fitzpatrick scale, which measures the skin’s reaction to the sun, they have identified six ‘skin kins’ that everyone falls into: White Pearl, Fair Lady, Honey Honey, Bronze Venus, Brown Sugar and Black Pearl. All the foundations have then been infused with specific skincare ingredients. White Pearl – very fair skin – is commonly hypersensitive so micro algae extracts have been added to help reduce inflammation. At the other end of the spectrum, with Black Pearl (dark brown skin), the most common concern is dullness so tomato extract has been included to brighten skin. All the foundations include a ‘biomimicry’ pigment meaning the look of pores and lines is minimised and the end result is a fresh velvety matte as opposed to one that makes you look dead inside. Now that’s what I call a good foundation.Uoma Beauty Say What?! foundation, £29.50, selfridges.com Dare to bare Violette, cool global beauty director for Estée Lauder, has created the Violette Oh Naturelle! nude makeup collection that speaks to all skin tones, with particularly divine lipsticks. From £26, esteelauder.co.uk Floral dance If you have a thing for pretty graduated hues and floral scents, you’ll love Jo Malone’s Blossom Collection. Highlights include a new Silk Blossom Candle and a Frangipani Flower Cologne. From £44, jomalone.com The eyes have it Eye creams don’t tend to float my boat, but Ole Henriksen Banana Bright is different. It’s thick but light, brightens and corrects, softens fine lines and creates a brilliant base for your concealer. £30, boots.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.