Raheem Sterling has bought 550 tickets for Manchester City’s FA Cup semi-final against Brighton at Wembley on Saturday and donated them to his old school close to the stadium. The 24-year-old winger attended Copland community school, now Ark Elvin academy, when growing up in London and is aware that many of the students come from similar minority ethnic backgrounds to his own. More than 50 languages are spoken at the establishment, which serves the estate in Wembley where Sterling was brought up after coming to England from Jamaica at the age of five. The academy’s principal, Rebecca Curtis, said she felt Sterling was a role model for her pupils. “To know he still thinks about the community he came from despite how his life has changed is really powerful for us,” she said. “The vast majority of our pupils have never been inside Wembley, let alone seen such a big game with one of our old boys playing.” Sterling said: “I have a close connection to Ark Elvin academy having attended the school myself when it was Copland community school, so it is great to be able to give these students the chance to watch a game at Wembley. “I grew up right next door to the stadium and would dream of one day playing in a cup final or even representing my country there. To now be able to play there myself is an honour and this is a great opportunity to give back to the community that helped me get to where I am.” City have had to return some of their allocation of extra tickets for the game, which is their fourth visit to Wembley this season and has a 5.30pm kick-off, unhelpful for anyone travelling from the north by public transport. Kevin De Bruyne, despite the side being 90 minutes from their second final of the season and in contention in the league and Champions League, still thinks it is too early to talk of a possible quadruple. “That is such a hard task and you have to go game by game,” the City midfielder said. “We are facing a really tough month.” De Bruyne was more effusive over the future of Phil Foden, after the teenager made his first Premier League start in the 2-0 defeat of Cardiff. Not only does the Belgian think Foden will be in the England squad before long, he can see Gareth Southgate’s team winning the European Championship next summer. “Phil is doing really well and for his age he is playing a lot of minutes,” De Bruyne said. “It’s really tough in England because top teams here have 20 star players who are all established internationals and the coach wants to win every game, but I think if Phil progresses he has a chance to go to the Euros next year. He will play enough games to be considered and I told the English guys in the dressing room a week ago that they should win the tournament next year. Only one team can do it but I think England will be favourites, with France.” Oleksandr Zinchenko has described the apparent hamstring injury he sustained against Cardiff as “not so serious”.