Labour has held on to the Newport West parliamentary seat following a byelection fought against the backdrop of Brexit chaos, but all parties said they had heard anger, frustration and mistrust on the doorstep. The seat in south Wales is seen as a Labour stronghold and was held by the veteran MP Paul Flynn for 32 years until his death in February. There was a modest swing from Labour towards the Conservatives while Ukip came third, polling almost double the votes it attracted in the 2017 general election. All three leading parties claimed they were satisfied with the result but expressed concern about the mood they had come across while campaigning, anger that was reflected in a poor turnout of just 37%, compared with 67.5% in the 2017 general election. Ruth Jones, a former president of the Wales Trade Union Congress, took the seat with 9,308 votes (39.5%) She thanked the people of Newport but said: “There is a level of distrust of all politicians at the moment because of what is going on in the House of Commons. I think that was highlighted in the low turnout. I want to work with the people who did elect me but I want to reach out to the people who didn’t go out today to make sure we get their voices heard and they re-engage with politics.” At the 2017 election, Flynn’s majority was 5,658. In 1997 he had a 14,357 majority. Jones said she was pleased with the majority this time of 1,951 over the Tories. “Paul [Flynn] had a massive personal vote. I’m grateful we had the majority we did. It’s something we can build on.” People have had enough after a decade of austerity Asked how she would vote over Brexit and if she would follow the party whip, she said: “We need to wait and see. I need to spend some time getting used to the idea and going up. The talks [between Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn] will be developing. It’s hard to say what I would and wouldn’t do. I don’t know what’s on the table.” She added: “Who knows what the next few days, weeks and months will bring. But what I do know is that people have had enough after a decade of austerity. “They’ve had enough of cuts that have taken police off our streets, they’ve had enough of being made to feel worthless by universal credit and the bedroom tax.” The Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said: “Ruth will be a fantastic successor to Paul Flynn and will take up the tireless work he carried out for this community. “Tonight’s result sends a clear message that the people of Newport and Wales are fed up of austerity which has robbed the Welsh economy of £1bn through needless cuts, and shows support for Labour’s alternative.” Conservative candidate Matthew Evans, the leader of the opposition on Newport city council, polled 7,357 (31%) votes. He said what was happening in Westminster had not helped his chances. “I’ve never known such anger and frustration,” he said. “What I’ve heard on the doorstep is that people want decisions made. People just want clarity and I’ve seen no appetite for another referendum or a general election.” During the campaign neither Labour nor Tory focused on Brexit. Jones was happier talking about how the introduction of universal credit was hitting citizens and fear of crime in the city. Evans was keen to make the election more about controversial plans to build a new motorway in Newport than the EU. The city voted to leave the European Union with 56% backing Brexit and some saw the by-election as a test of how both main political parties had been affected by the crisis in Westminster. Others were much quicker to talk about Brexit, including the disgraced former Tory MP Neil Hamilton, who is now a Ukip Welsh assembly member and polled 2,023 (9%) votes in the by-election. He said: “Ukip isn’t going to go away. We’re back on the rails and we will be going forward from here.” Hamilton claimed Ukip took votes from the Tories and Labour in Newport West. Plaid Cymru came fourth followed by the Lib Dems, the Greens and Renew.    