The US attorney general, William Barr, made an explosive claim in Washington on Wednesday, saying that he believed “spying did occur” on Donald Trump’s 2016 election campaign under Barack Obama’s administration. The president has frequently made such a claim and Barr indicated that he believed it was true in some fashion and that he wanted to determine whether that surveillance was justified. Under sharp questioning by lawmakers, he admitted there was no evidence of wrongdoing. At the congressional hearing on Capitol Hill on Wednesday morning, Barr said: “I think spying did occur” on the Trump campaign. “The question is whether it was predicated, adequately predicated, and I’m not suggesting it wasn’t adequately predicated, but I think I need to explore that,” he added. He said he had an obligation to make sure “government power is not abused”. In March 2017, Trump accused US agencies under his predecessor in the White House of “wire tapping” the Trump Tower offices in New York before the presidential election in November 2016, claiming the former president had overseen a “Nixon/Watergate”-style intervention. The claim was met with incredulity and some derision by many Trump critics. Earlier on Wednesday, Trump harshly attacked the launch of the federal investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 election, which he described as “an attempted coup” and treason. Barr, who was appointed by Trump, is already facing criticism by congressional Democrats for how he has handled the release of special counsel Robert Mueller’s report on the Russia investigation and his comments about surveillance brought more derision from Democratic senators. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, said she does not trust Barr, and suggested his statement on spying undermines Barr’s independence as the nation’s top law enforcement officer. “He is not the attorney general of Donald Trump. He is the attorney general of the United States,” Pelosi told AP. “I don’t trust Barr, I trust Mueller.” The justice department spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec, declined to comment. On Tuesday, Barr said he is putting together a team to review the origins of the FBI’s investigation into Trump’s campaign and allegations of collusion with Russia. That began in 2016 during the election and then continued in 2017 under the stewardship of Mueller after Trump became president and then fired the head of the FBI, James Comey. The Mueller investigation has just wrapped up and, although the US Congress and the public have not yet seen the resulting report, Barr issued his own summary that said Mueller had not found collusion. Barr said on Wednesday he intends to send the Mueller report to Congress next week. Now he is turning his attention to the propriety of the investigation itself as it began. On Wednesday, Barr said: “I am not saying that improper surveillance occurred. I am saying that I am concerned about it and looking into it. That’s all …” before adding “there might be abuses that don’t rise to the level of a crime”. He did not go into details about what might have prompted the new investigation. “There is a basis for my concern, but I’m not going to discuss my basis.” Eric Holder, attorney general under Obama from 2009 to 2015, tweeted about the department of justice and the FBI in response to the news. When there is a predicate, a legitimate basis, it’s called “investigating” not “spying”. I am confident that the people at DOJ/FBI conducted themselves in an appropriate way. No evidence to suggest otherwise. https://t.co/15QDByxKgM Barr was appointed by Trump earlier this year and is seen by some as a bulwark to legal jeopardy for the president. Barr also decided, after Mueller did not reach a conclusion, that the president had not committed the crime of obstruction of justice during the Russia investigation. On Wednesday, Barr told the Senate hearing of his stance on surveillance of the Trump campaign under the Obama administration: “I think spying did occur, yes … I think I need to explore that. I think it’s my obligation. Congress is usually very concerned about intelligence agencies and law enforcement agencies staying in their proper lane and I want to make sure that happened. We have a lot of rules about that.” The Associated Press contributed to this report