Football authorities are facing more scrutiny over their handling of fans’ racist abuse after three clubs reported alleged incidents and Crystal Palace’s Wilfried Zaha called out an online message branding him “a diving monkey”. The latest incidents came two days after the Tottenham defender Danny Rose said he “can’t wait to see the back of football” due to the lack of action taken against fans’ racism, and Raheem Sterling urged authorities to take a “proper stance” against abuse. Among the incidents on Saturday, Brentford confirmed a season-ticket holder was arrested at Griffin Park after confronting Derby’s Duane Holmes, who was in the dugout having been substituted during their 3-3 draw. Holmes’s manager, Frank Lampard, said: “A fan came up to him and abused him … it was very clearly reported by the players and the people around.” Brentford said they “utterly condemn discrimination” and would press for “the most severe sanctions”. Wigan issued a statement after their winger Nathan Byrne posted an image of a grossly offensive direct message he received on Twitter after their 2-2 draw with Bristol City at Ashton Gate. Wigan said they had reported the racist abuse to police as a hate crime. Northampton, meanwhile, said their players had been racially abused while walking through Nottingham before their League Two draw with Notts County. Northampton’s Timi Elsnik called it “the most disgusting thing I’ve seen and heard”. Later, Zaha, who was fouled in the penalty area during Palace’s 1-0 win at Newcastle, retweeted the abusive message he had received, tagging it “Lol”. The forward was also targeted online in October after a penalty decision in a 2-2 draw with Arsenal. He responded to that by writing on Instagram: “For all the people being racist and wishing death on my family I wish you and your families the best too … my life is still very good despite your hate.” Kick It Out released a statement condemning the latest incidents, writing: “Another week, another group of players racially abused … We won’t stop highlighting this disgraceful behaviour while it remains deeply ingrained within football. We’ll be liaising with the relevant authorities and offering support to clubs and players involved.”