As the news cycle continues to orbit around politics and primaries, John Oliver turned to a less scrutinized though still wildly popular topic: World Wrestling Entertainment, commonly known as WWE. WWE is “astonishingly popular”, said Oliver on Last Week Tonight, with over one billion fans on social media, two highly rated cable shows, a streaming network, multiple reality show spinoffs and an in-house movie studio responsible for at least six films under the title The Marine. And it’s profitable – it made over $930m last year, and its flagship event, WrestleMania, is worth more than the World Series. That comparison “actually makes sense, when you think about it”, Oliver said, “because while the World Series is mostly spent watching a millionaire in a button-down think about whether or not to throw a ball”, WrestleMania features people falling off a cage, “exploding through a table”, or spraying someone with a giant milk hose. But Oliver argued for looking into the WWE due to a disturbing trend of early deaths among its wrestlers. He pointed to a study by FiveThirtyEight comparing project lifespans for average men, NFL players and WWE wrestlers; the wrestlers’ death rate line on the graph was so much higher that “you’d expect that line to be labeled ‘test pilots who lied on their resume,’ or ‘zookeepers who aren’t just going to let some fucking baboon screech at them like that.’” Given that startling data, Oliver sought to turn Last Week Tonight’s scorching beam on WWE and how it treats its wrestlers. For starters, Oliver said: “You can’t talk about the WWE without talking about its chairman and CEO, Vince McMahon,” seen in a magazine photo shoot shirtless, styled as “scary grandpa who looks like big, bumpy hotdog”, and bearing a giant chain around his neck. McMahon bought the company from his dad and through the 1980s and 90s, consolidated and absorbed individual and regional wrestling leagues until WWE became “one giant company that basically holds a monopoly on the industry”. Oliver continued that “it’s impossible to overstate just how involved Vince is” in WWE – he oversees storylines, scripts and plays a fictional, villainous version of himself – but “the shocking thing about McMahon and his company is the extent to which he has shielded himself from responsibility for his wrestlers’ welfare”. For example, McMahons’ wrestlers aren’t technically his employees; they’re still considered “independent contractors” despite signing exclusive contracts and providing the wellspring for McMahon’s entire business. There’s also no off-season, and glimpses of wrestlers’ contracts, provided by Last Week Tonight, revealed some “astonishing clauses”, such as the right for WWE to terminate a contract if a wrestler is sidelined by an injury for as little as six weeks, or waiving the league’s responsibility for injury or death even if it’s “caused by negligence of promoter”. Oliver conceded that the league has taken positive steps in the past few years, such as banning chair shots to the head. Its “talent wellness program” now includes “annual physical examinations”, though Oliver pointed out that “that’s just nothing. I have to take one of those every year to host this show and I’ve never once exploded through this table.” All of this shadiness brought up an important question for Oliver: is there any hope here? “Well, incredibly, there might be, because there’s one group that even McMahon occasionally seems to listen to, and that’s the fans.” He pointed to successful fan campaigns to include more female wrestlers and resist making Roman Reigns the franchise successor to The Rock, even booing him for 8 minutes straight (“you may think that’s harsh, but I’d argue that’s the only rational response to someone with permanently wet hair,” Oliver quipped). Fans have even fronted several GoFundMe campaigns for wrestlers’ medical or funeral expenses, “which is heartwarming, but frankly, fans shouldn’t be the ones shouldering that responsibility” for a league that does not provide its stars adequate healthcare or compensation for the long-term consequences of professional wrestling. “Here’s how bad it is: even the NFL, for all its massive faults, now offers players health reimbursement accounts and have established a legacy fund for older players who may be dealing with health issues,” Oliver said. “And when you’ve lost the moral high ground to the fucking NFL, you’re morally subterranean.” Oliver then called on WWE fans to leverage their influence next week at WrestleMania, where the mic-ed crowd will have a live platform to, say, call for better healthcare. “I’m not saying the fans should do that, or make signs, or make lots of signs,” Oliver said, “I’m just saying I really hope they make their voices heard on this.” “Because given that Business Hulk here,” referring to Vince McMahon, “is a billionaire on the broken backs of his non-employees, the very least he could do is show the same dedication to wrestlers that they have shown to his company”.