If you are reading this on Sunday morning, I should be running the London Marathon. I say “should” because as of Friday night I have no idea if I will be able to run at all. I have been training since December. Baby runs at first. Then longer. Then I got lost – an unjustly underrated training strategy – and turned what was meant to be a 15-mile run into a 19-mile run. I finished it without too much trouble and thought for the first time that I just might get there. Speed sessions followed (although in my case “speed” would read better as “trot”). And then five runs over 20 miles. By this time, the Runner’s World sub-3.45 marathon training plan had become a policeman in my head. It commanded my daily movements and the weeks and months ahead. We went on holiday. All I could think about was how to fit the runs in. I “curated” my own midlife crisis playlist to keep my feet moving. Two weeks ago, I stepped out for an “easy” five-mile run. I was exhausted. But it said five miles in the plan, so what could I do? The path went up an incline so negligible you wouldn’t notice it. My foot hit the slope and my left hip flexor tore. I haven’t run since. I will run today – or try to run – for one practical and two emotional reasons. The practicalities can be quickly dispensed with. Every runner I know told me to rest. I hated the advice. But as of Friday it seems to be working. I can’t know until I run, but it feels as if I am healing. The emotional reactions are more complicated. I won’t begin to pretend I know what moves good sportsmen and women, but perhaps I understand them a little better now. If there were an illegal drug I could buy on the dark web that would fix me, I would take it without blinking. I’ve given up alcohol but the cold turkey I’ve had from giving up running has been worse. I can’t sleep. My body feels as if it has been imprisoned without trial. The looming deadline of the marathon adds panic to the withdrawal symptoms. I am so nearly there. I have so little time. If only somehow I could feel whole again. Self-pity can justify anything and injury brings it on as surely as bruising. You have put in vast amounts of work. Every part of you is ready apart from one faulty tendon. An outraged voice repeats in your mind that you do not deserve this arbitrary punishment. If I feel this way, imagine how real athletes feel. Fans of underperforming clubs believe their players pocket their ludicrous salaries and laugh. I wonder. Do the players of Manchester United, Europe’s most underperforming club, drive back giggling to their mansions in the Cheshire gin-and-jag belt? The prevalence of depression in sport suggests not all do. Depression, particularly among individual athletes without a team to support them, is not the loneliness of the long-distance runner but a reaction against pain and loss. German sports psychologists found it was linked with the “lack of time to recover from stress and injury”. They’ve trained to a level the rest of us cannot comprehend. Not just their income and status but their whole sense of who they are depend on their performance. They have to get back in the game or their life is a failure. I was so nearly there. I have so little time. If only somehow I could feel whole again This imperative surely provides part of the explanation for doping. Economists discuss cheating, as they are prone to discuss so much else. They work on the assumption that human beings are rational actors. There’s no fault in looking at the financial incentives to cheat, the odds against getting caught and the prisoner’s dilemma that athletes face when they suspect that their rivals are gaming the system. But just as rationality cannot explain all the behaviours of lenders and investors in bubble markets, nor can it explain why when Sports Illustrated asked Olympic athletes: “If you were given a performance-enhancing substance, and you would not be caught, win all competitions for five years, then die, would you take it?” More than 50% said yes. Say what you like about their responses, but you would be hard pressed to call them rational. Modern researchers have been unable to replicate the finding, so perhaps it was a fluke. But I can’t help noticing that many of the banned and dangerous drugs that athletes take are designed to minimise injury. Testosterone and steroids help decrease inflammation and allow rapid recovery. Cannabis and opiates mask the pain. I doubt athletes think they are cheating when they take them, any more than they think about the health risks. Restoring an injured body does not feel sneaky but an act of justice that returns you to your rightful state. So I will be running on Sunday with a selfish sense of entitlement. I’ve trained for this. It’s my right. But there is a slightly higher motive. I’ve written before about the hypocrisy with which we treat mental illness, which is astonishing even by the standards of these perfidious islands. Politicians say that helping the afflicted is a priority, then slash the money that local authorities need to fund places in special schools and sheltered housing. Educationalists coo about caring for children’s “special needs”, then put autistic pupils in “isolation booths” or push them out because they are too much trouble. Scores of kind people have given money to the National Autistic Society because I promised to do the London Marathon. One’s ego and indeed one’s bottom don’t matter in these circumstances and I will walk the bloody thing if I have to. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist