“You don’t want to mess around with that stuff as you open yourself up to ridicule. I just don’t want that stuff coming back to me, I’ll stay out of it.” It is now astonishing to think those are the words of Billy Vunipola explaining his self-imposed social media ban only a month ago. Whatever compelled him to end it, there is far more than ridicule now heading his way. Quite what Vunipola thought he was achieving by offering his public support to Australia’s Israel Folau, who had claimed that “hell awaits” homosexuals, is not clear but one by one on Friday the statements of disapproval arrived. The Rugby Football Union came first, then Saracens, the players’ union, Premiership Rugby and Channel 4, which wasted no time in dropping Vunipola as one of the faces of its rugby coverage. As far as the RFU is concerned it now has a crisis on its hands. It must deal with a very modern problem – that of players using social media to air or support abhorrent views – and an outdated one in homophobia. Because, let’s not kid ourselves, rugby has a problem with homophobia. It is evidently not restricted to these shores, as demonstrated by Folau’s latest outburst. But, judging by the number of Premiership and/or England players who “liked” Vunipola’s post, it is widespread. Granted, to “like” something is not necessarily to endorse it and it is likely some of those who did so were coming out in support of their teammate rather than of his viewpoint. But to do so is at best misguided and the RFU will be missing the point if it considers this an isolated incident and examines only Vunipola’s role in it. For, if there is any good to come from last week’s events, it is that rugby’s claim to be free from homophobia has been exposed as a fallacy and that is something the RFU must play its part in addressing. Perhaps part of the reason why rugby has allowed itself to make that assumption is the positive reaction received by the former Wales captain Gareth Thomas and the leading referee Nigel Owens when coming out as gay. Of course the goodwill received by both is hugely positive but let’s not kid ourselves that rugby does not have a problem when there is not a single Premiership and/or England player who is openly gay. The RFU must also not forget there are players to have represented England women – just as Vunipola does for Eddie Jones’s side – who are. The union trumpets its commitment to inclusion and diversity. It has been working with the LGBT charity Stonewall for the past two years as part of its Try for Change programme and often states its commitment to rugby’s core values. Now is the time to marry action with slogans. The RFU must show a firm hand when it sits down with Vunipola this week but it should not look for a silver bullet to solve the two issues it faces in one go. It must not be distracted by trying to ascertain whether Vunipola is inherently homophobic. That is not the union’s job. Vunipola is among the most open, welcoming and friendly members of the England squad and one of the most valuable to Jones, too. The RFU must not be distracted by that either. For it was to the union’s great detriment that in 2016 the then chief executive, Ian Ritchie, took a lenient view of Joe Marler calling Samson Lee “Gypsy boy” because he felt it was “inappropriate” rather than racist. Making that distinction was not the job of the RFU; sending the clearest message that such a comment will not be tolerated was, and so with Vunipola the union must act. That is not to say Vunipola’s views are irrelevant and the hope is that education – perhaps spending time with one of the UK’s gay rugby teams – is part of his punishment. The RFU must also play its part in dealing with a problem that exists across the world game. It is a complex problem; Folau and Vunipola used their strong Christian beliefs to justify their comments and a number of Pacific Islanders who “liked“ their posts share such religious views. But as Stonewall said on Friday: “Faith is often used to justify anti-LGBT views and attitudes. This is wrong and perpetuates a myth that faith and LGBT inclusion cannot coexist.” First, however, the union must sanction Vunipola for using his public profile and platform to air his views that “man is made for woman”. It must act because as the arbiter of rugby in this country it must demonstrate that voicing these kinds of opinions is unacceptable. Speech may be free but there must be consequences.