When it comes to making radical political statements, Jeremy Deller has been there, done that – and now he’s sold the T-shirt. The Turner prize-winning artist’s Fuck Brexit collection, which includes T-shirts, beach towels and a mug, has now almost sold out as Remainers seek creative ways to vent their frustration. Launched in collaboration with arts charity Studio Voltaire, Deller’s pieces have raised £25,000 for the organisation. “It’s been the most popular range we have ever made,” said the charity’s head of development Niamh Conneely. Of an original stock of 800 T-shirts, only 60 remain. Speaking to the Observer, Deller said he was originally frustrated by how much better the visual messaging of the Leave campaign was. His own designs came together quickly. “It was a very immediate response. It wasn’t particularly clever or articulate, but necessary – they’re just T-shirts, at the end of the day. They’re supposed to be funny.” The artist isn’t the only one doing a roaring trade in Remainer merchandise. The Flag Shop in Chesterfield, which sells EU and Union Jack flags made in Taiwan, has been selling out of stock ever since the referendum result was declared. “I couldn’t get them in quick enough,” said owner Brian Speed, who says he has sold “absolutely thousands” of EU flags, peaking in the weeks before big marches. Meanwhile, the east London jewellery maker Tatty Devine is celebrating its biggest-selling piece in 20 years of business – a £25 slogan necklace that reads “European” and has been spotted on MPs Jo Swinson and Meg Hillier. Co-founder Rosie Wolfenden said that she “couldn’t believe the appetite” from customers wanting to wear their politics loud and proud. “We have an engaged customer base and our move to making more campaign jewellery has been emerging over the last few years with jewellery for the suffragette anniversary and the No More Page 3 campaign – people want to wear jewellery that expresses their view,” she claimed. The brand expanded to launch a fuller collection, called EU and Me, which includes huge statement earrings and a European passport brooch. Jo Wilkins, who works at a rehabilitation centre in Northampton for people suffering brain injuries, said she was initially wary about wearing her European necklace. “Where I live is Brexit-land,” she said, “and, honestly, there have been times when I’ve wondered if I should wear it out but I do want people to know where my allegiances lie. And I’ve been surprised – real life isn’t like Twitter, where it’s divisive on anything to do with Europe. I expected funny comments but it’s really been a conversation starter. You don’t get conversation on the internet.”