I live in a new block of flats in south-east London. Our hot water and heating is managed through a district heating system by E.ON Energy. For the past month and a half we have been without hot water, or at best lukewarm water intermittently. Despite tens of people raising this complaint with E.ON, we are told we are the only one affected and an engineer is sent out. We have raised a complaint centrally but nothing has happened. There are families here who have been unable to wash in hot water for more than a month. NH, London SE10 District heating provides homes with heat and hot water from a central source, but is not regulated. As a result, customers have less protection when things go wrong, as you have found. A particular problem is developers using cheaper options that end up being paid for by customers in the longer term. The competitions authority said last year Ofgem’s remit would be extended to regulate it. E.ON was brought in to keep things “ticking over” but anything more involved needs approval elsewhere. It sounds to us like the worst of all worlds. You have set up a Facebook group to coordinate action but E.ON recommends that residents contact it direct. A spokesman for E.ON said: “We continue to respond to all residents’ queries as far as our provision allows and have made every effort to improve the experience for the small number of residents who have contacted us to report issues with hot water availability. We are now working with the managing agents and developers towards a longer-term resolution that will require investment beyond our remit. It is therefore vital that all residents experiencing issues with their hot water supply contact us on 0333 202 4858.” We suggest residents make their views very clear to E.ON. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions