With a bit of meteorological luck there could be 78 county cricketers gambolling out into the spring air at 11am on Friday morning; 11 fielders and two batsmen at six grounds who will usher in the start of a season and what is down to be the mother of all English summers. The home World Cup and Ashes series may be the jewels in the crown – England’s preparations for the former start as early as 3 May when they travel to Malahide for a one-off one-day international against Ireland – but for a month, at least, the domestic game commands the spotlight. The structure of the County Championship should promote ambitious thoughts across the 18 squads, too. In Division One there is only one relegation spot and – to tip the 8-10 split the other way in 2020 – there are three promotion berths in the second tier. Little reason, therefore, for teams to not be looking upwards even if they falter at the start. Surrey, who begin their title defence next week, look the team to beat once more; a well-run, well-resourced setup with sensible leaders who have a rolling production line of bright young things and an attack led by the 6ft 5in South African spearhead that is Morne Morkel. But then Essex don’t look too shabby either, having stuck together since their own title win in 2017, similarly pushed through youth prospects and now seen Alastair Cook return full time. Morkel knocked over England’s record run-scorer 12 times during their Test days – more than any other bowler – and, mouthwateringly, they meet again next Thursday at the Oval. Before this reunion, Cook and co start away at Hampshire, where following long chats with the national selector, Ed Smith – and a ballsy decision to decline a winter Lions spot – the captain, James Vince, has promoted himself to opener in a bid to get back into the whites of England. Yorkshire’s trip to the delights of Trent Bridge, where the newly fitted-out Nottinghamshire await, is arguably the headline contest in round one, however. The presence of the Test captain, Joe Root, for the visitors should sharpen the minds of the English talent on both sides, of which there is plenty both young and old. It would be quite something if Taunton was a dustbowl in early April but Somerset, hosting promoted Kent, are a strong all-round team that, for all the japes about Ciderabad, will challenge on most surfaces. Last year’s runners-up will likely go largely unbothered by England in terms of call-ups, too, something that Yorkshire will attest can be a handicap. As regards England’s Test needs, could this be the year when the batsmen fight back against a trend that has Jason Roy as the latest white-ball player being discussed for a call-up? Totals and personal hauls have dropped in recent times as the championship has moved ever more into the margins of the summer. But with the Royal London Cup taking place in April and May, this time a substantial block of championship fixtures takes place during the theoretically warmer months. Add in talk of a 2019 Dukes ball that has a more tightly stitched seam than last year’s and the bowlers may have to work a touch harder for their wickets. And so with the first Test not starting until 24 July – a four-day affair against Ireland at Lord’s before the Ashes gets under way at Edgbaston on 1 August – England’s selectors will examine a much broader body of work from hopefuls as they ponder that pesky (and perennially debated) top three. To that end, like the title race, things look enticingly open. Unless his returns for Surrey fall off a cliff, Rory Burns should hold his spot. But Keaton Jennings, back in Division Two with Lancashire, must surely make way, while Joe Denly, in the Indian Premier League for the start of the campaign, is no lock at No 3. Scorecards will be instead scoured for names such as Vince, Ben Duckett, Nick Gubbins, Sam Robson, Max Holden, Mark Stoneman, Dom Sibley, Will Rhodes and Alex Davies – some tried, some untested – while the hope continues that the latter’s Lancashire teammate Haseeb Hameed can recover from two horror seasons This particular observer would like to throw one more into the pot of ones to watch. Ben Slater travelled down the A52 from Derbyshire to join Nottinghamshire at the end of last season after his technique – rather than an extensive back catalogue of runs – caught the eye of Peter Moores (who remains as shrewd a judge as any). Aged 27, the left-hander’s ascent has not been the smooth progression afforded to others but one that has required determined graft. Indeed back in 2013 he found himself working in a friend’s shoe shop when Derbyshire briefly released him. While Duckett will doubtless take the attack to opponents at one end, the now matured Slater will calmly play the percentages. There are no guarantees as to how he fares up in Division One, of course. But as with the season overall, predictions are one thing – the fun comes in seeing how it all unfolds.