Daniel Kramer, the artistic director of English National Opera, is quitting his job after less than three years at the helm. Staff at the company were briefed on Wednesday morning that the American director would be standing down at the end of July to concentrate on directing more opera and theatre full time, rather than lead a company the size of ENO. Kramer will stay on as an artistic consultant until the end of the year to oversee a series of four Orpheus operas. But the surprise announcement will inevitably lead to speculation over whether he was under pressure to quit. His colleagues at ENO praised Kramer and his relatively short stint at the company. Stuart Murphy, the former BBC Three and Sky TV boss who became chief executive of ENO a year ago, said he had loved working with Kramer. “His energy, sense of humour and passion for bringing new stories to life and nurturing new talent has been completely contagious,” said Murphy. “His seasons have been marked by a huge mix, from the Olivier-nominated Turn of the Screw at Regent’s Park and Paul Bunyan at Wilton’s Music Hall, the Olivier Award-winning Porgy and Bess, to Salome, Iolanthe, and The Merry Widow, to the world premiere of Jack the Ripper: The Women of Whitechapel. Daniel’s War Requiem was a beautiful and stately reflection on the horrors of war, and deserves all of the accolades that it has received to date. “He leaves with the very best wishes of everyone at ENO.” Martyn Brabbins, ENO’s music director, said: “Collaborating with Daniel has been an enormously rewarding and fruitful experience. I wish him all the good luck for the future and look forward to working with him again in the autumn on Harrison Birtwistle’s The Mask of Orpheus – a project that we are both passionate about. “The season ahead has a huge breadth and depth of work, and I continue to be excited for the next chapter for ENO.” Kramer said he was proud to leave after “a season that has broken box office records, innovated and challenged, while delivering commercial success”. He said he would oversee the Orpheus series he commissioned, including directing the hugely anticipated production of The Mask of Orpheus, which has not been staged since its premiere 33 years ago. “Stepping back will allow me to focus full-time on my 2019-20 freelance directing commitments of La bohème and Nixon in China in Europe, and War Requiem in Taiwan. Never has an experience been more fruitful, more demanding, nor more clarifying to my beliefs as an artist. I thank everyone who crossed my path at ENO and wish Stuart, Martyn, the board and everyone at ENO the absolute best in this new chapter.” Kramer, who had never previously run an opera house, had been a surprise choice to take over a company that has faced problems in recent years. The hunt now begins for a new artistic director. The company has said Bob Holland, the associate artistic director, will work on delivering plans to which ENO is currently committed.