Not so long ago, the contraceptive pill was available only to married women. Naturally, sexually active single women found ways to circumnavigate this, finding fake rings and sympathetic medical professionals, and finally society buckled to demand, slowly nudging forward our reproductive rights. This week those rights shuffled on again with the launch of a same-day delivery service for the morning-after pill, designed to be taken up to 72 hours after unprotected sex. For the past six weeks, emergency contraceptive manufacturer ellaOne has been dispensing it directly to women within the Greater London area. Users answer a short online questionnaire and, if no concerns are raised, their order is sent in as little as three hours. It is available 24/7, 365 days a year, and will soon roll out countrywide. The morning-after pill has come a long way since its controversial launch in the UK in 1984. Although it has been available without a prescription from pharmacies since 2001, the 2015 decision to provide it to under-16s sparked further debate, as did the recent reduction in price. Despite its widening availability, ellaOne’s research showed that many women still hesitated to buy it: of those the company spoke to, 46% aged 18-35 had unprotected sex in the past year, and nearly 75% of them had decided not to use emergency contraception. Some reported being unable to get to a pharmacy or clinic, while others were put off by the potential awkwardness of asking for the pill over the counter, in public, and fear of embarrassment of being questioned by a stranger about their sexual activity. The online service, ellaOne argues, bypasses shame and offers considerable convenience. One might expect easy access to such a product to be embraced in modern healthcare provision, particularly in the UK, where there are high teenage pregnancy rates, but that would be to overlook the moralising that colours any discussion of women’s bodies, sexuality, reproductive rights and pleasure. We are a long way from sexual equality and a society in which women’s bodies are truly their own – but continued improvements to contraceptive access are another step towards it.