Maybe Tiger Woods should employ the services of the security officer who earned infamy at Augusta National on Friday by slide-tackling the 14-times major champion. After all, conventional means of competition are not affecting Francesco Molinari negatively at all – again. Molinari might be beginning to annoy Woods. At last year’s Open Championship the Italian brushed off a Sunday partnership with one of the most famous names in sport to lift the Claret Jug – and rather comprehensively at that. Nine months on Molinari is proving – in the nicest possible sense – a nuisance once more. Molinari’s unflappability under what must be intense pressure is extraordinary. Woods will begin day four of the Masters at 11 under par and, crucially, two adrift of Molinari. Woods’s day-three 67 was one more than the Open champion. Tony Finau has tied Woods’s total, with Brooks Koepka one stroke further back. “This is a chance to win a major championship,” said Woods. “I’ll be ready. I am trying to win a golf tournament. It’s about going out there and executing.” He did not have Molinari in mind, one assumes. Woods was the recipient of such outrageous fortune during his third round that one could only presume the golfing gods have appointed him as this week’s chosen one. The 43-year-old found clear paths towards greens despite drives pushed into trees at the 9th and 11th. As he sought to bite off more of the dog leg at the 13th than was safe, it seemed Woods would finally run out of luck. Not so; his ball rebounded from trees and into semi-rough, from where he was able to produce a birdie. Woods is within touching distance of becoming the central character in one of sport’s finest comeback tales. With the obvious exception of Molinari, Finau, Koepka, Adam Scott, Dustin Johnson, Ian Poulter and a batch of others who harbour varying hopes of a Masters triumph with 18 holes to play, Augusta National is vehemently pulling for Woods. As he holed out from 7ft at the 16th to tie the lead – briefly, as it was to transpire – the roars echoed around this famous old venue. The level of gallery support that has accompanied Woods through 54 holes makes you wonder what on earth will transpire should he prevail. His walk from the 18th green to scoring hut was akin to a victory march in front of screaming patrons. For now, it can safely be said that Woods hauling himself to the verge of a fifth Masters success from the depths of physical despair is remarkable in itself. So, too, is Molinari’s consistency. He last dropped a Masters shot on the 11th hole of round one. As Woods pressed for home up ahead, Molinari responded; birdies at the 13th, 14th and 15th solidified his position at the summit of the leaderboard. Moving day? More like Molinari day. A sun-soaked afternoon was as good as it is going to get in this tournament. It has already been confirmed that this will be no orthodox Sunday. The threat of afternoon thunderstorms has proved sufficient for Masters organisers to schedule a two-tee start – previously unheard of for the final round here – with players taking to the course in threes. In contrast to a typical, evening finish, the last groups will start at 9.20am local time. “The safety of everyone on our grounds is paramount,” said Fred Ridley, the chairman of Augusta National. “We also believe the earlier start will give us the best opportunity to complete the Masters on Sunday. This decision should benefit everyone – the players, our patrons and our fans watching around the world.” Pending no further delays, that is. Woods added: “It’s going to be more difficult tomorrow. It’s going to be a good test.” When championship golf becomes a scrap, there has historically been nobody better. Augusta National was unquestionably vulnerable on day three. There had never been multiple rounds of 64 in the same Masters until Saturday, where three appeared in a single afternoon. Patrick Cantlay led the way as he charged from two over to six under. More meaningful, perhaps, was the marauding through the field of Webb Simpson. The former US Open champion’s 64 meant an aggregate of minus nine. Finau signed for 64 number three; and to think, this place is supposedly laced with danger. Poulter’s 68, worthy of even more credit given Woods was his partner, ensured he joined Simpson at minus nine. “The oldies are doing not too bad here,” said Poulter with a smile. Johnson was also nine under before dropping a shot at the last. Louis Oosthuizen, Xander Schauffele, Matt Kuchar and Justin Harding are alongside Johnson. Rory McIlroy’s second 71 in succession edged him to one under. The Northern Irishman will now need to wait at least another 12 months to complete his grand slam of majors. “Too many mistakes,” was the McIlroy buzz-phrase, appropriately. Woods has delivered precious few such errors. His clear and present danger is that the same, and then some, applies to Molinari.