When Anne Keothavong was growing up in east London it was, at times, all anyone could do to find a serviceable tennis court. The facilities at her regular haunt, Hackney Downs, were often beset by moss and the risk of slipping over; park wardens were constantly on the prowl and there was certainly no thought that this area would one day host an event that may have a dramatic impact on the sport’s presence in this country. Even less did Keothavong imagine that she would, essentially, be driving it. She will captain Great Britain’s women in their Fed Cup World Group II play-off against Kazakhstan this weekend; a win would put them back among the world’s top 16 teams for the first time since 1993 and that is not the only novelty on offer. The tie takes place at the Copper Box Arena, better known as a distinctive multipart venue at London 2012, on Saturday and Sunday; it has never hosted tennis before and nor, at any significant level, has this part of the capital. “The fact that we’re able to bring a big tennis event to this part of London means the world to me,” Keothavong says. “We’re trying to open our sport up to a new audience; this isn’t, I guess, an area of London that you closely associate with tennis but we’re here to change that.” Something else she intends to change is Great Britain’s unfortunate record at this stage. Last year they lost in Japan and in 2017 they were beaten by Romania in a tie overshadowed by Ilie Nastase’s appalling behaviour towards Keothavong and Johanna Konta. Two previous attempts at promotion fell short too and, in all five of those ties, Great Britain had been drawn to play away from home. “Having a home tie at this stage in the competition, when we’ve been away so many times, will be special,” Keothavong says. “When we walked through the door and saw the court for the first time there was a real ‘wow’ moment from the players. It will be a memorable weekend and it gives the players even more motivation to perform well out there.” The team of Konta, Katie Boulter, Heather Watson, Harriet Dart and Katie Swan is as strong a lineup as Keothavong can select. They earned the tie by beating Slovenia, Greece, Hungary and Serbia during an intensive four days in Bath two months ago; Kazakhstan are not, on paper, as fearsome a prospect as a Naomi Osaka-led Japan although Keothavong describes it as a “50-50 match” and points out their biggest threat, the 38th-ranked Yulia Putintseva, beat Konta at the French Open last year. If everything goes to plan then a crowd of around 6,000, many of whom will have been encouraged to sample competitive tennis for the first time with ticket prices as low as £12 for adults and £6 for under-16s, will feel energised to follow Great Britain’s fortunes in the World Group. “It had always been in the back of our mind,” the LTA tournament director, Rebecca James, says of hosting a match at the Copper Box. “A lot of people have been waiting a long time for this kind of home tie so to realise this opportunity is a quite historic moment. We see it a chance to bring people tennis at a different time of year to the grass-court season, giving new fans the opportunity to watch it and inspiring people to take it up. It’s a special, incredible atmosphere being in there and supporting a team.” Kazakhstan’s players were amused, upon travelling to the venue on Tuesday, to recognise the accommodation block they had used in what was, back in 2012, the Olympic Village. The tournament itself was held at Wimbledon that year but any kind of familiarity will be welcome. Keothavong feels a responsibility to make her own squad feel at home, too. “They take a lot of pride in representing Great Britain and that’s a credit to them, because we know the tennis season is a long one and coming together as a team is different,” she says. “One of my main goals as captain is to make the week memorable and off court so that they want to keep coming back.” The best way to explain the event to a layman, she believes, is to imagine that qualification for the football World Cup hinged on this meeting. That could provide a cue for an expectant crowd to turn up the volume. “We’re counting on the home support to help us over the line,” she says. “The backing we got in Bath was incredible and I think the team will draw on the emotions and memories created by that week. But we want this weekend to be even better.”