“Suppose there was a machine that knew more than you … and could make better decisions than you. Would you hand control of all the important decisions in your life to that machine?” Paul Mason, in his tub-thumping humanist manifesto, takes this to be the urgent political question of our day. His ambitious narrative attempts to convince you that the answer should be a defiant no, but the results are confused. Clear Bright Future belongs to a wave of recent books – those most similar to Mason’s are Douglas Rushkoff’s Team Human and Shoshana Zuboff’s monumental The Age of Surveillance Capitalism – that reflect on the encroachment of technology into our lives. They point out that tech makers have designed platforms and devices that steal our attention, distract us from our higher goals and divide us into ideological echo chambers. Big-tech business models depend on surveilling us and converting our private experiences into data that they use to predict or manipulate our behaviour. This is what Mason calls the “nightmare of the present”. However, he focuses on the threats and opportunities that AI and technology will create in the future. He tables an important scenario in which artificial agents become more intelligent than us. But he underestimates where the real danger lies. For many experts an acute risk is presented by the so-called “value alignment problem”: how to give AIs the right goals and values to ensure that things turn out well from a human perspective. This problem is accentuated by our ignorance of our own values. Despite millennia of moral philosophy, we are not able to explicitly articulate in English the values that we implicitly live by, much less code them in C++. Mason blunders his way through the value alignment problem, failing to recognise its subtleties. He starts by setting out four classes of ethical theory. But despite claiming his list is exhaustive, there is no mention of rule-based or “deontological” ethics. This is like attempting to list the primary colours but forgetting blue. After a few short pages of reasoning he announces that “there is a strong case for saying that virtue ethics is the only ethics fit for the task”. Having put moral philosophers out of a job, he then turns to solving open problems in software engineering, declaring that “outcome-based ethics should be easy to code into artificial intelligence”. Mason does do us an important service by reminding us that AI risk, like the risk posed by climate change, is something we all have to be vigilant about, and is not just a problem for thinktanks and tech firms. Even if experts solve the engineering problem of aligning AI with select human values, further political concerns remain. One is that AI values may be skewed towards the interests of the powerful – potentially the deformed politics of Trump, Putin or Xi. He attempts to knit together too many disparate, zeitgeisty topics into his unifying theme Another fear – the locus of Mason’s anxiety – is that we collectively sleepwalk into a future in which we have ceded sovereignty over our minds to the machines. He argues that three decades of neoliberalism have not only transformed our economics, but also our sense of who we are, softening us up to be further dehumanised by machines. He thinks we have surrendered to market forces, which “run our lives, shape our behaviour and overrule our democratic rights”, and that we are now ripe for “algorithmic control”. Isaiah Berlin liked to categorise thinkers according to an enigmatic line of Greek poetry: “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.” Mason is a hedgehog who tries and fails to also be a fox. His big idea is a Marxist critique of neoliberalism that fans out into a vision of a technology-enabled post-work utopia. But he attempts to knit together too many disparate, zeitgeisty topics into his unifying theme: the culture wars, the neuroscience of decision-making, postmodernist critiques of scientific realism. Many seem totally irrelevant. For instance, given the book’s core theme, why are there lengthy excursions into the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, or the metaphysics of information? Clear Bright Future ends with a blueprint for averting technological dystopia. In addition to some thoughtful policy suggestions around data privacy and universal basic income, Mason advocates putting up “micro-scale resistance” and making “tiny acts of rebellion”. For him, refusing to use automated checkout machines in a supermarket becomes a radical act. You might worry that if we confront a race of superhuman AIs then more than a muscular assertion of human dignity would be needed to secure our freedom. • Clear Bright Future: A Radical Defence of the Human Being by Paul Mason is published by Allen Lane (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99