Independent business economist and member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee (MPC) from 2006-11 The picture of the UK economy since the Brexit vote has been pretty consistent: slow GDP growth but fairly positive employment performance. Growth is being strongly driven by consumer spending – but more recently by stockpiling linked to Brexit. Inflation was pushed up by the fall in the pound after the referendum result, but that impact has washed through the system. Inflation is is now very close to the 2% target set by the government for the Bank of England, and it will probably stay in that zone unless we get another inflationary shock over the next one or two years. I would describe the state of the UK economy as being in a “no-man’s land”. We are neither benefiting from being a full-blooded member of the EU, nor experiencing the full impacts of being outside. The mixed economic data we are currently seeing reflects this state of affairs. The UK economy will be limping on for a while, until Brexit negotiations are fully resolved. I can see the UK being in this limbo-land for quite a while – certainly until the late 2020s. My best estimate of the underlying growth potential of the UK economy in the 2020s is for GDP growth of 1.75% a year. That would represent the weakest economic growth since the second world war. The short-term economic consequences are plain to see. But the longer-term implications have yet to unfold. Brexit is bad for the British economy. We have already seen short-term negative consequences. But the bigger long-term issues have yet to unfold. Against this background, the UK government is trying to recruit a new central bank governor. I wish them luck, but it is not a very attractive job for “rock-star” central bankers in the Carney mould. Andrew Bailey is a good candidate, but in the outside world I am struggling to identify good people to take the job. Hopefully they will make themselves known in the appointment process. Professor of economics at Dartmouth College in the US and member of the Bank’s MPC from 2006-09 The big news this week is that Mark Carney is leaving as the governor of the Bank of England and the adverts are out for a replacement. The money is pretty good. Ladbrokes has Andrew Bailey, the head of the Financial Conduct Authority, as 2-1 favourite. But there is a long list of candidates including several well-qualified women. I suspect it will be a Bank outsider once again. Whoever gets this poisoned chalice as the UK leaves the EU is going to have a major influence over the UK economy going forward. Brexit fallout will be the new incumbent’s biggest challenge. The economy appears to be holding up remarkably well at the moment but there are clear fragilities. The worst news is from the purchasing managers’ indices (PMIs), which take into account company bosses’ views of business activity in the economy. They are a scary indicator for the path ahead. The PMIs suggest the economy is in a similar state to early 2008. The IHS Markit services PMI came in at 48.9 in March, down from 51.3 in February, and below the 50 no-change mark for the first time since July 2016. New orders fell for the third month running. That is not good. The construction PMI revealed a sustained decline in total activity, with the first back-to-back monthly decline in output since August 2016. Brexit preparations remained a prominent feature in the manufacturing PMI in March, as companies built stockpiles to record levels in anticipation of disruption. The short-term picture has not been bad, but Brexit is still having a chilling effect on the economy. The big news from the labour market is that real earnings fell on the month, despite the headlines from the ONS that pay rose over the three months to February. By real earnings, I mean pay adjusted for price increases – so it is a measure of what workers can buy with their pay packet. The total weekly pay packet of an average worker, after inflation, has fallen from £525 in February 2008, to £497 in January this year, and then to £494 in February. In January real wages were 5.3% below their level at the start of the great recession in February 2008. They fell further again still in February and are now 5.9% below their starting level. No wonder people are hurting.