As our own house of cards sways precariously, can Veep (Sky Atlantic) still find humour in terrible politicians getting away with it, no matter how incompetent or how untouched by conscience? Of course it can. This is masterful comedy, packed out with the darkest of zingers, its black heart buoyed only by the delighted embrace of its silly, clown-like brilliance. When Julia Louis-Dreyfus was diagnosed with breast cancer, Veep went on hiatus for her to receive treatment, and showrunner David Mandel (who took over from the show’s creator, Armando Iannucci, in its fifth season) rewrote what had been planned. “Had we shot the show we had written ... I believe it would have seemed out of touch,” he told the New Yorker in December, adding, with a dry, Veep-ish flourish: “What I’m saying is the cancer was a good thing.” Louis-Dreyfus has won a record six Emmy awards for her role as Selina Meyer, and, frankly, it’s no wonder. She is magnificent, brittle and bristling and furiously amoral. This is the seventh and final season of Veep, and it appears to be getting out while it still has a hope in hell of making its fictional world look more comedic than the real one. Selina is running for president again, in a crowded field, in which one rival offers up not one but two people in wheelchairs behind him on-stage. The trouble is that Selina has done this before, and fluffed this before – or, as she has it, in one of the many creative linguistic concoctions that leaves a visual residue burned on to the brain, she “took a dump on the glass ceiling and shaved my muff in the sink of the old boys’ club”. Bearing the blandest of campaign slogans – “New Selina. Now” – Selina has to work out why she wants to be president, so she can tell potential voters why they should choose her. But she has only ever wanted power for the sake of power, and the search for her motivation, for any semblance of a heart, leaves her stumped. Immigration is too “issuey”; she mulls over promising a cardboard cutout “better deal, or some crap like that”. There is plenty in this episode that is as damning as it is hilarious, and such default, pallid blandness incites as much despair as it does laughter. It is a bold decision, too, to make mass shootings the comic thread that hold together Selina’s farcical attempts to announce her candidacy. A lesser comedy would be accused of chasing the shock factor, but, as a plot device here, it is almost righteous. When a school shooting happens just before a press conference, Selina asks whether the culprit being a Muslim or a white guy would be better for her. When she is blindsided by a reporter condemning the rote “thoughts and prayers” response politicians offer up, she improvises, and offers: “Mindfulness and meditations.” It is not so much a punchline as satire at the point of exasperation. “I cannot take any more of this,” Selina declares, but more because of the inconvenience of the route to her favourite smoothie shop being closed than any principled stance on gun control. Still, it’s the most enthusiasm she can muster, and inevitably, it’s better than anything she actually means. For those who have watched Veep from the start, it can be easy to take its cleverness for granted, but its intricacies are something to marvel at. Amy is pregnant with Dan’s baby, even though he gallantly offers to Venmo her the money for an abortion – she can make it public, he suggests, because it shows he’s a gentleman. As Gary, Tony Hale continues to have one of the best supporting roles on television – all he has to do is say “now” and I’m in bits – and then there’s Jonah, who is not so much populist as absurdist, and who can do no wrong among the white male demographic, even though he has, sort of, married his sister. In many ways, Veep is bleaker than anything else on television right now, apart from the news itself. Selina finally finds her mission statement, her reason to run, her galvanising speech, but it is stolen from a man she has not paid for the work he has done for her. As can sometimes be the way with Veep, I greatly admire its speed, wit and vicious eye for the sheer ridiculousness of the many awful situations it presents, and am simultaneously just a little bit relieved when each episode is over.