Inside the No 10 bunker, advisers hurriedly backed away on Monday from an idea floated less than three days previously – that a snap general election fronted by Theresa May remained a possibility. With the Conservatives plunging below Labour in the polls this weekend and the party’s split over Europe looking increasingly irreconcilable, no one now wants to admit responsibility for that bright idea. “It was certainly being tested,” said one Downing Street adviser. “Some people weren’t exactly arguing in favour, but saying it could be the least worst option.” Stephen Parkinson, May’s political secretary and a former Vote Leave organiser, and Robbie Gibb, the Downing Street director of communications, were named as the main voices considering whether to take May’s deal to the people. But a No 10 source denied in the strongest terms that Gibb in particular was ever in favour of such a course of action. Suspicions that May was considering a snap poll were raised by her address to the public from No 10 lambasting parliament for frustrating Brexit, and money was spent on Facebook adverts promoting her message. Speculation was then dampened again by May’s promise to stand down if her deal was passed, with Conservative MPs reassured that she could not possibly lead a general election as a “lame duck” who had signalled that she was ready to hand over to a colleague for the second phase of negotiations. But then the argument resurfaced again in No 10 that she could carry on in power for longer by taking her deal to the public, pitching the Conservatives as the party of Brexit against a Labour party that would argue for a softer Brexit and only with a second referendum. May’s decision to call a third futile vote on her deal last week then looked like an attempt to portray Labour as voting against the withdrawal agreement on 29 March – the date that would have been Brexit day. Over the weekend, May was quickly confronted with the reality that the Conservative party is in no way ready for an election, in terms of money, organisation, the backing of her own MPs or support in the country. In no uncertain terms, the prime minister has been told by senior Conservative party figures that it would risk annihilation and Jeremy Corbyn being installed in No 10. One cabinet minister predicted to the Guardian that it would not even get the support of enough Tory MPs to get through parliament, which would need to give its approval by a two-thirds majority. Lord Hayward, the Conservative peer and election expert, said: “The prime minister has been given the message loud and clear that there should not be an election. If you are a Conservative MP with anything other than a massive majority, you do not want one.” He said polls and byelection results suggested the prime minister’s address to the public lambasting MPs had initially not gone down badly, but any benefit of that had been lost by the indication that she would stand down if her Brexit deal was passed. Part of the problem appears to have been that No 10 was given hope about May’s chances with the public because of data that suggested she was not unpopular with the country. But senior Tories note there is a difference between voters feeling sorry for a prime minister struggling to deal with enormous Brexit difficulties and deciding that the Conservatives are the party they want to vote into government. From cabinet ministers to senior backbench MPs in both the leave and remain camps, there is widespread despair in the party that anyone in Downing Street could ever have considered such a path at such a time. “It is nailed-on mad. But the mood in No 10 is desperate. They are in a bunker and in denial about how bad things are,” says one special adviser. Several Downing Street advisers rejected the often repeated idea that they operate in a bunker and argued that their plan has always been about listening to the public. A No 10 source said: “We have been trying to find a way to deliver the referendum result. But the point we keep making is that if parliament doesn’t want the deal or no deal, parliament has got to come to a decision about what it does want. “The country, government and parliament has to find a way through. The pressure really needs to be on those people, and particularly the Labour party. They say they want to leave, but every single option is rejected.” Two people who have spent time with the prime minister recently conclude that she does not regard the idea of fighting another election with relish, even if it would give her a mandate to stay in power. In fact, she is thought to be listening closely to the views of Gavin Barwell, her chief of staff, and “JoJo” Penn, the deputy chief of staff and her longterm adviser, who are of a softer Brexit persuasion than some of their colleagues. The risk of a snap election remains potentially a useful tool to frighten some more Conservative MPs into voting for her Brexit deal. But the prime minister’s path to calling one looks increasingly difficult, with some colleagues determined to find a way to replace her before that would be allowed to happen. Robbie Gibb May’s influential director of communications is a former head of the BBC’s political team at Westminster, who is guided by his deep knowledge of the broadcast media and connections across the Conservative party. He is viewed as a firm Brexiter. Stephen Parkinson worked with May in the Home Office, so is a very trusted aide. He was subsequently instrumental in the ground war of the Vote Leave operation. Gavin Barwell The chief of staff is a former MP who lost his seat in 2017 and was previously a strong remain supporter. He tweeted after the 2016 referendum: “Proud that my home town [Croydon] and the great city of which it is part rejected the politics of hate and division yesterday.” Joanna Penn May’s most senior female adviser has been with her since the Home Office and is known to have the prime minister’s ear. Philip May The prime minister’s husband is an investment manager for his day job but also part of her inner circle and a close adviser.