Mauricio Pochettino has said he does not even need to tell his squad to focus on the fight to finish in the top four of the Premier League rather than the impending Champions League semi-finals against Ajax because his players’ mentality is “perfect”. Tottenham face Brighton in the league on Tuesday knowing they may well have to win their remaining four games to secure Champions League football next season. Spurs could also qualify by winning it this season but for the time being Pochettino has set his players two targets: to finish in the top four and to beat Ajax. “We’re not thinking about Ajax, like we showed [against Manchester City],” he said. “We showed [against them] we were thinking of that competition, the Premier League. Now our energy is on Brighton. I think it is so clear we have two alternatives. “One is to be in the top four at the end of the season and the other is to beat Ajax but we have to go step by step. That’s important. The players know it. Their behaviour and mentality is perfect. You know very well I don’t need to tell them. I think they were very professional against City.” Spurs lost 1-0 at City on Saturday after conceding an early goal but were helped in their quest to finish in the top four on Sunday when Manchester United and Arsenal lost. Pochettino is also encouraged by the fact Tottenham have won all three games at the new stadium. “I hope we keep going, getting the same result,” he said. “It is going to be fantastic and it is going to be very helpful for us to play in our stadium in front of our fans. I hope and wish to keep the same results.” Pochettino has some injury concerns, with Harry Kane still out and Moussa Sissoko set to be missing for two weeks. “Moussa is not going to be fit for the next two weeks,” he said. “I hope he can recover before then but I’m not optimistic. And with Harry Winks, I don’t know. It’s a problem that one day is very good and one not so good. It’s about assessing every day. We will see, maybe he will be available for Brighton but I’m not sure.” He hopes to have Hugo Lloris available after the goalkeeper missed the City game with a muscle injury.