Step into Steam Down, the weekly jazz jam in south-east London, and you’ll be pulled into a mass of jumping, writhing bodies. Horn notes might screech overhead as a kick drum pounds through your chest but you’ll be hard pressed to see where the music is actually coming from. At Steam Down, it isn’t just the musicians who play, it is the crowd too, encircling each other and responding with their voices and bodily rhythms. It is this communal spirit that has given Steam Down such a loyal following and an almost cultish reputation of being the place to experience the raucous edge of London’s new jazz scene. Arriving at the cavernous arch space of Shoreditch’s Village Underground, then, feels like a leap upwards, and outwards, for the core members of the collective. Here all 11 cram on to the elevated stage for the packed crowd to see while leader Ahnansé conducts his sermon. After opening somewhat awkwardly with a saccharine selection of neo-soul numbers, the mood picks up with a fluid solo from keys player Dominic Canning on Come Find Me and the arrival of guest tuba player Theon Cross. Cross’s earth-shaking stamina sees Steam Down find their groove, launching into the longform improvisations their jam sessions have become known for. From here the collective charge through Fela Kuti-inspired rhythms accented by the smoky vocals of singer And Is Phi. Highlights come on the breathy intensity of Ahnansé’s languid tenor solo on Infinity and the accompanying uncompromising spoken word of Brother Portrait. Yet at times the energy can feel overcooked and almost manic, Ahnansé willing the music to a spiritual state it can’t quite reach. With a music as complex as jazz, sometimes a stillness is needed to surround the craziness of improvisation, a space to take the music in. While Steam Down’s full-throttle blast can be overwhelming, it finds its place with this audience. A snapshot of London in all its open-minded variety, they revel in the intricacies and feel the spirit of this new jazz without needing to analyse it.