Maurizio Sarri will consider his first season at Chelsea a success whatever the outcome of the club’s pursuit of Champions League qualification, but he has challenged his players to secure a top-four finish and a place in the Europa League final in the weeks to come. Chelsea can open a six‑point gap over Manchester United, effectively knocking their hosts out of top‑four contention, by winning at Old Trafford on Sunday with qualification for Europe’s elite competition in their own hands. Sarri has also taken the team to a Europa League semi-final against Eintracht Frankfurt, and saw his side beaten on penalties by Manchester City in the Carabao Cup final. Yet the season has actually been played out to grumbling discontent from the sidelines at the style of football mustered by Sarri’s side. Asked if it would constitute a failure if Chelsea did not secure a return to the Champions League, Sarri said: “No. No, we played a final, which we lost on penalties. We are in the semi-final in the Europa League. We are fighting for the top four. So the season, at the moment, is good. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels “Of course we have two very, very strong targets: we want the top four in the Premier League and to go to the final of the Europa League. If we are able to get to the final, then we will want to win the final. And so I think the season is, at the moment, good. It’s been a very difficult season. We lost two or three matches in the wrong way – without fighting – so the feeling, sometimes, is worse. But it’s only the first step. We need to improve more. We need to become competitive for the top. The first step, though, has been good.” The Chelsea head coach has accepted a decision, made by the club, Burnley and the Football Association, not to pursue his allegation that members of the visiting coaching staff had repeatedly referred to him as “a shit Italian” during Monday’s draw at Stamford Bridge. Sarri was sent to the stands after leaving his technical area, an offence which saw him fined £8,000, yet the comments allegedly made by Burnley’s staff, which Chelsea reported to the match official, would have constituted a breach of FA rule E3 (2) in referencing nationality and, if proven, opened the door to a suspension and heftier fine. Instead, the FA indicated on Thursday that no further action would be taken around the fixture. Chelsea later issued a statement confirming issues “between both benches have been resolved between the coaches and clubs”. Sarri said: “It was a strong discussion but on the pitch, under pressure, and, in my opinion, a situation on the pitch has to remain on the pitch. I made a lot of mistakes on the pitch in the past. Under pressure it can happen. “I know very well you can say something sometimes that is not in your mind. I think that the situation is finished, and I prefer that the situation is finished. I think that the two clubs spoke, and they agreed that the situation is finished. I agree with the two clubs.”