Sadio Mané has said Liverpool are confident of winning every game until the end of the season and will have to do so to wrestle the Premier League title from Manchester City. Liverpool lead the champions by two points with six games remaining, albeit with City having a game in hand, after producing another dramatic late winner to defeat Tottenham on Sunday. Jürgen Klopp’s team visit Southampton on Friday with a belief they can overcome every test, according to Mané, who says the leaders require a flawless finish to the campaign to hold off Pep Guardiola’s side. The Senegal striker said: “That [belief] is what makes you more motivated and makes everyone say: ‘Let’s go, we can do it’, so I think it’s important. This is a very, very good sign and I think everything is possible, so let’s do it and win it. To be honest I think we need to win all of the games, even if it will not be easy. We still can win every game because we are a good team and we play very well.” Mané admits Liverpool must improve on their second-half display against Spurs to maintain pressure on City. “Sometimes it’s difficult after the international break because we only had two or three sessions together. Now we are back and we start with a win, I think it’s very important. We have three or four more days to train together so be like before and go again.” Andy Robertson, meanwhile, believes the defeat of Spurs demonstrated the heart and attitude that has propelled Liverpool throughout the title race and will push them on for the final games of the campaign. Liverpool replaced Manchester City at the top of the table on Sunday courtesy of Toby Alderweireld’s late own goal at Anfield. It was the third time this season that Klopp’s team have claimed victory in the 90th minute –more than any other Premier League side – and cleared arguably their toughest remaining assignment in pursuit of a first league title since 1990. Robertson admitted that luck was on Liverpool’s side against Spurs, who were the stronger team in the second half at Anfield. But he says the leaders’ habit of winning late is evidence of the indefatigable spirit within Klopp’s squad and no fluke. The Liverpool left-back, once again outstanding on Sunday, said: “I think it comes from the whole squad having the right attitude and belief that we are good enough to win any game. We knew Tottenham were playing well in the second half but we still believed we were better and could go on and win the game. “We know we’ve got the energy and we know we’ve got the heart to go right until the end in every single game. Our fitness levels are the best they should be at this point of the season so we know we can go right to the end. But sometimes you just need that wee bit of luck and we got it. “Even when we were going through the tough times in the second half, we still believed we were going to win the game and that’s the mentality we have. It maybe didn’t look likely at times but three points and looking at the league table is all that matters. Performances don’t really matter at this point of the season as long as we win.” Klopp admitted the manner of Liverpool’s dramatic victory on Sunday would have a greater impact on his players than a 5-0 stroll, and Robertson said: “Of course we’re all buzzing but only time will tell if it can give us that. I don’t think we’re lacking a spark but it can give us a real good push right to the end of this season now for six games. But we need to keep going like that and we need to play better than we probably did, especially in the second half.” Trailing at Stamford Bridge to Eden Hazard’s first-half goal a few days after losing to Maurizio Sarri’s side in the Carabao Cup, substitute Daniel Sturridge curled in from an unlikely angle in the 89th minute to maintain Liverpool’s unbeaten start to the season With both sides level on points at the top of the table, City were awarded a penalty in the 84th minute at Anfield after Virgil van Dijk brought down Leroy Sané. But with regular taker Sergio Agüero off the pitch, Riyad Mahrez shrugged off the claims of Gabriel Jesus before sending his spot kick over the bar. The Merseyside derby seemed to be heading for a stalemate until Jordan Pickford’s inexplicable mistake in the 96th minute allowed substitute Divock Origi to bundle the ball over the line. The victory kept Liverpool two points behind leaders Manchester City. Pegged back to 2-2 by James Tomkins with just 25 minutes to play, Liverpool were grateful for Julián Speroni’s moment of madness as the veteran goalkeeper - making his first Premier League appearance since December 2017 - gifted a goal to Mohamed Salah before Sadio Mané ensured Jürgen Klopp’s side stayed four points clear at the top. The visitors had passed up three opportunities to take the lead when a mix-up between Hugo Lloris and Toby Alderweireld in the 90th minute saw the ball trickle over the line off the Belgium defender’s shin – the third time this season a goalkeeping error at the Kop end has contributed to a Liverpool win. Robertson’s peach of a cross for Roberto Firmino’s opening goal was his ninth assist of the Premier League season, the most by any Liverpool defender this term. “It’s a nice feeling,” the Scotland captain said. “But I won’t enjoy that until the end of the season because I want nine to become 10, 10 to become 11, and that’s the attitude I want to keep producing and hopefully get more assists and maybe pitch in with a goal or two – but that doesn’t look likely! I’m just happy to help create goals or score goals and this season I’ve put in some good crosses and the quality has been there but I just need more and six games to go hopefully I can get a couple more.” Virgil van Dijk, meanwhile, is expected to be fit to face former club Southampton at St Mary’s Stadium on Friday. The influential defender hurt his ankle when defending Moussa Sissoko’s late charge at Anfield and required an ice pack after the game. He is not believed to have suffered serious damage, however, and should be back in training before the game.