Like fake tans, bronzers (as seen at Altuzarra SS19, right) will warm up lifeless skin. Misuse, however, is ubiquitous but preventable. Choose a bronzer no more than two shades darker than your own skin. Take a big fluffy brush – tap off any excess – apply around areas that catch the sun – temples, jaw, side of nose, high points of cheek – and buff. Drier skins: consider a liquid bronzer. Oily skins: go easy on the shimmer. And for every skin, remember the name is misleading; you should never actually look bronzed or, God forbid, radioactive à la Trump. 1. Fenty Beauty Sun Stalk’r Instant Warmth Bronzer in Coco Naughty £23, harveynichols.com2. Marc Jacobs Beauty, The Bronzer Brush £52, net-a-porter.com3. Dior Addict Stellar Shine Lipstick in Twinkle £25.50, johnlewis.com4. Tom Ford Soleil Glow Bronzer £59, tomford.co.uk5. D-Bronzi Sunshine Serum £30, drunkelephant.com Warning: I am about to ask you to add another step to your skincare routine. I know, I know, it’s outrageous, like you don’t have enough to do. But an essence, I promise, will give you better skin. In beauty vernacular, an essence (aka ‘miracle water’) is a concentrated watery formula, a staple in Japanese and Korean skincare regimes. By increasing the hydration levels in your skin, it enables other products to be absorbed more effectively. Basically, it turns your skin into a sponge so your serums and moisturisers no longer loaf around unemployed on the surface. There are numerous variations: some have serum-like textures, others target specific concerns, such as hyperpigmentation and enlarged pores and, if I’m honest, there also exists a contingent that are just not worth bothering with. Fresh’s essence, however, is superb. It is a fast-absorbing water-meets-(non-greasy)-oil hybrid made from fermented sweet black tea. Weird but wonderful, it claims to enhance luminosity, refine the look of pores and fine lines, smooth skin texture and provide 24-hour moisture. And, lo and behold, it works – and on all skin tones. I pat it into my skin morning and night. So, seeing as my skin improved in days, I’d say the extra step is a no-brainer. Fresh Black Tea Kombucha Facial Treatment Essence, £59 (johnlewis.com) Milky treat Need a cleanser for dry, sensitive skin? Aesop’s milky offering is infused with soothing, nourishing lavender, grapeseed oil and provitamin B5 for a non-stripping experience. Aesop Gentle Facial Cleansing Milk, £25, aesop.com Lash out Kat Von D Go Big or Go Home vegan mascara replaces beeswax with nourishing plant-based waxes, and imparts an intense clump-free volume to quell your faux lash habit. Launches tomorrow. £20, debenhams.com Nostalgic nose Maya Njie’s London-made fragrances are inspired by her Swedish and West African heritage, musical influences – from Fela Kuti to Axelrod – and an old family photo album. The results? Dreamy scents. Maya Njie Les Fleurs, £85, liberty.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.