Poor old Joe. So Farmer’s Lung got him in the end. None of us believed he had Farmer’s Lung or, even, that it existed. For one thing, he wasn’t much of a farmer and for another he was a Grundy. People like Joe Grundy make the countryside look untidy. People like Joe Grundy are Compo in The Last of the Summer Wine, Adam Lambsbreath in Cold Comfort Farm, Baldrick in Blackadder and, of course, Joe’s immediate predecessor in The Archers, Walter (“Me ol’ pal! Me ol’ beauty!”) Gabriel. When nice people settle in the smiling countryside they find it is already infested with Grundys. Prospero had this problem. They toil not neither do they spin (though the clattering of dishes in the background suggests their wives do both) yet maddeningly they survive and thrive. The consensus of the nice people is that the Grundys are not as green as they are cabbage-looking. Joe Grundy was in many ways a lucky old man. I cannot personally recommend one’s 90s. You tend to fall down in the street causing unkind comment. Admittedly Joe enjoyed his pint of Shires, a brew so thick you can eat it with a spoon, but Bartleby, his elderly pony, always knew the way home. If nobody offered to pay for his pint, he brewed his own cider. Which actually dissolves spoons. His saintly daughter-in-law only drew the line at ferrets on the table at mealtimes. And his entire family reacted with that blind rage so characteristic of the younger Grundys at the mere idea of putting him in a home like the Laurels, that black hole which swallows Ambridge residents surplus to requirements. Admittedly, they couldn’t afford the Laurels but one appreciated the gesture. He was free of all the fashionable problems that nice people suffer in Ambridge: depression and coercive control and donor insemination. Regular spats with Bert Fry (The Bard of Borchester) kept Joe on his toes. Bert will miss him dreadfully and is already working on a threnody “So! Farewell Joe Grundy! Awkward to the end. If you had died on Sunday it would have made my life easier. Or even Monday. But no! It had to be Wednesday didn’t it?” This week he was teaching his little great-granddaughter to clip a ferret’s claws (thus taking her mind off her mother’s early death from sepsis and her father’s obsessive compulsive disorder). She will remember him fondly.