Rugby Australia is facing a potential player mutiny after one of the Wallabies’ most exciting prospects claimed all Pacific Islanders “might as well just be sacked” because of their religious beliefs. At the same time, there are fears Israel Folau’s recent social media posts could lead to a player boycott if he wins his RA code of conduct hearing and saves his multimillion-dollar career. Days out from Folau’s hearing, Queensland Reds and Wallabies hooker Taniela Tupou took to Facebook to express his support for the under-fire star. “Seriously ?????????? Might as well sack me and all the other Pacific Islands rugby players around the world because we have the same Christian beliefs ??????,” Tupou posted late on Tuesday night. “I will never apologise for my faith and what i believe in, religion had nothing to do with rugby anyways ???????? #TYJ” Tupou, also known as the “Tongan Thor”, attached a link to an earlier post from fellow Wallabies teammate and Reds captain Samu Kerevi, who felt compelled to apologise for taking to Instragram at Easter thanking “Jesus for dying on the cross for me. I love you Jesus#”.” “I appreciate the kind words from everyone,” Kerevi posted. “But to be clear I’m not apologising for my faith in Jesus Christ my saviour. God will always come first in my life and many other professional rugby players. “Today, I felt things were taken out of context in regards to certain articles. I do not feel obliged to apologise to people because of the situation happening right now with a brother of of mine.” Tupou’s “sack me or back Folau” ultimatum is sure to turn the heat up on Rugby Australia, who last month issued Folau with a breach of contract notice following his latest round of controversial posts. The three-time John Eales medallist had been previously warned by RA about his social media conduct and the governing body subsequently announced its intention to terminate his contract. Several senior Wallabies players, including Michael Hooper, Will Genia and Bernard Foley, have spoken out against Folau, while coach Michael Cheika and Waratahs coach Daryl Gibson have also expressed their displeasure at his latest comments. Last week Genia told a Fox Sports podcast that Folau’s actions had made “it a bit uncomfortable for people within those team environments to relate to him and, moving forward, even to play with him”. Folau has been stood down by the NSW Waratahs after posting a Bible passage last month claiming hell awaits “drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists and idolators” unless they repent and turn to Jesus Christ. He will front a three-person tribunal – comprising chair John West, RA’s representative Kate Eastman SC and the RUPA-appointed John Boultbee SC – on Saturday. However, Folau has since received backing from England star Billy Vunipola, who liked Folau’s post and called for people to “live their lives how God intended”. Brisbane-born Vunipola was himself slapped with a warning by his English club Saracens over his defence of Folau’s post and handed a “formal warning” by the English Rugby Football Union. But Vunipola’s England teammates Manu Tuilagi, Nathan Hughes, Courtney Lawes – who wrote his own post defending Vunipola’s right to express his opinion – and Wales’ backrower Taulupe Faletau all “liked” Vunipola’s social media post. It is a huge concern for Cheika ahead of this year’s World Cup – a third of Australia’s last Test line-up of 2018 were Polynesian.