Barack and Michelle Obama have revealed their first slate of content at Netflix. The former first couple signed a deal with the streaming platform in 2018 to produce a string of shows and films under their production company Higher Ground. “Touching on issues of race and class, democracy and civil rights, and much more, we believe each of these productions won’t just entertain, but will educate, connect, and inspire us all,” Barack Obama said. The seven projects range from acquisitions to new material, fiction to non-fiction and content aimed at adults and at children. At this year’s Sundance film festival, the couple acquired the acclaimed documentary American Factory which takes a look at what happens when a Chinese billionaire opens a factory in Ohio. Peter Debruge of Variety called it both “humorous” and “horrifying”. Another acquisition, still in production, is Crip Camp, a documentary about a summer camp for disabled teenagers. The Obamas are also set to work with the Moneyball and The Big Short author Michael Lewis on a documentary series based on his book The Fifth Risk: Undoing Democracy. The show will reportedly “aim to portray the importance of unheralded work done by everyday heroes guiding our government and safeguarding our nation”. Their other projects include a feature film biopic of the abolitionist Frederick Douglass, based on David W Blight’s Pulitzer-winning book, a pre-school series called Listen to Your Vegetables and Eat Your Parents about food, a scripted anthology series based on the New York Times column Overlooked and a drama series called Bloom set in the world of fashion in postwar New York. “We love this slate because it spans so many different interests and experiences, yet it’s all woven together with stories that are relevant to our daily lives,” Michelle Obama said. “We think there’s something here for everyone – moms and dads, curious kids, and anyone simply looking for an engaging, uplifting watch at the end of a busy day. We can’t wait to see these projects come to life – and the conversations they’ll generate.” The couple’s deal with the platform is one of many major talent signings in the last year alongside the Scandal and Grey’s Anatomy creator Shonda Rhimes and the American Horror Story creator Ryan Murphy.