April Fools’ Day is a particularly difficult time for celebrities, many of whom haven’t laughed in years, yet the pressures of constant content creation mean they must attempt to join in the fun. This year was particularly arduous: Vicky Pattison, of the not-that-popular reality show Geordie Shore, posted that she was going to be on a celebrity version of the much-more-popular reality show Love Island, only to reveal that no such version existed. Holly Willoughby was pranked during the This Morning makeover slot, when a mum began weeping about her awful new outfit, only for Phillip Schofield to reveal it was all a trick and they had made her look ugly on purpose. As if the normal makeovers on This Morning weren’t all Boohoo explosions presided over by a playsuit-clad stylist goon squad who want to scorch the earth until there is only crushed velvet left. Perhaps the most flawed prank of all came from Justin Bieber, whose joke went so wrong that he had to deliver a grovelling apology for it the next day. Before we get to the gag itself, we should remind ourselves that Bieber doesn’t have a fantastic track record when it comes to reading a room – his comedic energy lies somewhere between Noel’s House Party and Trailer Park Boys. At 15, he was filmed in his dressing room telling a joke in which the punchline is to repeat the n-word in the sound of a chainsaw. He was still a teenager when he hosted Saturday Night Live, and has since been nominated by multiple cast members as the worst celebrity ever to appear on the show. Bill Hader said he was in “a bad place” and seemed “at the end of his rope”, the kind of expressions normally associated with a weary civil servant or the Joker, rather than a 19-year-old having to perform sketch comedy. But surely we can forgive the youthful Bieber, the wild child, the monkey-purchasing, paparazzi-punching, mop-bucket urinating, monkey-abandoning urchin who needed to rebel against wealth and success? In recent years, he has become a more sober figure after finding first Skrillex and then God in quick succession. His public outings have mostly been confined to appearances at Hillsong Church, a sort of hipster bible group whose excitement about their most famous congregant is best summed up by the following genuine quote from Bieber’s pastor, Carl Lentz: “THIS IS MY DOG TIL THE DAY I DIE .. he’s the biggest Brodog. ride or die”. Cool. It was in the revery of Christian rediscovery that Bieber began dating Hailey Baldwin. Hailey is the daughter of Stephen Baldwin, who was an enfant terrible who got clean and then formed a ministry that preached the word of Jesus through extreme sports. Let’s just say it’s not going to be a hard case to crack for her therapist. The couple are currently on the cover of Vogue, a still life of blond hair and cheekbones, the kind of people Steve Bannon imagines when he talks about “real Americans”, even though Bieber is, in fact, Canadian. In the photos, they seem like love’s young dream, although the interview raises more red flags than the Momentum summer party. “I’ve made some bad decisions personally, and in relationships. Those mistakes have affected my confidence in my judgment. It’s been difficult for me even to trust Hailey,” says Bieber, like someone who’s on his seventh marriage rather than being wed for seven months. “Marriage is very hard, it’s really effing hard,” replies Hailey, about their September 2018 nuptials. It continues like this for some time, the couple apparently unaware that they are not talking in confidence to a clergyperson: “Fighting is good. Doesn’t the Bible talk about righteous anger?” asksBieber. “I prayed to feel peace about the decision,” says Baldwin about the first week after the ceremony. Yet, strangely, the possibility of not getting hitched after 12 weeks of dating is never brought up. So, anyway, the April fool, and prepare your laughing gear for this one: Bieber posts a photo of a sonogram suggesting the couple are expecting. But, because it was 1 April, fans were quick to point out that it was probably a trick, so Bieber posted a second photo of Baldwin at the checkup, apparently connected to an IV drip with nurses around her. “If U thought it was April fools,” he wrote. Now, Lost in Showbiz doesn’t want to come down all Karen Killjoy on a bit of spring fun, but surely, in the same way that a plain-clothes police officer has to identify themselves if asked, you’re not allowed to say “this definitely isn’t an April fools” when playing your April fools. The idea is to outsmart your victim, surely, not to perjure yourself. In a third post, Bieber revealed … pause for gasps … it was, in fact, a prank, or as he put it in his subtle caption: “Wait omg is that a,,, APRIL FOOLS”. Wow. You really had us there. The old Bieber would have celebrated this gotcha with a few gallons of Bud Light and an ill-advised night out. But the new, more thoughtful, we’re-working-on-it, marriage-is-a-conversation Bieber started reading the comments. How dare he mock pregnancy when women struggle to get pregnant, said a handful of fans on social media. Controversy lightly bubbled with some of his more devoted fans. So came the fourth post in this April Fools vignette – the apology. “I am a prankster” it begins, which is a wonderful way to begin any sentence. If you cut me, do I not bleed fake blood? If I sit down will there not be a loud squeaky fart and a whoopee cushion beneath me? “I am a prankster and it was APRIL FOOLS... but I will apologize anyway and take responsibility and say sorry to people who were offended,” he wrote. “It’s like when I shoved cake in my little sisters [sic] face for her birthday expecting her to laugh but she cried. You sometimes just don’t know what will hurt someone’s feelings not to compare pregnancy with cake in the face but it’s just to paint the picture of not knowing what will offend.” Consider the picture well and truly painted of a man who can’t quite reconcile his new clean godly lifestyle with his innate need to jape. Someone needs to reach out to him and let him know it’s OK, there’s a spectrum of naughty: drug addiction and violence is bad bad bad, pregnancy Instagram gags are OK. It’s like Jesus himself says in the Hillsong bible: “Yo Thaddaeus, you just got Punk’d!” The Met Gala theme for 2019 has been announced and, marching band drumroll please, it’s camp! Which is sort of like Kim Jong-un announcing that the dress code for his next parade will be “military”. It’s the Met Gala, an event where Anna Wintour handpicks her favourite popstars to wear couture gowns – what year is it not camp? Still, after last year’s tarts and vicars, sorry “heavenly bodies”, theme in which women wore priceless antique pieces inspired by the Renaissance and the blokes wore off-the-rail Calvin Klein tuxedos but with crucifix cufflinks, we must applaud a theme that provokes men to do more. Could we see the Hemsworths caked in kohl trotting up in Givenchy stilettos? Will George Clooney go for a tasteful silk gown or perhaps something more extravagant: a sequined bodysuit and canary train? It could even give comedians who have wronged the queer community a chance to show us how much they have grown – a glitter corset for you, Kevin Hart? It’s the only mature thing to do.