Barclays has cut bonuses for its investment bankers and traders as it posted lower first-quarter profits amid tough market conditions. The bank made a pre-tax profit of £1.5bn between January and March, down from £1.7bn a year earlier but in line with City forecasts. This excludes litigation and conduct charges. If they are included, Barclays made a £1.5bn profit against a £236m loss a year earlier, when it was hit by a £2bn charge largely related to a settlement with the US justice department over the sale of mortgage-backed securities. Barclays is under pressure from the activist investor Edward Bramson to scale back its poorly performing investment banking division and install him on the board. The results come ahead of a showdown between Bramson and Barclays’ chief executive Jes Staley at the bank’s annual meeting next Thursday. At the international business, which includes the investment bank, pre-tax profit fell to £1.1bn from £1.4bn, while the UK bank posted a rise in profits to £600m from £200m, with mortgage applications up quite strongly. Staley said the group had cut bankers’ bonuses to reduce costs and was “very comfortable” with its cost targets. In the first quarter, costs amounted to £3.3bn. He said the bank took a £400m charge in 2016 to allow it to better align bonuses with the firm’s revenues. “What you see in the first quarter is Barclays using this discretion around variable compensation to manage our costs and deliver expected profitability,” he said. Barclays said there would be further cost cuts if tough trading conditions continued. Bramson, a British lawyer based in New York, is Barclays’ third-largest shareholder, with a 5.5% stake, after BlackRock, the world’s largest fund manager, and Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund. At next week’s AGM, Bramson will call on other shareholders to back his demand to be voted on to the board. While Bramson wants the investment bank – which he has described as a “black box with too much leverage” – to be scaled back, Staley has pledged to protect it from further cuts. Tim Throsby was ousted as head of the investment bank last month after reportedly clashing with Staley over his profitability targets, and Staley assumed closer day-to-day control of the division. Staley has pledged future share buybacks, which would be the first since he took the helm in 2015, but was vague about the timing. He said about Brexit: “Everyone would like to see the uncertainty of Brexit behind us but it doesn’t look like it’s going to happen anytime soon.”