Never mind finding the perfect red, try finding a decent pink. No, I don’t mean its froufrou comrades; there are millions of those, they have their place, but it’s not here. This isn’t about the baby pink, purplish or even reddish imposters, it’s about a rich fuchsia pink. Chanel’s SS19 take nailed it for three reasons: it works on every skin tone; it’s more playful than a traditional red but with just as much clout; and the impact is so effective that you barely have to do anything else with the rest of your face. Well, sort of… Ordinarily I wouldn’t make a beeline for eye shadows. I admire a good eye game on other women, but I don’t have the patience to perfect the application process. This means I end up with a look that disintegrates as the day goes on. However, even I find this palette irresistible. Now here’s the rub. It costs £115 (try not to choke on your outrage) and here’s the reason why: this heavyweight – it weighs a ton - is by an industry heavyweight, Pat McGrath. She is easily the biggest and most influential makeup artist in the world – one of the very few whose work actually creates trends. So this launch is a big deal. Now to the actual product. Most palettes throw in duff colours many will never wear. This, however, has super universal shades – browns, bronzes, deep aubergine – wearable on every skintone. There are more experimental colours – an intense bronzy orange – but it’s still workable. The biggest draws, however, lie with the pigment and formulation. Pat herself tried these colours on me and, wow. Remarkable colour payoff means you only need a teeny bit (so it’ll be a while before you hit pan) and it does not budge. So, when you’re about to purchase a single, lesser-quality eye shadow for £20, keep all the above in mind and do the maths. Pat McGrath Labs Bronze Seduction Palette, £115, selfridges.com Pore relief This lightweight moisturiser hydrates without clogging pores. It targets acne and promises clearer-looking skin in a week. Vichy Normaderm Phytosolutions Double Correction Daily Care, £18, boots.com Beat the breakouts Mineral-rich clays (to draw out impurities), eucalyptus, tea tree and antioxidants make this mask brilliant for all breakouts, including hormonal and pregnancy- related. Alpha H Clear Skin Blemish Control Mask, £22.95, alpha-h.com Ex-zit strategy Unlike most spot treatments that simply sit on the skin, these genius stick-on patches use a micro dart technology that targets the source of spots and eliminates them quickly. KILLA by Zitsticka, £27 zitsticka.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.