Memorandum to Super Netball defenders; It’s time to get nervous, real nervous. That’s because one of the league’s most damaging shooters, Giants recruit Caitlin Bassett – who switched from reigning premiers the Sunshine Coast Lightning in the off-season – is back on-court and back in business. The 193cm superstar has recovered from a fractured left forearm, sustained in a practice match in Manchester ahead of the Quad Series in January, is “really, really fit” and is ready to make an impact in her new strip. While she missed four weeks longer than first anticipated after requiring surgery, Bassett got back into full on-court training two weeks ago, wearing a foam guard on the arm, and has impressed her new captain, former Australian Diamonds teammate Kim Green. Bassett, 30, might be fitter than at any other time in her career, thanks to lots of pre-season running, and has added an extra layer of movement to her already-impressive courtcraft in recent times, according to Green. It’s a one-two punch combo to strike fear into the hearts of the league’s defenders ahead of round one of the third Super Netball season, which begins on 27 April. “She’s really, really fit and moving well out there, now she’s back on-court. It’s [the arm] completely fine,” Green said at the launch of the 2019 season in Melbourne on Tuesday. “She’s probably run a little bit more with us this season than ever. I think she’s put a little bit more movement into her game, too. “I honestly believe she’s one of the most valuable players in the world; she wins games. She’s a big-game player, so we’re very fortunate to have her in our team and I’m very excited to work with her.” Having silver service from a world-class feeder like Green will undoubtedly help Bassett’s game, as will a burning desire to avenge last year’s heartbreaking Commonwealth Games loss to England at this year’s World Cup in the UK. While having Bassett spend most of pre-season in a splint was less than ideal, Green said it hadn’t been a major issue for the Giants, who finished top of the table last season, but went out of the finals in straight sets, losing to eventual premiers, Bassett’s old side, the Lightning, by nine in the preliminary. “I think she was a bit disappointed that she had to sit out and our (pre-season) process has been disjointed, for sure, but I think other teams have been dealing with niggles as well. We’re not worried about it. She’s also been super-impressive off the court. “Having a player like Caitlin come into the fold for some of our young feeders, it’s been actually really good the last couple of weeks, for them to get some touch with her. And for me too. We’re excited for the season to start,” Green, who’ll play her 200th national league game this year, said. Bassett, who shot 675 goals at 92 per cent accuracy last season, is wearing a foam guard at present and with the approval of officials, will most likely wear some kind of protection during the regular season too. “She’s not stressed about it; it’s just making sure that if a hit goes to there, that it has some sort of protection,” Green said. Bassett’s move to the Giants will see English star Jo Harten pushed out to goal attack; a position she’s not unfamiliar with. The AFL-aligned franchise also has impressive Australian youngster, Kiera Austin, who Green rated as the best goal attack in the country who doesn’t currently “own a bib”. Twenty-one year-old Austin, a member of the Diamonds squad, was a training partner in 2017 before being elevated last year, and impressed every time she got on court. “The great thing about Kiera is that she’s so level-headed, not a lot fazes her and she’s got speed. We’ve got Joey [Harten] and also Kiera out in front [of Bassett], playing different sort of roles with her and I feel like, for the first time at the Giants, we have a different look in that shooting end and I think that’s really exciting,” Green said. In round one, the Giants take on fierce rivals the NSW Swifts in Sydney on 28 April. The round also features a double-header in Melbourne on 27 April, when the Vixens take on the Firebirds and the Magpies play Lightning, who welcome back a supremely fit Laura Langman. The Adelaide Thunderbirds are at home to last year’s grand finalists, the West Coast Fever, on 28 April. To accommodate the World Cup in Liverpool in July, the third installment of Super Netball will be split in two, taking a break after nine rounds, between 23 June and 27 July. Players will have just 19 days after round nine before the tournament in England begins and six between the medal matches and having to be back on court for round 10, raising questions about potential player burn-out and the capacity for the Australian team, and other internationals in the league, to adequately prepare and then return for club duties. After the World Cup, it will feature five more rounds, before finals begin and the grand final on 15 September.