While the comedian’s last show, Animal, was all about the human body, her follow-up, LadsLadsLads, is a more personal endeavour, inspired by the breakdown of a four-year relationship. Even so, it’s heavy on the same anxious, ribald brilliance as its predecessor. This programme, recorded on the final stop of the tour at the London Palladium, takes in a bungled yoga retreat, a not-so-romantic break to Paris, and wearing the same knickers as your ex’s mum. Hannah J Davies Think of this new take on entrepreneur TV as a dowdier Dragons’ Den, with consumer ratings replacing investors’ money. Each episode sees products put to the test, with feedback determining the winner. This week, a battle between a pet feeding bowl, a back lotion applicator and a bed extender. Mike Bradley From Cecil B DeMille’s The Ten Commandments of 1923 to modern-day marvel Gravity, via 70s blockbusters such as The Poseidon Adventure, Kermode expertly explores the conventions that underwrite the disaster movie genre, or what he calls “uplifting displays of destruction”. MB After a throat-clearer of an opening episode, the eighth and final season looks set to start belting out the hits, as the White Walkers inch ever closer to Winterfell. Can the forces of the living hold them off for a little longer? They will probably need to stop squabbling with each other first, you suspect. Gwilym Mumford With the set-up out of the way, this sitcom about a creaky mansion inherited by a millennial couple, only one of whom can see the spirits that haunt it, is now flying. Strong, clever gags are offset – as always with the Yonderland/Horrible Histories gang – by lovely little performance flourishes. Delightful. Jack Seale As Lee Phillips’s grimly absorbing docu-series about former prisoners adapting to civilian life concludes, newly liberated Andrew and Kimberley try to overcome their addiction to alcohol; homeless Gemma prepares to live in the park over the summer; and Jason seeks help for his worsening mental health. MB Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again (Ol Parker, 2018), noon and 8pm, Sky Cinema PremiereThe success of the Abba-singalong film came out of the Aegean blue, and here is a likable sequel. Cannily blending the 1970s adventures of young Donna (Lily James) with the present-day wedding problems of daughter Sophie (Amanda Seyfried), it’s an effervescent, sun-soaked delight. Paul Howlett Snooker: World Championship 10am, BBC Two. Shaun Murphy and Mark Selby are in action on day three. Rugby league: Catalan Dragons v Castleford Tigers 5pm, Sky Sports Action. Super League action. Premier League football: Chelsea v Burnley 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Top four-chasing Chelsea take on by now surely safe Burnley.