The Ministry of Defence has launched an urgent investigation after a video emerged via social media that shows members of the parachute regiment firing at a poster of Jeremy Corbyn at a target range in Kabul. MoD insiders said they believed the video – which had the caption “happy with that” – was genuine, but inquiries were ongoing to establish why an image of the Labour leader, studded with bullet marks, was used. The video shows four soldiers, clearly identifiable as members of the 3rd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment, stationed in Afghanistan, using simulation weapons. The blue shade of the guns in the video identifies them as simulation weapons, which are commonly used in target practice. They fire a hardened wax pellet said to be “10 times harder than you would feel in paintball”, but MoD insiders stressed they could not be described as live ammunition. “There are a number of different posters used as targets on that range, but the use of this poster obviously shows poor judgment,” an MoD source said. The video was shared on Snapchat overnight among a smaller group, but subsequently leaked, prompting the investigation and complaints from Labour and other politicians concerned about safety and security at Westminster, at a time when feelings are running high over Brexit. An MoD spokesman said: “We are aware of a video circulating on social media. This behaviour is totally unacceptable and falls well below the high standards the army expects. A full investigation has been launched.” A Labour party spokesman said: “This behaviour is alarming and unacceptable. We have confidence in the Ministry of Defence to investigate and act on this incident.” Party sources highlighted that Corbyn and other Labour figures have been targeted by others. A Brexit supporter who hit Corbyn with an egg outside a mosque in north London was jailed for 28 days last month. Corbyn is due to meet Theresa May on Wednesday afternoon for talks about solving the Brexit impasse, with speculation that the Labour leader could strike a deal with the prime minister over the handling of the ongoing crisis. The Brexit minister, Robin Walker, said the video was “extremely distasteful”. Speaking on BBC Radio 5 Live, he said: “We might have strong views on one another in parliament, but clearly that kind of violence is unacceptable in any context about a democratically elected representative. And if that is true, I would certainly condemn it.” The former British soldier Trevor Coult, who was among those who circulated the video, later claimed it was fake. Coult, who has written about his experiences in Afghanistan, shared the video on Twitter with the message: “Not looking good for a Labour leader.” After it prompted criticism, he claimed the video had been Photoshopped. Alex Sobel, a backbench Labour MP, submitted an urgent parliamentary question to the defence secretary, Gavin Williamson. He also tweeted that there was no reason to doubt the authenticity of the video. Gavin Shuker, a member of the Independent Group, tweeted that it was “unbelievably irresponsible”. Dan Jarvis, a Labour MP and former army major, tweeted that the video “goes against the values and standards” of the army.