There’s a hoary old debate about what constitutes a sport as opposed to a pastime or an activity. Is darts, for example, a sport? Angling? Mountaineering? There are all manner of ways of answering the question that are to do with codification, exertion, competition. But ultimately, particularly for participants, sharp lines of definition probably seem rather arbitrary. In recent years those intense activities that were once deemed to lie beyond the borders of sport have been granted a new and inclusive designation: extreme sports, a group where you’ll find such diverse enterprises as cave diving, free climbing and base jumping. Each to his own, even if, to borrow Nabokov’s phrase, I would sooner open a sardine can with my penis than go cave diving. But perhaps the distinction is to be made not between sports and activities but the spirit in which they are taken up. I am thinking here of the celebrated return to competitive rowing of the Olympic gold medallist James Cracknell, when, last Sunday, he became the oldest man, at 46, to win the Boat Race. We learned that the commitment required to prepare for the race – moving away from his wife, Beverley Turner, and their three children to study and train in Cambridge – led to the breakup of his marriage. As Turner ambivalently put it on witnessing her soon-to-be former husband’s victory: “Returning to university to study full-time at 46 and getting into a boat alongside blokes 25 years younger may have been an absolute dereliction of parenting and marital duty, but even I can admit that it’s nothing short of super-bloody-human.” But where does competitive spirit end and pathological obsession begin? Is sport the place where we can admire human determination or an arena to parade psychological compulsions? In Cracknell’s case these questions are made much more complex by the fact that he suffered a serious brain injury in 2010, when he was hit by a petrol tanker’s wing mirror while cycling as part of a TV challenge to cross America by running, rowing, cycling and swimming. He had already broken his foot in a running stage. The impact of the mirror smashed his frontal lobes on to his skull, instigating personality changes that would make him, as one doctor put it, more himself: ie a less compromising version of his already uncompromising tendencies. Turner wrote of “the dark internal restlessness that drives all overachievers” and said that, having spent time with multiple Olympic medallists, it was obvious to her that “such ambitions rarely arise from a healthy psychological place”. Plenty of sportspeople have made the same observation. Andre Agassi is just one of many leading athletes who have confessed to cracking up under the pressure they placed upon themselves. There’s a reason why many successful sporting stars turn to booze or drugs or gambling as a means of escaping – although it will actually perpetuate – the mania in their heads. Still, I suspect that some sports are better at absorbing this overwhelming drive, while others serve to increase it. A crude division would be between team and individual sports, because the collective is more likely to limit the realm of the individual ego. Really? I hear you say. Is that why Roy Keane was so restrained in his personal ambition? Why Cristiano Ronaldo appears so balanced and un-self-obsessed? But try imagining them without teammates to rail at, with only themselves to blame. Now imagine if all that pumping, near-deranged selfhood was channelled into the most physically demanding feats of endurance. It would be spent, annihilated, the screaming inner voice silenced by sheer exhaustion. Until, that is, the body recovers and the whole process starts again. Two months before Cracknell embarked on his ill‑fated trans-American sojourn – for no purpose other than it was there, extremely difficult and would pay money – he completed the Marathon des Sables, a 251km run over six days, which works out roughly at a marathon a day, in July in Morocco in the desert. He finished 12th, then the highest-placed Briton in history. But he wasn’t sated. Just as rowing the Atlantic and skiing to the South Pole left no lasting sense of completion. He did those two with Ben Fogle, the reality TV star and adventurer. There’s something about the pair that is oddly anachronistic, like two Edwardian explorers seeking out the undiscovered global extremities as heroic embodiments of imperial reach. Except there is no empire, the world is known, and all that is left for the incurably restless spirit is ever more preposterous and ultimately empty physical challenges. This search for extremity, taken to its extreme, results in the futile endurance of Sir Ranulph Fiennes, with his self-amputated fingers and ever more bonkers feats of suffering. However we define sport, at its best it celebrates rather than fetishises indomitable motivation. The sight of the Brownlee brothers completing their gold- and bronze-medal-winning triathlon at the 2012 London Olympics was tremendously moving to witness. Similarly, when Cracknell won his first gold while one of his teammates, Steve Redgrave, won his fifth at the 2000 Sydney Olympics, that too was an awe-inspiring moment. Such times are always simultaneously incredibly personal and profoundly shared. I’m not sure the same applies to Cracknell’s Boat Race victory. Yes it was, as his wife said, a super‑bloody‑human effort. Just like those multiple marathons in Morocco. But ultimately such accomplishments seem like a variety of masochism in search of meaning. You spend less time marvelling at the milestone the competitor is speeding towards than wondering about what mindset he’s fleeing from. Naturally, good luck to Cracknell and I certainly hope that his life, post-accident, is made more satisfying by these endeavours. But essentially they feel like private challenges, a testing of personal limits that seem to have little bearing on the world beyond. Apparently Fiennes is planning to walk five miles underwater on the seabed from Robben Island, where Nelson Mandela was once held prisoner, to Cape Town. It’s for charity. Good luck to him too, but I have to admit I wouldn’t be the least bit bothered if he decided instead to stay home and play darts.