For a scholarly study of the British educational system’s upper tier, Gilded Youth is unusually rife with tension. Much of its air of unease is down to an underlying conflict, in this case the stand-off between James Brooke-Smith’s commitment to professional objectivity and the personal prejudice boiling up beneath it. The commitment to impartiality is elegantly set down in a chapter about the “secret life” of the Victorian schoolboy. “It is wrong to impose one’s own values on the past, to see history only through the lens of one’s own intellectual categories and moral standards,” Brooke-Smith insists. Yet it soon becomes clear that he was asked to leave the public school at which he fetched up (Shrewsbury) in his mid-teens, hates the institution that nurtured him like poison and would like to see its playing fields dug up for cabbages. All this gives these well-researched pages on the theme of public school “rebellion” an undeniable piquancy. Brooke-Smith’s argument is that almost since the moment of their foundation, the country’s elite private schools have been a nursery for dissent and sedition, sometimes to the point of outright insurrection. The Great Winchester rebellion of 1793 had to be put down by the North Hampshire militia, and as late as 1851 a mob of Marlborough boys enraged by the school’s punitive regime broke into the headmaster’s study, burned his collection of canes and destroyed the manuscript of his book on Sophocles before it could be sent to his publisher. As for the motives beneath these irruptions of juvenile unrest, Brooke-Smith notes the self-consciousness of their political rationale. The inky malcontents who set to work at Rugby in 1797, in the shadow of the French revolution, were careful to nail a copy of Thomas Paine’s The Rights of Man to the school noticeboard. Similarly, Percy Bysshe Shelley, otherwise known as “Mad Shelley” or “the Eton Atheist”, who was expelled in 1808 for blowing up his housemaster’s garden with gunpowder, and to whom science was “a visionary, almost psychedelic pursuit”, had a long history of study-bound browsing amid radical political works of Concordet, Rousseau, Benjamin Franklin and William Godwin. The trail winds on into the world of mid-Victorian educational reform, the atmosphere of “godliness and good learning” that Thomas Arnold attempted to instil at Rugby and the Breughel-like landscape of beatings and sexual escapades that existed on the farther side of the dormitory door, where members of staff rarely strayed. Here Brooke-Smith offers an intriguing chapter on ‘Classics and Nonsense’, where he argues that the whimsical, Lewis Carroll side of Victorian humour began as a response to the rigour of the Arnold-era curriculum (although it might be pointed out that Edward Lear, the greatest nonsense-merchant of them all, never went anywhere near a private school). The author has a good line on the rise of the dandy aesthetes, whose art world precocity was a direct response to the late 19th century’s fixation on sporting prowess. “In the sports-mad school, a taste for art and beauty was one of the chief means of voicing dissent,” Brooke-Smith suggests in a chapter about Brian Howard and Harold Acton (joint models for Anthony Blanche in Evelyn Waugh’s Brideshead Revisited) and the birth of the Eton Candle journal in 1922, which contains a moving but generationally hostile poem by Howard addressed “To the Young Writers and Artists Killed in the War 1914-18”. By the 1930s, an ingrate such as Esmond Romilly could run away from Wellington College to found the “underground” magazine Out of Bounds, feature in newspaper exposés of the “red menace” and eventually fight on the republican side in the Spanish civil war. In Romilly’s radical wake, the exploits of such well-educated traitors as Burgess, Maclean and Blunt scarcely need restating. And yet the second part of Brooke-Smith’s book concentrates on the public school’s historic ability to contain and self-advertisingly mythologise these acts of rebellion. Such was the paralysing mystique that surrounded the traditions of Eton, Harrow and the rest that most of the rebels were half in love with the things they were complaining about. Alec Waugh’s novel The Loom of Youth (1917), might have been denounced from pulpits, but the Sherborne-educated Waugh was a reformer, not a revolutionary. A glance at Brooke-Smith’s bibliography reveals just how widely he has read in the vast literature of the public school – not least the thousands of boys’ school stories that were set in it. If Gilded Youth has a weakness, it’s the fact that its author seems to imagine that all private schools are the same. But relativism affects the public school system as much as any other part of our national life. William Golding, a product of Marlborough grammar school, might have resented the posh boys of Marlborough school, but his near-contemporary and old Marlburian John Betjeman was made just as uncomfortable by the Old Etonians he met at Oxford. This occasional lack of nuance is perhaps symbolised by the re-appearance of Jimmy Sime’s famous photograph of a band of Harrovians in morning coats being eyed up some more casually dressed onlookers. The picture is called ‘Toffs and toughs’ but the boys looking on are off-duty grammar school pupils, respectably dressed in blazers and open-necked shirts – interested rather than contemptuous. Brooke-Smith is wrong, too, to make George Orwell his lodestar in his search for authentic public-school rebels. An afterword makes a pointed comparison between Orwell and his friend Cyril Connolly, the latter “in thrall to the aristocratic glamour of ‘Pop’, Eton’s famous sixth-form club”, the former “implacable in his rejection of the school and all it stood for”. This is a serious overstatement. After all, Orwell’s first reaction to the arrival of his adopted son in 1944 was to suggest that he be put down for his alma mater. His diaries reveal him to have been fixated on the Eton-Harrow cricket match, and one of the last reviews he ever wrote was of a book about Eton, where he praises “the tolerant and civilised atmosphere” that gives each boy a chance of developing his own individuality. In many ways Orwell was a classic Old Etonian, which is probably further evidence for Brooke-Smith’s concluding remarks on the insidious influence of private education and the elites it so consistently sustains. • Gilded Youth: Privilege, Rebellion and the British Public School is published by Reaktion (£18). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.