Russian oligarch Evgeny Lebedev, the owner of the Evening Standard and the Independent, is in talks to offload his loss-making London Live TV station. Lebedev and his father, Alexander, won the hotly contested battle for the licence for the capital’s first dedicated TV channel six years ago, the crown jewel of the government’s plan to launch dozens of local TV channels across the UK. At the time it was seen as the most lucrative TV licence to be awarded since Channel 5 in 1997. A star-studded launch party in 2014 counted David Cameron, former chancellor turned Standard editor George Osborne, Elizabeth Hurley, Hugh Grant, Naomi Campbell, Ralph Fiennes, Tracey Emin and Anna Friel among the attendees. The plan was for the Evening Standard-backed TV station to help drive profitability across the Lebedevs’ media portfolio but in reality it has proved a financial blackhole. London Live, which it was hoped would break even in 2017, has never made a profit – running up losses of £30m to date, according to filings at Companies House. It is understood that Lebedev is in talks with That’s Media, which owns licences to 20 local TV stations, including Manchester, Cambridge and Oxford, about potentially selling London Live. That’s Media has sought to build a network by taking on struggling local TV franchises, including five from the Scottish broadcaster STV last year – with Edinburgh and Glasgow among them – and Norwich’s Mustard TV, from the newspaper publisher Archant in 2017. Lebedev has also previously held talks with David Montgomery, the former chief executive of the publisher of the Daily and Sunday Mirror, who is now a director at the local TV franchise operator Made Television. The value of the loss-making London Live to an existing local TV operator is unclear. However, when Archant offloaded Mustard TV to That’s Media it did so in return for a small stake in the local TV group. A spokesperson for London Live said: “Local television is a fast-evolving sector and, as a significant player in the largest UK market, we receive approaches for the business all the time. We don’t discuss private business matters publicly, so wouldn’t comment on any specific discussions.” Lebedev first engaged with local TV rivals and some larger broadcasters about a sale or merger of London Live a year ago. In the five years since London Live launched it has been subject to round after round of job cuts and requests to Ofcom, which regulates local TV, to reduce its commitments to local programming and news.