“Now is the best time ever to be a professional cricketer in this country.” That is the view of Daryl Mitchell, chairman of the Professional Cricketers’ Association. The PCA has been involved in the negotiations about the future of the English game and Mitchell says: “The PCA has worked tirelessly to ensure players are remunerated for their centre-stage role, meaning an extra £8 million per year to the players who feature in the Hundred [there will be 96 domestic male cricketers].” So by my calculations that will, on average, make those cricketers involved £83,333 better off each year. Yes, it is hard to argue with Mitchell. Now is the time to be a cricket pro. The PCA’s power is expanding and it is determined to use it to improve the lot of its members, who will undoubtedly become better paid from 2020 onwards; it seems to be doing a good job for them. However, it remains the case that the England and Wales Cricket Board, not the PCA, is, theoretically, the prime guardian of our game and it does not always inspire the same confidence. Cricketers have never been better paid. Fred Rumsey, who appeared in five Tests for England, earned £600 for a season as a county cricketer for Somerset in 1966, the year after his last international appearance. Today this equates to about £11,000 for the summer. By comparison six weeks of the Hundred delivers enormous riches. I know Rumsey’s salary after reading his autobiography, Sense of Humour, Sense of Justice, which was published last month. Mitchell has cause to be grateful to Rumsey, who was the first proponent of a players’ union. In his book Rumsey explains how he single-handedly spoke to all the counties and their players about his notion of starting “an association”, a less provocative term than a “union”. “The idea had been mooted for years but no one had attempted its formation,” writes Rumsey. “There was reluctance in the ranks of first-class cricketers to buck the establishment at any level, particularly Lord’s.” Then he goes on to add that the easiest dressing room to convince was that of Yorkshire. “They were all enthusiastic, from Brian Close downwards.” Those in charge of the game were not so thrilled by the idea. “Somerset had a chairman called ‘Bunty’ Longrigg, a Bath solicitor who had been educated at Rugby and Cambridge” recalls Rumsey. “He had been captain of Somerset on either side of the war and was a man at ease in the cricketing establishment at Lord’s. ‘Skipper,’ he said to Colin Atkinson, ‘may I speak to Rumsey?’” Naturally this request was granted and Rumsey takes up the story of Longrigg inviting him to dinner at his club. “I won’t beat about the bush,” he said, “I have been approached by certain of my friends at Lord’s. They have requested of me that we at Somerset should curb your activities with this union you are planning to form.” “I see,” I said. “So how did you reply?” He was not a man who regularly used expletives but in his best public school voice he said loudly: “I told them to fuck off. And furthermore I told them that Somerset County Cricket Club and I will be giving you all the support we possibly can.” A meeting was held with Cliff Lloyd and Jimmy Hill from the Professional Footballers’ Association, who could not believe how little cricketers were paid and soon an executive committee was set up. Roger Prideaux was briefly the first chairman, Jack Bannister, who would become a central figure in the association for decades, was appointed treasurer and Rumsey was the secretary. Soon afterwards John Arlott agreed to become the first president and he told Rumsey how this was the most wonderful offer he had ever received. Their meeting was not exactly a beer and sandwiches affair, according to Rumsey. “I put the offer of the presidency during the first four bottles of claret and then celebrated his acceptance with the next two.” Today’s cricketers owe Rumsey a lot. And we should be grateful to Stephen Chalke of Fairfield Publishing – and Rumsey himself – for delivering an enchanting book. It is probably not the greatest cricket book ever, though. That accolade has been decided – with a hint of mischief – in this month’s Wisden Cricket Monthly. If nothing else the debate over the merits of cricket books is a source of a damn good argument among fans and the mere fact that the magazine is prepared to devote 16 pages to finding a winner is heartening to anyone having a book published in the next couple of months. Maybe even in the 21st century there remains an enthusiasm for books on cricket, which is supposed to be the sport that provokes the best literature. And the winner is … after a tortuous process which involved creating seven categories and then pitching the best in each into a short list discussed over dinner by the judges, quite a surprise. I am familiar with the book and can confirm that it is no ordinary biography. In my first year as the chairman of the MCC/Cricket Society judging panel in 2010 we discussed it at length and – as I’m frequently reminded by admirers of the Australian writer Christian Ryan – somehow it did not win the award. Ryan’s book Golden Boy is a biography of Kim Hughes, in which the author talks to the major figures in Australian cricket during the incendiary post-Packer era – except Dennis Lillee, Rodney Marsh and Hughes himself, the key characters in a riveting story. Ryan is interviewed in the magazine and he agrees that his book is a study of “how men are around men”. He was asked whether Hughes had read it. “Friends of friends of friends of Kim have informed me he’s half read it or quarter read it and found it a pretty OK read, who knows?” Wisden Cricket Monthly does. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.