Here is the worst-kept secret heading into this month’s NFL draft: the Arizona Cardinals will select Kyler Murray first overall and are shopping second-year quarterback Josh Rosen. The team’s new head coach, Kliff Kingsbury, made his admiration for the Heisman trophy winner apparent as far back as October when he was still a college coach in Lubbock, Texas. “Kyler is a freak,” Kingsbury said. “I would take him with the first pick of the draft if I could.” This is a unique situation. The Cardinals were so bad last year that they detonated the long-term plans they’d put in place just 12 months prior when they hired a new coach and drafted Rosen as their signal-caller of the future in the first round. Now, they want to start over again. They’ve hired a coach, Kingsbury, with a specific vision and secured the top overall pick, giving them a shot to land another quarterback, Murray, a transformative talent at the most valuable position in the sport. Moving on from Rosen is hard. He may flourish with another team (or flourish with Kingsbury). He may become 90% of the player the Cardinals envision Murray to be, without the electrifying athleticism. But that 10% separates the very best players from the merely good. It wins championships. Every one of those 10 percentage points is exponentially harder to find than the one below it. The closest equivalent we’ve seen to this situation came when the Cleveland Browns selected DeShone Kizer early in the second round of the 2017 draft. Kizer stunk during his rookie year. The Browns went winless and secured the No 1 overall pick, selecting Baker Mayfield and shipping Kizer to Green Bay. Kizer is an afterthought with the Packers; Mayfield is a savior in Cleveland. What the Cardinals are attempting to pull off, though, is unprecedented: they want to upgrade at quarterback while recouping as close to a top-10 pick as they laid out to add Rosen a year ago. According to multiple reports, the asking price is a first-round pick in the upcoming draft, or a high second-round pick packaged with a series of third-round selections. What remains unclear: why has no one made the deal yet? There are three likely answers: 1) teams are posturing for value, dragging negotiations down to the wire; 2) they’re waiting for the Cardinals to select Murray first, thereby, theoretically, driving Rosen’s value down; or 3) the league has collectively given up on Rosen a year into his career after his less-than-stellar rookie campaign. Not everyone was sold on Rosen as a top-10 pick a year ago. His attitude and on-field decision-making were constantly questioned. And Rosen did little to disprove the latter in his first year. He completed just 55% of his passes, threw 11 touchdowns against 14 interceptions. Yet he wasn’t given much of a chance to succeed. Rosen was sacked 45 times and pressured on a tick over 35% of his dropbacks, the third-worst clip in the league. He played in a stale, mundane scheme surrounded by a bunch of stale, mundane players. It was a slog. It was wrenching. Rosen’s offensive line was an apocalypse. Only David Johnson (when available) and an aging Larry Fitzgerald offered any sort of security. The Cardinals fired head coach Steve Wilks after one year, in part, because the Cardinals offense was historically atrocious. Arizona ranked 30th or worse among the NFL’s 32 teams in DVOA (down to down efficiency), yards per play, yards per pass attempt, yards per rush, points per game, third-down conversion percentage, and points per drive. You get the picture: they were dreadful. Rosen was thrust into the worst possible situation for a first-year player, particularly a quarterback. What Rosen managed to conjure under those conditions was little short of magic. His best game of the year came in his first as the team’s starter, at home against Seattle. He made some great throws, demonstrated savvy pocket presence (patient when possible, hurried when necessary), and made some big throws while getting crushed. If you liked Rosen coming out (I did, a lot) or want your team to trade for him now, his game against Seattle is the best example of his skill-set: wow throws, savvy pocket presence (patience when possible, hurried when necessary), scanning & resetting, big throws under fire pic.twitter.com/TZAcEqbUvf Rosen had better statistical games, but that performance against Seattle remains the most tantalizing. All of the skills that made him special in college were on display. A team should look at Rosen the way Sean McVay looked at Jared Goff prior to his arrival in LA. Goff was surrounded by a smorgasbord of incompetence and became an underappreciated player. He had been thrust into a plodding Jeff Fisher offense that didn’t fit his skill set. Goff’s DYAR (a measure of a quarterback’s total value) sat dead stinking last in the NFL during his rookie year, 34th among qualified quarterbacks. McVay’s arrival ushered in a fresh, modern system and Goff exploded. In 2018 and 2019, he finished sixth in DYAR, putting him ahead of Russell Wilson, Carson Wentz and Cam Newton over that two-year span. With the right staff, surrounded by the right pieces, Rosen could see similar growth. Like Goff, his contract helps. If Rosen plays at close to a league-average level in his new spot, he would be a bargain for plenty of teams. Last year’s top overall pick, Baker Mayfield, landed a $32m deal. Rosen’s deal, by contrast, will pay the quarterback just shy of $12m over the following three seasons, and there’s a fifth-year option tagged onto the end of his current deal. Adding a franchise quarterback on a rookie deal remains the top market inefficiency in professional sports. Getting a 12-karat player for the price of 12 carrots in a salary-capped sport is almost unfair. It is the best way to ensure success in the NFL: it enables a team to flesh out the rest of the roster. Cleveland are already benefitting. Although Mayfield’s contract is hardly meager, he is paid much less than a veteran, allowing the Browns to add Odell Beckham and Olivier Vernon this offseason to a roster bursting with young talent. Chicago, meanwhile, were able to pay Khalil Mack like a quarterback, in part, because they are paying quarterback Mitch Trubisky, still on his rookie deal, less than $650,000 next year. Rosen could hand any number of teams the opportunity to build in the same way for the next three seasons, provided a staff taps into his gifts. A number of spots make sense: the Giants, Patriots, Chargers, Broncos, Bengals, Raiders, Titans and Washington. Some could use a new starter on a rookie deal. Others could secure the long-term heir to their aging star. It makes sense why the Cardinals want to move on from Rosen for Murray. It doesn’t make sense why a quarterback-needy team hasn’t ponied up the asking price to land Rosen yet.