Chinatown didn’t appear to be broken before the planners set out to fix it. Still, here we are, many years later, with the new Central Cross, a gleaming, 48,000 sq ft plaza just off Charing Cross Road. Shanghai Modern is one of Central Cross’s first openings. It is yards from the former Dive Bar beneath the King’s Head pub, which at one stage was one of the West End’s most excellent subterranean hidey-holes. “Call the police, there’s a mad man around,” sang Neil Tennant, immortalising Gerrard Street’s melee: a glut of Cantonese, Sichuan and Hunan restaurants, plus a rolling cast of tipsy gays, Wag clubbers, glamour studio girls, OAP mahjong leagues and jobbing sari seamstresses. Central Cross, in the other hand, is more about fresh cement and attracting tourist footfall, but then, all regeneration is tricky. Some will say that Shanghai Modern and its new neighbour JinLi are exactly the kind of Instagram-pretty, future-facing, 150-seat projects that Chinatown needs right now. Give the ’Grammers their soft-shell crab perched on a tropical island of mango fried rice and their signature novelty, pastel-pink-coloured pork xiao long bao with adorable ears and snout. Give them their front display kitchen to focus a zoom lens up a chef’s nose as he crimps the dough. Other onlookers might ask how bigger, better, brighter Chinatown hopes to survive when “fishing raids” by immigration have become so “violent”, according to the London Chinatown Chinese Association, that last July there was a mass restaurant shutdown in protest. What Shanghai Modern definitely – yes, definitely – is: it is marginally nicer to hang around in than Din Tai Fung. That Taiwanese behemoth opened last year serving xiao long bao to considerable hype, despite it feeling like the inside of a cavernous cruise ship that has been stripped down for parts. Din Tai Fung makes its dumpling technicians toil solemnly in a glass box, whereas Shanghai Modern lets them breathe fresh air. There’s also a pretty, shiny, chessboard floor and vaguely comfortable seats. The welcome may be brusque – don’t expect anything as over the top as eye contact – yet, on the bright side, you will quickly hold a vast shopping list of dumplings, wonton noodles, Sichuan broths and “Chinese tapas” (their words), plus a pen. Tick your list and hand back the slip. Do not, repeat, do not doodle on your order, or let your bored child deface it. (I enjoyed one glorious customer review where this occurred and let’s say it did not end well). On our visit, dishes began arriving almost instantly, first a bowl of steamed but now cold okra with a snotty trail of fierce wasabi and soy, more cleansing and saintly than delicious, but a pleasing start. Drunken chicken wings in rice wine were pale and decidedly sober, but next came a real highlight: roasted bran dough with assorted fungus, a magical, slightly gothic-looking bowl of dank sponginess. Similar to seiten (not Satan), bran dough is the hinterland between tofu and the heel of a Warburtons thick wholemeal loaf. It is an umami Hoover. I am a convert. Next along, baskets of pan-fried beef Shanghai buns and vegetable dumplings, both neatly made, both yielding, and with bags of seasoning and colour on the correct surfaces. By this point, we were already plotting to come back. Shanghai Modern may not be life-changing, but in some ways it’s comforting that, after all the developers’ intentions to flatten, rebuild and reinvent the wheel, these owners have unveiled something that’s, at best, simply reliable and wouldn’t have set the world alight in 1988. There is no shame in this. If you want fireworks, however, I recommend the ebulliently numbing Sichuan fish broth, which appears in a huge tureen, gorgeous, vivid red and brimming with peppers. It would feed four, at least. I wildly misjudged how much food we needed, and by this point the staff were sighing while pulling up adjoining tables to host our dishes. I’d have been more sheepish if I could feel anything from the ears downwards. The much-talked-about soft-shell crab on top of mango fried rice is actually rather pretty. Naff, but pretty. If you ask them for the sweet red bean xiao long bao, they’ll bring a warm basket of nine, pristine gob-fillers stuffed with an irresistible, salty-sweet, burgundy sludge. The bill arrived in 11 seconds. Shanghai Modern continues the rich, four-decade-long Chinatown tradition of serving decent, fairly priced, unsentimentally served meals. Some things don’t go out of fashion. • Shanghai Modern 12 Newport Place, London WC2, 020-7734 6137 (no website as yet). Open Mon-Sat, noon-11.30pm, Sun 11.30am-10.30pm. About £25-30 a head, plus drinks and service. Food 7/10 Atmosphere 8/10 Service 7/10