Much as I share the view that the Extinction Rebellion protesters’ anger over government inaction has catapulted climate change into the spotlight, I think they still have a way to go to meet the claim that it is “the biggest act of mass civil disobedience in the UK for generations” (Extinction activists to stand on ‘climate emergency’ ticket, 27 April). The House of Commons library collated statistics for me, from the Home Office, of cases taken to the magistrates’ courts of refusal or inability to pay the poll tax. At over 25 million, between April 1990 and September 1993, compared to just over 1,000 climate change protest cases so far which may end up in the courts, the poll tax rebellion still takes some beating. It not only ground the legal system to a halt across the whole country but led directly to the downfall of the prime minister of the day. I wish the climate change protesters the same good fortune.Dave NellistLabour MP for Coventry South East, 1983-92, and parliamentary spokesperson for the All Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation • It has been said that Extinction Rebellion’s recent actions amounted to the biggest civil disobedience event in recent British history, with 1,000 demonstrators arrested. Readers may like to be reminded that 1,314 people were arrested in Trafalgar Square on 17 September 1961 as part of the Committee of 100 group, which had Bertrand Russell as its president. The Evening Standard banner headlines read “London, a police state” as all demonstrations had been previously banned by the government at the time. This was ignored by the committee. It was only after midnight, after TV crews had left, that police crews began to arrest people remaining in the square. This, of course, was one of many Committee of 100 demonstrations from 1961-65, primarily outside US air force bases as well as various command centres. As far as I recall, all those arrested were charged under the Justices of the Peace Act 1361. I remember this well as I was one of those arrested and put in a van with Alan Sillitoe. One of the other demonstrators that day was Augustus John, the painter, who was to die the following month. Younger readers may not know that the original Committee of 100 counted many playwrights, authors and other literary folk among its members. The Committee of 100 was the fellow campaign to CND at the time. Our focus was on unilateral nuclear disarmament. We are still waiting! May Extinction Rebellion have better luck.Dennis GouldStroud, Gloucestershire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition