When actor Patsy Ferran and director Rebecca Frecknall last worked together, on Tennessee Williams’ Summer and Smoke, the result was a revelation. Now they are reunited in Cordelia Lynn’s new “version” of Chekhov’s play, but the result is a mild curiosity. Lynn says that her text “exists in a liminal space between past and present, Russian and western”, but that approach subverts Chekhov’s genius for immersing dramatic action in the circumstantial. This version inhabits a historic and geographic no man’s land where familiar actions are starved of context. The three sisters still pine for Moscow, but there is no sense that they live in a remote town without a railway link to the capital. People talk of Lermontov and fight duels, but Masha reads a Penguin paperback. Tuzenbach still talks of “a great storm coming”, but the line, which uncannily prophesies the Russian Revolution, loses much of its resonance in this indeterminate period. It is possible to update Chekhov, as Benedict Andrews did in his much more radical 2012 Young Vic production set in today’s Russia. The flaw in Lynn’s approach is that it is neither one thing nor the other. It also sacrifices what the critic Eric Bentley described as Chekhov’s ability to combine “the most minute attention to realistic detail with a rigorous sense of form”. What we are left with is Chekhov’s psychology and, in Hildegard Bechtler’s design, an absence of clutter: we get an array of chairs, a handful of necessary props and a protruding ledge where the sisters’ brother, Andrey, squats in moody isolation. In Frecknall’s production, it is up to the actors to supply the particularity that is Chekhov’s hallmark. You certainly see this in Ferran’s Olga, who is not only an overworked schoolteacher but someone fiercely protective of her siblings. She guards Ria Zmitrowicz’s pathetically vulnerable Irina like a mother hen, and is so concerned by Masha’s affair with Vershinin that she can barely listen to her confession of love. Ferran’s bird-like animation and Zmitrowicz’s raw naivety would work just as well in a more conventional production. The same goes for Pearl Chanda’s expressive Masha: her eyes sparkle as soon as Vershinin starts talking and yet go dead when her dull husband is mentioned. To be fair, this version also heightens the sisters’ clannishness. Chanda’s Masha rudely tells Annie Firbank’s servant “You old woman, you’re talking shit,” but when Lois Chimimba as Andrey’s wife shows a similar abrasiveness, the sisters react with savage indignation. There are things to admire here. Peter McDonald’s Vershinin has the smugness of the self-regarding philosopher; Alan Williams as the regimental doctor exudes a weary disenchantment; and Elliot Levey is outstanding as Masha’s unregarded husband. The astonishment he shows when one of the soldiers gives him a farewell gift is as moving as anything in the evening. The parting of Irina and Shubham Saraf’s Tuzenbach is also nicely shadowed by a sense of mortality. While the production has many good things, it misses much of the play’s polyphonic richness. One of the great moments in world drama is the off-stage sound of a band playing a joyful march as the sisters confront the stark reality of their future. Here we simply get some nondescript background music, which epitomises the production’s failure to give us the full Chekhovian experience. • At Almeida, London, until 1 June.