The last proper dust-up between Great Britain and Kazakhstan in this part of town was Anthony Joshua’s close win over Ivan Dychko in the super-heavyweight semi-finals at the 2012 London Olympics, and this Fed Cup tie looks headed for a similarly bruising conclusion on Sunday. Johanna Konta put the home team on the board in the first match on day one, recovering from a slow start to beat the world No 107, Zarina Diyas, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 in two hours and 38 minutes. The second singles was a mere seven minutes shorter but it seemed longer as the Kazakh terrier Yulia Putintseva saved three match points to beat Katie Boulter, 3-6, 6-2, 7-6 (6). The reverse singles on Sunday are equally hard to call, and Konta’s showdown at high noon with Putintseva – the world No 38, who shocked her in the first round of the French Open last year when 97 in the world – will set the tone for the drama’s closing act. Anne Keothavong’s tight-knit squad remain buoyant, however, knowing victory in this World Group II play-off would return Great Britain to the competition’s elite level for the first time in 26 years. The 5,000 fans who filled the arena could hardly have asked for more sustained entertainment on Saturday. After a minute’s applause in memory of the Davis Cup and British tennis stalwart Paul Hutchins, the spirit of the cup was stretched to perfectly acceptable limits as a witty Kazakh ensemble of two drums, a trumpet and trombone provided a raucous soundtrack to the hosts’ encouraging start. There were some dubious interruptions, however, when over-enthusiastic travelling fans angered Konta with calls mid-shot as she butchered a volley on set point in the first frame, and again in the second set. “You need to find your feet in these [noisy] surroundings,” said Konta, who trailed 5-1 in the first set before grinding her way back to parity and finishing with a convincing flourish. “It does shock you, but every Fed Cup it takes a bit of time to get used to. You get a bit more resilient as the match goes on. I didn’t get bogged down too much.” As for the intermittent offerings of Kazakhstan’s answer to Kenny Ball – who broke into a decent rendition of It Ain’t Necessarily So when Diyas pulled off a couple of stunning winners – Konta said: “I was in two minds, because he was bloody good.” Diyas said later: “I don’t think it was too much noise. It’s normal when you play in the Fed Cup. I didn’t think it affected her. There were British fans cheering also.” She expects a minor shoulder strain to recover in time for her match against Boulter: “I’ll be fine – nothing serious.” There is minor concern over Boulter, who needed off-court treatment at 1-2 in the second set. “I was just struggling a bit physically,” she said. “I’m sure I’ll be OK for tomorrow.” Boulter, who impressed with her tenacity in the previous tie in Bath, had a famous win on her racket, but Putintseva dug deep to force the tie-break and was relieved to see her young opponent waste two easy volleys in a see-sawing finish. “She surprised me because she was able to keep her level up the whole match,” Putintseva said of Boulter. Boulter said: “I’m devastated. It’s difficult to give an answer right now. I put everything out there, as I always do. All you can do is keep doing it. It was a really high level. I expected her to play well. That’s why she is ranked where she is. It’s tough to lose match points but I’m going to get over it.” Keothavong said: “Katie put herself in a great position against a very good player. She just doesn’t go away. Katie gave everything she had but Yulia was able to ride the challenge. We’re still very much in this. We expected it to be this tough.” Konta’s challenge is ramped up on Sunday when she takes on Putintseva. They have history. “I lost to her in Paris,” Konta said, referring to last year’s early exit at Roland Garros, a defeat that began a slide to 46 in the world. “She’s incredibly feisty, a pocket rocket. She’ll be there until the very last point.” Indeed – just ask Boulter.