A room of one’s own. Endless biscuits. Coffee, democracy, a cleaner, an osteopath, reliable wifi and an ergonomic chair with lumbar support. These are some of the things that contemporary authors say they need in order to write. These requirements have been shared in response to a new survey from the Royal Society of Literature, which will be published to mark the 90th anniversary of Virginia Woolf’s A Room of One’s Own. Woolf said that a woman needed £500 a year and a lock on the door in order to stand a chance as a writer of fiction, and not much seems to have changed since then. Except perhaps the modern novelist’s choice of snack. It was Woolf’s view that “One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if one has not dined well,” and she reserved unlikely vitriol for the meal that was once served to her at a women’s college at Cambridge. “Prunes, even when mitigated by custard, are an uncharitable vegetable (fruit they are not), stringy as a miser’s heart and exuding a fluid such as might run in misers’ veins who have denied themselves wine and warmth for eighty years and yet not given to the poor,” she wrote. It’s a mercy, really, that Woolf didn’t live to experience avocado toast. People who aspire to write often have a particular fascination with how authors work and the environments that inspire their creativity. The long-running Guardian series Writers’ Rooms offered an unmissable insight into the basements and studies of writers past and present, revealing, for example, that Deborah Moggach, Martin Amis and Elizabeth Jane Howard felt they couldn’t write without smoking cigarettes; that Louis de Bernières, Amis and Roald Dahl wrote in sheds at the ends of their gardens; and that Clive James, Wendy Cope and AL Kennedy all rely on their fancy chairs. Sarah Waters revealed that her best advice to aspiring writers is wholly practical: “Make sure your desk and chair are set up properly! Don’t get RSI!” Some writers and their work seemed intimately connected to their writing spaces. The historian David Starkey’s room was “in an 18th-century house and was fitted out by one of the more bizarre figures of mid-20th-century British public life, Sir Hughe Montgomery Knatchbull-Hugessen”. Jane Austen wrote at a tiny, 12-sided, walnut table, next to a front door; she refused to fix the door’s creak so that she would know when anyone was coming and could hide her work under blotting paper. How literary history could have been different if WD-40 had been invented in the 18th century. As an interviewer of authors, it is a goal and a privilege to see inside their writing rooms. I have taken afternoon tea with Judith Kerr and seen her neat and airy attic office, where the original Mog the cat used to come and help with the illustrations. I have sat on the sofa where the bestselling romantic novelist Jill Mansell works on her lap in front of daytime TV. And I’ve been poured chilled, sparkling water in the ascetic office that the philosopher Alain de Botton rents in central London. Once I even carried De Bernières’ mandolin. Woolf herself wrote in a “writing lodge”, under a chestnut tree in the garden of a house bought for £700 in 1919. But a Sussex house with a garden big enough for a writing lodge would cost rather more now, and authors’ earnings have not kept up. In 2018, the Authors’ Licensing and Collecting Society reported that the average author makes £10,500 a year from writing, with women earning around 75% of men’s income. Would Woolf be shocked? In 1919, she wondered “What effect has poverty on fiction?”, and remarked that the only people writing about women were “young men who have taken the MA degree; men who have taken no degree; men who have no apparent qualification save that they are not women …” It’s still worth asking: what happens to fiction if the only people writing it are those who can afford to do it as a hobby? Publishers, retailers and book pirates, beware: we must pay the writer, or our literature will become as miserly as Woolf’s prunes. • Katy Guest is a writer and editor, and a commissioning editor for the publisher Unbound