The United States was handed a $2m bill from North Korea for the hospital care of American Otto Warmbier, who died soon after his release back to the US in a comatose state in 2017, after being detained for 17 months. Acting on instructions passed down from Donald Trump, the main US official who was sent to North Korea to bring Warmbier back to the US signed an agreement to pay the surprise invoice he was handed by Pyongyang, according to the Washington Post on Thursday, which cited two anonymous sources familiar with the situation. It is unclear whether the bill, which was then sent on to the treasury department, has ever been paid. The bill was first given to Joseph Yun, who was the US state department’s point-person for North Korea at the time, during negotiations for Warmbier’s release, according to the Post. The North Korean officials insisted that Yun sign the invoice for $2m before they release Warmbier. Going up his chain of command, Yun contacted the then secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, who contacted the president. Yun was then told to sign the agreement. “We do not comment on hostage negotiations, which is why they have been so successful during this administration,” the White House press secretary, Sarah Sanders, wrote in an email to the Post. Fred Warmbier, Otto’s father, told the Post he was never informed about the bill and that it sounded like a “ransom” for his son. Warmbier, who was 22 when he died, was “jerking violently” and “staring blankly” on a medical flight during his return home, his family said in 2017. He died at the University of Cincinnati medical center less than a week after returning. Warmbier, a college student, had been sentenced to 15 years of hard labor after North Korea found him guilty of “crimes against the state” related to him taking a propaganda poster while on a tourism trip to Pyongyang. Michael Flueckiger, an American emergency doctor, traveled with Yun to retrieve Warmbier. North Korean officials asked him to examine Warmbier and write a report about his findings. “It was my impression that if I did not give them a document that I could sign off on, that would cause problems,” Flueckiger said. Flueckiger, who said he did not have to lie in his report, found that Otto had “state-of-the-art resuscitation” after he suffered cardiovascular collapse and had received “really good care” at the hospital in North Korea. It is still unknown what caused the young man’s ill health. The Ohio coroner’s office said at the time that it had not been able to determine the cause of Warmbier’s death after carrying out an external examination. His parents asked doctors not to conduct an autopsy. At a press conference during his summit with Kim Jong-un in February, Trump said that he believed Kim when the North Korean leader said he didn’t know what was happening to Warmbier. “I don’t believe he knew about it. He felt very badly about it, I did speak to him. He knew about it, but he knew about it after,” Trump said at the conference. The day after the press conference, Warbmier’s parents – who had been friendly with Trump up until that point – issued a statement that was a direct rebuke to Trump’s remarks. “Kim and his evil regime are responsible for unimaginable cruelty and inhumanity. No excuses or lavish praise can change that,” the statement read.