In the good old days, of course, you wouldn’t dream of venturing on to the North London line – a trundly old thing connecting Stratford in the east to Richmond in the south-west – without being at least mildly flutered. Journeys could be long, the atmosphere anywhere between carnival and Beckett-bleak, and you had to hold your nerve if you were travelling, as many of us did, without a ticket; not for nothing was the largely barrier-free and inspectorless route known as the Free Line. But they liked to surprise you (I believe I once saw the comedian Arnold Brown being taken to task, but am happy to correct if it was mistaken identity). With all that going on, a drink or two was a bare necessity. Anyway, that was then, and now the whole shebang has had a rebrand, subsumed into the labyrinthine London Overground, on which you can zip about between Fritz Lang stations from Dalston to Penge West. But you must do so without an accompanying slug of Teacher’s, for which we must thank none other than former mayor Boris Johnson, who deemed a decade ago that Transport for London must become a dry zone. High-street cocktail tinnies are brilliantly naff, a fabulous poke in the eye to world of mixology As unintended consequences go, a booze ban that eventually turns a hideously maligned politician into a folk hero must be right up there. For Diane Abbott, the victim of intense and relentless misogyny, has now found a way to touch the hearts of millions. For who among us has not had a mojito moment? Her succinct Twitter apology was pitch-perfect for two reasons: the Marks & Spencer’s detail, and the deployment of sincerity. She neither went into unnecessary background (I was a bit tired/on my way to a party/grabbed it in error thinking it was fizzy elderflower) nor sought to cast shame on the super-snitch who snapped her. She allowed the bathos of the situation – drinker’s machismo aside, how whacked can you really get on 250ml of an 8% cocktail which is two-thirds fizzy water? – to flourish. Admittedly, she is the shadow home secretary. True, she broke the law. Yes, the country has a collective drink problem and no, we don’t really want our transport system to be crammed with staggering, belligerent vomiters. But a middle-aged public servant quietly sipping from a slender can of minty rum and lime while scrolling through her phone is not Broken Britain. Grassing people up, though, is another matter, as are sententious passengers pretending to be shocked at someone – yes, even a woman who aspires to high office – ignoring signs. Sir or Madam, if that indeed shocks you, wait until you hear about some of the properly naughty things MPs do. Had she been reading Rainer Maria Rilke, Abbott would likely have been open to charges of elitism and pretension; sifting through official papers could have led to accusations of jeopardising national security; surfing earrings on Etsy would have seen her branded a superficial consumerist. But as it turns out, downing a cheeky mojito hit the censorious spot. And now, in our bizarrely performative culture, comes a Facebook page inviting Londoners to express their solidarity by following suit on 22 June. One can only imagine the delight in the M&S boardroom. Like everything else in Britain, there’s a heavy class element to the story. One might suspect, for instance, that Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson has rarely had need to fortify himself by slurping from a can en route to an engagement; when you’ve got that much social confidence, you can easily wait to lift your glass of Pol Roger from the silver tray standing ready for you. Even on your busiest days – when plotting in the Commons collides, perhaps, with writing your handsomely remunerated newspaper column – the edges don’t need quite so much knocking off as they do for most of us. And if they do? Well, you wouldn’t be déclassé enough to crack open a pre-mixed cocktail in public when a fine Laphroaig sits in the drinks cabinet at home. High-street cocktail tinnies – from pornstar martini to Pimms – are brilliantly naff, a fabulous poke in the eye to world of mixology and absurdly over-provenanced bar menus. In London, the cognoscenti now favour gin so local that anything not distilled in their actual street is infra dig, and roam the neighbourhood in search of craft beer pubs from which bequiffed staff would bar you for life if you asked for a pint of Carlsberg. The rest of us, looking merely for a long-haul lager or a G&T that doesn’t require doing a diploma and taking out a second mortgage, must hang our heads in shame. As they are fond of pointing out, politicians are people. But people can be terrible. As a general rule, the ones who like cheap and cheerful booze and don’t see much wrong with a lunchtime slurp during a boring train ride are likely to be a bit less terrible. Bottoms up. • Alex Clark writes for the Guardian and the Observer