I was at the multiplex the moment the doors opened and saw the first screening here in Bangkok. And I’m glad I did. I had no preconceptions, no spoilers and I enjoyed it as Marvel intended! And what a movie! The three hours pass in a flash. Marvel and the Russo Brothers have created the definitive superhero movie. It’s one for us, the fans. You will go through every imaginable emotion – I didn’t dwell on problems caused by the time travel , I went with the flow and simply enjoyed it just as Marvel intended: an amazing, jaw dropping homage to the 21 movies that preceded it. This will always be regarded as the biggest and best Marvel movie ever. NormanBKK It felt like a great ending to a series but not necessarily a great movie. It lacked its own sense of purpose, but of course it is an ending and should be judged on those merits. I feel it went a little “19 years later” or The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at the end, but it’s such a fun experience you really don’t notice that much while watching it. I think my closest comparison is it’s like the finale of The US Office, it does everything you want for all of the characters in a way that makes fans happy but as an individual episode of TV comedy it isn’t great. However, I do feel the billions spent on these movies was worth it for the “on your left” and “Avengers, Assemble” moments alone.Luke18 Overall, it was the film I expected ... but not the film I wanted. As expected, it was epic on every level. It was emotional in places and a fitting farewell for some of the key characters. The humour was there, although nowhere near the level of Infinity War. I wanted way more Captain Marvel – especially some dialogue with Fury. The biggest grin on my face came when she returned in time for the final battle but I understand that she’s the new wave and they’re closing out the original characters’ storylines. I am going to see it again tonight and tomorrow so I’m looking forward to spotting new things and making more of my favourite characters’ limited screen time. Alcyone I was really, really looking forward to it but ultimately I was a bit disappointed. For one thing Stark’s endlessly pivotal roles in the plot were exasperating and quite irritating after a point. As I understand Robert Downey Jr has a fairly sizeable ego of his own, so much so that in several other films including previous Avengers movies he has insisted on the script being amended/written to ensure he gets more screen time or for Stark to get to play a bigger role. It felt like the script had been written by his (aka Stark’s) ego. There were many parts that I did like, for example the nostalgic time travel trips, especially Captain seeing Carter and spending his life with them. I have to say that I never liked the Captain when I was younger as I thought he was too boring. But with all the jaded cynicism these days it’s nice to see a principled morally upright decent protagonist/human being.elmondo2012 They needed to kill off Tony Stark as Robert Downey Jr would have popped up with a walking stick sooner or later – he looks all of his 54 years and the hair dye in this film particularly had a Paul McCartney-esque tinge. Overall I enjoyed the film, but it could have been 30 minutes shorter without any real drop off in quality. Also found it a bit odd that Captain Marvel was something of a bit part after they seemed to have built the character up so much. philtin It’s a fun movie, and a satisfying end to this grand, albeit silly and pompous, saga. It stutters a bit in the first half, mainly because it has to cover a lot of ground to get to it’s main premise … and you have to take a lot of things for granted and suspend your disbelief quite a lot to make all this work. Or, just sit back and enjoy and don’t think too hard about it. I was surprised how small a role Captain Marvel played in the story, some of the hype surrounding her entry pointed to her being the savior of the Avengers and the one to take down Thanos. But I do hope this is the last of the huge, sprawling, silly and galactic super hero movies (yeah, right...). Time to go the way of the Daredevil shows or Logan with more down to earth premises and characters closer to real life. malacara There were gaping plot holes and huge character assassination. Thor’s entire arc has been about maturing into his responsibilities then he ups and leaves Valkyrie in charge when she has never shown any inclination towards leadership. The whole redemption arc that Loki had has also been erased. As for Steve Rogers going back in time? There are so many problems. Marvel went for the commercially popular outcome and sacrificed any common sense and character development over recent films. They’ll make money so I doubt they care but it’s soured the whole MCU (Marvel cinematic universe) for me.mfbxhem2 There was a moment in the climactic battle where Spider-man hands Captain Marvel the gauntlet to deliver through the battleground and expresses concern that she could do this alone. At that moment the camera pans and there are all the female MCU characters, and only the female characters, gathered together to support her. The only thing it was missing was the tune from the Boots advert “Here Come the Girls” blasting out over the top. It was completely ridiculous to compartmentalise the female characters in this way. These characters are bad-ass and entirely equal, often superior, to their male counterparts. Aside from this one misstep I thought the film was awesome.venners The writers did a good job pulling together so many story arches into a compelling end and got 90% of it right. Acknowledging that it is always easy to nitpick, there were only 3 things I would change: 1) The Hulk infinity war storyline was rendered irrelevant, as was the relationship with black widow. That could have been addressed more effectively, especially with Black Widow dying. 2) Thanos was underused – he was excellent in Infinity War. 3) Hawkeye added very little to the Avengers and could have been removed from all three films. Overall, I thought they spent a little too long showing how hard everyone has been hit by the events in Infinity War. Difficult though, given that each character had an individual arch to complete. Overall though a worthy end to an amazing run of 22 films. Carlton Avengers: Endgame – discuss with spoilers