A flag of stars and stripes is projected against the theatre’s back wall and we see an aerial view of suburban houses: it’s as if this were America’s very own home movie. And now we close in on one particular house where Arthur Miller’s All My Sons is about to begin. The film flickers and the house and its verandah become – in a marvellous transition – three-dimensional. The message seems to be: what we’re about to see could be happening in any American suburb and beyond. The weather-boarded house is like an Edward Hopper painting. The garden has ambitious poplars at its edges and plentiful furniture. The show unostentatiously includes two Hollywood actors: Bill Pullman and Sally Field. And if the overall look (designer Max Jones) is conservative, it’s to encourage a false sense of security. Yet watching this tragedy evolve is like seeing a fragile object slip from a high ledge and being unable to interrupt its fall. It was Arthur Miller’s first great box-office hit, in 1947, and Jeremy Herrin’s skilful production brings it back to anguished life. Bill Pullman, as Joe Keller, father of the family, has an understated naturalness, geniality in denial. He is first encountered reading the classifieds section of a newspaper (he has, tellingly, given up on news) and purports to be intrigued by what other people want (two Newfoundland dogs, an old dictionary). We do not yet know what is behind his escapist curiosity. In front of him, a broken apple tree lies felled by last night’s wind. The tree carries more symbolic weight than it can stand: it was planted for his son, Larry, missing in action. Joe’s wife, Kate Keller, tries to keep Larry alive by force of will. Sally Field plays her with a wrung-out intensity and an excruciated smile. It is a beautifully pitched performance. But does she believe Larry is alive? She is not fooled by her surviving son, Chris – anticipating and opposing his plan to propose to Ann, once Larry’s girlfriend (pertly played by television star Jenna Coleman). Colin Morgan is outstanding as Chris. He does embarrassment brilliantly – his gauche marriage proposal is wonderfully entertaining (the only problem with the performance is the slurred vocal shift towards the end of the evening – it makes him sound as if he is missing a couple of teeth). It is only through George, Ann’s jumpily intense lawyer brother (excellent Oliver Johnstone) who turns up like an unhappy waxwork about to melt, that we learn why 121 faulty cylinder heads were sent on from Joe Keller’s shop to fighter jets and why Ann and George’s father, one of Joe’s workers, is still in the penitentiary. There are moments when the play loses its grip, falters in that unsatisfactory hinterland between tragedy and melodrama, but this high-achieving production steers its way confidently onward to an ending that is as devastating as it needs to be. The sins of the father dominate this week. In Lucy Bailey’s exemplary production of Ibsen’s Ghosts, we find ourselves in an interior reminiscent of a Hammershøi painting (beautifully designed by Mike Britton) behind an unsafety curtain of rain. More than once, Mrs Alving makes the point that her stiff-upper-lip house has been a witness to unspeakable acts. Her late husband is to blame – but, as in All My Sons, it is a while before we discover why. Mrs Alving is played by Penny Downie on top form, with a lightness of touch and piercing truthfulness. Her scenes with Pastor Manders (James Wilby, suitably pig-headed) are particularly splendid as she finds the courage to assert her independence. Her son Osvald is powerfully played by Pierro Niel-Mee with a desperate vigour in his sickness (syphilis his inheritance). There is good support from Eleanor McLoughlin as Regina – she mixes hauteur with vulnerability – and from an entertainingly plausible Declan Conlon as Jakob Engstrand. Mike Poulton’s version of the play is triumphantly unstarchy (unlike previous versions of Ghosts I can remember). And he makes sure the message – also promoted by Arthur Miller – is clear: family secrets are bad for the health. The Play That Goes Wrong has been going right for four years after winning the Olivier award for best new comedy in 2015. It was the brainchild of Henry Lewis, Jonathan Sayer and Henry Shields, drama-school graduates who put it on in Islington’s Old Red Lion theatre. The show transferred to the West End in 2013. It is now longer (slightly too long at two-hours-plus) and the company has followed up its success with other shows that “go wrong”. The formula is apparently inexhaustible: we like nothing better than gaffs, slips of the tongue and collapsing scenery. We are four years late with this review, but I am delighted to report that Nigel Hook’s set is pleasingly amateur, as dowdy as an old Cluedo board (with sub Agatha Christie plot to match). Doors get jammed, a sofa collapses, actors get concussed routinely. There is a hideous portrait above a collapsing mantlepiece of a bodiless spaniel. Everything you could imagine going wrong – and much you couldn’t – does. The clock strikes 14. There is a dog lead with no dog attached. White spirit is routinely poured out – and spat out – in lieu of whisky (they have no shame in repeating jokes). My favourite line in this gloriously silly show is: “I don’t think they noticed.” Star ratings (out of five)All My Sons ★★★★Ghosts ★★★★The Play That Goes Wrong ★★★ • All My Sons is at the Old Vic, London SE1 until 8 June • Ghosts is at Royal and Derngate, Northampton, until 11 May • The Play That Goes Wrong is at Duchess theatre, London WC2 until 3 May 2020