A weary European media had three questions after Theresa May’s last-minute attempt to “break the Brexit logjam”: why did it take her so long; will it work; and should Europe even be bothering any more. “There is not a playwright living or dead who could have devised a drama to incite as much fury, exhaustion and resignation as Brexit,” wrote the Irish Independent in an exasperated editorial complaining of “near-total chaos” in Westminster. “The prime minister has at last woken up to the fact she must either step up, or step out … But hovering for too long in mid-air can only ever end in disaster; let’s hope this desperate last roll of the dice is not too little, too late.” With just 10 days to a no-deal Brexit, “May has completely changed her strategy,” despaired Germany’s Die Zeit after the prime minister announced her intention of seeking a compromise with Labour and a short further extension from the EU. “She has realised she cannot secure Brexit through her own party, because a third of Tory MPs are Brexit fundamentalists who dislike her deal and refuse all compromise. So she has to find another solution – and her gaze naturally falls on the opposition.” But May knows full well that any softening of Brexit risks a deep split in her party: “That is why she waited so long. She would never have taken this step if Britain was not about to crash out in a few days’ time. She had, finally, no other choice.” Italy’s La Repubblica said the offer came two years too late: “She should have done it after the 2017 elections. That would have been the time to acknowledge that the UK was split, that there was no clear majority, and that an issue as sensitive as Brexit could only be resolved by uniting the country in a compromise.” Such a tactic might well have led to civil war among Conservatives leavers and remainers even then, of course, the paper said. But now “everything is made far, far more difficult by the timetable – we need an agreement before 10 April, the day of the emergency EU summit. It will not be easy”. In the Netherlands, NRC Handelsblad said that after “nearly three years in their stranglehold, May has finally thrown off the hawks in her own party”. Seeking a cross-party agreement was “logical” but would be difficult, it said, not least because “collaboration is likely only to deepen the divisions in both parties”. The Frankfurter Algemeiner Zeitung agreed that May’s compromise effort would spark an “almighty row in her party that will erupt over the coming days”. But her call for a further short delay to Brexit would be equally difficult for the EU, it predicted. “To grant a brief postponement, Brussels will need a guarantee that Britain will exit before the European elections on 23 May,” the paper said. “That could prove difficult for London to provide before the agreement has been ratified in parliament.” Le Monde was equally sceptical. “Finally, a cross-party agreement in London to ratify the exit agreement and sketch out a future relationship?” the paper asked. “At this stage, a majority in Europe find that frankly somewhat hard to believe.” Faith in the prime minister and Britain’s political class to deliver anything concrete is now “virtually zero”, it said, since both May and the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, have thus far plainly “prioritised the unity of their own party at all costs”. The real difficulty will be if the prime minister arrives at next week’s EU summit without agreement and demands an extension until 22 May to help her reach one, Le Monde said: “On that question, opinions among the EU27 are deeply divided. Many simply want the whole painful process over with.” Denmark’s Berlingske said May had finally “thrown her towel in the ring. She does not have the votes to get her divorce deal passed, nor the courage to crash out of the EU without an agreement, so after an hour crisis cabinet meeting, she folded.”