At some point in each of the last NRL seasons there has been varying degrees of debate around the merits of drawn games being decided in extra-time by golden point. Wayne Bennett has had a say (against), Todd Greenberg has had a say (for), and myriad coaches, players and the great unwashed in the Twittersphere have had a say and a spray. And it’s all come to very little. Because it’s still here, and still deciding games. Does rugby league need to change? It always has. Each year, league coaches, ex-players and administrators gather to thrash out the game’s rules. Rugby league is never above changing them. It’s an evolving organism. Golden point is on agendas, but not high. So the status quo rules because not enough people are against it and it keeps people watching on television. And yet, though teams tend to win and lose an equal amount of golden point deciders over time, it isn’t an equitable way to decide a game or a season. This season just four rounds old, yetthat familiar debate has already kicked off, after three matches were decided by the lottery of a field goal shootout. The Dragons’ Corey Norman won a second consecutive match with a drop-kick while Nathan Cleary (Penrith Panthers) and Daly Cherry-Evans (Manly Sea Eagles) sent home crowds into paroxysms with finely-struck, sudden-death efforts. This writer was at Brookvale Oval on Sunday when Daly Cherry-Evans slotted his 35-metre strike and can assure all that my seven-year-old will never forget it, as none of we sports lovers can forget the hair-tingling sensation when we first hear tens of thousands of voices roaring as one, “Yesss!” And yet, it wasn’t fair for South Sydney, as it wasn’t fair for Newcastle or Wests Tigers. Rugby league matches, in the regular season, run for 80 minutes and the tacked-on extra-time in order to determine a winner and loser should be for finals fixtures only. A team that has battled for the allotted period of play and gained parity with an opponent should walk off with as many premiership points. Instead, there is a coin toss for two premiership points, which does nothing to reflect why one team was better than another in normal time. A draw isn’t the worst thing. Test cricket is strong because the game can go for five days without a winner. Boxing has split decisions and horse racing has dead heats. If two athletes throw a hammer the exact same distance in the 2020 Olympics in Japan, there will be gold medals for each. Yet in rugby league, one team is given two competition points while the other – which has spent 80 minutes exerting the same physical and mental application upon the result – walks away with nothing. Brisbane didn’t deserve to lose the 2015 grand final because Ben Hunt knocked on. Brisbane deserved to lose because they shut up shop against a team with Johnathan Thurston in it and invited him to go bombs away. Finals now have a period of extra-time before golden point extra-time so there’ll be field goal shoot-outs there too. Regular season games, though, should be able to reach 80 minutes and be drawn. Souths didn’t deserve to lose to Manly because Cherry-Evans landed a field goal and Adam Reynolds hit the post. Yes, the Brookvale faithful were as thrilled as the Dragons and Panthers fans were when Norman and Cleary landed their respective one-point winners. But the vanquished supporters and clubs walked away with zero points when for 80 minutes they fought to win – or to gain parity at worst. All that effort for nothing. Yes, it’s the same rule for everyone and is what it is. But here’s what it is – not fair. It feels like an “American” way to solve things. US sport cannot countenance the idea of a “tie” or “draw”. All that effort, and there’s no winner at the end? What’s the point of that? Golden point remains here to stay at least until the people vote with their feet. And that doesn’t seem to be happening any time soon, because the finishes are undoubtedly thrilling. And they keep people watching on television. And there, one would suggest, is very much the rub.