The US has declared its support for Venezuela’s opposition leader, Juan Guaidó and called on top members of the Nicolás Maduro’s government to defect, in a gamble to tip the balance in the struggle for power in Caracas. After Donald Trump and key officials tweeted their support for Guaidó, the national security adviser, John Bolton, appeared in the grounds of the White House to declare that the situation in Venezuela had reached a critical moment. Bolton named three senior officials who he said had been negotiating with the opposition and accepted that the president had to be replaced. Bolton called on defence minister Vladimir Padrino, head of the supreme court, Maikel Moreno and the commander of the presidential guard, Ivan Rafael Hernandez Dala to fulfill their “commitments” to defect. He listed the names three times, in a gambit apparently designed to force their hand. “We think it is still very important for key members in the regime who have been talking to the opposition over the last three months to make good on their commitments to achieve the peaceful transfer of power from the Maduro clique to interim president Juan Guiadó. “All [three] agreed that Maduro had to go. They need to be able to act this afternoon or this evening to bring other military forces to the side of the interim president,” Bolton said. He said it was possible that Maduro’s key backer Cuba may prevent the trio from acting. Bolton also addressed a tweet to the three men, declaring: “Your time is up. This is your last chance. Accept interim president Guaidó’s amnesty, protect the Constitution, and remove Maduro, and we will take you off our sanctions list. Stay with Maduro, and go down with the ship.” To which the Venezuelan foreign minister, Jorge Arreaza, replied: “Dream on [John Bolton] … Not today!” Arreaza had earlier pointed to Bolton’s remarks as proof of US involvement in the uprising. “The heads of the coup d’état admit their responsibility without scruples,” Arreaza said. “The Trump administration, in its despair, attempts to spark an internal conflict in Venezuela.” The Trump administration escalated its conflict with Maduro in January by recognising Guaidó, the head of the Venezuela’s national assembly, as the country’s leader. According to a source close to Venezuela’s opposition, Guaidó did not receive US planning support or resources for his move on Tuesday, which came after months of contacts with military officials, the source said. But the opposition has nurtured links with Washington since well before Guaidó took the political center-stage in January – and such efforts took on a new impulse after Trump took office. On Tuesday morning, Guaidó was joined outside La Carlota military base by his mentor Leopoldo López – the divisive leader of his People’s Will party – who has played a key role in building a relationship with the US, despite being jailed in 2014 and later moved to house arrest in 2017. López’s wife, Lilian Tintori, dined with Trump at the White House in February 2017 in a meeting facilitated by Senator Marco Rubio. “The Trump administration took a side, supporting the Venezuelan people because they know how we suffer,” Tintori told the Guardian in February. The opposition push in Washington intensified last May, ahead of elections in Venezuela, when a plan was hatched to declare Maduro illegitimate before he would assume his second term in January. A day before Guaidó formally declared himself Venezuela’s interim president on 22 January, Pence called him to promise the US backing. The next day, Trump made it official, and Washington has proved an outspoken supporter for Guaidó. But although senior US officials have repeatedly stated that “all options are on the table”, the Trump administration has so far taken little concrete action beyond further tightening economic sanctions. Reuters news agency reported on Monday night that Erik Prince, a prominent and wealthy Trump supporter who runs a global private security business, has been lobbying for a plan to deploy a private army to help topple Maduro. According to the report, Prince, the founder of the controversial security firm Blackwater, has been seeking investment and political support for an operation that would involve up to 5,000 mercenaries. Lital Leshem, director of investor relations at Prince’s private equity firm, Frontier Resource Group, was quoted as saying: “He does have a solution for Venezuela, just as he has a solution for many other places.” However, Marc Cohen, a spokesman for Prince, said this month that Prince “has no plans to operate or implement an operation in Venezuela”.