Government statisticians are trying to harness the power of big data technology, monitoring the number of lorries on roads and company VAT receipts, in an attempt to more rapidly spot changes taking place in the UK economy. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) believes rapid advances in technology, including around big data, machine learning and online activity, could enable economists to update their traditional toolkits. The new set of measurements is aimed at helping policymakers to follow economic developments as close to real-time as possible and follows sharp criticism of the economics profession over its forecasting record since the 2008 financial crisis. It includes data harvested from road traffic sensors outside 13 different major ports and at various points on motorways and A roads across England to identify shifting trends in international trade, as well as monthly VAT data from companies reporting sales taxes to HMRC. The new snapshot from the ONS showed a “very slight” downturn in economic activity in the opening months of 2019 based on VAT receipts. The traffic data showed little change, with the count for larger vehicles close to the average levels between 2016 and 2018. The ONS said the figures could not be relied upon to predict GDP without its usual array of traditional indicators. However, the traffic data caught previous downturns, including the financial crisis. The experiment adds to the proliferation of ways to monitor trends in the economy. The frequency of Google search terms is often used as an indicator of shifting trends, while the economist Paul Ormerod has used machine learning to translate tweets, emoji usage and blogs into measures of wellbeing. Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank of England, believes music download figures from Spotify and studying the lyrics of songs can be used to gauge the public mood. Some European countries, such as the Netherlands, have been exploring the use of shipping and road traffic data but they have not yet produced regular publications as the ONS has now done. Li Keqiang, the Chinese premier, has reportedly used electricity consumption, railway freight and bank lending data to assess growth in China, leading economists at banks to name an index based on those metrics  after him. Economists have long counted the number of cranes over cities in the hunt for signs of growth, while GDP growth has been shown to link closely with shipments of rubbish: when more goods are bought, more waste is created. Building booms correlate closely with downturns. Barclays assessed the links in 2012 between construction of the world’s tallest towers and the onset of a financial crisis, finding evidence in New York in 1930, Chicago in 1974, Kuala Lumpur in 1997 and Dubai in 2010. The former chairman of the US Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan has looked since the 1970s at sales of men’s underwear. His theory is that sales remain stable in normal economic times and drop during a downturn, as consumers are more likely to tighten their belts. There are, however, likely to be questions over the quality of the new ONS data and its usefulness. The figures reveal several spikes in average traffic counts because of data issues rather than shifting trends in the economy. It also comes as GDP statistics are published more regularly than in the past. Louisa Nolan, the lead data scientist at the ONS, said: “Today’s new release draws on new data sources to give much quicker signals of changes in the UK economy than was possible before. “These new indicators are part of our radical plans to transform the way we collect and produce information about our ever-changing and increasingly digital economy.”