Ederson Strangely dived the wrong way for Son’s first goal. Had little to do but conceded three. 5/10 Kyle Walker Difficult night against the England player’s old club. The electric Son troubled him time and again. 5 Vincent Kompany Surprise choice, but proved City’s best defender. Made a superb tackle to stop Son. 7 Aymeric Laporte Nightmare start. At fault for two goals with a terrible pass to Son and a poor touch. 4 Benjamin Mendy Couldn’t find his targets with his crossing but stretched the game with his overlapping runs. 6 Kevin De Bruyne Magnificent and marauding. Got three assists, with a lovely cross for Sterling and a great pass for Agüero. 9 Ilkay Gündogan Missed a late chance, did not protect the defence in the first half when City missed Fernandinho. 5 David Silva Gave the ball away more than normal. Set up one chance but otherwise below his best. 6 Bernardo Silva A big-game player got City’s equaliser, played a part in their third goal and never stopped running. 8 Sergio Agüero Fantastic finish to score his 30th goal of the season. Unselfish pass for Bernardo Silva’s strike. 8 Raheem Sterling Almost the hero. Showed flair with a brilliant opener and a predatory streak with a clinical second. 8 Subs Fernandinho (for D Silva 62) 6 Leroy Sané (for Mendy, 84) 6 Hugo Lloris Stood little chance with the goals but saved well from Sterling, De Bruyne and Agüero. 7/10 Kieran Trippier Could not get near Sterling for his goals. Redeemed himself with the corner for Llorente’s strike. 5 Toby Alderweireld Probably Spurs’ most reliable defender on the night. Did well to block an Agüero shot. 7 Jan Vertonghen A fine interception when Sterling was lining up a shot. A defiant display in a fine season. 7 Danny Rose Bernardo Silva’s shot deflected in off his heel, and he struggled against the Portuguese. 5 Victor Wanyama Could not contain De Bruyne and was booked for a cynical foul on the rampaging midfielder. 5 Moussa Sissoko Harshly booked for time wasting as he went off. Struggled with a groin problem before then. 6 Dele Alli His pass led to the equaliser. Took on more defensive duties after Sissoko went off. 7 Christian Eriksen Found space intelligently to provide the pass for Son’s second. Tracked back diligently. 7 Son Heung-min Ensured Harry Kane was not missed with an early double. His second was a lovely strike. 9 Lucas Moura Won the ball and launched a rapid counterattack for Son’s second goal. A threat on the break. 7 Subs Fernando Llorente (for Sissoko 41) 7 Ben Davies (for Moura 81) 6 Davinson Sánchez (for Rose 90) 6