Leon Mann tells a story which, by his own admission, is as depressing as it is amusing. It goes back to his early days at the BBC and when he first found himself in the company of the presenter Damian Johnson. “I remember asking him which football team he used to play for,” says Mann. “Growing up, all the black people I saw on TV talking about sport were former athletes, so I presumed Damian was the same. But of course he wasn’t. He was – is – a fully-trained, highly-experienced journalist. Damian being Damian, he took it well.” Mann laughs as he delivers that final line but there is no denying the seriousness of his point and especially so after he reveals that people have made the same mistake about him during a career in broadcasting that began more than a decade ago and seen the 39-year-old cover a host of major events, including the 2012 Olympics and Euro 2016, for ITV as well as the BBC. Quite simply, there are very few people from a black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) background working as sports journalists in this country, with the bulk of those in the public eye having kicked a ball, run on a track or punched someone professionally in a former career. It is a damning state of affairs and something Mann has been campaigning to change since 2010, when he founded the Black Collective of Media in Sport (Bcoms), a lobbying group aimed at increasing diversity in an industry which, to put it bluntly, has been too white for too long. “Bcoms originated from a meeting of journalists at the Soho hotel in 2008,” Mann recalls. “Rodney Hinds from the Voice was there, as was the likes of Hepburn Harrison Graham, Drew Christie and Stephen Lyle, and it’s crazy to think an aspiring BAME journalist in their mid-twenties was a teenager back then who hadn’t even sat their GCSEs. They are facing all the same problems, and while now there is recognition of that among senior figures in the media, not enough is being done to make a difference.” The Guardian, in whose offices Mann and I are speaking on a gloriously warm Friday afternoon, runs a Positive Action Scheme which this summer will enable young BAME journalists gain experience in the sports department. But Mann is accurate in saying that, in general, there appears to be little drive across the UK’s mainstream sports media to address diversity, and even after Raheem Sterling made it a live issue with his Instagram post in early December that homed in on the practices of certain publications and claimed they helped “fuel racism” after he had been the victim of abuse at Stamford Bridge the previous evening. There followed an acceptance from within the industry that things had to change, that more people from different backgrounds and with different experiences needed to fill this country’s press boxes, newsrooms and studios. But four months on the picture looks the same, one laid bare by Bcoms’ own statistics. Of the 338 journalists who covered last year’s World Cup, Winter Olympics and Paralympics, Wimbledon, the Commonwealth Games and the inaugural multi-sport European Championships for the major national newspaper titles and broadcasting networks, Bcoms found: • Only 32 (9.4%) came from a BAME background. • Of those 32, only five did not have an association with professional sport. • No BAME women filled any of the 109 newspaper roles. • Only one black writer, of either gender, attended the World Cup. “These figures don’t account for positions in newsrooms or behind the camera, but they’re still stark,” Mann says. “They shine a light on some very uncomfortable truths”. It is important to say that while this country’s sports media lacks diversity it does not lack compassion. Plenty of journalists want to see the industry do a better job of reflecting the society it serves while most abhor the coverage Sterling addressed on social media. Having been in the industry for over 11 years, I can also testify to the warm and inclusive nature of many who work in it. But change is undeniably required and for the good talk to be turned into good deeds. As Mann puts it: “We need people in positions of power and influence to show they genuinely care about this issue. Who is ready for the challenge? Who is ready to be radical? To the bosses I say: ‘the person before you, their legacy was the digital change. Make your legacy the diversity change and you will be remembered for ever’.” So what should be done? “One step that can be taken immediately is adding diversity to the hiring process,” Mann says. “All too often I’ve heard BAME journalists say they’ve gone for a sports media job and been faced by an all-white hiring panel, and more often than not an all-white male hiring panel. Research tells us we recruit in the best image of ourselves so this undoubtedly skewers the process.” Mann then outlines another possible measure and one inspired by watching his wife, Anna Kessel, a former Guardian sports writer and co-founder of Women in Football, do her bit for the cause. “She regularly gets asked to join TV and radio discussion panels and I’d hear her on the phone saying: ‘Can you tell me who else is on?’ and then: ‘I’m not comfortable joining the panel if it’s not diverse.’ If every journalist did this it would make a huge impact – quite simply there would be no shows until those involved took necessary action. “It’s also vital there are more black and Asian faces on things like Sunday Supplement to show the next generation of people from those communities that they can be journalists and that they are welcome in the industry. As things stand, that message is not apparent.” Mann’s ideas are sound but I suggest to him that even if they were implemented, increasing diversity in the mainstream sports media, at newspapers specifically, would prove difficult because of a lack of money. Right across the board, a decline in sales has led to a decline in recruitment. “I simply don’t buy that,” Mann replies. “Newspapers always find the money for expensive redesigns and relaunches, so why can’t they find the money for this? “Senior figures need a budget, a plan and to appreciate better diversity means better business. Look, for instance, at the guys behind the Football Association’s YouTube show, Lions’ Den. During the World Cup, presenter Craig Mitch and producer Zander Brown were part of a dynamic team that created content which reflected and represented the England squad in a way that had not happened before – a way that played a huge role in the positive way the squad were viewed by the public. Does a non-diverse media team generate that vibe? I’m not sure.” The work being done by Mitch and Brown shows BAME talent is out there, as does the masterclasses Bcoms recently ran in which 20 young people listened to advice from professional journalists and developed the skills required to make it in the industry. “Many are already pitching stories, getting work experience and even paid work,” says Mann. “Imagine if we could roll the masterclasses out, with 50 young people at a time? It could be a game-changer.” For that to happen, Bcoms would need to secure funding, something the volunteer-led body is lacking and which has made its efforts over the past nine years particularly impressive. Last October, for instance, Bcoms organised its third D-Word conference, which was held at BT Sport’s studios in Stratford and saw more than 300 people, including a host of senior media figures, gather to discuss how to improve diversity across the industry. It was a proud moment for Mann, who worked as a spokesman for Kick It Out and Football Against Racism before embarking on a career in journalism that has now extended into film-making and consultancy work. He is talented, hard working and, in sharp contrast to his easy-going manner, fiercely determined to make a difference. “This wasn’t part of the gig when those of us involved with Bcoms decided to become sports journalists,” he says. “We’d all prefer to be focusing on talking and writing about sport. But right now, if we want things to change, that’s not an option. There’s something very sad about that.”