People recognise themselves in Alan’s plays. He understands the British and the middle classes’ pomposity and vulnerability, the way they try to keep up appearances. His plays don’t do great big emotions, but he writes about the small things that can change a life. I first worked with him on The Norman Conquests in 1974. Like all his plays, it started in Scarborough. The producer figured three plays wouldn’t work in the West End – they all have their own story, but they show a single weekend in different rooms of a country house. So we did it in Greenwich with a wonderful cast: Michael Gambon, Penelope Keith, Felicity Kendal. One day someone literally rolled in the aisles. A man fell out of his seat because he knew what was happening in the other rooms in the other plays. It’s a wonderful thing to hear laughter that’s uncontrollable. Alan’s plays always seem much more serious on television. They’re best watched with other people. He’s made British theatre a much livelier place. He’s always doing interesting things with time on stage – I did Sisterly Feelings and that’s two plays in one. He understands isolation particularly well. Look at Woman in Mind, where you’re watching a woman having a nervous breakdown. He notices people that aren’t being noticed. I come from Scarborough, and I’d say the Stephen Joseph theatre there has been one of his greatest successes. He kept it going for years. Scarborough’s busy in the summer, but most of the year it’s not and he’s brought such a lot of wonderful work – not just his own – to that part of the world. He never stops. Penelope Wilton is in The Bay at Nice at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, until 4 May I came to star in The Norman Conquests at the Old Vic in 2008 not knowing much about Alan’s work, other than he was considered one of the greats. I’d misconceived them as light comedies, but was blown away by the depth of the writing. It seemed to me like an English Chekhov: nothing happening in a rural country house. When you lift the lid, it’s total chaos: spiritual, psychological, emotional. There’s huge tragedy but it’s achingly funny. He gets English anxiety so perfectly and portrays it with such humanity and humour, it’s agony. That’s the key to The Norman Conquests. If you ignore the agony, you dilute the comedy. He has this genius for structure. The Norman Conquests is so beautifully orchestrated. One country weekend seen in three separate rooms, and the audience get such a thrill seeing events in the second play echoing something they’ve seen earlier on. The trick is that the audience knows more than the characters on stage. It’s a delight to witness and a joy to play. You’re thinking, “Just wait until you see what’s going on next door in part three.” We were all worried it wouldn’t work on Broadway. “No one’s going to know where the A218 is or what Guildford even is. Surely, no one’s going to care about Sugar Puffs.” But it went down incredibly well. There’s a huge Ayckbourn fanbase in New York. I’m doing The Lehman Trilogy here now and people have come up to me saying The Norman Conquests was one of the best times they’ve had in a theatre. They loved seeing this chaotic little England. Ayckbourn ranks very highly in the anglophile’s handbook out here – up there with Shakespeare, Monty Python and Fawlty Towers. Ben Miles is in The Lehman Trilogy at the Piccadilly theatre, London, 11 May-3 August Alan Ayckbourn was the last thing I expected to do. I’d trained as a dancer and his plays didn’t seem to have space for somebody like me. They were about middle England – the irony being I’m from middle England. To be honest, I had an opinion of him even though I’d never seen or read his plays, so I had no idea what they really entailed. How dark and profound and how funny they can be. Just auditioning for House and Garden changed that. The character – Pearl – made sense to me straight away. Alan sat there chuckling. It was very satisfying. The two plays were staged simultaneously in 2000, directed by Alan, at the National Theatre – House in the Lyttelton, Garden in the Olivier next door. We had two rehearsal rooms and someone had taped out a track to match the distance between the two theatres. You left one rehearsal room, weaved through the building, past the dressing rooms, before you arrived at the rehearsal room next door. That was hilarious in itself. He’s very loyal with actors. I remember the read through. The calibre of actors was ridiculous: David Haig, Sian Thomas, Jane Asher. They all seemed to grasp the style straight away. Their timing was impeccable, their characterisation outstanding. While I was desperately trying to find a subtext or a fresh angle, they knew it was already there on the page. Alan knows exactly how to get a laugh. Really, his England is no different from anywhere else. It’s a microcosm for examining human interactions such as love and betrayal, trust and friendship. House and Garden is absolutely not about a country fete. It’s a shame we don’t see more Ayckbourn today. There’s almost a feeling it’s too of its time. Too establishment, too middle-class, too white. I wish they were marketed a bit differently. He’s due a renaissance because, well, he’s a master. Nina Sosanya is in Killing Eve season two and Good Omens