After a marathon seven-hour cabinet meeting at Downing Street, and 10 days before the UK is scheduled to crash out of the EU without a deal, Theresa May has unveiled an updated Brexit plan. Here is what we know so far. She has called for talks with Jeremy Corbyn to try to work out a compromise Brexit plan that both the government and Labour could agree to. If this happens, the plan would be swiftly put to the EU. If not, parliament would be asked to vote on what plan MPs would like to see, with the government agreeing to abide by the results. This would, May said, involve another brief extension to the departure deadline. If it happens and the EU agrees – both remain to be seen – a compromise deal would be put to next week’s European council summit, paving the way for departure on 22 May, rather than 12 April, as currently scheduled. After Theresa May's statement on Tuesday, she is expected on Wednesday to meet with Jeremy Corbyn to try and agree a way forward that they could both support in the House of Commons. In parliament, MPs will be debating a bill proposed by Yvette Cooper which would allow the House of Commons to make Theresa May request a much longer extension to Article 50. Theresa May will present whatever deal she has reached with Jeremy Corbyn and parliament to the European Council. If the UK parliament or government have significantly changed position, then a lengthy Article 50 extension may be required. EU leaders would decide how long, but there's no guarantee the EU27 would unanimously agree to this. If Theresa May's deal is not passed by parliament, then, with no other significant developments, this would be the date by international law that the UK leaves the EU without a deal. However she appears to have ruled out allowing this to happen. If Theresa May's new proposal does pass parliament and is approved by the European Council, then this could be the scheduled date of the UK's departure from the EU. Unless there is a further longer extension of article 50, the EU27 will vote for a new set of MEPs without the UK participating. However, if Brexit has been further delayed, the UK would hold European elections on the Thursday. If Theresa May's deal passes parliament, she is expected to stand down after the UK leaves the EU on 22 May, triggering a contest for the leadership of the Conservative party. There has been some suggestion though that she might hold out through the summer so that the contest takes place after the next Tory conference in October. It is hard to see how it would not. Any compromise with Labour would involve May dropping some of her red lines, and at the very least Corbyn will seek a permanent customs union with the EU. If May refuses to budge at all, then under the terms of her proposal the issue would move to MPs, who would be expected to back a softer form of departure. This seems very possible, but depends a lot on how far May is willing to bend. The PM has been shown three times that the Commons clearly does not support her Brexit deal. She has now made the move to compromise, but it seems perfectly realistic that she and Corbyn will be unable to hit upon a plan that works for both of them and, just as crucially, their parties. It seems possible. Corbyn will be under intense pressure from his MPs to make support for a deal conditional on it being endorsed in a public vote, and Labour has whipped its MPs to back this option in the recent indicative Commons votes. This could be the undoing of a compromise plan, as May has repeatedly made it plain that she cannot countenance a second referendum. A sheer lack of other options. There had been talk of May’s Brexit plan being put to the Commons for a fourth time, but No 10 stressed repeatedly this would only happen if there was a realistic chance of it passing, and with both the Democratic Unionist party and her hard-Brexiter MPs still vehemently opposed, this appeared impossible. Two sets of indicative votes by MPs also failed to see a majority for any alternative plan. The default option, leaving without a deal on 12 April, was opposed by a majority of MPs and a number of cabinet ministers. Only time will tell. The softening of her stance has enraged the European Research Group of hard-Brexit Tory MPs, but they disliked May anyway and this will have been factored in. The big question is whether the PM can keep her Brexiter cabinet ministers on board.