1) It’s been quite the week for spectacular goals, and some pretty striking own-goals too. There was heartache for Chelsea’s Magdalena Eriksson whose last-gasp own goal sent Manchester City to the Women’s FA Cup final. And calamity for New York City FC goalkeeper Sean Johnson in their 3-3 MLS draw against Minnesota United. Speaking of OGs, here are five of the best from the FA Cup archives. As for goal of the week, move aside Coutinho, Messi and Salah, and all hail Exeter’s Hiram Boateng, for this pearler against Port Vale, and a view from all angles. 2) Jofra Archer has been English cricket’s centre of attention this week – shining in the IPL, left out of the initial World Cup squad but given a chance in the warmups. Here’s a taste of what the fuss is about – and he can bat a bit too. 3) Victor Campenaerts rode around the Aguascaliente velodrome in Mexico to great effect on Tuesday, breaking Sir Bradley Wiggins’s one-hour world record. Here’s how he did it, in brief, and in detail. Wiggins’ mark had stood for four years – and you can watch its closing stages again here. 4) Great Britain’s women could reach the Fed Cup’s World Group for the first time for 26 years this weekend. Here’s some highlights of their progress this season so far, some chat with their class of ‘93 and five of the best shots from this year’s competition. 5) Haile Gebrselassie turns 46 today. Here’s a 10-minute profile of the great Ethiopian distance runner, his first Olympic gold, in the 10,000m at Atlanta in 1996 and his retention of his title in Sydney four years later. And watch some late-period Gebrselassie as he sets a marathon world record in Berlin in 2008. 6) Dodging a bullet in MLB, Matrix-style. 1) When on-court marriage proposals go wrong. 2) Downhill mountain bike craziness. 3) Richie Benaud: captain, cricketer, all-rounder, broadcasting legend, road safety adviser: 4) A stunning recovery in the NHL as the Blue Jackets rally to beat the Lightning in the opening win of their Stanley Cup play-offs clean sweep. Spotters’ badges: MSJM, Whobroughtoranges, GrahamClayton, fmgazette. Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.