It was a day of humiliation for the UK, but also a day of hope. Humiliating to see our politics made a global laughing stock, and our prime minister reduced to making a direct plea to her fellow EU leaders, then to be asked to leave the room as they, not she, decided the way forward for her and our country. It is humiliating to be anywhere overseas right now (I was following events from Paris) and have foreigners talk to you about Britain in the tone of voice normally associated with consolation over a death in the family. Donald Tusk has proposed a 'flexible extension' to Article 50. Under the plan the UK’s nominal last day in the EU would likely be 10 April 2020, but Britain would be expected to leave well before then, as soon as a withdrawal agree had been ratified by the UK parliament. But hope comes in the growing sense that there is now only one way out of the mess we have created for ourselves – a fresh referendum. Its time is coming, and yesterday was another big step on the way. The biggest threat is political incompetence at home, and the irritation among politicians around Europe. This could fuel the sense that whatever happens now, until the new cliff edge of 31 October, they just want to see the back of us. Even EU council president Donald Tusk, who has been heroic in standing up for the UK, could not conceal the sense of frustration that yet again, Europe is having to listen to Theresa May tell it that she could find an approach to get MPs behind a way forward. Leaders who have been subject to her direct lobbying see her as the anti-diplomat. President Macron appeared more aggressive towards the British after her pre-summit visit to Paris than he was before. Other European leaders watching her press conference would have been shaking their heads once again. As events unfolded in Brussels, my social media timeline was getting regular reminders of another historic political gathering, exactly 21 years ago, on Good Friday in 1998. It was perhaps the best day of many I spent working for the former prime minister Tony Blair. That day, the world watched our politicians in awe, as something so many said was impossible suddenly became real. Now, not only has our politics fallen into disrepute but that Good Friday agreement is under threat, thanks to the chaos of Brexit. But back to hope. One of the best things about the fight for a new referendum has been the birth of all manner of campaign groups, and among the best have been those formed by a generation not even born when the Good Friday agreement was signed. They include Our Future, Our Choice (OFOC) Northern Ireland, which has been tireless in getting its voice heard, not least face to face with EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier. Or those like OFOC UK founders Will Dry (a leave voter who now cannot believe he bought the lies of Boris Johnson) and Lara Spirit, who have taken time out from their university courses to fight for a referendum that hopefully ends in us not leaving at all. The People’s Vote campaign has played an important role in shifting the political dial in Britain and elsewhere in Europe. The more time we get, the more we can shift the dial further. Marches have really succeeded in doing this. The ones in the thousands and the tens of thousands early in the campaign showed MPs and the media the case for a new referendum was gaining ground. Those at last year’s party conferences showed Labour and the Tories that there was a price to pay for ignoring the possibility that the will of the people might be changing. And the recent marches, in the hundreds of thousands, showed people who believed Brexit had to be resisted that they were not alone, and showed European politicians on the continent that this fight was gaining ground. Among the most excited reactions to the sight of vast crowds waving UK and EU flags side by side were those of European leaders witnessing the birth of the biggest pro-EU movement anywhere in Europe. (NB Jeremy Corbyn: a clear, enthusiastic commitment to a “people’s vote” with a clear, enthusiastic expression of hoping to remain is the route to electoral success in the forthcoming European elections, not failure, and can provide a stronger base for fighting a general election than the one on which you currently stand. Let May and Nigel Farage fight it out for the votes of anyone who seriously still thinks no deal and a Boris Johnson premiership is the way forward. Just over 4 million people voted Labour in the 2014 European elections. Just over 6 million – and counting – have signed the petition to revoke article 50. Do the maths.) The campaign for a people’s vote is still attracting new and inspiring voices every day. The wonderful Betty Boothroyd may have stolen the show with her speech at our rally in London on Wednesday, but the voices that mattered most to me were those of former leavers who now want to stay, and those of former opponents of a people’s vote, like Tory MP Huw Merriman, who now see such a vote as the only way forward. History is written in chapters, not commas. Last night was a big comma. But the chapter we are living through, for all the noise en route, still has only three possible endings: May’s deal (dying, almost dead), no deal (dying) or no Brexit via a people’s vote (very much alive.) That sounds pretty hopeful to me. • Alastair Campbell is a People’s Vote campaigner, and was Tony Blair’s director of communications • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.