Raheem Sterling led the condemnation of Juventus’s Leonardo Bonucci after the Italian defender claimed the blame for the racist abuse aimed at his teammate Moise Kean in Cagliari was “50-50”. “All you can do now is laugh,” wrote Sterling on Instagram in response to Bonucci’s comments, which came after Juve’s teenage forward Kean was subjected to racist abuse by Cagliari fans during a 2-0 win in which Kean scored the second goal. After scoring, Kean – who was born in Italy to Ivorian parents – turned to the home fans and folded his arms. In response, Cagliari’s supporters made the noise which is described by Italian media as “buu” and is regarded as a racist insult in Italian football. Monkey noises could also be clearly heard among the crowd. Juve’s midfielder Blaise Matuidi protested furiously to the referee and at one point appeared to threaten to walk off. The Frenchman complained last year that he was subject to racist abuse at the same stadium and Cagliari later apologised. Play was halted for around three minutes and a warning was broadcast to the crowd – the first step in the so-called three-step procedure which ultimately leads to the teams being led off the field. Yet Bonucci criticised Kean, his 19-year-old teammate, for his reaction. According to Football Italia, the defender said: “Kean knows that when he scores a goal, he has to focus on celebrating with his teammates. He knows he could’ve done something differently too. “There were racist jeers after the goal, Blaise [Matuidi] heard it and was angered. I think the blame is 50-50, because Moise shouldn’t have done that and the Curva should not have reacted that way. We are professionals, we have to set the example and not provoke anyone.” Cagliari’s president Tommaso Giulini also took a less-than-enlightened view of the incident, claiming any Juventus player would have been treated the same as Kean following his goal. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels “I don’t want people to start being self-righteous about it, because I heard that already,” Giulini said according to Football Italia, “whereas Juventus players came to me afterwards and confessed Kean was wrong to celebrate that way. “We cannot go around calling the entire Cagliari crowd offensive things. If there were racist jeers, then our fans got it wrong, but it happened because of the celebration and would’ve happened even if the goalscorer had a different colour of skin.”