Bolton Wanderers players have said they will not play their home match against Brentford on Saturday if they are not paid the money they are owed by the club. The stance comes as the Championship squad members have still not received their salaries for March. The current month’s wage is thought to be due early next week. “The long running financial crisis at our club has been well documented,” a statement read. “As has the fact that we, the playing staff have yet to receive our March salaries. Five of our coaching staff are also yet to be paid for March. We have endeavoured to continue our training and playing commitments during this extremely difficult time, with seemingly no resolution in sight. “We thought that the prospective takeover of the club would provide a solution, but difficulties in its completion has left us no further forward. This situation is creating mounting mental, emotional and financial burdens for people through no fault of their own.” Ken Anderson, the Bolton owner, also failed to pay his squad their February salary on time. This month players did not train for 48 hours because of the missing March wage, an action that came following a lack of information regarding the situation. While staff have now been paid for last month, the players have still not so to effectively go on strike for the penultimate game of the season was deemed the logical next step for the side. In January the Professional Footballers Association was forced to loan the club money to source salaries for November and December, a sum that has since been paid back. Anderson continues to try to complete the sale of the club. The former Watford owner, Laurence Bassini, was announced as a buyer yet his proposed deal is still to be ratified by the Football League. “We worked very, very hard to get the deal done. It was very close to going to administration this morning. At the 11th hour we did it, going through the night,” Bassini told BBC Radio Manchester last week. Bolton are already relegated to League One.