Jeremy Corbyn has said Brexit talks with the government are stalling because of a Tory desire for post-withdrawal deregulation, including as part of a US trade deal. Corbyn said Labour had been putting forward a robust case for a customs union during the talks over the past week but suggested he feared the two sides would not find common ground. “There has to be access to European markets and above all there has to be a dynamic relationship to protect the conditions and rights that we’ve got for environment and consumer workplace rights,” he said. “We’ve put those cases very robustly to the government and there’s no agreement as yet.” Theresa May is elected Conservative leader and, having backed remain, seeks to burnish her credentials as someone who can bring her party together by appointing key leave figures to the cabinet including making Boris Johnson foreign secretary, Liam Fox trade secretary and David Davis Brexit secretary.  Nigel Farage calls them “inspired choices”. In her first conference speech, May sets a course for a hard Brexit by vowing “we are going to be a fully independent, sovereign country”. Insisting “Brexit means Brexit”, she vows to trigger the process of invoking article 50 by the following March and implies the UK will leave the customs union and the single market. Three months later, she delivers the Lancaster House speech that inked her red lines in permanent marker and left her with little room for manoeuvre. In what would become a familiar refrain, she said: “No deal for Britain is better than a bad deal for Britain.” Having taken the decision to call a snap general election in order to garner a majority that would allow her to push her Brexit vision through the Commons, a calamitous campaign results in the Conservatives losing their majority. That left May not only turning to the DUP in order to prop up her government, with knock-on effects for all that followed, but set the scene for the  parliamentary deadlock that was to come. May gathers her warring cabinet at Chequers in a bid to set out a compromise negotiating position that has a chance of finding favour with the EU. But a perceived move towards a softer Brexit provokes an immediate backlash from the right of the party, prompting the resignations of Davis and Johnson from the cabinet and a fresh wave of plotting from ERG members determined to “chuck Chequers”. With her deal having been voted down by a crushing 230 majority when she first brought it before the Commons in January, May tries again with 19 days left until the original Brexit date. She is again humiliated when the deal is beaten by a 149 vote majority, amid a series of votes that showed the extent to which the process had become mired in parliamentary paralysis – mirroring the position in May’s own divided cabinet and the country at large. Meetings are scheduled this week between ministers and shadow ministers on environmental protections, security and workers’ rights, which Corbyn described as “quite interesting, quite long technical discussions, particularly on environment regulations”. However, there will be no discussion before Easter on the big issues of a customs union or a confirmatory referendum. Corbyn underlined again that an agreement could only be reached if Theresa May was prepared to accept Labour’s central demand for a common external tariff policy with the EU. “The government doesn’t appear to be shifting the red lines because they’ve got a big pressure in the Tory party that actually wants to turn this country into a deregulated, low-tax society which will do a deal with Trump. I don’t want to do that,” he said. Corbyn said the UK had “lost a lot of time by the dithering of the government on bringing issues to parliament,” suggesting he believed the route out of the impasse would be moving on to binding indicative votes in parliament rather than pursuing a compromise deal between the two frontbenches. Labour has less incentive than the Conservatives to avoid EU elections at the end of May, in which the Tories expect heavy losses. Labour’s national executive committee is conducting final candidate interviews for potential MEPs on Tuesday. Corbyn said Labour would “fight the elections as a party that is committed to that relationship with Europe, but above all it’s about uniting people. However they voted in 2016, they’re suffering from austerity.” He said he did not see much electoral threat from the Brexit party, which launched last week and is led by Nigel Farage. “We have to have a relationship with Europe, in or out of the EU. We have a major trading partnership with Europe and all Farage is offering is some kind of never-never-land, saying we’ll walk away from everything,” he said. “Well, he should say that to those people whose jobs would be at risk in manufacturing industries and food processing industries. He should say that to those people who are really going to suffer as a result of this. “We’re serious about having a trading relationship with Europe. We’re serious about our relationship with the rest of the world. I’m not sure he is.”