The Cameo app is based on a simple idea: let ordinary people pay celebrities to record personalized messages for fans upon request. Instead of tweeting incessantly at a star asking for them to shout you out, you can just pay them $50 and they’ll do whatever you want. Users can scroll through the hundreds of personalities on the platform, from athletes to actors and social media influencers, to pay for a little bit of their time. Casual Friday just turned formal. Book @therealkateflannery for your promposal and, remember to dance harder than Meredith did at Jim & Pam’s wedding. • • • www.cameo.com/kateflannery A post shared by  Cameo (@cameo) on Apr 23, 2019 at 6:42pm PDT “Our goal is really to help the 99% of talent monetize,” founder Steven Galanis said last year. “We think the Kardashians and the Drakes of the world, they have so many outlets to make money and to engage with their fans, that this is just a great outlet for everybody else to boost their reach.” The very liberal definition of celebrity the app uses can make finding someone you’re a fan of, never mind ever even heard of, a bit difficult. But one person’s nobody is another person’s hero, so there are some diamonds in the rough. One of the regular uses of Cameo is getting a celebrity to wish a friend happy birthday or congratulations, a common request for Snoop Dogg, probably the most undeniable big name on the app. Snoop, categorized in both the Legends and Rappers categories, can be summoned to your friends’ inbox for the thematically appropriate price of $420 for a short video message. Navigating over to the actors page, things start off promisingly with Michael Rapaport, infamous onscreen tough guy, who’s available to record a message telling you off or whatever you prefer for $100, but considering how often he loses his cool on Twitter you could probably get the same reaction for free. A few rungs down the ladder you’ll find Marla Maples, the second wife of Donald Trump, who is listed as an actress, offering her time for $102 per message. You can probably imagine all manner of mischievous things to try to get her to say, but odds are she probably ignores requests to dish the dirt on her ex-husband. Stormy Daniels is available for a short video for $250 but there are other cheaper ways to get personalized videos from adult actresses. Or so I’m told. The rest of the politics category Daniels is featured in is particularly grim, with Ken Bone, the guy famous for wearing a red sweater that one time, going for $20 a pop, Omarosa at $100, and Joy Villa, the musician who appears once a year wearing a Trump costume at an awards show then vanishes for 364 days, waiting for your call at $35. Just got a Cameo from Ken Bone (@KenBone18) #cameofameo https://t.co/GyAu88V7DB via @bookcameo Happy 21st @NoahBlock11 hope it was stellar man. Thanks again @kenbone18 for incredible content. Fans of 90s and 2000s music are in luck on the other hand. Joey Fatone of ‘NSync will speak directly to your boy-band loving family for $150. “My sister was in tears she was so happy!! This was the best way she could start her wedding day! You have no idea how much this means to all of us. Thank you so very much, you are truly the best!!” one of his reviews reads. After you scroll through, the law of probabilities dictates you’ll end up with someone you actually admire. I mean, Lisa Loeb is on there. If, say, a friend of mine forked over $75 to get her to say “hi” to a nice journalist, that would be pretty cool, I guess.