You wait nearly a month and then two come along on the same day. An injury-time equaliser from substitute Harvey Barnes rescued a point for Leicester as Brendan Rodgers’s side kept alive their chances of qualifying for the Europa League on an afternoon that the Premier League’s longest streak without a draw was finally ended. There had been 34 matches since Bournemouth’s 2-2 draw Newcastle on 16 March yet while Wolves and Brighton played out a stalemate at Molineux that will have given Rodgers more reason to think they can still seal seventh spot, this was certainly no bore draw after Michail Antonio had given Manuel Pellegrini’s side the lead in the first half. Lucas Pérez thought he had won it after an equaliser from Jamie Vardy but it was another substitute in the form of Barnes who had the final say. The last time West Ham had lost four successive league matches was at the very start of Pellegrini’s reign and despite assuring their safety weeks ago, the Chilean had challenged his players to finish the campaign strongly as a platform for next season. Marko Arnautovic was recalled after missing the defeat to Manchester United last week and a groin injury to Manuel Lanzini also meant a recall for Antonio, while Rodgers also made two changes as Marc Albrighton returned from two months out with a hamstring problem. Just like their opponents, this has been a season of inconsistency for Leicester following the death of owner Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha after the game against West Ham at the King Power Stadium in October. The defeat against Newcastle last week had somewhat dampened hopes of snatching seventh spot, even if Rodgers was quick to stress he is ore concerned with the bigger picture. Yet judging by their approach to the first half here, there is plenty of work to be done as a lackadaisical display allowed West Ham to take a deserved lead through Antonio seven minutes before half-time. The winger had been already been denied twice through last-ditch defending but made no mistake after Felipe Anderson’s cross was delivered perfectly into box, rising above Ben Chilwell before celebrating by rolling around on the new £250,000 claret and blue carpet surrounding the pitch that was making its debut. A lengthy dispute with landlords the London Legacy Development Corporation had seen the unveiling of the new carpet delayed until this week, with Pellegrini spending most of the first period testing it out on the 30-metre walk from dugout to pitchside and back. Rodgers was often not far behind as he attempted to cajole his side into a response in the second half, although the home supporters seemed in the mood to tease and responded by chanting “You’re only here for the carpet” when one half-chance was spurned. Barnes was summoned from the bench and the result was an equaliser within three minutes as Vardy was on hand to stab home Chilwell’s low cross at the near post after the England defender was given acres of space to deliver his cross. Suddenly, Leicester looked enthused by their task and could have gone ahead had James Maddison picked out Vardy with quarter of an hour to play. It looked like they had been made to pay when Pérez was the first to react when Pedro Obiang’s shot came back off the post but Barnes made no mistake from Youri Tielemans’s excellent through ball to earn a share of the spoils.