Well done to Nottingham racecourse, which becomes the first British track to open a ‘safe space’ facility for racegoers living with poor mental health. This is a result of the profile given to the issue in recent months by Debbie Matthews, a tourism consultant who has become an expert on the subject while dealing with her own anxiety disorder over the years. Nottingham says it is “is thrilled to be the first racecourse to support Debbie and the #GoRacingGreen community”. One of its bars has been converted into ‘The #GoRacingGreen Room’, “a safe and quiet space for anyone who needs to seek respite during a race day”, sited just inside the entrance and, I’m told, well signed. “It’ll be quite a simple room,” Matthews says, “tables and chairs and two big television screens, so that anyone who doesn’t want to watch racing trackside, they can stay there and watch. It will always have a member of staff that I’ve trained in dementia and autism awareness and a general overview of anxiety disorders, who is always able to help if needed.” Matthews has also written an Invisible Access Statement and a Sensory Guide for Nottingham’s website, giving full details of what a day at the races might involve. “Knowing in advance is a really big part of deciding whether to go somewhere. Hopefully this information will reassure people that they can go racing and there will be somewhere safe that they can go.” Of Nottingham, Matthews said: “Bless them, they’ve gone above and beyond and implemented all of it. They’ve all been so welcoming. Hopefully in the long term it will benefit them with more people through their turnstiles.” Apparently, other tracks are waiting to see if the initiative works before deciding whether they should adopt it too. I note that Nottingham say the room will not be available for its three busiest fixtures, presumably because they want to use it for hospitality. This sounds like a mistake to me and I hope they review that idea. You can’t allow your patrons to get used to a facility being there and then withdraw it when they need it most. Hurrah for day one of the Punchestown Festival, betting minefield though it be. Three Grade Ones grace Tuesday’s card and my focus is on trying to get Klassical Dream beat in the Champion Novice Hurdle. On one view, this is churlish, since I was a supporter when he was a taking winner of the Supreme last month. But he put a lot into that race, when he was headstrong before the tape went up, and it’ll be impressive if he can run to the same standard now. Four Supreme winners have tried to follow up in this race in the past decade and only one managed it. In fact, since 1980, only three horses have won both races. His trainer, Willie Mullins, has an excellent record in today’s race, with six wins in the past 10 years, but it was his second-string that won two years ago and his fourth-string (by starting price) last year. I’m going to spread my interest over two of his other runners, the main hope being Quick Grabim (4.20) at 6-1, down from the opening 9-1. The choice of Paul Townend, Quick Grabim quickened smartly to win the Royal Bond in December, form that puts him right in the mix here. He’s been kept off by a stress fracture but is seemingly ready to go. “He could improve on the form he has shown so far,” the trainer has said in the Racing Post. I’ll also have a saver on Aramon at 12-1, bearing in mind that he went an inch ahead of Klassical Dream on the run-in at Leopardstown in February. Conditions are likely to favour speed over stamina, which should help him. I’d rather have the old boy Un De Sceaux than Min at the prices for the Champion Chase at 5.30pm but it’s a no-bet race for me. I’d love to see Delta Work bounce back in the three-mile novice chase at 6.40pm and the ground should help but 7-4 is short enough for a small horse whose season began on 2 November. The best of the British action is at Nottingham, where Beignet (1.30) is napped at 11-4 for the opening novice race. Well related for sprinting, she showed bright speed on her debut and Richard Hannon juveniles often come on a lot for their first run. Later, there’s 11-2 about Hateya (3.35) in a mile handicap. Jim Boyle’s filly remains on an upward curve, judging by her reappearance third at Lingfield. Nottingham 1.30 Beignet (nap) 2.00 Space Blues 2.35 Roseman 3.05 I’m Available 3.35 Hateya (nb) 4.05 Queen Constantine 4.35 Champagne Champ 5.10 Free Love Brighton 1.50 Harry Hurricane 2.25 Audio 2.55 Autumn Pride 3.25 Geetanjali 3.55 False ID 4.25 Bbob Alula 5.00 Roy Rocket Yarmouth 2.15 Take It Down Under 2.45 Fleeting Princess 3.15 Rochester House 3.45 Luna Magic 4.15 Lake Volta 4.50 Dream World 5.25 Parknacilla Newcastle 4.45 Puchita 5.20 Luis Vaz De Torres 5.55 You Little Ripper 6.30 Kwanza 7.05 Surfman 7.40 Blindingly 8.15 Gunmaker Chelmsford 5.15 Outrath 5.45 Fantastic Flyer 6.20 Astrologer 6.55 Field Gun 7.25 In The Cove 8.00 Tour De Paris 8.30 Imperial Act