Here is one statistic you won’t find in the official game book from Sunday’s AFC Championship Game: it took 59 minutes in real time to complete the last eight minutes and 39 seconds of the fourth quarter. All the more time for ad breaks selling pickup trucks and building drama with men who have become central to NFL broadcasts, the “rules analysts.” The Kansas City Chiefs and New England Patriots combined to score 31 points in that span, but the game was also stopped four times so critical plays could be reviewed by the replay official. The longest stretch came when play grinded to a halt for seven minutes while officials reviewed New England receiver Justin Edelman’s apparent muffed handling of a punt, which the Chiefs, trailing 17-14 at the time, recovered at the New England 28-yard line. Needing to dissect the play in microscopic detail, but also maybe to fill air time, CBS showed no fewer than 12 replays of that play in those seven minutes, trying to determine if the ball had glanced off Edelman’s gloved thumb, or his shoulder, or maybe even his forearm. Just then Clete Blakeman, the referee, popped onto the TV screen and announced that the ruling on the field was a muff, with Kansas City regaining possession. To the delight of the Arrowhead Stadium crowd, Gehrig Dieter had scooped up the ball after it hit, or did not hit, and ran with it into the end zone, but a muff can’t be advanced, so there would be no touchdown. Summoning Gene Steratore, the former NFL official who is in his first season as CBS’s NFL rules analyst, the play-by-play man Jim Nantz said, “There’s got to be enough visual evidence to overturn it!” “Most definitely, Jim, the point is well-taken,” Steratore said, sounding like he was on a witness stand. “The ruling on the field is that he did touch it. So something must be clear and obvious” to overturn the call. Five commercials followed. Blakeman finally announced that the ball had not touched Edelman. After all that, it was New England’s ball. Because instant replay, reintroduced in 1999, had become such a vital part of officiating a game – a football field covers 57,600 square feet, and seven officials can’t be expected to cover every inch – Fox hired a former official, Mike Pereira, as the first NFL rules analyst in 2010. Pereira’s first tough call involved a game in which he said on the air that an apparent last-minute touchdown catch by Detroit’s Calvin Johnson would be overturned by replay officials, which it was. The referee in that game was none other than Steratore. Each of the three networks that carries NFL games now has a rules analyst. Pereira even has a helper in Dean Blandino, another former official. The rules analyst’s job is to explain succinctly why the refs made the call they did, sometimes softly suggesting that the refs messed up. For the heightened scrutiny they are under, the refs do a pretty good job. Coaches have challenged 10 calls in 10 playoff games this year, and six calls have been upheld after video review. The calls on only six other plays in 10 games have been reversed by the replay official. According to the NFL, replay reversals dropped to 172 in the 2018 regular season from 196 in the 2017 regular season, with challenges falling to 349 to 429 in that span, suggesting that coaches might have more confidence that the officials are making the right tough calls. But coaches – like Saints coach Sean Payton, to use a recent example – still think officials miss tough judgment calls. The most consequential play in Sunday’s NFC Championship game, won by the Rams, is memorialized in the game book simply like this: 3-10-LA 13 (1:49) (Shotgun) D.Brees pass incomplete short right to T.Lewis. What was not noted was that Saints receiver Tommylee Lewis was barreled into by Nickell Robey-Coleman of the Rams as Lewis turned to make the catch. It was clearly a defensive pass-interference penalty that would have resulted in a first down with less than two minutes left that could have essentially led to a victory for New Orleans. “That should have been a penalty!” analyst Troy Aikman hollered on Fox. “Sean Payton is justifiably upset!” Pereira was on referee-analysis duty for Fox on Sunday. No penalty was called on a pass that was ruled incomplete, and coaches are not allowed to challenge a judgment call, nor can they be reviewed by a replay official. The Washington Post reported Monday that the NFL is considering adding pass-interference calls subject to replay review. Pereira said he agreed with Aikman, then added, “I know it’s easy in slow-motion. They’re close to bang-bang, but that’s way early enough – even high contact on the receiver. You could have had a foul either way,” either pass interference or illegal contact. Wil Lutz gave the Saints a 23-20 lead with a field goal, but the Rams would have been forced to spend their last time out had New Orleans been awarded a first down, making a game-tying drive substantially more difficult. The Rams tied the game and won in overtime. The Saints-Rams game was not bogged down by either a coach’s challenge or a replay reversal. Pereira had much less to talk about Sunday than Steratore. The fact that these “rules analysts” have become a cottage industry, though, suggests that the NFL has a problem. Referees are people, and even seven of the sharpest people in the business can’t see everything that unfolds on a 1.32-acre football field. Perhaps just scoring plays should be reviewed by a replay official, and the refs can be left to figure everything else out. Or maybe there should be no refs, and everything would be judged on cameras. But that would leave Gene Steratore and Mike Pereira out of a job, and no extra time to sell more beer.