Jos Buttler described England’s hopes of one day topping the world rankings as having been given a reality check during the first Test in Barbados. Speaking after the wicketless third day, during which Jason Holder powered his way to a dominant double century from No 8, the England vice-captain accepted the team selection was “potentially” wrong in hindsight. But as well as praising the bowlers for their efforts, Buttler insisted the blame for England’s current predicament lies squarely at the feet of a batting unit that collapsed to 77 all out on day two and leaves them staring at defeat. “Yesterday was a poor reflection on us as a side,” said Buttler. “To get to No 1 in the world that’s nowhere near good enough. It’s a good reality check as a side, in terms of where we are at.” Holder’s unbeaten 202 in an unbroken stand of 295 with his fellow Bajan and close friend, Shane Dowrich (116 not out), represented his career highlight to date and there was a touching moment after the close when he was embraced by his mother, Denise, in the stands. Holder said: “It was a very pleasing day – best days I’ve had in Test cricket. To top it off would be 10 wickets, make sure we start this series with victory over England. “[The plan was] to grind them down – there is lots of time left and for us it was to keep them there in the heat and on their legs – credit to us.” During his four years as captain Holder has wrestled for authority over a West Indies side that has struggled results-wise and been dogged by regional politics. But now, amid a golden run of form with bat and ball, his mandate has never been stronger. Holder added: “It was a slow start to my career and very tough at first as well. It was about just finding a way to understand the dynamics of Test career. “[Former captain] Clive Lloyd is someone I hold in high regard and he always said it took him three years to learn Test cricket. “To get the performances in now that I am is very pleasing. I just want to keep pressing forward for this West Indies team.”