There’s troubles in doubles. The seemingly innocuous observation by Jamie Murray that the widely respected specialist coach, Louis Cayer, deserves to be made national performance director across all disciplines has broken out into a full-blown feud with Dan Evans. Evans, who does not play much doubles, entered the debate just as it was dying when he told the Daily Mail: “Who exactly has Louis Cayer ever coached apart from doubles players? Why would British tennis allow him to take charge? It’s a ludicrous comment.” He added, “Jamie thinks we should be celebrating six pairs inside the main draw of a grand slam? So we are celebrating people who didn’t make it at singles and people who didn’t have the attitude to work hard enough to make it in the singles game.” But Murray, who is through to the quarter-finals here in both the men’s doubles with Bruno Soares, and the mixed with Bethanie Mattek-Sands, hit back hard on Monday against his sometime Davis Cup partner and friend. “It is lazy comments to make. It is ill-informed and dumb really. To question the reason that we are on the doubles Tour is because we don’t work as hard as the singles guys is just total nonsense. “I’ve been playing the Tour since 2007, travelling the world, working my ass off to stay at the top of the game and make a living for myself. [For that] to come from someone who really hasn’t applied himself as much as he should and really... he has made a hash of his career with his decision making and stuff. To come out with those sort of comments is just ignorant. It’s really disappointing. We should be celebrating any success that we have in this sport, whether it’s singles, doubles, mixed doubles, wheelchairs, whatever. Everybody should be getting their recognition for the efforts that they’re putting in and the success that they’re having. “It’s not just singles that you can make a career from tennis in. It’s important for a lot of young kids to know that growing up. It’s not easy to make it in the tennis world. There are only a few people that can make a really good living from the game. The journey is incredibly long. However you get there, whether it’s singles or doubles or whatever, there’s options there for you – more than just being a singles player.” Murray acknowledged, “Of course when people start playing they want to be singles players, because if you look at the prize-money and the glory and stuff, that’s where it is. I’m playing on a tour where 80% of the prize-money goes to the singles. At the grand slams it’s even more. We’ve got a much smaller slice of the pie, but I still manage to make a good living playing tennis. Let’s be honest, [I make] a lot better living than what Dan has done in his career.” Murray has made $4,273,432 (£3.3m) in a title-littered doubles career that includes six grand slam titles – more than three times Evans’s earnings of $1,339,182 (£1.04m) in singles, as well as $75,413 (£58,720) from a handful of doubles matches. Murray added: “If he does something that’s noteworthy and deserves recognition then absolutely he should get it, along with anybody else that’s got a GBR next to their name. But just to kind of lazily trash the doubles game, it annoys me a lot.” He will not hold a grudge, though. “I’m friends with him. I like him. You know what he’s like: he’s a character. He’ll shoot from the hip, he won’t necessarily think first before speaking but, if that’s how he feels, that’s how he feels. I’m sure there’s a lot of other guys that maybe think the same but I’m not going to lose sleep over what he thinks about doubles or whatever.” It is an arcane spat that grew disproportionately when the Lawn Tennis Association chose to challenge Murray’s earlier assertion that Cayer was, “under-appreciated”. It certainly will spice up the next Great Britain Davis Cup team gathering. Soares, the Brazilian who has partnered Murray to slam titles here and at Flushing Meadows, said after they reached the quarter-finals on Monday, reiterated his praise for Cayer, a widely respected Canadian whose astute analysis is used by singles and doubles players throughout the game. “[He is good] for everyone. From what I see, the singles guys use him a lot. What he does for me is insane. I send him clips from my practice somewhere in the world and Louis spends two hours watching it and making notes. He doesn’t have to do that. He sits there for two hours watching a practice session. People know he’s amazing and a genius with that stuff.” Soares added: “The LTA has got enough cash to support everyone. In terms of the [Evans] question of working hard, it’s different skills. Everyone can try to play singles and doubles, some guys are good in singles and doubles or both. So I wouldn’t go that way: who is working and who isn’t. Everyone has got their own routine. If someone works hard and makes it, good for them. If someone is super lazy and makes it, good for them as well.”