Off to the Caribbean we go. Once English cricketers went there with trepidation: quick pitches, quick-scoring West Indian batsmen and very quick, skilful bowlers easily trumped the prospect of blissful sandy beaches and a few rum punches. A tour of the West Indies was an ordeal that used to encompass visits to some of the great cricketing arenas, Sabina Park in Jamaica, the Queen’s Park Oval in Trinidad and Bourda in Guyana, the last of which has been replaced by another white elephant, out-of-town stadium. England no longer visit these venues since they are not so popular as tourist destinations. Instead, after their first match at the Kensington Oval in Barbados, they will play another Test in Antigua and their first ever in St Lucia. The assumption is that it will be a doddle for Joe Root’s rejuvenated team to win the series and it is easy to produce stats to support that theory. Since 1963 England and the West Indies have played for the Wisden Trophy. The West Indies took possession of that trophy between 1973 and 2000, which amounts to 13 series. Since then there have been nine more series, just one of which has been won by the West Indies and in their last match against Bangladesh in Dhaka at the beginning of December they lost by an innings and 184 runs. Of course, it is also possible to demonstrate that England face a major challenge in the next month. They have not won in the West Indies since 2004 when Michael Vaughan’s side romped to a 3-0 victory. In 2009 England lost 1-0 as Andrew Strauss and Andy Flower, the interim coach after the sacking of Peter Moores, set about rebuilding a flagging England team. Then the West Indies bowled England out for 51 at Sabina Park and managed to avoid defeat in the three other matches (four if you count the 10-ball Test at the Viv Richards Stadium in Antigua). In 2015 England surrendered a 1-0 lead in Barbados to a West Indies team described as “mediocre” by Colin Graves, the new chairman of the ECB at the time, which was the final nail for Moores. The current interim coach of the West Indies, Richard Pybus, would do well to incite some infallible Englishman to demean the Caribbean cricketers since they seem to react well to such barbs. Graves’s “mediocre” was more than matched by Mark Nicholas’s observation that they were “short of brains” just before the T20 World Cup in Bangladesh in 2016, which the West Indies duly won. At least Nicholas was quick to apologise. This correspondent does not intend to help out the West Indies in this department before the forthcoming Test series. West Indies can challenge an England side buoyant after their victory in Sri Lanka but they will have to play very well to do so, spurred on by the unusual presence of big crowds at their Test grounds, even though most of them will be supporting the “away” side. Kraigg Brathwaite is arguably the most accomplished opening batsman on view; Shai Hope, as he displayed at Headingley in 2017, has a touch of class even though he still averages only 28 in Test cricket; Shimron Hetmyer has great potential, while Kemar Roach and Shannon Gabriel share 286 Test wickets between them at less than 30 runs apiece. Statistically Jason Holder, the captain, has a Test record that is not so different to that of Ben Stokes (he averages 30 with the bat and 28 with the ball). Roach and Gabriel may not be the reincarnations of Marshall and Garner but they are proven Test performers, often on surfaces far more docile than those encountered by their illustrious predecessors. At least the home side will be more accustomed to the modern pitches of the Caribbean. These tend to be disappointingly slow and lifeless, though hopefully it is still possible to generate some bounce at the Kensington Oval. We wait to see what the mood is like in the Caribbean. The recent appointment of Pybus could complicate an already fragile environment. Darren Sammy, their former captain, is not impressed and has listed 15 reasons why. Perhaps more alarming is the manner of Pybus’s appointment, which appears to have been carried out unilaterally by Dave Cameron, president of the West Indies board. This is the equivalent of Colin Graves appointing England’s next coach, which may not be a brilliant idea. This should surely be the job of the cricket director. So England begin the series as favourites. But they would be foolish to admit that they have one eye on their momentous summer of 2019. However, there will certainly be the tacit desire to cement a few positions before the Ashes series gets under way in August. What is the best opening pair? Can Jonny Bairstow and Ben Foakes consolidate their positions at three and seven? England will be fervently hoping that is the case. At least one spinner will have to be jettisoned from the team that won in Sri Lanka and there is still a debate to be had over which pacemen/all-rounders are the most appropriate to accompany Jimmy Anderson.