Good morning, I’m Warren Murray and here is today’s order of business. A flurry of amendments to Theresa May’s Brexit bill will come before the House of Commons today. The PM has urged Conservative MPs to support replacing the Irish border backstop with “alternative arrangements” via an amendment tabled by Tory chair Graham Brady. The aim is to get opponents to pass May’s amended bill, in the hope the European Union will reciprocate with concessions on the backstop. Brussels has continued to insist negotiations cannot be reopened. Overnight a surprise initiative dubbed the “Malthouse compromise” emerged. It involves drafting a new backstop that would be acceptable indefinitely, while incentivising the EU and UK to move beyond it and reach a new future relationship. In a message to Tory MPs, the remainer Nicky Morgan said: “It ensures there is no need for a hard border with Ireland.” The hardline Tory Brexiter Jacob Rees-Mogg was said to have backed the idea. Here is a list of Tuesday’s proposed amendments – notable among them, options to extend article 50, establish a citizens’ assembly, or hold a second referendum. There are divisions within Labour over whether Yvette Cooper’s amendment to rule out a no-deal Brexit should be supported, or whether the party’s pro-Brexit constituents would see it as a rebuff to their wishes. Labour has also performed a late U-turn over the immigration bill – after instructing its MPs to abstain, the party came in for intense criticism and eventually allowed MPs the option of voting against it. In London’s “Silicon Roundabout” tech district, John Harris finds that the implications of Brexit are emptying the ranks of talented and much-needed European staff. And Polly Toynbee writes that P&O dropping the British flag because of Brexit shows the decline of a rich seafaring tradition. Huawei’s woes worsen – A Chinese telecommunications company has been charged overnight by the US with stealing trade secrets, laundering money, obstructing justice and evading sanctions on Iran. The FBI says Huawei offered bonuses for employees to steal information from other companies. Among such instances, investigators say, engineers from Huawei copied and stole parts from a robot called “Tappy” used by T-Mobile to make smartphones. The company has denied the charges, which Beijing has called “immoral”. Meng Wanzhou, the Huawei finance chief, remains under Canadian house arrest on a US extradition warrant. Screen dims young minds – Frequent use of screens by children aged two to five has been linked to developmental delays by researchers in Canada. The more time children were reported to be spending in front of screens, the worse they did on development tests. The researchers say parents should be cautious about time spent with devices – on average, the 2,400 children they studied spent about 17 hours a week in front of screens at two years old, increasing to almost 25 hours a week at three years, before falling to 11 hours a week at five. Meanwhile the electronic bullying of young people has grown significantly worse in recent years, according to the UK’s media watchdog. Ofcom says 9% of 12- to 15-year-olds report being bullied via text messages and apps. Pressure piled on Maduro – The US government has announced sanctions against Venezuela’s state-owned oil company, PDVSA, as the Trump administration tries to force out President Nicolás Maduro. After the opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, declared himself Venezuela’s rightful interim president, New Zealand has refused to join close allies like the US, Australia, the UK and Canada in giving him its backing. “It is not New Zealand’s practice to make statements of recognition of governments,” said Winston Peters, the NZ foreign affairs minister. Rat plague haunts man – A former inmate of Wormwood Scrubs is bringing a claim for post-traumatic stress disorder, saying he was left mentally scarred by rats swarming around the jail, running over him in bed and eating his cellmate’s smoky bacon crisps. In 2015, officers from HM Inspectorate of Prisons officers found rats “every day and night we visited the prison and a large rats’ nest was very obvious in the grounds”. The ex-prisoner, 71, says being almost always locked in his cell had meant there was no escape from the scurrying tormentors. His lawyer, Jane Ryan at Bhatt Murphy Solicitors, is suing the Ministry of Justice on his behalf. “Living conditions in prisons should be humane for the benefit of staff and prisoners,” said Ryan. No end to waste – About 1.2bn ends of bread loaves that could be eaten are being binned, according to a campaign to plough them back into meals. The North London Waste Authority has got together with chefs to come up with ways to save a crust, like the panzanella salad recipe that you can find at the bottom of our story. Better get stockpiling for 29 March … Today is the day that backbench MPs in parliament could wrestle control of the Brexit process away from the government. Overseeing proceedings is the all-powerful Speaker, John Bercow. But is he pushing an agenda from the traditionally neutral chair? Plus, in opinion: Jonathan Freedland on the Brexit-backing elite and how they will avoid the worst consequences of leaving the EU. When it comes to milk, in 2019 there is no shortage of alternatives, and alternatives to those alternatives. Supermarket aisles overflow with choice: almond, hazelnut, peanut, tiger nut, walnut, cashew, coconut, hemp, spelt, quinoa, pea. Ads abound for new plant “mylks” – EU law dictates anything promoted as “milk” must come from a lactating mammal. In New York, when coffee shops ran out of oat milk, there was mild panic. From the days when soy milk sat lonely on the shelves, the global plant milk industry is now estimated to be worth $16bn. Real milk’s reputation as a healthy food is under threat from anxieties ranging from lactose intolerance and bovine antibiotics to animal cruelty and the dairy industry’s environmental impact. But whether or not plant milks really are a healthy substitute for cow’s milk is a matter of fierce and not inconsequential debate. Eddie Jones’s England are set for a severe mental and physical examination against Ireland when they open their Six Nations campaign at the weekend in a stadium where they have enjoyed little success. Manchester United have been handed the chance to exact FA Cup revenge when they travel to face the holders Chelsea next month. Barnet, the last non-league side in this season’s competition, are still in with a chance of reaching the last 16 after a 3-3 draw forced a replay with Brentford. Jasmin Paris, the ultrarunner who became a global sensation earlier this month when she won the 268-mile Spine Race, beating her male rivals by 15 hours and the course record by over 12, has been selected to run for Britain. And Ben Foakes has said the margin of England’s defeat against West Indies in Barbados suggests something is not right. The news of charges against Huawei sparked a slide on Asian markets. The Nikkei, Kospi, Hang Seng and Shanghai Composite all fell. Australia’s S&P/ASX 200, reopening after a holiday, eased 0.6%. Stocks fell in Taiwan and Singapore but rose in Indonesia. The FTSE is forecast to open higher, and sterling has been trading at $1.315 and €1.150 overnight. It’s no surprise that Brexit is splashed across just about all of the front pages. The Guardian leads with “May supports Irish backstop changes amid Tory splits”. The FT has: “May seeks to split Tory hardliners with bid to amend Brexit backstop”. The Times says: “Tory rebels reject May’s Plan B”. The Express strikes a positive tone, carrying a picture of Boris Johnson and Theresa May with the headline: “We can do it together”. The i takes the opposite view on the former foreign secretary and one of his fellow rebel Tories: “Johnson and Rees-Mogg cut PM’s lifeline”. The Daily Mirror leads on warnings about Brexit food shortages: “No Deal, No Meal” is its headline. The Sun seems to ignore the Tory crisis, instead attacking Jeremy Corbyn: “Don’t let Labour kill Brexit”. The Telegraph devotes its splash not to Brexit but to Philip Green: “Green urged to let his accusers tell their story” is its main headline, with a smaller story noting Tory Eurosceptics are in revolt “over Brexit plan B”. And the Mail ignores Brexit altogether on its front page, instead leading with the headline “Generation of web addicts”, about children’s obsession with the internet. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com