The Golden Globes red carpet featured its share of scene-stealers: Lady Gaga in a dress with a train several metres long , Timothee Chalamet in a sequin holster, Melissa McCarthy dressed like a gorgeous, purple wizard, and Billy Porter in an embellished silk cape with a hot pink lining. But all of them were arguably outshone by the consistent appearance of a woman in a violet dress handing out bottles of Fiji water. The “Fiji Water Girl” concept quickly caught the eye of viewers following the awards ceremony, as she appeared in the background of a variety of celebrity shots, photobombing Nicole Kidman, Dakota Fanning, Jim Carrey, Richard Madden, Emmy Rossum, Idris Elba and Judy Greer, among others. She was immediately noticed on Twitter, where some people called for her to be given the award for best supporting role. This woman holding FIJI Water at the #GoldenGlobes truly came to SERVE. pic.twitter.com/Aln54zOhKY She got mad because I got all the attention... Chillax, Nics. #GoldenGlobes pic.twitter.com/R2lvKYsrdS Fiji Water is the official bottled water partner for the Golden Globes, supplying water for the event since 2015 and the brand was quick to capitalise on people’s interest, writing on Twitter: “We’re so glad everyone is talking about our water! *senses ominous presence* She’s right behind us, isn’t she?” “Richard looked handsome but hot in his velvet suit. Luckily, my Fiji tray provided him with the sweet relief he desperately needed 😉” pic.twitter.com/HAEHwTaBeu But people’s fascination had nothing to do with the water. It was the Fiji Water Girl herself who had captured people. There she was, standing behind Cody Fern. As Fern was photographed, instead of looking away demurely, the Fiji Water Girl stared directly down the lens with an arched eyebrow and a half-smile, daring the camera to consider her a less worthy subject than the actor in front of her. She did the same, again and again throughout the evening, with an unerring sense of where the camera is and her best angles. There are two kinds of people in the world: the ones who desperately tries to shine and the ones who shine bright like a diamond. #GoldenGlobes #fijiwatergirl pic.twitter.com/E67OeuBqcr It did not take long for a parody Twitter account to start, with someone tweeting on behalf of Fiji Water Girl. Please meet my cousins: Moet & Chandon Guy. Family first. #GoldenGlobes pic.twitter.com/qQhPmYdsn4 As well as the water girl’s imagined response to claims she had “photobombed” celebrities. I've photobombed nobody. I was actually the only one there working. #BillsDontStopComing #GoldenGlobes https://t.co/TK1eaOkcaF