Theresa May is to speak to the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, as she seeks further written reassurances that the unpopular Northern Ireland border backstop in her Brexit deal will not be used. The phone call on Friday afternoon will be one of several the prime minister is expected to make to European leaders in an attempt to secure additional clarifications before the House of Commons vote on her arrangement, currently due to take place in the week of 14 January. It is not clear what May could secure to satisfy the Brexit rebels, given the EU has repeatedly said the backstop, designed to ensure the Irish border remains open in all circumstances, cannot be removed from the draft withdrawal treaty. A backstop is required to ensure there is no hard border in Ireland if a comprehensive free trade deal cannot be signed before the end of 2020. Theresa May has proposed to the EU that the whole of the UK would remain in the customs union after Brexit, but Brussels has said it needs more time to evaluate the proposal. As a result, the EU insists on having its own backstop - the backstop to the backstop - which would mean Northern Ireland would remain in the single market and customs union in the absence of a free trade deal, prompting fierce objections from Conservative hard Brexiters and the DUP, which props up her government. That prompted May to propose a country-wide alternative in which the whole of the UK would remain in parts of the customs union after Brexit. “The EU still requires a ‘backstop to the backstop’ – effectively an insurance policy for the insurance policy. And they want this to be the Northern Ireland-only solution that they had previously proposed,” May told MPs. Raising the stakes, the prime minister said the EU’s insistence amounted to a threat to the constitution of the UK: “We have been clear that we cannot agree to anything that threatens the integrity of our United Kingdom,” she added. Expectations are being kept deliberately low, and May is likely to begin the political year talking about the long-term future of the NHS, rather than Brexit, with a visit to Liverpool planned for Monday. Meanwhile, the Brexit secretary, Stephen Barclay, told a group of European newspapers that EU leaders could not hope to push May into organising a second referendum because it would inflame political tensions. “The extent to which Britain is divided currently is small compared with the tensions a second vote would cause. It would continue to split our nation,” Barclay said, in remarks first reported by Germany’s Die Welt. The minister said it would not be possible to hold a referendum before EU parliamentary elections due in May, and if Britons had to vote for MEPs again, he predicted there would be “huge democratic damage, because the citizens voted to quit”. Barclay even signalled that holding European elections in such a context could lead to a surge in support for Ukip or other anti-EU populists. “Even our European colleagues cannot be interested in it because that would trigger a very populist reaction,” Barclay said. Downing Street had hoped Brexit passions would have cooled over the Christmas break as warnings mount about the potential impact of no deal, but the early signs are that rebel positions remain firm and the vote is expected to be be lost. It is believed 30-40 Tory MPs will definitely vote against May’s deal, including former cabinet ministers and veteran anti-EU campaigners, although that would be a significant reduction from the 100 who publicly declared their opposition in December. The Democratic Unionist party, whose 10 MPs help keep May in power, has been repeating its objections to the proposed Brexit arrangement over the past 24 hours, despite continuing talks with No 10 to try to resolve the impasse. Sammy Wilson, the DUP’s Brexit spokesman, said his party opposed the backstop because if it came into force, Northern Ireland “would have to treat the rest of the United Kingdom as a third country” and would not participate in any trade deals which the United Kingdom may enter into in the future. Downing Street has floated the idea of staging a second parliamentary vote almost immediately after the first in an attempt to pressure MPs to change their minds, in an atmosphere of rising public concern and jittery financial markets. The argument is helped by May’s position being more secure than it was in December, after rebel MPs failed to unseat her. Under Conservative party rules, she cannot be challenged again for nearly a year. Labour has repeatedly called for May to step aside if her deal is voted down, but she could only be forced out if she were defeated in a Commons vote of no confidence. Rebel Tories have said they would not vote with Labour in such a situation. A poll of 1,215 Conservative party members found 57% supported a no-deal Brexit if there were a three-way referendum in which May’s Brexit deal and remaining in the EU were the other two options. In comparison, 25% of voters back no deal.