A backbench Tory amendment to Theresa May’s Brexit deal that Downing Street had hoped could limit the extent of her likely losses on the key vote has not been selected by the Speaker, John Bercow, meaning MPs will not get a chance to express their view on it. The amendment, tabled by the Conservative MP Andrew Murrison and backed by 29 of his colleagues, called for the backstop solution to the Irish border to expire on 31 December 2021 if it came into force, and was seen as a sop to MPs on the issue. While the idea goes against the withdrawal agreement with Brussels, the hope was that if it drew much support it could help the prime minister if she returned to the EU to seek new concessions after losing the vote. Perhaps the most contentious issue. In order to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland, a backstop arrangement that keeps the UK in the customs union and requires Northern Ireland to follow single market rules would prevail until a free-trade agreement is reached that avoids such a frontier. The UK and EU negotiators have agreed the former should honour those commitments it made while a member of the bloc – finally settling on a figure of £39bn. The deal would secure a status quo transition period to negotiate the nature of the future relationship, and during which the UK could begin to make trade deals with third countries. A fraught issue at the outset, an agreement was reached relatively quickly that would see the UK respect the rights of EU citizens who arrive before the end of the transition period, which could be in 2022, and vice versa. The document is accompanied by a political declaration that sketches out the future relationship between the two parties – focusing primarily on trade and security. However, even before the amendment was not picked, its likely impact was minimised after the Democratic Unionist party said such machinations would not change its MPs’ minds. “Today’s very belated amendments are part of the internal parliamentary games and do not change the need to secure legally binding changes,” a DUP spokesman said. Murrison said he was very disappointed his amendment was not selected. “Speaker Bercow conducts himself to his own entire satisfaction,” he said. “The most decorous thing I can say about his selection or not of amendments today is it’s interesting.” Bercow, beginning the fifth and final day of debate on the plan, said he had accepted four amendments. With voting due to start at 7pm, that should push the result on May’s deal back to around 8.15pm. The amendments chosen include one tabled by Jeremy Corbyn and other Labour frontbenchers. It seeks to rule out a no-deal departure, and criticises May’s plan for not providing “a permanent UK-EU customs union and strong single market deal”. Another frontbench amendment jointly tabled by the Scottish National party and Plaid Cymru was also chosen. This condemns the deal on the basis it “would be damaging for Scotland, Wales and the nations and regions of the UK as a whole”. Two backbench amendments were picked. The first, by the Tory MP Edward Leigh and backed by about a dozen colleagues, seeks to limit the scope of the backstop by saying it is temporary, and that international law decrees the UK can unilaterally end the withdrawal agreement if there is any attempt to extend the backstop beyond 2021. The final amendment, tabled by another veteran Tory MP, John Baron, is also on the backstop. This states that the UK would have the right to terminate it without the say-so of the EU. 11.30am The Commons begins sitting. The first item is questions to Matt Hancock, the health secretary, and his ministerial team. These are meant to last 30 minutes but can run slightly over. Then the Labour MP Debbie Abrahams briefly introduces a private member’s bill on public sector supply chains under a 10-minute rule motion. After midday If there are no urgent questions or ministerial statements to delay proceedings, the final day of debate on Theresa May’s Brexit deal – officially known as section 13(1)(b) of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 – begins. It will be opened for the government by the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox. Before 7pm May will make a final closing speech for the government, appealing for support for her deal. From 7pm Voting begins. However, before the crucial vote, MPs must vote on the four amendments accepted by the Speaker. One amendment, tabled by the Tory Hugo Swire, has been accepted by the government. At some point between around 7.30pm to 9.30pm MPs finally vote on the deal, as amended. The amendments will be taken in order – the Labour amendment, then the SNP/Plaid Cymru, Leigh and then Baron – and if one is passed by MPs then the full, amended motion will immediately be put to the vote without any subsequent amendments being considered, Bercow said. May is expected to respond quickly if she is defeated, probably immediately after the vote, but it has not yet been decided whether it will be a point of order or a full emergency statement. The prime minister was urged by pro-soft Brexit ministers at the weekly cabinet meeting to turn her overtures towards Labour should the deal fall, though others warned strongly against such a strategy. Downing Street said May opened the cabinet meeting by saying that “the government is the servant of the people” and pledging to deliver the referendum result. In a tacit acknowledgment that a defeat was highly likely, May’s spokesman said ministers had discussed “the buildup to the vote and what would happen afterwards”, but refused to give further details. The prime minister was in the Commons to see the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, open the final day of debate. She was then expected to retreat to her Commons office to speak to Tory MPs. A Downing Street source said May had spoken to more than 20 MPs over the weekend and more on Monday and planned to speak to as many as possible before Tuesday evening’s vote. Asked if May would resign if she suffered a heavy defeat, her spokesman said: “The prime minister is determined she will deliver on the vote of the British people and she will take the UK out of the European Union.”