From Remainiacs to Pod Save America and Slow Burn, political podcasts are proving a popular genre. Further evidence of this comes in the form of Bag Man, an MSNBC podcast hosted by the news anchor Rachel Maddow. It recounts the bribery scandal that brought down the Nixon-era US vice president Spiro Agnew, a story that was major news at the time, but which has since been largely forgotten. The series has been downloaded 10m times since it launched in the autumn, according to MSNBC. From one vice president to another: the most distinctive new podcast of the week is Gay Future. This purports to be an audio adaptation of a recently discovered YA novel written by the LGBT-unfriendly US “veep” Mike Pence, but is an entirely fictional and very funny takedown of the sort of “gay panic” thinking promoted by the conservative movement. Set in 2062, it imagines a world where the “gay agenda” has overtaken the US and the future of humanity rests on the shoulders of one straight teenage boy. Listen to episode one here. Over Christmas the BBC released a host of new episodes in its Slow Radio audio strand. First broadcast on Radio 3, the languid series offers up the sounds of among many others, meditating monks and migrating reindeer. The Last Days of AugustJon Ronson’s podcast about the modern history of the porn industry, The Butterfly Effect, was an illuminating and sensitively handled hit. Now Ronson looks into the story of August Ames, an adult film star who killed herself after being shamed on Twitter for a supposedly homophobic comment. At first it sounds like perfect fodder for a true-crime podcast, but it turns out to be nothing of the sort as Ronson pieces together the reasons she died, giving an idea of the woman she was. Hannah Verdier Monster: The Zodiac KillerYour new true-crime blockbuster is a follow-up to the hugely popular Atlanta Monster podcast. This time around, Payne Lindsey and Matt Frederick shine a spotlight on the Zodiac killer, the notorious serial murderer who operated in north California in the late 1960s. Despite there being as many as 2,500 suspects, the perpetrator has never been found, so there’s a lot of mileage in an investigation that spills small-town secrets and spares no details about the grisly crimes. HV As the remnants of tinsel are swept from the nation’s floors, post-Christmas normality is marked by the return this week of our Today in Focus podcast. And with it comes the reminder of some of life’s more pressing matters, including Wednesday’s episode: Deal or no deal: where next for Brexit? Joining Anushka Asthana is the Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour; the pair attempt to provide a road map for the many possible routes to Brexit. The episode also features a personal account from the Guardian columnist Owen Jones on the rising levels of abuse he and others are receiving online and, worryingly, on the streets. Chosen by David Waters (freelance producer, Today in Focus and The Story) The latest episode of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation’s Love Me podcast, Outside Looking In, features a piece by producer Neil Sandell that reminds me why I try to produce audio stories. In our media environment, where so much content seems to be churned out (or is that just me?), this piece has so much heart, honesty and wit. Its use of double exposure is beautiful and so much is revealed in the spaces where things are not said.