The singer-songwriter Steve Gunn is too low-key for anything as gauche as a personal brand, but if his ruminative music espouses one idea, it can be found in Ancient Jules, a song from his 2016 album Eyes on the Lines: “Take your time, ease up, look around and waste the day.” It’s an inviting outlook in an era where it’s easy to feel squeezed for every last drop of human efficiency. But the financial realities of operating at Gunn’s level – feted as a successor to Jerry Garcia and John Fahey, gigging modestly – have made his ethos near impossible for him to live by. He used to try to cram in writing while he was travelling, or in the studio. He would “go on autopilot and rush without having time to think,” he says, calling from his New York home. “And I think that sorta shows. To have five or six people in a studio for a week … we gotta get this done or I’m gonna be completely broke with no album.” As well as his solo work he’s played on at least 20 releases in the past 12 years, including collaborations with Kurt Vile, Sun City Girls and British cult folk hero Mike Cooper. But Gunn’s new album, The Unseen in Between (technically his fifth “proper” album), comes after a period of relative quiet. It’s his best album, balancing a shimmering quality – one that recalls Johnny Marr at his most transcendent – with Gunn’s backing band’s reassuring depth; moments of compelling rigour dissolve into wilderness. His label, Matador, encouraged him to take his time, giving him space to dig deep into the arrangements, but that slowing down also follows a period of introspection that prompted Gunn, now 41, to spend time figuring out what he wanted the record to say. He had previously denounced personal writing as something that can be “a shallow and selfish undertaking”. This time, he felt he had something worth sharing. His father died of cancer two weeks after he released Eyes on the Lines. Five months later, Trump was elected. “I think when you experience certain levels of shock, it can be a really isolating feeling,” he says, haltingly, seeming uncomfortable talking about himself. “And I think there’s hope in knowing that almost everyone around you is going through similar things. A lot of the songs are addressing that.” New Familiar details post-Trump paranoia. “After it happened, you’d stand in the train station, look around and think, ‘Who the fuck made this happen?’ You feel so separated from the general consensus.” But the songs are rarely that explicit. The starkest, Stonehurst Cowboy, reveals the necessity of community and empathy. The first verses are sung from the perspective of Gunn’s late father, a Vietnam veteran, and describe the psychological effects of war on a generation never taught to process it: “Found ways to hide the pain / Stole your car / Drove real far / No one can explain.” Gunn’s uncles also fought in Vietnam. “It was a nightmare that I think continues to haunt them,” he says. “And, as a friend of my father’s, rather than son (and father), I wanted to know more about that time. When I was younger, I wasn’t exploring any of my parents’ history. I realised that as my father’s life was ending, I wanted to complete the circle and really understand the whole story.” Still, Gunn says his youthful awareness of his father’s unspoken pain may have pushed him towards the artistic, gently adventurous spirit that defines his songwriting. He recalls his family coming to a show a couple of years ago. “One of my uncles said: ‘This is so funny, we’re all Vietnam vets and now our kids are artists.’ And they were just so proud of us and happy. The fact that I pursued music, it wasn’t easy.” As a teenager and young adult growing up in Philadelphia, “there was a cloud over me,” Gunn says with a chuckle. “I had this ability to become complacent, go to the bar every night and become bitter, and listen to great music but not do anything, not practice, not travel.” Meeting the American primitive guitarist Jack Rose when Gunn was in his early 20s shifted his outlook. After Rose was fired from a cafe for refusing to give a police officer a free coffee, he dedicated himself to his craft. “I was always picking his brains,” says Gunn. “When I saw him come into his practice, it inspired me to follow a bit of his path.” Then 22, Gunn moved to New York and worked in construction, driving and artwork delivery to sustain his music career. He continued such work until well after the release of his third album, Way Out Weather, which offered opportunities to tour Europe that he couldn’t turn down. “You have to trust your ability of a journey and where it takes you, and know that it doesn’t necessarily have the outcome that you might predict,” he says. “That’s part of life, and certainly a part of my musical life. Understanding that is important in being able to work with it.” That openness to experience also informs the burnished Lightning Field, which stands among Gunn’s finest songwriting. It’s named after Walter De Maria’s 1977 land art: 400 polished stainless steel poles arranged in a grid in the New Mexico desert, designed to draw lightning bolts to the earth. Visitors are picked up by a guide and taken to a small, shared house to watch the field. Often, lightning doesn’t strike, “and when it doesn’t, the experience changes, and the experience is then you sitting in a room with these other people”, says Gunn. The song suggests his desire for art as a reciprocal experience, rather than a passive one, a relationship that took him a long time to work out. “I listened to a lot of esoteric music when I was younger; I was trying to read poetry and it just didn’t make sense, it was too far-fetched,” he says. “But over the years, I’ve learned how to read things, let my guard down and let them mean something to me.” The pressure to sustain a career as an independent musician entails compromises that often aren’t geared towards these holistic experiences. “It’s not just this comfy cushion,” says Gunn of Matador’s support. “The music business can now be very unforgiving and confusing as someone who is very interested in tradition.” He has had to come to terms with the demand to churn out content to please streaming services and radio stations, an issue he says has grown worse since his last album. “You have to clog the stream to push through and get people to notice it. I had to let a part of my own psychosis go a little bit in that respect,” he laughs. “It’s almost like this existential crisis: it’s not my style but I totally understand.” Gunn’s prolificacy is gearing up again: he has produced Michael Chapman’s new album, True North (he also did his last one, 2017’s brilliant 50), recorded in Wales, with appearances from pedal steel guitar player BJ Cole and legendary folk singer Bridget St John. He praises Chapman, 78, for his enduring dedication to art, performance and travel, and cites him as a role model: “People who work hard and have been on the road for a really long time and have this longstanding career is inspiring to me. There’s such an immediacy with the business – and I obviously am extremely grateful to be able to do it – that is crazy and hard. In my dream mind, I just wanna be this guy with my guitar, travelling around,” he says. “But it’s not that easy.”