Journalism is a good career for the perpetually anxious. It doesn’t allow time to dwell on failures and expands to fill all available space, meaning you can ignore everything that isn’t work. This is quite relaxing until suddenly it isn’t. I have a number of techniques for dealing with the frittering restlessness that follows. Watching four seasons of a television show in a week. Listening to Good Omens on audiobook while lying on the floor. Watching every available episode of QI so there’s always someone talking, even when I am sleeping or in the shower. But the thing that works best is reading romance novels. I discovered this by way of another anxiety remedy: podcasts. Not the fashionable true crime podcasts, but gentle discussions of books and pop culture such as may murmer away in the background. A few years ago I listened to the entire back catalogue of the BookRiot podcast and for several episodes in a row of one of the hosts, Rebecca Schinsky, raved about how she had read her first romance novel. Like most people who considered themselves serious readers, she said, she had been prejudiced against the genre and dismissed it as badly-written mush. And, like most people who consider themselves serious readers, she was wrong. The book Schinsky recommended was A Rogue By Any Other Name, by Sarah MacLean. I didn’t really like it. The male protagonist was a jerk in a way I was supposed to find sexy but didn’t and I got hung up on the sex scenes, which seemed to involve an inordinate amount of growling and use of the word “pleasure” and once, “milking”. But it was well written and the dialogue skipped along and the female protagonist was interesting and funny and, more importantly, it was the first thing with a plot that I had seen through to the end in months. So I downloaded the next book in the series, and then the next. Five years later, I have 500 romance novels. I read them as e-books, partly because it is surprisingly difficult to find romance novels in regular bookshops despite the popularity of the genre, but mostly because I tend to binge and instantly buy the next instalment, even, or especially, if it’s 3am and my alarm is set for 6am. I wandered into contemporary romance novels for a bit, which was nice because the female characters weren’t all blushing virgins but frustrating because they still tended to get married and knocked up within six weeks. Popular romance tropes of forced proximity or marriages of convenience or extremely overbearingly alpha men can make sense in a historical setting but are frankly baffling in modern-day San Francisco. Women who have political and economic agency of their own should not marry men they just met, no matter how unrealistically sculpted their abs. My most comforting stories – and this is comfort food in its purest form, nourishing but unchallenging – are set in the late 18th and early 19th centuries in England, usually involving the British aristocracy. This is in direct conflict to everything I care about in real life but that is the appeal of romance novels. They do not concern real life. They are not, except for specific and very narrow examples, concerned with politics or the fact that their self-made men, who return from years overseas, have been plundering colonised cultures in order to show their father, who believed they spent too much time a-whoring, that they are not a useless fribble after all. (The father, naturally, shuns them for engaging in trade.) The female characters in these stories are interesting and smart. The writing is good. The male character may be a chauvinist on page one but is reformed by the end. The setting is historical but the sensibilities are not: homophobia, racism, and old-fashioned beliefs in the superiority of penetrative sex are all absent. Bodice-rippers may have launched the modern romance genre but they no longer define it. Once the two point-of-view characters have been introduced, it’s fairly clear what’s going to happen. You read along to see if it’s done well. If it’s not, you can abandon that author and find another. The number and variety of stories is infinite. There are historicals, contemporaries, paranormals, and erotica. The majority still depict white, monogamous, heterosexual pairings but the number of LGBT, polyamorous, and non-white stories and authors is large and growing. Every category sprouts a dozen sub-categories, allowing readers to narrow in on exactly the story they want to read. The blog Smart Bitches, Trashy Books provides weekly recommendations to people who write in with a genre and a trope. Snowed in plus second chance? Simply Unforgettable by Mary Balogh. Friends to lovers historical set outside the Regency period? Let it Shine by Alyssa Cole. Hygge in a novel? Anything by Tessa Dare, staring with The Duchess Deal. There are few things I have worked so hard to conceal as my love of romance novels. As an overweight single woman who lives alone with a cat, I know I match an unkind stereotype and that to say I like romance is to invite people to dismiss me as frivolous and silly. That is what we have done to women who write stories for and about women, or read stories for, about, and by women, since the days of the Minerva Press. But that stereotype is wrong, both about me and about the novels. Many of them are genuinely good. Not just good romance novels: good books. And it’s time to break my silence publicly, if only to better be able to enthusiastically recommend my favourites to people I barely know and receive their recommendations in return. I’ll start: the Girl Meets Duke series by Tessa Dare, The Worth Saga series by Courtney Milan, and the A Season For Scandal series by Kelly Bowen. Now tell me who you love.