Bart De Strooper is clear about his decision to accept the post of running Britain’s massive pioneering research project on dementia. “I would have not gone for it had I known what I know now,” the 59-year-old Belgian biologist told the Observer last week. The cause of his dismay is simple: Brexit has blighted the nation and distorted its attitude to international science, said De Strooper. As a result, his UK Dementia Research Institute, set up in 2016 at a cost of £250m with the aim of turning the UK into a world leader in dementia research, now faces serious funding and recruitment problems. De Strooper insisted he would continue leading the project and help its scientists achieve their goals. Brexit just makes that aim much more difficult. “There used to be an open mentality in this country, but over the past two years that has changed to something that is close to racism,” said the scientist. “I always felt at home in Britain so, when I took up the job, I thought I would be coming to family. “But the country has become anti-European, anti-international. Many Brexiters say Anna Soubry is a fascist. It is just the reverse, of course, and as a foreigner I ask, ‘When will it be my turn?’ When are they going to gather outside my institute, demanding why I am recruiting all these foreigners. ‘Belgian, go home’, they’ll shout.” These prospects worry De Strooper, who last year was awarded one of the world’s top science awards, the Brain Prize, for his work on dementia. “I am not going to be able to convince bright young scientists to come over, along with their families, so that they can work with me and help beat the scourge of dementia. They will know they will not be made welcome. Some are already being turned back, in fact.” Last year, De Strooper said, he tried to get a temporary visa for a young Indian scientist, who was then working in Belgium, to speak at a UK seminar. “He was highly educated, an expert in his field, and had a good salary, but the UK authorities would not let him attend a two-day meeting. Nor would they explain the grounds for that refusal. So we are already treating foreign scientists badly.” De Strooper contrasted Britain’s attitude to scientists with its luring of top foreign footballers to ensure the English Premier League is the best in the world. “It sees nothing wrong with that, but it does not want to do the same for scientists who would make sure our science maintains its top-flight status in the UK.” Another country or group of countries will do it and Britain will be the losers The UK Dementia Research Institute consists of a hub, at University College London, which coordinates the efforts of six other centres around the UK. “Dementia research has been underfunded for decades and, by setting up a UK centre of excellence on the subject, we are hoping to uncover the very early causes of conditions such as Alzheimer’s and so develop treatments. We already have about 250 researchers working on projects and one day hope to reach 700,” he said. “That would be a formidable total.” But Brexit now threatens that goal. Apart from discouraging brilliant young scientists from outside the UK, a hard Brexit could cripple the institute’s economic underpinning, De Strooper believes. Britain has a first-class record in attracting research funds from the European Union; the money it pulls in greatly exceeds the cash it invests in research budgets for the EU. For example, in the period 2007-13 Britain paid a total of €5.4bn towards research, development and innovation activities in the EU. In return, it received €8.8bn in EU grants for research projects carried out at universities and other scientific centres in the UK. “We would no longer be eligible for these grants after a hard Brexit and so British scientists would lose a great deal of money,” said De Strooper. And one of the first probable victims could be the groups of scientists working on UK Dementia Research Institute projects, he added. The institute was expected to continue to expand for several more years. “But if there is a hard Brexit, we will no longer be eligible for European grants which we would otherwise expect to form a major part of the funding of that expansion,” he said. After a hard Brexit, most financial experts believe the UK economy would take a hit and government coffers would have much less in them than at present. “That means that when I go for the next set of UK grants to maintain our work, there will be little chance of them being maintained at current level – never mind making up for all that EU money we will also have lost,” said De Strooper. Dementia research in the UK would stall. Other nations would be likely to take up the challenge. Dementia is a global threat with numbers of patients set to double over the next 10 years. De Strooper said: “Another country or group of countries will do it. And we will be the losers. If a nation invents a medication, all the income from it goes to its coffers. The patents, the development, the jobs will all be taken up there. You will be the first to profit from this drug. And any treatment of dementia is going to be a world leader. “So, if you want the UK to be great, then this should be allowed to go ahead. Brexiters should realise that.”