Good morning briefers and a happy new year. I’m Martin Farrer and it’s my turn to bring you the best news from the Guardian this Monday morning. It might be the new year, but it’s the same old problem for Theresa May as she makes yet another desperate plea to EU leaders for concessions to persuade rebellious MPs to back her deal in a vote which she has promised will take place next week. Without offering any details, the prime minister said on Sunday that she was seeking “further assurances” on the Irish border backstop and Britain’s future relationship with Europe. But as parliament prepares to debate the Brexit deal this week, the PM faces formidable obstacles, including vehement opposition by many of her backbenchers and the Democratic Unionists to the backstop plan, implacable EU opposition to reopening talks on the 535-page withdrawal agreement and a groundswell of bipartisan support in Westminster for a second referendum. It comes as Germany’s foreign affairs minister flies to Ireland tomorrow as the governments in Berlin and Dublin intensify their efforts to find a fix for the Irish border problem. Relations between the two countries have blossomed during the Brexit imbroglio, helped by the fact that the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, speaks German. But one EU source warned any fix would be around the forthcoming “political agreement”, and not on the withdrawal package which was “locked”. To find out what might happen over the next two weeks, check out this explainer from our political editor, Heather Stewart. Oscar Favourite? – Olivia Colman seems set to go head-to-head with Glenn Close for an Oscar next month after they both won best actress awards at the Golden Globes in Los Angeles overnight. The British star triumphed in the musical or comedy category for her tragicomic turn as Queen Anne in The Favourite, while the veteran American won in the drama segment for The Wife. Other notable British successes were Ben Whishaw for his portrayal of Norman Scott in A Very British Scandal and Richard Madden for The Bodyguard. Christian Bale was also on the board for his role in Vice. The big surprise came at the end, however, when the critically unloved Queen biopic Bohemian Rhapsody scooped best drama and best dramatic actor for Rami Malek. Read how the awards unfolded at our live blog here and who won the battle of the red carpet. Health pledge – In a welcome diversion for Theresa May, the embattled prime minister will today announce a new long-term plan for the NHS detailing ambitious plans to use genomics, cutting-edge surgery and artificial intelligence to help save up to half a million lives over the next decade. Health chiefs hope the plan will dramatically reduce the number of people dying from common killers such as cancer, heart attacks and strokes. But some experts voiced concern that funding cuts and staff shortages could undermine the bold vision. Trump threat – Donald Trump has repeated his threat to declare a national emergency in order to override Congress and secure the $5.6bn funding he needs to build a wall along the border with Mexico. The US president raised the idea twice over the weekend as the government shutdown he triggered last month entered its 16th day. The newly installed House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, has refused to drop her opposition to the wall. Adam Schiff, a Democratic leader on Capitol Hill, said the idea that Trump could invoke the 1976 National Emergencies Act, which grants a president powers to take unilateral acts in times of crisis, was “a non-starter”. Trade hope – US and Chinese officials are meeting in Beijing today in the hope of ending the damaging trade standoff between the world’s two largest economies. The dispute over tariffs, technology transfers and intellectual property rights has rattled financial markets, where fears are running high that a prolonged trade war risks a worldwide recession. However, hopes that the sixth round of negotiations between the two sides could yield a breakthrough have helped Asian shares rise overnight, combined with optimism on the back of strong US jobs figures on Friday. The FTSE is set to see a modest rise of 0.1% this morning. Teenager’s plea – A Saudi teenager who fled her family claiming physical and psychological abuse has barricaded herself in a hotel room in Bangkok after being refused onward passage to Australia. Rahaf Mohammed al-Qunun, 18, has renounced Islam and fears she will be killed if she returns to Saudi Arabia. A friend close to her said the threats to her life were real. Thai immigration officials said they would force her to board a plane to Kuwait on Monday but it left without her. She is refusing to leave her room until she sees the United Nations high commissioner for refugees. The re-emergence of the disgraced doctor Andrew Wakefield has fuelled a resurgence of vaccine scepticism among rightwing populists. After a surge in measles outbreaks across the EU in 2018, Sarah Boseley looks back at how confidence in the MMR vaccine was dented after Wakefield’s discredited campaign against it. Plus: Sonia Sodha on how to improve the British honours system. The Channel 4 dramatisation of the Brexit referendum campaign has been well-timed for what might prove to be one of the most pivotal two weeks in recent political history. With Theresa May fighting for her deal– and her career – the screening of Brexit: The Uncivil War has taken us back to where it all began. Stephen Moss has spoken to some of the protagonists depicted in James Graham’s film and most agree that it is brilliantly acted, with Benedict Cumberbatch outstanding as the leave strategist Dominic Cummings. Some quibble about the details though, with arch-leaver Daniel Hannan complaining that Michael Gove is portrayed as a “fool” and that it is written too much from a remain perspective. Peter Mandelson has the last word, however, saying that the film only makes you wonder: “What on earth was it all for? What has the country gained?” Darren Currie, Barnet’s caretaker manager, praised the fearlessness of his side after they provided the biggest shock of the day in the FA Cup to reach the fourth round by beating Sheffield United at Bramall Lane. England’s all-time-leading scorer, Wayne Rooney, was arrested in the US for being drunk and swearing in public at a Washington DC airport. The three-times Formula One world champion Niki Lauda has been admitted to hospital with flu five months after a lung transplant. The Football Association has launched an investigation after Tottenham Hostpur Ladies defender Renée Hector alleged monkey noises were directed at her by an opposition player during a game on Sunday. And former Spain and Barcelona star Andrés Iniesta has been criticised on social media for posting a photo showing him with a group of people, including two in blackface, as part of the Three Kings Day celebration in Spain. Away from the markets, a survey by the TUC warns that the UK’s household debt mountain has reached a new peak, with homes now owing an average of £15,385 to credit card firms, banks and other lenders. The figures do not include mortgage debt. The study says each household has added an average of £886 to their debt in the past year. On foreign exchanges, the pound is buying $1.275 and €1.115. The government’s 10-year NHS plan is published today and dominates coverage. The Express reports: “NHS mission to save 500,000 more lives”, as does the Mail: “We’ll save 500,000 more lives vows NHS”. The Telegraph says: “Gene test for every child with cancer”, but the Times is concerned about how the NHS can meet its commitments: “NHS faces £1bn budget hole despite cash boost.” The Guardian has the NHS news on the front, but its main story is “May pleads for EU to give ground and rescue Brexit”. The FT has “US and China under pressure to end tariff war as fresh talks open”. The news that Wayne Rooney was arrested for being drunk leads the Sun – “Boozy Roo nicked in USA” – and the Mirror: “Rooney US booze shame”. For more news: www.theguardian.com The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.