The Iowa senator Joni Ernst has stated she turned down the opportunity to be Donald Trump’s vice-president because she believed her husband Gail “hated any successes I have”. In an affidavit filed as part of divorce proceedings with her husband of 26 years, Ernst states: “in the summer of 2016, I was interviewed by Candidate Trump to be vice president of the United States. I turned Candidate Trump down, knowing it wasn’t the right thing for me or my family. “I continued to make sacrifices and not soar higher out of concern for Gail and our family,” she added. The Iowa Republican met with Trump in New Jersey at his Bedminister golf course on 4 July 2016 and gave a positive statement about the meeting. However, within two days, Ernst told Politico: “I made that very clear to him that I’m focused on Iowa. I feel that I have a lot more to do in the United States Senate. And Iowa is where my heart is.” However, in the affidavit, Ernst points to a strained marriage as the reason for her decision. “Meanwhile, he hated any successes I had and would belittle me and get angry any time I achieved a goal,” she says. In his own court filing, Gail Ernst insists that he had been supportive of his ex-wife’s political career, but details the toll he believes it took on him. “I gave up all my aspirations and goals to be a good dad and husband so Joni could pursue her dreams,” the filing says. Gail Ernst’s attorney did not immediately respond to an email requesting comment from the Guardian. Had Ernst decided to seek the vice-presidential nomination, it would have been a historic election with a woman on the ticket for both parties. Hillary Clinton was the first female presidential nominee for a major party. Two women have been major party vice-presidential nominees, Democrat Geraldine Ferraro and Republican Sarah Palin. No woman has ever been elected president or vice-president. Trump eventually chose Mike Pence, the governor of Indiana, for vice-president out of a group of three finalists that also included the New Jersey governor, Chris Christie, and former speaker Newt Gingrich. Ernst, the first woman elected to federal office in Iowa’s history, had been touted as a vice-presidential prospect during the campaign. She was also the first female combat veteran elected to the Senate in American history. The Trump campaign did not respond to a request for comment.