Late-night hosts interpreted the end of the government shutdown and the arrest of Roger Stone. On Monday’s Late Night, Seth Meyers addressed what he saw as a particularly symbolic weekend of news for the White House. Between Trump’s capitulation on the government shutdown and the arrest of his close associate Roger Stone, Meyers said, “it’s not often that a single event sums up an entire presidency but on Friday, we got one that came pretty close. “Remember, Trump brags that he only hires the best people, calls the Russian investigation a hoax, calls CNN fake news, and his government shutdown left FBI agents without pay,” Meyers explained. “So it was especially ironic when one of Trump’s closest associates was arrested by unpaid FBI agents working for the special counsel on the Russia investigation, and the whole thing was caught on tape by CNN. “The only way that could’ve been more humiliating for Trump,” Meyers said, “is if Robert Mueller celebrated by eating a Happy Meal at McDonald’s on a date with Stormy Daniels.” The indictment against Stone may seem damning – he allegedly told a radio host that he should “pull a Frank Pentangeli”, in reference to a Godfather character who lied to a congressional committee – but Stone left his house in high spirits, imitating his hero Richard Nixon’s victory pose. “Now you might be thinking to yourself: didn’t Nixon resign in disgrace? Maybe that’s not the best pose to show your innocence? But Stone doesn’t remember that, because he spent most of the 70s traveling around in a glass elevator that he stole from Willy Wonka,” Meyers joked about Stone and his off-kilter, retro-formal outfits. “This guy was basically begging to be arrested,” Meyers said. “I mean, he imitates Richard Nixon, he quotes from The Godfather, and he dresses like Hannibal Lecter.” Stephen Colbert also poked fun at the braggadocio of the Trump team in the face of seeming defeat. Trump compromised his harsh position on his signature campaign promise on Friday, agreeing to not veto a Senate bill to appropriate funding as long as a Senate committee looked into border funding. However, “not everyone thought Donald Trump folded like an origami swan,” said Colbert. “For instance, Donald Trump.” The president tweeted that the reopening was “in no way a concession”, and that if there’s no border security deal with wall funding in 21 days, then “it’s off to the races!” “And believe me, folks, I know races,” Colbert continued in the president’s voice. “Many people call me a racist.” “So, just to be clear,” Colbert said of the new situation, “he’s making the exact same offer, backed by the exact same threat, but somehow he expects different results. Well, you know what they say: the definition of insanity is Donald Trump.” On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah examined the Fox News response to Roger Stone’s arrest. “It was really interesting to see how his supporters and Trump’s supporters on the right reacted to the way he was arrested,” Noah said in reference to footage of Sean Hannity and Roger Stone decrying the use of armed FBI agents and excessive force in the arrest of Trump’s surrogate. Stone said in a news interview that more force was used in his arrest than in the raid on Osama bin Laden, El Chapo or Pablo Escobar. “Calm down, fourth blind mouse, calm down,” Noah exhorted, with a poke at Stone’s signature dark, circular sunglasses. “It wasn’t more force than Bin Laden - Bin Laden is at the bottom of the ocean right now.” Basically, Noah continued, “you have Trump and his people lambasting the police for what they did … and for how many years have black people been saying police in America are extreme – the way they arrest people, the way they interact with citizens when they take them away.” When those concerns are raised, Noah said, the same people calling foul for the treatment of Roger Stone always say “blue lives matter”, “respect the police” or “that’s the law”. In an interview with Fox, Stone even compared the FBI approach to that of the Gestapo. “Really? When the cops arrest you, they’re Nazis?” Noah said. “And when they go after black people, you’re like, ‘Well, that’s the law.’ “Look, I’ll be honest with you: I agree with Roger Stone,” Noah continued. “I think the amount of force when that the police used to arrest him seemed excessive … but I also don’t blame the cops. They were just following orders from the top.” Noah then cut to footage from a July 2017 speech Trump gave to law enforcement officers, in which he encouraged them to be rougher when putting suspects in police cars. “Yeah, poor Trump, he thought rough policing would only apply to MS-13,” joked Noah. “Who knew they would also be using it on the Maga 6.”