Saturday 3pm Venue Crown Ground Referee Dean Whitestone Odds H6-4 A2-1 D9-4 Accrington and Ipswich meet for the first time competitively with omens not looking ideal for Paul Lambert’s side. Ipswich have lost their last four Cup matches to opponents from a lower division, with three out of the four in the third round. They have not won a Cup match since 2010. Accrington miss Offrande Zanzala through suspension while Callum Elder could make his Ipswich debut. Graham Searles Bolton v WalsallMillwall v Hull CityGillingham v CardiffBrentford v Oxford UnitedSheffield Wednesday v LutonManchester United v ReadingEverton v LincolnTranmere v TottenhamPreston v Doncaster RoversNewcastle v Blackburn RoversChelsea v Nottingham ForestCrystal Palace v GrimsbyDerby v SouthamptonAccrington v IpswichBristol City v HuddersfieldNewport v Leicester CityFulham v Oldham AthleticShrewsbury v Stoke CityBlackpool v ArsenalManchester City v RotherhamBournemouth v BrightonWest Ham v BirminghamWoking v WatfordBurnley v BarnsleyQPR v Leeds UnitedSheffield United v BarnetNorwich v PortsmouthFleetwood v WimbledonWest Brom v WiganMiddlesbrough v PeterboroughWolves v LiverpoolAston Villa v Swansea Saturday 3pm Venue Villa Park Referee Gavin Ward Odds H10-11 A3-1 D5-2 Aston Villa have progressed past the third round once since losing the 2014-15 final to Arsenal. Their chances of progressing against Swansea look positive after 1-0 wins both home and away in the Championship this season. Neil Taylor and Henri Lansbury could return for Villa but Wilfried Bony, Oli McBurnie and Jefferson Montero could all miss out for Swansea because of illness. Graham Searles Saturday 5.30pm BT Sport 2 Venue Bloomfield Road Referee Mike Dean Odds H12-1 A1-4 D5-1 Arsenal are likely to rest a series of players as they take on League One Blackpool for the second time this season. Hector Bellerín, Mesut Özil and Henrikh Mkhitaryan look likely to miss out while Shkodran Mustafi continues his rehabilitation from a hamstring injury. Peter Cech will replace Bernd Leno in goal while, for Blackpool, Jordan Thompson is likely to return to midfield after suspension. Paul MacInnes Saturday 3pm Venue University of Bolton Stadium Referee Darren England Odds H9-10 A3-1 D11-5 Christian Doidge, Remi Matthews and Gary O’Neil could all be missing for Bolton because of a registration embargo resulting from money owed to an outstanding creditor. Such an outcome would serve as a further reminder of the troubles being endured by the four-times FA Cup winners and current Championship strugglers. They will hope for some respite against opponents who sit 15th in League One. Sachin Nakrani Saturday 12.30pm Venue Vitality Stadium Referee Michael Oliver Odds H4-5 A3-1 D5-2 A quick return for Brighton, who lost this one 2-0 on the Saturday before Christmas in what is now Bournemouth’s only win in nine games. “It’s the best cup competition in the world and we want to have a good run,” said Chris Hughton, who took Brighton to the quarters last season and won it twice as a player with Spurs. Eddie Howe is promising to make changes and presumably does not see it that way. Mark Tallentire Saturday 3pm Venue Griffin Park Referee Jeremy Simpson Odds H1-2 A5-1 D7-2 Wales international Chris Mepham is posed to return for Brentford having been out with injury since before Christmas. That will come as a boost to the Championship side as they look to overcome opponents who won when they last met – a League Cup first-round tie at Griffin Park in August 2015 that ended 4-0 to the visitors. New signings Mark Sykes and Jordan Graham could feature for Oxford. Sachin Nakrani Saturday 5.30pm Venue Ashton Gate Referee Peter Bankes Odds H5-4 A9-4 D2-1 On the face of it, this Cup tie is the last thing Huddersfield need right now but David Wagner has taken the opposite view and spoken about a chance to get “this winning feeling back”. November was the last time the Premier League’s bottom club enjoyed that experience. Bristol City, who are 11th in the Championship, unbeaten in eight matches and full of confidence, will be awkward opponents. Stuart James Saturday 12.30pm Venue Turf Moor Referee Simon Hooper Odds H6-4 A7-2 D11-4 Barnsley will be buoyed by the return of top scorer Kieffer Moore from injury but could be more focused on their promotion push than a deep run in the Cup. Burnley’s Nick Pope could return in goal for the first time since injury in July. Sean Dyche’s side are fresh from winning two successive games for the first time this season so spirits should have improved since their disappointing start. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Stamford Bridge Referee Andrew Madley Odds H2-9 A16-1 D11-2 The defending champions, who beat Manchester United at Wembley, start this campaign aiming to reach a third successive final. They are no strangers to a long Cup run. They host Nottingham Forest, who sit one place outside the Championship play-off places and are fresh from a rousing win against leaders Leeds. Chelsea are looking for a bounce after a goalless draw against Southampton. Amy Lawrence Saturday 5.30pm Venue Selhurst Park Referee Martin Atkinson Odds H1-7 A20-1 D6-1 It is nearly 15 years since these clubs last met, with Palace avenging their 5-2 thrashing from the previous season by winning 4-1 at Blundell Park. Back then, Grimsby were members of the top two divisions and have since recovered after spending five years in non-league. They will fancy their chances of causing an upset against Roy Hodgson’s understrength and inconsistent side. Ed Aarons Saturday 3pm Venue Pride Park Referee Oliver Langford Odds H7-4 A8-5 D2-1 Frank Lampard will be without Harry Wilson after the Liverpool loanee sustained a hip injury. Tom Lawrence returns to the squad, with Lampard hoping to balance progression in the Cup with a promotion push. For Saints, Ralph Hasenhüttl will give Angus Gunn another start in goal after an impressive debut against Chelsea in midweek. Maya Yoshida is unavailable, having departed for the Asian Cup. Paul MacInnes Saturday 3pm Venue Goodison Park Referee John Brooks Odds H1-7 A25-1 D8-1 Everton’s pursuit of a first trophy since the 1995 FA Cup begins with a third-round tie against the team who sit top of League Two and in 2017 became the first non-league club to reach the quarter-finals in over a century. Danny Cowley remains in charge but the squad has gone through significant change since then and they will hope to overcome opponents who are in poor form. Sachin Nakrani Saturday 3pm Venue Highbury Stadium Referee Ross Joyce Odds H6-5 A5-2 D9-4 The Dons won 1-0 at Fleetwood on the first day of the League One season but have struggled since, losing seven on the bounce back in the autumn. They are bottom now and Joey Barton will be confident his Fleetwood side can reach the fourth round for the first time in their history. Dean Marney returns from suspension for the home side and James Husband is also available. Graham Searles Sunday 2pm Venue Craven Cottage Referee Anthony Taylor Odds H2-7 A9-1 D5-1 Claudio Ranieri may have bigger fish to fry but he will be wary of underestimating an Oldham side that have won their last two matches since the departure of manager Frankie Bunn. Caretaker Peter Wild has a full strength squad to choose from as the Latics attempt to reach the fourth round for the first time since the 2012-13 season, while his Italian counterpart is expected to ring the changes. Ed Aarons Saturday 3pm Venue Priestfield Referee Tim Robinson Odds H3-1 A4-5 D11-4 Gillingham against Cardiff pits League One vs the Premier League but there might not be much romance at Priestfield. Neil Warnock is likely to make changes after a frantic festive period, while the Gillingham manager, Steve Lovell, said this week he will prepare “as if it is a league game”. They last beat a top-flight team in the Cup in 2004, knocking out Charlton, and they might have a sniff this time too. Nick Miller Sunday 2pm Venue Etihad Stadium Referee David Coote Odds H1-14 A50-1 D13-1 Kevin De Bruyne should start after being an unused sub for Thursday’s 2-1 league win over Liverpool. Pep Guardiola would dearly like to add the FA Cup to complete his set of domestic trophies at Manchester City. Rotherham will arrive fourth-bottom in the Championship so if they can somehow pull off a win this would be a serious act of giant-killing. Fabian Delph serves the final game of his suspension. Jamie Jackson Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 2 Venue Old Trafford Referee Stuart Attwell Odds H1-9 A25-1 D7-1 Four wins from four is the perfect start Ole Gunnar Solskær has achieved and he is looking for another against Reading. The Norwegian’s last game as a United player was the 2007 FA Cup final loss to Chelsea so to win the trophy as manager would be doubly sweet. José Manuel Gomes’s side are second-bottom in the Championship so there will be no excuse should Manchester United be knocked out at Old Trafford. Jamie Jackson Saturday 3pm Venue Riverside Stadium Referee James Linington Odds H4-7 A9-2 D3-1 Middlesbrough’s last encounter with League One opposition, in the Carabao Cup, ended in a 1-0 home defeat by Burton Albion a week before Christmas. That humiliation came after a five-game winless run in the Championship that put a huge dent in their promotion hopes and although results have improved since then, another poor performance will only increase the pressure on Tony Pulis. Rich Flower Sunday 2pm Venue The Den Referee Andy Woolmer Odds H11-10 A12-5 D5-2 Millwall, the 2004 FA Cup finalists, came from behind to win at Ipswich last time out. It make it nine Championship points from nine over the festive period after a dreadful season to that point, although they did take a point from the visit of Hull last month. The 2014 finalists have won their last five after a similarly bad start and are 13th, six ahead of the Lions, and may feel they can be a little bolder with selection. Mark Tallentire Saturday 5.30pm Venue St James’ Park Referee Kevin Friend Odds H4-6 A9-2 D3-1 Newcastle have developed a habit of making early Cup exits and Rafael Benítez does not seem convinced this season will be any different. Tony Mowbray’s Blackburn – featuring the former Newcastle forward Adam Armstrong – will hope to take advantage. Benítez is expected to field youngsters, including the goalkeeper Freddie Woodman and the midfielder Sean Longstaff. Louise Taylor Sunday 4.30pm BBC One Venue Rodney Parade Referee Chris Kavanagh Odds H10-1 A2-7 D5-1 The fact Newport beat Leeds at this stage of the FA Cup last season and came within eight minutes of knocking out Tottenham in the following round should serve as a warning to Claude Puel and his players as they prepare for a trip to Rodney Parade. Leicester’s manager is expected to bring back Wes Morgan and make a few other changes after a hectic but successful festive period. Stuart James Saturday 5.30pm Venue Carrow Road Referee Darren Bond Odds H8-11 A4-1 D11-4 Norwich and Portsmouth are well-placed for promotion from the Championship and League One respectively. The home side could be forgiven for prioritising a lucrative step up to the Premier League rather than the Cup and Daniel Farke could be without five midfielders through injury. Portsmouth will have to wait to give cup-tied Andy Cannon his debut as they try to make the fourth round for just the second time since losing the 2010 final. Graham Searles Sunday 2pm Venue Deepdale Referee Andy Davies Odds H5-6 A7-2 D11-4 Injury-ravaged North End may have Sean Maguire, Josh Earl, Alan Browne and Brandon Barker back involved but Ben Pearson remains suspended. The home side’s three January signings are all cup-tied but Doncaster recruit Kieran Sadlier is expected to get international clearance. Preston were unlucky not to convert numerous chances in their past two games and Doncaster have been scoring for fun so expect plenty of goals. Tony Paley Sunday 2pm Venue Loftus Road Referee Geoff Eltringham Odds H9-5 A8-5 D12-5 Leeds arrive at Loftus Road on a run of two successive defeats but are still top of the table while QPR are undefeated in five, their last setback being 2-1 at Elland Road. Marco Bielsa is hinting at making changes as Leeds are back in league action against Derby five days later and enjoying their best chance of promotion in recent seasons. Fans will remember last year’s third-round defeat at Newport but care little if they win on Friday. Mark Tallentire Sunday 2pm Venue Bramall Lane Referee Tony Harrington Odds H2-7 A12-1 D5-1 Flying high in the Championship, Sheffield United host non-league Barnet looking for a fourth successive win. Chris Wilder will likely hand the Everton loanee Kieran Dowell his debut, while his captain, Billy Sharp, may be rested having created history last weekend by becoming the leading scorer in the Football League since the turn of the century after taking his tally to 220 since making his debut in 2004. Ben Fisher Saturday 12.30pm Venue Hillsborough Referee Robert Jones Odds H6-5 A2-1 D9-4 Lee Bullen takes charge of a fifth game as Sheffield Wednesday’s caretaker manager and his aim will be to maintain the unbeaten run that has returned some positivity to Hillsborough following last month’s sacking of Jos Luhukay. Victory will not be easy against opponents who sit second in League One and are the division’s top scorers with 49 goals. James Collins and Elliot Lee are the ones Wednesday need to watch. Sachin Nakrani Saturday 12.30pm Venue New Meadow Referee David Webb Odds H3-1 A10-11 D5-2 Shrewsbury have improved since winning once in 13 matches in all competitions at the beginning of the season and Stoke will be a test of just how much better the going is at the Meadow. Stoke’s first season back in the Championship is not going according to plan. Gary Rowett is under pressure and has said his focus is on winning. Stoke have the quality but will miss Ryan Shawcross and could be without Joe Allen. Graham Searles Saturday 12.30pm Venue The Hawthorns Referee Keith Stroud Odds H4-6 A9-2 D3-1 Darren Moore wants West Brom to bounce back after defeat to Blackburn on New Year’s Day but a fifth game in 15 days means that Mason Holgate, newly on loan, and Jack Fitzwater will make debuts in defence. Jake Livermore is unavailable through suspension. West Brom beat Wigan 2-0 on Boxing Day and a poor run of one win in 13 matches has left Paul Cook feeling pessimistic about his side’s chances. Graham Searles Saturday 12.30pm Venue London Stadium Referee Roger East Odds H4-9 A6-1 D7-2 West Ham’s owners, David Gold and David Sullivan, will expect a strong performance against their former club. The pair were in place at Birmingham for 16 years and will not want to be on the wrong end of an upset. Yet Birmingham, who are four points off a play-off spot in the Championship, may fancy their chances at the London Stadium. West Ham will rest players after a couple of tired league performances. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 2pm BT Sport 2 Venue Kingfield Stadium Referee Graham Scott Odds H16-1 A1-5 D11-2 Relegated from the National League last season, Woking released their entire first-team when they went from being full to part-time. Under Alan Dowson – with Martin Tyler, the commentator, his first-team coach – the club have rebuilt and are second in the National League South. Only once have Woking reached the FA Cup fourth round. Their chances of an upset? “You can’t make a shock,” Dowson said. “It’s ridiculous.” David Hytner Monday 7.45pm BBC One Venue Molineux Referee Paul Tierney Odds H3-1 A5-6 D9-4 Jürgen Klopp’s side ran out 2-0 winners at the Molineux just over a fortnight ago but may be unrecognisable, at least in terms of personnel, when they return on Monday. The pursuit of a first league title in 29 years is an all-consuming priority for Liverpool at present and that may be reflected in changes for the cup tie, with Naby Keïta, Daniel Sturridge, Alberto Moreno and several youngsters likely to be involved. Andy Hunter