Jonas Mekas, who has died aged 96, was one of the most important and influential figures in American underground cinema. The term underground as a film genre originated in the US towards the end of the 1950s, boosted by the magazine Film Culture, of which Mekas was founder and editor-in-chief. The magazine, Mekas’s iconoclastic answer to Cahiers du Cinéma, became the mouthpiece of the American avant garde – rooted in the European avant garde but strongly connected to the Beat movement that emerged at the same time. In 1958, Mekas became the first film critic of the Village Voice, spotlighting the newest and most radical film-makers in New York City. “I had to protect all the beautiful things that I saw happening in the cinema and that were either butchered or ignored by my colleague writers and by the public.” Although he was a key player in American film history, Mekas’s early life in Lithuania played a significant part in his own film-making. He was born in the Lithuanian village of Semeniškiai, and in 1944, during the Nazi occupation, he and his younger brother, Adolfas, were arrested and taken to a labour camp in Elmshorn, Hamburg. They escaped eight months later, hiding on a farm near the Danish border for two months until the war ended. Thereafter, they lived in a series of displaced persons’ camps for almost four years. It was during this time that Mekas’s interest in cinema bloomed. The US army showed movies, one of which, The Treasure of the Sierra Madre, made the greatest impression on him. “Especially I remember liking the ending, and the desert, the sense of something crawling. Visually it was interesting. Then I saw another movie, Fred Zinnemann’s The Search, about displaced persons, made immediately after the war. I saw it with my brother and we got very angry about how little understanding of the real situation there was in this film, about what it means to be displaced. So we started writing scripts. That’s when we decided to make our own films.” After studying philosophy at the University of Mainz, where he also edited a Lithuanian émigré magazine and wrote short stories and poetry, he was sent, with Adolfas, to the US by the UN refugee organisation when the displaced person camps in Germany were dissolved. Weeks after his arrival in Brooklyn, at the end of 1949, Mekas borrowed the money to buy his first Bolex 16mm camera and began to record moments of his life, a practice he continued into the next century. His first 35mm feature, which he wrote, directed, produced, edited and photographed, was Guns of the Trees (1961), made under the influence of John Cassavetes’ Shadows and Robert Frank and Albert Leslie’s film Pull My Daisy. A real period piece, Guns of the Trees describes aspects of Beat culture in New York through the lives of four fictional characters, one of whom was played by Adolfas. There are discussions of Caryl Chessman’s execution, Nixon’s 1960 campaign, and US hostility towards Fidel Castro. Allen Ginsberg narrates and reads his poems, and there are folk songs on the soundtrack. Mekas followed this with The Brig (1964), a cinéma vérité record of life in a Marine corps jail in Japan. However, by this time he had decided that his talent lay outside the feature film tradition and he shifted to creating a cinematic diary, Diaries, Notes and Sketches, inspired mainly by the example of Stan Brakhage and Marie Menken. Meanwhile he had co-founded the New American Cinema Group and the Filmmakers’ Cooperative in 1962, prompted by the dearth of interest in his work from existing distributors. It was also a reaction against “the official cinema”, which he claimed was “morally corrupt, aesthetically obsolete, thematically superficial, temperamentally boring … The very slickness of their execution has become a perversion covering the falsity of their themes, their lack of sensibility, their lack of style.” Mekas screened avant garde, no-budget independent films at a number of venues, principally the Bleecker Street cinema in Greenwich Village. “We don’t want rosy films, we want them the colour of blood,” he proclaimed. In 1964, he was arrested on obscenity charges and given a six-month suspended sentence for showing a “queer double bill” of Jack Smith’s outrageously camp Flaming Creatures and Jean Genet’s Un Chant d’Amour. Undeterred, he launched a campaign against the censor board. The first chapter of his film diary was the three-hour Walden (1969), depicting four years in his life, which he called “just images for myself”. This is no ego trip, but a record of the world and the people surrounding him, with Mekas often breaking in to offer his private reflections. The staccato, single-frame flashes, edited directly in the camera, are balanced by longer sequences of dinners, weddings and meetings with a who’s who of counterculture personalities including Timothy Leary, Andy Warhol, Norman Mailer, John Lennon and Yoko Ono. The main section of Reminiscences of a Journey to Lithuania (1972) describes the emotional reunion of the Mekas brothers with their 90-year-old mother when they returned home for their first visit since the war. The film opens with a summary of Mekas’s initial experiences in the US and ends with a recognition of the difficulty of recovering the past or returning “home”. Lost, Lost, Lost (1976) records, over three hours, his early life in the US and his feeling of being an exile. Every few years, Mekas released more of his “home movies”, a phrase he embraced, using much archive material and featuring his friends, many of whom were fellow avant garde film-makers. He had married Hollis Melton in 1974 and became the father of Oona and Sebastian, in them finding a new subject. Paradise Not Yet Lost (1980) is a memoir of his family’s life in New York and travels abroad. According to Mekas, As I Was Moving Ahead Occasionally I Saw Brief Glimpses of Beauty (2000), was “the ultimate Dogme movie, before the birth of [the Danish film movement] Dogme”. During almost five hours, Mekas invites the viewer to share his family life, although its true subject is the very act of filming itself. Mekas’s obsession with reclaiming the past took another turn when, in 1969, he led a team to establish the Anthology Film Archives. Over the last 50 years, this has grown into one of the world’s largest and most important repositories of avant garde films. Mekas called himself a filmer rather than a film-maker (“I don’t really make films; I only keep filming”) or director (“I direct nothing”). He preferred to capture the essence of the moment rather than stage an event. As a perceptive film critic, he was very adept at describing his work, referring to his films as “personal little celebrations and joy … miracles of every day, little moments of paradise … awkward footage that will suddenly sing with an unexpected rapture”. He continued to film his life almost up to the end of it, one of his last films being Out-takes from the Life of a Happy Man (2012). Adolfas died in 2011. Mekas’s marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his children. • Jonas Mekas, film-maker and critic, born 24 December 1922; died 23 January 2019