There is one complaint about Tom Enders’ latest warning about Brexit. The chief executive of Airbus would do himself a favour if he sounded vaguely grateful for the huge subsidies his company has received from the UK government, and thus British taxpayers, over the decades. The corporate sense of entitlement is one reason why we’re in the current mess. But let’s save that one for another day. When Enders warns that a no-deal Brexit could force “potentially very harmful decisions” for Airbus’ operations in the UK, it’s time we listened to him and ignored what he called “the Brexiteers’ madness”. This is about the politics and economics of aircraft production and three points are important. First, Enders – or, since he’s on his way out, his successor – is in a position to pull investment from the UK. If that happened the jolt to the entire UK aerospace industry could be enormous. As Airbus regularly points out, there are 110,000 jobs in its UK supply chain, on top of the 14,000 people it employs directly, and this is an industry that runs on multinational lines. Second, it is naive to think Airbus is engaged in elaborate scaremongering in its analysis of Brexit. The company’s “risk impact assessment” last June was not, as some Brexiters tried to pretend, an argument about tariffs that would not apply. The worries were about the movement of employees between the UK and the EU, supply logjams and the harmonisation of aircraft regulations on parts and components. If those factors create costs and disruption they will inevitably enter calculations on where to invest. Third – and perhaps most importantly – one can be very confident that other countries would try to exploit a no-deal outcome to bag more Airbus work for themselves. “Make no mistake there are plenty of countries out there who would love to build the wings for Airbus aircraft,” Enders said – a lofty statement but one that is also plainly true. It’s an open secret that the German and Spanish governments, even before the 2016 referendum, were lobbying to get the wing-manufacturing work currently done at Broughton in north Wales. China might also want to pitch. That’s the aerospace industry – it is political. So, when Enders says Airbus is not dependent on the UK for its future, take him seriously. It would be expensive and time-consuming for Airbus to dump its sole supplier of wings and establish another facility from scratch, as he acknowledged. And one suspects, even after a no-deal Brexit, Airbus would first want to see what extra incentives were on offer from the UK. But the threat to redirect investment – with strong encouragement from EU capitals – is credible. Gratitude, you can be sure, will not form part of the thinking in the Airbus boardroom.