1) Cody Parkey was left feeling like the loneliest man in the world after watching his last-gasp potentially game-winning field goal bounce off the upright and crossbar in the Chicago Bears’ playoff defeat by the Philadelphia Eagles (keep an eye on the mascot in the background, too). Maybe we shouldn’t be surprised by Parkey’s supposed misfortune. He has a knack when it comes to finding the woodwork. Here he is clattering the goal-frame four times from four kicks in a match last November. And here are those doinks immortalised in Tecmo Super Bowl. Parkey still has some way to go before he matches this single rugby union penalty, though. It boinged off the crossbar and post a full four times! Over to you Cody. 2) The Australian Open kicks off on Monday and, as always, Roger Federer is among the favourites. Here’s his emotional journey to winning a 20th grand slam title in Melbourne last year, when Caroline Wozniacki finally won her first. Her ding-dong battle with Simona Halep was one of the matches of the year. There have been countless classic matches down the years but here are some of the best: Chris Evert Lloyd v Martina Navratilova in 1982, Boris Becker v Omar Camporese in 1991, Jennifer Capriati v Martina Hingis in 2002, Andy Roddick v Younes El Aynaoui in 2003 and Marat Safin v Roger Federer in 2005. And will Bernard Tomic have the chutzpah to try this bizarre underarm serve against an opponent at Melbourne Park? We hope so. 3) Some passes are so good you just have to watch them over and over again. Lionel Messi’s to Luis Suárez against Getafe was one such piece of creative brilliance. It took six players out of the game. And there’s a reason Bayern Munich are splashing out £31.4m on Stuttgart’s Benjamin Pavard: the full-back can drill the ball through defences with arrow-like precision. And here’s Espanyol’s David López with an entertaining long-range assist – not that he meant it. 4) Ellyse Perry was on fire for the Sydney Sixers in the Women’s Big Bash league, with brilliant batting, a couple of wickets and a superb diving catch to boot. The best catch this week though? This fan may argue otherwise. Oh, and here’s cricket with a banging donk on it. 5) Rally legend Sébastien Loeb has got off to a flying start in the 2019 Dakar Rally. Not that we should be surprised. The man can drive. See for yourself with this onboard view of him bossing the Monte Carlo course in 2015 in the snow … at night. Even on three wheels, and with the police bothering him, Loeb can make rapid progress. 6) Airport-bothering drones are giving the flying machines a bad press at the moment but they’re great for filming motocross, analysing football and capturing parkour … while drone racing looks like a lot of fun too. 1) Urban downhill mountain biking in Colombia. 2) Player gets the ball belted into his nuts – and sets up goal for opposition team. 3) When live animal mascots collide. 4) Every goal that Ole Gunnar Solskjær scored for Manchester United? Why not. Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, Edgeley, BedfordBlueRaider, Giles Skerry Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.