Police searching for the footballer Emiliano Sala will consider calling off the operation later on Wednesday after failing to find any sign of the aircraft he was travelling in despite scouring 280 sq miles of the Channel. In a lunchtime update, Guernsey police “multiple aircraft” have been involved in the search operation over five hours, but “no trace” of the missing light aircraft had been found. It added: “A decision whether to continue will be taken later today.” Earlier, rescuers said they were basing the operation on the premise that Sala made it into a life raft after the plane he was in disappeared over the sea. The pilot of the plane is reported to be Dave Ibbotson, an experience flyer and member of the British Parachute Association. A woman at the family home in Crowle, 10-miles west of Scunthorpe, told Grimsby Live that she did not wish to comment. Sala’s travel arrangements are understood to have been arranged by football agent Willie MacKay, who was reported involved in the Argentinian footballer’s transfer from the French side Nante to Cardiff City. Asked to confirm whether he was involved in Sala’s travel, MacKay told the Guardian he could not discuss the matter. L’Equipe reported that the head of the rescue operation said that if Sala and the pilot landed on water and made it on to a life raft, there was still a chance they were alive. “Nobody here, including me, is giving up. We are determined to find the two men alive,” the newspaper quoted Capt David Barker as saying. Guernsey police said they were working on four possibilities: Sala and the pilot have landed elsewhere but not made contact. They landed on water, have been picked up by a passing ship but not made contact. They landed on water and made it into the life raft police know was on board. The aircraft broke up on contact with the water, leaving them in the sea. The police added: “Our search area is prioritised on the life raft option. More updates as information becomes available.” A spokesperson for the force said: “There are currently three planes and one helicopter in the air. We are also reviewing satellite imagery and mobile phone data to see if they can be of any assistance in the search. So far today nothing spotted can be attributed to the missing plane.” The UK Air Accidents Investigation Branch said the plane was unlikely to have been fitted with a flight recorder, or black box, which are mandatory on airliners and business jets, and are a vital tool for crash investigators. A black box is not mandatory on light aircraft such as the Piper PA-46 Malibu that Sala was travelling in. It is a legal requirement for European aircraft to carry an emergency transmitter to aid search and rescue operations. The AAIB said it was working closely with authorities in the US, France and Argentina. A spokesman said: “We will be gathering all the available evidence to conduct a thorough investigation. However, if the aircraft is not found it is likely to limit the scope of the investigation.” The remarks came as Sala’s former girlfriend Berenice Schkair, 27, made an emotional appeal on social media, writing: “I want to wake up and all of this to be a lie. Please investigate because I cannot believe this accident. Don’t suspend the search for bad weather when you only just found objects floating. I need to read that you have shown up.” She added: “Emi, my heart is broken. I still cannot understand it. I’m destroyed, I feel pain, fear, anger and impotence for not being able to do anything. I know you’re strong. We are waiting for you.” In a separate post, Buenos Aires-born Schkair wrote: “Investigate the football mafia because I don’t believe this was an accident.” When asked by the Argentinian media outlet Infobae for a comment, she said: “The only thing I want is for him to show up. Out of respect for the family I prefer to wait, I’m going to say what I need to say in a few days.” The aircraft, carrying Sala and the pilot, disappeared off Alderney on Monday night. The 28-year-old footballer reportedly sent a voicemail message to his father saying he was frightened the plane was about to break up. He was flying to Wales from Nantes, France, after signing for Cardiff City for a club record fee of £13m. In a transcript of the call, quoted by the Mirror, he said: “I’m here on a plane that looks like it’s about to fall apart, and I’m going to Cardiff … If in an hour and a half you have no news from me, I don’t know if they are going to send someone to look for me because they cannot find me, but you know … Dad, how scared am I!” The search and rescue operation – which included help from the Channel Islands, UK and France – was suspended for the day at 5pm on Tuesday. According to Guernsey police, the Piper PA-46 departed at 7.15pm on Monday and was flying at an altitude of 5,000ft (1,500 metres). On passing Guernsey it “requested descent”, but Jersey air traffic control (ATC) lost contact with the plane while the plane was flying at 2,300ft. After a 15-hour search from rescue teams, which covered an area of 1,155 sq miles (2,990 sq km), police said “a number of floating objects” had been seen in the water, but they were unable to confirm whether any were from the missing aircraft”. Earlier on Tuesday, Cardiff City’s executive director, Ken Choo, expressed his shock and distress at the news. Choo described Sala as a “great person” and said he had been “so happy” to sign for Cardiff. Its chairman, Mehmet Dalman, told BBC Radio Wales: “We spoke to the player and asked him if he wanted us to make arrangements for his flight, which would have been commercial. He declined and made his own arrangements. “I can’t tell you who arranged the flight because I don’t know at this stage – but it certainly wasn’t Cardiff City.” Investigators say the pilot had checked in with air traffic control in Nantes and Brest, then was transferred to London. He had requested to descend to 5,000ft. Last readings show the plane was flying at an altitude of 2,300 feet, it was reported. Le Point magazine claimed the aircraft was registered in the United States. Dalman said the club’s manager, Neil Warnock, was “in a state of shock”. He said: “Neil is human and he’s affected as much as we all are. We need to get on and do the right things but at the moment there’s a vacuum of information – it’s very unsettling.” Dalman said the reaction from the football world and beyond had been overwhelming, adding: “I even had a text message from a prime minister to wish us well.” He added: “Cardiff City will be involved with the investigation. We won’t leave a single stone unturned until we have all the facts … It’s a tragedy that I have never faced before. It has affected the club enormously. Our hearts go out to his family, especially those very far away. It’s a distressing time. We feel very saddened by it.” Hundreds of fans, many in tears, gathered in Nantes city centre on Tuesday evening for an emotional tribute to the missing player. Many laid bouquets of yellow flowers – Nantes are known as the Canaries because of their bright yellow kit – and chanted Sala’s name. Nantes FC said in a statement the tribute was “a spontaneous initiative by fans … The club thanks its supporters and the entire football family for the numerous expressions of support”. The message concluded: #PrayForSala. Claudio Ranieri, the Fulham manager who was at Nantes last season, said he was “devastated” to hear the news. “Emiliano was a marvellous person, a fighter. The football world is united in hoping for positive news. I pray for Emiliano and his family,” Ranieri tweeted.