Plan B? No, just B for Back to Brussels to Beg a Better Backstop, not even Botoxing her old plan A. Theresa May does not surprise. Wild rumours that she might dash for another election or resign mid-crisis fooled no one. Why expect better? If she pretended to listen to flotillas of visitors imploring her to see sense, change course, stop the madness, then she wore earplugs. Of course nothing changed. However, she has every reason for intransigence, strapped to her pilot seat, clamped in irons. Move an inch on the customs union, soften a red line and she would haemorrhage Tory MPs, winning few from Labour. Kate Hoey may cavort at Jacob Rees-Mogg’s Bollinger bash at his home to celebrate May’s 230-vote defeat, but entices no fellow Labour MPs. As the captive prime-minister-in-name-only runs the clock down closer to a nuclear no deal, how terrified should we be? Pay attention when her own business minister, Richard Harrington MP, warns that it would be such an “absolute disaster” that he would resign, warning of car industry collapse if supply chains were cut. Some cabinet ministers would walk, too, rather than take the blame for needless carnage. Every day brings more bad news: the International Air Transport Association warns that 5m sold airline tickets could be cancelled: no deal means no extra flights above last year’s quota. Rule out no deal and MPs can heave a sigh of relief – except the ERG revolutionaries clamouring to tear the country up by the roots Contrary to Brexit myths, Calais is not ready for extra checks: read the Guardian’s hair-raising report from lorry drivers. Think how unprepared we are to replicate EU agencies – atomic, medicines, chemicals and scores more. Some 10,000 extra civil servants are at work in Whitehall already: a crash-out needs a permanently bigger (but pointless) state, no small-state nirvana. Promises were made to replicate all EU grants to farmers and deprived areas: but for how long? Tariffs will cost business £6bn, while growth falls sharply and the pound is still weak, so far with zero benefit to export/import trade balances. Refusing to pay that £39bn will make us debt-defaulting pariahs. Leaked documents show that the National Crime Agency is ready to declare no-deal day a “critical incident”. Cobra will meet, civil servants work 24/7, police leave cancelled, army reservists called up, the “agency responding to any threats” from “protest and public disorder, disruption at ports, transport blockages, food and fuel shortages”. Dominic Raab, the former Brexit secretary, says blandly: “Yes, we might risk up to six months of significant – but manageable – disruption.” That almost makes it worth putting him in charge to cope with public outrage. Remember in 2000 how a short blockade of fuel depots by a few brought the country to a halt and government to its knees, plunging in the polls. Don’t trust the “out now!” Brexiters not to lead the protests at fuel and food rationing. It doesn’t take much. Do you believe this self-inflicted Dad’s Army parody will actually happen? No, me neither: I’m not stockpiling. No deal means chaos. But I am confident that forces of good government will prevent it. Not because of Downing Street’s alarmingly unconvincing claim that it is “putting in place mitigations”, but because enough wise people will refuse. Start with MPs: a large majority know it can’t happen. They will surely back Yvette Cooper’s modest amendment delaying article 50 and EU withdrawal until the end of 2019, if parliament hasn’t set a deal by the end of February – and back Dominic Grieve’s motion for indicative votes on all options. If no-deal Brexit looms, will Mark Sedwill, the head of the civil service, do nothing? He should at least warn his permanent secretaries to demand from their ministers “letters of direction” to absolve them from having authorised shocking sums – £4.2bn so far, with no deal costing far more – for an entirely destructive act. No such letters are yet demanded by this pusillanimous generation of civil servants. Amyas Morse, comptroller general of the National Audit Office, should be blasting this wastage. Rule out no deal and MPs can heave a deep sigh of relief – except for the ERG Tory revolutionaries clamouring to tear the country up by the roots and the 28% of voters the Guardian/ICM poll finds wanting a no deal. Don’t blame them for saying what I hear on my travels all the time, “Let’s just go!” and “Why didn’t we go the day after?” Instead, blame the fanatics still pumping out untruths: that it’s simple, just quit, no harm done, World Trade Organization terms will be fine (they won’t be). Look how Brexiteer Bernard Jenkin dumbfounded Mark Mardell on The World at One last week: after listening to a polite but deadly exposition by the Japanese ambassador on why no deal would cripple Japanese industries here, Jenkin simply denied the ambassador had said it at all. What can you do when no klaxons reach the ears of the wilfully deaf? You turn to the two thirds of people who are not adamantine, to MPs and ministers who take their job seriously – and to Labour whose leader today repeated his commitment to stopping no deal, staying open to a referendum. High time, too, that business made more noise, including the big supermarkets and household names hiding behind the CBI for fear of offending anyone. There is no easy healing of this miserable national rift. Shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer rightly says there are just two options now: a Norway soft Brexit or a referendum. With Norway we pay, leave borders open, obey each new EU edict with no voice, no veto. How long would that survive Brexit outrage at the first controversial EU directive imposed on us? I dread a referendum, but believe remain would probably win. Now people have seen the darker shades of Brexit never revealed for the first ballot, let them decide. Incidentally, focus groups show the so-called magic slogan, “Tell them again!”, only works with die-hard no dealers: those thinking again flinch at its aggressive tone. Simplistic slogans won’t swing it this time. What will win is a Labour campaign promising to change the country with a shift of power, wealth and well-paid work out of London and the south, understanding what the Brexit vote really meant. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist