Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un will hold a second summit near the end of next month, the White House has announced, after the president held an Oval Office meeting with a North Korean emissary. Kim Yong-chol, North Korea’s top negotiator and a veteran spy chief, met the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, for about an hour in a Washington hotel about an hour from the White House, and then spent a bit more than an hour and a half with Trump in the Oval Office, before leaving for a lunch with Pompeo, to discuss more details. After the envoy left the White House, Trump’s spokeswoman, Sarah Sanders, put out a statement saying the two men had met “to discuss denuclearization and a second summit, which will take place near the end of February”. “The president looks forward to meeting with Chairman Kim at a place to be announced at a later date,” Sanders said. US diplomats have been scouting locations in the Pacific for the second summit, including Hanoi, Bangkok and Hawaii, with the Vietnamese capital currently seen as the more likely. Since the first summit in Singapore in June, North Korea has continued its pause in nuclear and missile tests, and Trump has called off joint military exercises between US and South Korean forces, but it has not led to any substantial dismantling of Pyongyang’s nuclear programme that Trump claimed would follow from the Singapore summit. There has been evidence that North Korea has stepped up uranium enrichment and missile production. This week the vice-president, Mike Pence, conceded that Washington was still “waiting for concrete steps” from the Kim’s regime, and the US unveiled a plan for a significantly expanded missile defence system, much of it designed to counter what the Pentagon termed “an extraordinary threat” from North Korea. For its part, the Pyongyang regime has insisted that it will not unilaterally disarm, and has demanded the relaxation of international sanctions before offering any more concessions on its nuclear programme. Kim Jong-un is also demanding security guarantees from the US, and a formal end to the 1950-53 Korean conflict. The last time Kim Yong-chol, whose official title is vice-chairman of the Workers’ party, was in Washington, to finalise arrangements for Singapore, he presented Trump with a letter from the North Korean leader in an outsized envelope. Trump and Kim Jong-un have already exchanged letters in recent weeks, and the US president at one point claimed that they were so positive, the two men had “fallen in love”. The North Korean former spy chief has returned to the US capital at a time when Trump is under intense pressure from a special counsel investigation into his campaign’s links to the Kremlin, and he is locked into a struggle with Congress that has led to a partial government shutdown. “I sense a little bit of desperation on the part of the president to try and get a meeting to take all of the attention away from everything else,” Victor Cha, a former national security council official, told NBC News.