As I do most years, I watched the Golden Globes red carpet show last week. I like red carpet shows. Among other things, I like the parade of pretty frocks and the awkwardness of one group of adults milling around shouting the names of another group of adults nearby. This year, however, the entertainment was impaired by the sense that – as the parenting manuals like to say – I was showcasing bad behaviour for my daughters. Along with “can I have a treat?” and “when is it going to be my birthday?”, the question “do I look pretty?” now comes up regularly in my house – and the attraction of the rote answer, “yes”, has started to pall. I can’t put all the blame on the Disney princesses, although God knows they don’t help. The present generation of animated heroines have been given “feisty” attitudes and desires beyond marriage, but, with the exception of Moana, they still have tiny waists, tinier noses and, in the case of Elsa from Frozen, an amazing Dolly Parton chest that busts out at the climax of Let It Go, to the ongoing amazement of her four-year-old fans. Recently, out of curiosity, I flipped to a page in People magazine and asked one of my daughters who was prettier: a glamorous woman in her 50s or a glamorous woman in her 20s. Without knowing who they were, the age gap was almost imperceptible, but she glanced down and pointed effortlessly to the younger woman. I tried this several times and both daughters always called the “right” answer. None of this is news. But to see the bias in action, and to hear myself consolidate it by saying, as I do without thinking, “you look so pretty” has been sobering. In a UK study undertaken by the Girl Guides last year, more than a third of seven to 10-year-old girls said they were made to feel the way they looked was more important than anything else. In the US, the journal Science published a paper in which the question “is my daughter overweight?” was googled 70% more often than the question “is my son overweight?” It’s not something we can opt out of, but these days I’m at least trying to check myself. “Do I look pretty?” asked my daughter the other day, to which I replied, “you look extremely kind and very clever.” She was not impressed by this. “Anyway it’s not a competition,” I said, at which point my other daughter chipped in with, “it’s important to be a good girl, right?” and I found myself hesitating. “Up to a point,” I said. She looked at me quizzically. “It’s important to do what mummy says,” I said and we all stood for a moment in baffled silence. There is some hope. At the weekend, I took them to an event they have been begging to go to, billed as a Princess Show, which promised to introduce them to the real Elsa, Rapunzel, Moana and Ariel-from-the-Little-Mermaid. Dutifully we waited in line for the photo op and when we got to the front, they stared at the adult women in Disney costumes and wigs and both looked completely appalled. “Go on,” I said, pushing them towards the line-up. But they wouldn’t. “It’s Elsa!” I said brightly, but both my children scowled. “It isn’t real,” said one of them. Now if only they can hang on to that lesson. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist based in New York