Tom Rogic scored deep into injury-time to ensure the Socceroos emerged from a nervy game against Syria with the win they needed to progress from Group B in second place. Australia were ahead after 41 minutes when a terrific decoy run from the industrious Rhyan Grant created just enough space for Awer Mabil to lash a perfect curled effort past the outstretched Ibrahim Alma and into the top corner. While it should have calmed the Asian Cup holders’ nerves, it led to an immediate slip in concentration. Almost immediately from kick-off, Syria were level through Omar Khrbin as a well-directed cross from Mouaiad Alajaan caught Milos Degenek out of position. Mat Ryan’s save from the resulting header could only momentarily halt Khrbin, who followed up the rebound to bundle the ball into the net. A controversial 54th minute Chris Ikonomidis goal, after a glorious through-ball from Tom Rogic, once again had the Socceroos in front. Meanwhile, the vocal Syrian crowd at the Khalifa bin Zayed showed their displeasure at the awarding of a goal they believed had not crossed the line. Not to be denied though, the Syrians earned a fortuitous 80th minute penalty that was smashed home by Omar Al-Soma to draw level after two Syrian players collided in the penalty box. It ensured a captivating conclusion to the match as Syria pushed for a win that would see them qualify from Group B. The Australians managed to regain composure deep in stoppage time, though, and the imperious Rogic capped off a fine performance with the match-winning goal. Australia will look back on their group stage campaign disappointingly after failing to secure first place. The opening game defeat to Jordan meant they were out of contention for top spot before this game. That defeat highlighted the problems the team has in attack, with their inability to break down organised teams defending in a low block. This lacklustre performance against a reinvigorated Syrian team – whose manager Bernd Stange was sacked after their second match – showed that the team can be susceptible to defensive errors and lapses in concentration. On the available evidence, it will be difficult for Socceroos fans to take a great deal of confidence into the knockout rounds. A possible matchup against Japan and a realistic matchup against Uzbekistan will do little to quell fears. At times throughout this game, the Socceroos looked nervous as Syria looked to press them at every opportunity as they played out from defence. It was an open and attacking first half as both teams produced a string of chances predominantly through their respective strikers; Jamie Maclaren and Al-Soma. Syria had a close penalty shout denied as Mark Milligan found himself isolated on Al-Soma before the Mexican referee César Ramos waved away the Syrian’s appeal. Milligan again found himself at the centre of controversy as Syria thought they were a goal up, only to have it revoked after the referee spotted a body-check from Mohammed Osman on the Australia captain. The Socceroos continued to receive favourable calls in the second half as the referee waved away another penalty appeal on Milligan. On this occasion, the handball after a poor first touch from the 33-year-old was extremely fortunate not to be judged a penalty. This was nonetheless cancelled out by Ramos’s penalty call later in the second half. The teams traded blows just before half-time, but Australia had started to move into the ascendancy, despite another intimidating atmosphere. In midfield, the match-winner Rogic had one of his finest games in a Socceroos jersey as he continuously found willing runners in Maclaren, Mabil, Grant and Ikonomidis. Nerves remained defensively despite Ikonomidis’ goal early in the second-half but the Socceroos looked imperious surging forward. Ikonomidis and Maclaren will both look back on this game wondering how they did not each score two or three, while Apostolos Giannou hit a post with a rasping low drive after coming off the bench. Al-Soma’s late penalty ensured fans were left on tenterhooks but Australiafought back to claim an important victory and seal progression to the round of 16, where they will return to the Khalifa bin Zayed Stadium to play on Monday.