Unai Emery is two men down because of long-term injuries to Rob Holding and Danny Welbeck and so he would be open to adding a defender and striker. But with Aaron Ramsey on his way out and the continuing uncertainty over Mesut Özil, what he really wants is a new midfielder. David Hytner A spate of knee injuries has left Eddie Howe with a defensive crisis, particularly at right-back with Simon Francis and Adam Smith sidelined. Howe has stated how January is a notoriously difficult time to recruit, but injuries have forced him into a rethink. Links to Nathaniel Clyne make sense, and Howe admires Brentford’s Chris Mepham. Keeping hold of Callum Wilson, a Chelsea target, will be crucial. Ben Fisher Chris Hughton has been trying to reduce the burden on Glenn Murray ever since promotion. Attempts to lure the Liverpool forward Dominic Solanke appear to have failed, though Jürgen Locadia’s form has eased anxiety. They have also been linked with Tunisia’s Youssef Msakni. The Rangers captain James Tavernier and Wigan playmaker Nick Powell were previously of interest. BF Sean Dyche has described Burnley as minnows when it comes to matching other Premier League clubs for spending power, which is why they frequently raid the Championship in their search for value. The same may happen this January, as long as Burnley can convince targets they are not about to return to the Championship, with West Brom’s Jay Rodriguez and Matt Phillips among the usual suspects, along with Conor Hourihane of Aston Villa. Paul Wilson Neil Warnock said on Saturday that Cardiff had “nine or 10 concrete inquiries in for players”, which provides an indication of how desperate he is to strengthen. He would like to take Nathaniel Clyne on loan from Liverpool but the priority remains a proven striker. A budget of £10-12m feels realistic. Stuart James Chelsea are attempting to secure Christian Pulisic from Borussia Dortmund for the summer, and have spoken to Juventus and Milan about taking Gonzalo Higuaín on loan. If the latter arrives, Álvaro Morata could depart to San Siro in a similar arrangement. Yet the priority could be squad trimming, with Victor Moses, Gary Cahill and Danny Drinkwater likely to leave, and Tammy Abraham, currently on loan at Aston Villa, potentially also on the move. Dominic Fifield Palace have needed a natural goalscorer all season, and are confident of securing Dominic Solanke on loan from Liverpool. They lack the budget to invest heavily mid-season but may be tempted to add another forward-thinking player, which would allow them to cancel Jordan Ayew’s loan from Swansea and send out Alexander Sørloth for greater game-time. DF Marcel Brands, Everton’s director of football, has stated this will be the quietest window for some time at Goodison Park. “It is not a goal to sell, it’s not a goal to bring in new players,” he said. The need for a quality striker and to secure André Gomes on a permanent deal is pressing, however. Andy Hunter Fulham may have to cancel Timothy Fosu-Mensah’s loan to bring in another temporary signing from the Premier League, but they will surely find money to spend on permanent deals, even after a vast summer outlay, given their desperation to stay up. They will be tempted to invest in Chelsea’s potential rejects. Danny Drinkwater, after all, has flourished under Claudio Ranieri before. DF With 12 goals in 20 league matches – and none from their centre-forwards – Huddersfield are crying out for players who can give them a cutting edge, starting with a clinical finisher. David Wagner has said they will do “everything we can” to improve their attack. That may mean breaking the club’s transfer record of £17.5m. Paul Doyle Leicester will be looking to trim rather than add to their bloated and imbalanced squad, with Andy King and Adrien Silva, two of seven central midfielders, expected to depart. The out-of-favour Shinji Okazaki could move on, too. The perennial question for Leicester is where do they find a deputy for Jamie Vardy? SJ Despite repeated links to Borussia Dortmund’s Christian Pulisic Jürgen Klopp maintains he is unlikely to move in the January market unless circumstances change and dictate otherwise. Liverpool were the biggest spenders in the summer as they built with a title challenge in mind and a healthy lead at new year has vindicated their planning. AH The champions insist there will be no incomings, yet given the lack of competition to 33-year-old Fernandinho another defensive midfielder would be welcomed by Pep Guardiola. Lyon’s Tanguy Ndombele is one potential candidate – and his asking price of around £55m is affordable. Left-back is another problem area; Leicester’s Ben Chilwell may, again, be of interest. Jamie Jackson As always there will be sizeable funds available. A centre-back is the prime requirement for the interim manager, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, given the lack of clean sheets. Porto’s Éder Militão, Tottenham Hotspur’s Toby Alderweireld, Leicester City’s Harry Maguire and Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly may be ideal but whether any can be prised away in the winter window is the challenge. JJ Rafael Benítez wants a playmaker – ideally Atlanta United’s 24-year-old Paraguay international Miguel Almirón – a left-back, a winger and an extra striker. Whether he gets any of those – or even one player on the shopping list – remains to be seen. No one in and around the first-team squad is for sale. Louise Taylor Southampton blew their modest January budget on Mark Hughes’s severance package and the new manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl, wants to trim the squad. He would listen to offers for Cédric Soares, Manolo Gabbiadini, Fraser Forster and Steven Davis. A new right-back and pace in the final third would be welcome. DH Mauricio Pochettino resorted to mime when asked whether he would make any January signings, turning his pocket inside out to indicate it was empty. Spurs have no money, as they wrestle with their £1bn stadium project, and any incoming business would have to be funded by outgoings – Mousa Dembélé being one possibility. DH Watford do not intend to sell any members of their first-team squad but some peripheral players will be made available on loan, and they are open to making a small number of signings, in particular a central defender. They would like a proven goalscorer, but given salary constraints and with their need not desperate they may wait until the summer. Simon Burnton Manuel Pellegrini spent heavily last summer but an injury crisis could force the manager to dip into the market again. Samir Nasri is set to join on a free when his doping ban ends and Pellegrini also wants more depth in central midfield. Gary Medel, the experienced Besiktas midfielder, could be available for a modest fee. Jacob Steinberg Nuno Espírito Santo gives nothing away about Wolves’ transfer plans, but the club are known to be looking for another striker to provide some competition and cover for Raúl Jiménez. Identifying the right players midway through a season, rather than coming up with the money, is the issue for Wolves. SJ