The tiny, fish-hook shaped island of Nantucket feels like a place separated from America by place and time. There are no traffic lights. You won’t find a McDonalds, CVS or any other chain store ubiquitous across the US. In its quiet and partially cobblestoned downtown, some leave their cars running while they go into shops. In winter, the silence is only broken by church bells and the sound of a foghorn. In the 1800s the island was the centre of the whaling industry but it has left its gritty past behind. It now attracts the richest of the rich, among them scions of business, owners of sports teams and faces familiar from TV: former Google CEO Eric Schmidt, Tommy Hilfiger, Chris Matthews, John Kerry, Charles Schwab and Ben Stiller come here, among many others. Among those who have everything and can go anywhere, many choose to live – or at least summer – here. The actor Kevin Spacey visited the island in recent years. On Monday, he is due in the island’s lone courtroom to be arraigned on felony charges for an alleged sexual assault against a busboy at a restaurant in 2016. If convicted, the actor could face five years in prison. He would also have to register as a sex offender. The saga has brought the #MeToo movement, and all the attention it generates, to an island where many go to get out of the spotlight. “Extremely wealthy people or famous people or high-level politicians are attracted to Nantucket for a variety of reasons,” said Bruce Percelay, publisher of Nantucket Magazine and the chairman and founder of the Mount Vernon Company, a New England real estate firm. “But one of them is that people don’t care. If a celebrity comes to Nantucket and is hoping to be fawned over, they will be very disappointed. This is not the kind of place where people go to genuflect over sightings of the rich and famous. We leave that kind of behaviour to the Hamptons.” On Nantucket, the rich and famous 'can be themselves' There appears to be truth to this. On Friday evening Bill Belichick – coach of the New England Patriots football team, practically a deity to many in Massachusetts, particularly at playoff time – was having a quiet dinner in the corner of a dimly lit restaurant where this writer was enjoying a beer. Nobody appeared to be paying him much attention, save for perhaps this writer, who couldn’t help but steal glances at the man with five Super Bowl rings. “Enjoy your evening coach,” a hostess said casually as Belichick walked out into the cold winter night. “Good luck next Sunday!” “You could be sitting on a bench on Main Street next to a billionaire and you wouldn’t know it because everybody is just casual and in their happy place,” said Jeneane Life, owner of the Carlisle Inn. “Nantucket just gets in your blood. It’s just a peaceful, serene, beautiful place.” On Nantucket, Percelay said, the rich and famous “can be themselves. That is something increasingly difficult to find. “You can pick up the phone book and find the names of Fortune 100 CEOs and their home phone numbers.” For those who want to make a home here, the entry barrier is set forbiddingly high. According to the Inquirer and Mirror, the island’s weekly newspaper, the median home price on the island last year was $1.8m. The average price sat at $2.7m. “We like to jokingly say that this is where the millionaires have to mow the lawns for the billionaires,” said Renee Ceely, executive director of the Nantucket Housing Authority. “Because if you do own real estate, more than likely it’s worth more than a million dollars.” Even visiting the island is out of reach for many: during the summer, rooms at inns run to many hundreds of dollars a night. There is one hostel, but visitors won’t find any motels or popular chain hotels. The exclusivity of Nantucket is enhanced by its seclusion, 30 miles off the Massachusetts coast. The only way on or off is by ferry or plane, though both of those options can be delayed by poor weather. The attention brought by the Spacey case is unwelcome, a breach of presumed safety and serenity The island has about 10,000 year-round residents, but that number can go up more than five-fold in the summer. With most of the island zoned as conservation land and unavailable for development, land and housing stocks are limited. That means that finding housing for the workers who make the island tick – school teachers, postal workers, cops, restaurant and hotel staff – presents significant challenges. Ceely, the Nantucket Housing Authority director, calls it a “critical problem” and is working on creative solutions. On land deeded to the housing authority by the town, a small development of homes priced between $300,000 and $500,000 was recently built. A lottery chose prospective buyers who made less than 50% of Nantucket’s median income. “Affordable housing affects everyone, even the wealthy,” Ceely said. “They get their meals, who takes care of them behind the register at the supermarket, who’s cleaning the floors at the hospital? Who’s your nurse?” On such an island, where invisibility and seclusion are main draws, the attention brought by the Spacey case is unwelcome, a breach of presumed safety and serenity. Spacey was an outsider, just visiting, when the sexual assault is alleged to have occurred. His accuser, however, is from a family with Nantucket ties. He is the son of Heather Unruh, a former Boston news anchor and a fixture on the island. In October 2017, as the #MeToo movement was born with sexual abuse allegations surfacing against film producer Harvey Weinstein, Unruh used Twitter. “The #weinsteinscandal has emboldened me – #truth time,” she wrote. “I was a Kevin Spacey fan until he assaulted a loved one. Time the dominoes fell.” Days later, actor Anthony Rapp came forward with allegations against Spacey, saying that when he was a 14-year-old child actor in New York, a 26-year-old Spacey tried to force himself on him. Spacey said he did not remember the alleged incident, but apologised for “deeply inappropriate drunken behaviour”. In November that year, Unruh held a press conference where she said her then 18-year-old son had been star-struck when Spacey showed up at the Club Car restaurant, where he worked. She alleged the actor bought her son alcohol and later stuck his hands in his pants, grabbing his genitals. She said her son fled the restaurant when Spacey excused himself to go to the bathroom. Spacey will plead not guilty. But to Percelay, the alleged incident was a violation of what Nantucket is about. “There’s a presumed safeness to this island unlike many places,” he said. “You don’t expect violations like the one that was [allegedly] perpetrated by Kevin Spacey. It just doesn’t happen on Nantucket. “This type of celebrity just doesn’t fit the ethos of Nantucket.”