While these have been a troubled few weeks for Arsenal, with Sven Mislintat’s impending exit set to leave a big hole in their recruitment department, their victory over Chelsea was a reminder there have been plenty of positives during Unai Emery’s first season. The Spaniard has had to muddle along with an imbalanced squad but has shown he can make important tactical interventions on several occasions. He certainly got the better of Maurizio Sarri, disrupting the Chelsea manager’s attempts to build from the back by using an energetic high press, and his switch to a midfield diamond demonstrated Arsenal have become more flexible since parting company with Arsène Wenger. Emery’s side played with snap and bite from the start, with the tone set by Lucas Torreira’s waspish performance, and the impressive Aaron Ramsey. Jacob Steinberg Lacazette shows Chelsea the value of a no-nonsense No 9 “Exceptional achievement from a world-class player,” was Jürgen Klopp’s verdict on Mohamed Salah reaching the milestone of 50 Premier League goals. The Egypt international hit the half-century in 72 games. Only out-and-out strikers Ruud van Nistelrooy, Alan Shearer and Andy Cole got there in fewer games. “Maybe he would have scored more and earlier if I hadn’t played him on the right wing so often,” Klopp added. “My fault.” The forward’s anticipation, awareness and improvisation earned the reward but rather less appetising was his theatrical attempt to win a first-half penalty under pressure from Mamadou Sakho. Salah was affronted by Luka Milivojevic’s angry reaction to the tumble but didn’t have a leg to stand on. Theoretically and literally. The slight on Salah’s reputation was self-inflicted. Andy Hunter ‘Liverpool had to dig deep,’ says relieved Klopp after thrilling win “Tactical” was the explanation from Pep Guardiola when he was asked about Riyad Mahrez, Manchester City’s record signing, not even warranting a place among their substitutes for the 3-0 win at Huddersfield Town. Others might see it as perplexing that the £60m man has drifted out of the squad and was an unused substitute in their previous two Premier League games against Wolves or Liverpool. For Mahrez, who was bought from Leicester, it must clearly be a worry. More than anything, however, it is probably a reminder of City’s immense resources rather than anything the player has particularly done wrong. And there can be no guarantees, with Kevin De Bruyne fit again, Leroy Sané and Raheem Sterling excelling on the wings and the two Silvas, David and Bernardo, also to factor in, that it was only a one-off. Daniel Taylor Guardiola says City must improve to win the league Fulham scored first for the third match in succession but all three of those games ended in defeat. That their defending is hapless is one of the 2018-19 season’s leading statements of the bleeding obvious. It was in painful evidence during one of their most organised displays since being promoted and what should have been one of their better results; this was the squandering of a golden chance to take points off a tired, diminished Tottenham. Tim Ream’s disorientated swinging at fresh air created the chance for Dele Alli to equalise just as it seemed a frustrated visiting side could be kept at bay and then Joe Bryan lost Harry Winks for the injury-time winner. As someone who honed his managerial art in the Serie A of the 1990s, Claudio Ranieri’s instinct is to sit back on leads but he does not have the players for that to be viable at Fulham. John Brewin Pochettino says Alli’s hamstring injury does ‘not look great’ Diogo Jota became the first Wolves player to score a top-flight hat-trick since John Richards in 1977 but it was his all-round game, bouncing off Raúl Jiménez, that brought his rewards against Leicester. Jota is perhaps the most unheralded of the club’s sizeable Portuguese contingent, operating in the shadows of midfield pair Rúben Neves and João Moutinho but he undoubtedly plays a key role in helping Wolves tick. After enjoying a prolific debut season in England, Jota had, until now, struggled to replicate that form but there is evidence there is plenty more to come from the talented forward, who turned 22 in December. “Pre-season was not the best for many reasons,” Jota said. “I was struggling to feel good on the pitch and [did not] feel fast and quick. Now is a good moment. I am able to do what I always want to do.” Ben Fisher Jota completes Wolves hat-trick to break Leicester hearts With 15 games remaining Chris Hughton’s Brighton are seven points clear of the drop zone. The next three league outings are all winnable as the manager looks to ensure safety for another season. “I think if you’d asked me at this stage if I would be happy on the back of two positive performances against United and Liverpool and be seven points clear, then I would say yes,” he said. “But the pressure is always to get the points when you need to. The pleasing bit is we have lost 1-0 to Liverpool who are top and 2-1 at Old Trafford to a United team that’s in really good form. We’re going into a series of games now [against Fulham, Watford and Burnley] where the pressure will be on us to make sure that we get points from these.” Given how awkward Brighton are to play against it would be some surprise if they do not retain their top-flight status. Jamie Jackson Pogba and Rashford strike to keep winning run intact Success for Everton is finishing seventh but despite being just three points off their Valhalla, they look a long way from being the best of the rest. Marco Silva’s side have come under heavy scrutiny following a summer of investment, which has failed to provide a stable defence or regular goals. This defeat means they have won back-to-back Premier League games once this season. A battling win over Bournemouth will have given fans hope but losing to Southampton again proved their inability to put together two good performances consecutively. Failing to recover from going behind does not help; James Ward-Prowse’s opener was the 10th time this season Everton have conceded first and they have only procured two points from those games, a sign of their inability to fight back, a problem management rather than money will need to resolve soon. Will Unwin Ward-Prowse hits stunner to seal win for Saints The last time Newcastle had beaten Cardiff 3-0 on Tyneside in the Premier League, Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side were relegated and the home manager, Alan Pardew, was subjected to such sustained abuse from fans he remained, cowering, in his dug-out throughout. On Saturday Mike Ashley, Newcastle’s owner, proved the target of hostile chants but he merely sat smiling as the ground echoed to “Stand up if you hate Ashley.” With suggestions that a mooted takeover had collapsed, the mood was ugly but did not inhibit Rafael Benítez’s players. Instead, Fabian Schär showed he is a centre-half with show-stopping technical benefits and midfielder Sean Longstaff shone. “The players, especially the foreign players, aren’t bothered [about the possible takeover],” said Newcastle’s manager. Louise Taylor Newcastle out of bottom three as Schär sinks Cardiff Andy Carroll’s jaw-dropping miss against Bournemouth sparked derision although, at some level, one could be forgiven sympathy for a player who badly needs something to go his way. Saturday’s game was only his 61st league start since joining West Ham permanently five and a half years ago and, while there was the odd glimpse of the intelligent hold-up play and aerial power he can provide, the way forward seems unclear. Carroll is 30 now and the chances of things getting much better are receding. Assuming Marko Arnautovic departs there will surely remain a role in Manuel Pellegrini’s squad between now and the end of the season, even if a regular starting place seems unthinkable. Carroll is out of contract in June and it is hard to see who would bank on him these days as an option to count on at the top level. Nick Ames Wilson’s blistering strike sets up Cherries win Javi Gracia is not a man who is prone to hyperbole. But as he celebrates the first anniversary of his appointment today, the Watford manager has every reason to feel proud of his efforts since replacing Marco Silva. Despite failing to find a way past Burnley on Saturday, Watford have created a strong identity under the Spaniard and now look strong contenders to finish seventh. The reward for that could be the Europa League, and their squad could be better suited to handling the extra workload that brings than Sean Dyche’s men – they failed to reach the group stages last August, losing in the play-off round. “I’m very pleased but not only for me,” Gracia reflected on his first year in charge. “When I arrived it was because the owners trusted me and after one year I can say they are happy with our work and the position we are in.” Ed Aarons Heaton is Burnley’s hero as Dyche enjoys homecoming