Hugo Lloris Fingertips could not repel Rashford’s winner and had his hands full keeping out a series of efforts. 6 Kieran Trippier His loose pass proved costly as possession was given up en route to United’s goal. 6 Toby Alderweireld Came so close to equalising with a canny near-post shot but De Gea was up to it. 6 Jan Vertonghen Not the easiest task to come back from a month out and the Belgian looked a little rusty. 6 Ben Davies Selected ahead of Danny Rose he did not show a superior performance at left-back. 6 Moussa Sissoko Pulled up mid-sprint with a muscle strain in the first half and was replaced by Érik Lamela. 5 Harry Winks In the right place for a couple of early shots but keeping track of Pogba proved a challenge. 6 Christian Eriksen Full of endeavour trying to pull strings, the arch-creator did his bit but the killer pass did not come. 7 Son Heung-min Final game before leaving for Asian Cup but he was unable to weave more magic on his farewell. 6 Dele Alli Was involved with some creative passing and movement but came up short in three key duels with De Gea. Booked. 7 Harry Kane Nudged the ball over the line in the first half but was offside and De Gea thwarted other efforts. 7 David de Gea Another day at the superhuman office. Made a compilation of stunning saves look easy. 10 Ashley Young A fine cross served up an excellent chance for Pogba when he joined United’s attack. 7 Victor Lindelöf Was not shy to make a physical challenge to try to hold his team’s defensive ground. 7 Phil Jones In a game when Spurs had an abundance of chances, he did not feel any serious discomfort. 7 Luke Shaw Renewed confidence is there for all to see and he looked comfortable and focused. 7 Ander Herrera Concentrated on tidying up in front of the back four, a job he did diligently and securely. 8 Nemanja Matic Important block to deny Kane a shot on target, helped the second-half rearguard action solidly. 7 Jesse Lingard Buzzed busily in the service of the team, he instigated the goal with an alert interception. 7 Paul Pogba Involved and influential. His assist, a precision pass upfield, was masterful. Unlucky not to score. 9 Anthony Martial Threatened with occasional high-speed runs from the flank before being substituted. 7 Marcus Rashford The leader of United’s energised attacking line scored the winner – his shot was early and deadly. 8