Two of the world’s smallest and most vulnerable penguins have been stolen in a brazen overnight raid on their nests in New Zealand. Little blue penguins – or kororā – are native to New Zealand and are listed by the Department of Conservation (DoC) as an at-risk, declining population. Little blues are the world’s smallest penguin, and are threatened by common predators such as dogs and cats, urban development on their coastal environment and being hit by cars, boats or caught in nets. Last week two men wielding a crowbar orchestrated a late-night raid on a little blue penguin burrow at Perfume Point in Napier, on the east coast of the North Island. The DoC believes the thieves used the crowbar to prise heavy rocks off the penguins burrow, and then hooked the instrument around the birds’ necks to pull them from their sanctuary. One penguin died in the attack, and two others were wrapped in towels and taken away in a vehicle, in what DoC staff worry may not be a one-off smuggling attempt, with the birds likely destined for the illegal wildlife trade. Rod Hansen, a DoC officer at Hawkes Bay, described his team as “outraged and disturbed” by the incident. “We are really concerned as we believe this might not be a one-off. The very next day another penguin/kororā was found dead floating nearby and it appears it may have died from a head injury,” said Hansen. “We have no idea where these birds are being taken to and we are seeking CCTV footage from the surrounding area.” Little blue penguins moult from January through to March and stay in their burrows for protection during the “vulnerable” period. Hansen said it was “disturbing” that the thieves had chosen to target the animals when they were enclosed and defenceless. “They are nocturnal animals and the time this offence occurred – in the evening – further suggests the poachers knew exactly when best to target the birds.” Locals in the area expressed shock and disgust at the incident, which has rattled the local community who play a vital role in protecting the birds and their fragile coastal habitat. “I think it’s pretty sick really,” one local told Newshub. Kororā are protected under the wildlife act and anyone found harming the animals could face a NZ$100,000 fine and up to two years in prison. New Zealand police have been contacted for comment.