The crowd at San Siro was the smallest it had been for any game in this Serie A season, yet also perhaps the most uplifting. Inter’s match against Sassuolo was originally supposed to be played behind closed doors, as a punishment for racist abuse of Kalidou Koulibaly by supporters at the stadium last month. Club officials persuaded the footballing authorities to let them distribute 11,000 tickets to schoolchildren instead. They filled a part of the stadium’s lower tier, with the remaining seats covered over by gigantic banners upon which ‘BUU’ had been printed in various fonts. That spelling is used by Italian journalists to represent monkey noises directed at black players during games. Inter were inviting us to reinvent the letters as an acronym – to be written, not said – ‘Brothers Universally United’ against discrimination. Write and share your BUU so it's never heard again. Let's make it a message of unity, rather than racism. #BrothersUniversallyUnited #NoToDiscrimination #FCIM pic.twitter.com/J1gqj4gsOd The young audience cheered both teams: showing a great enthusiasm for attacking football in general. Such a convivial atmosphere stood in contrast not only to that game against Napoli but also the stark silence of Inter’s Coppa Italia win over Benevento on 13 January – when the full stadium ban was in force. Sadly, neither team could give the kids a goal to celebrate. Saturday’s game finished 0-0, with Sassuolo enjoying slightly the better chances. There was no shortage of scoring elsewhere, though. After its grim end to 2018, Serie A returned from the winter break with an entertaining round of games: from Roma’s helter-skelter 3-2 win over Torino to Atalanta’s 5-0 rout of Frosinone and a defiant 2-1 victory for a short-staffed Napoli over Lazio. If those kids in the stands at San Siro offered hope for the future, then so too did a 19-year-old on the pitch at the Stadio Olimpico, Nicolò Zaniolo climbing off his backside to improvise an opening goal for the Giallorossi. His namesake Nicolò Barella, 21, has been running games for Cagliari all season but highlighted his performance against Empoli with some precocious acts of individualism as well. Most absorbing of all was the match between Fiorentina and Sampdoria at the Stadio Artemio Franchi. Both teams begin 2019 with aspirations of qualifying for Europe, or perhaps even – given the underwhelming form of Lazio, Milan and Roma – of seizing a place in the top four. Toward that end, Fiorentina signed Luis Muriel on loan from Sevilla at the start of this month. The Viola had been frustrating to watch in the first half of this campaign: a young team blessed with abundant creative talent but lacking the quality up front to capitalise on it. Only Torino, in the top half, had scored fewer. Muriel might seem a curious choice in that regard. Although likened to the Brazilian Ronaldo by reporters throughout his previous stint in Italy, he has never been especially prolific. Only twice in his career has he made it to double figures – scoring 11 Serie A goals for Udinese in 2012-13, then the same number for Sampdoria in 2016-17. He did furnish a further nine assists during that latter campaign, though, prompting Sevilla to make him their most expensive signing of all time. Muriel departed for Spain, talking of a desire to “make that step forward towards the top five or six teams in Europe”. Plainly, things did not work out as he envisaged. Muriel was unfortunate to join Sevilla in what would become a period of constant upheaval, the club rotating through four managers in less than a year, but he also frustrated fans with erratic performances and drew criticism for his fluctuating weight. He had played just six league games this season, and only one as a starter. His impact for Fiorentina, however, would be immediate. Muriel opened the scoring against his former club with a memorable goal: picking the ball up just inside the Sampdoria half and sprinting 30 yards before slipping the ball between two defenders and easing a side-foot finish into the far corner just as a third arrived to close him down. He declined to celebrate, as he would again after producing an even more special strike midway through the second half. The game had turned against Fiorentina in the interim. Edimilson Fernandes was sent off for a second booking and Gastón Ramírez equalised before the interval. The visitors were pressing for a second goal, when Federico Chiesa played a ball out of defence towards Muriel on the edge of the centre circle. The Colombian took one touch to spin past Joachim Andersen and one more to evade the challenge of Nicola Murru. Nobody else could catch him as he sprinted half the length of the pitch to finish across the goalkeeper once again. For Fiorentina supporters, it was a goal that evoked memories of Roberto Baggio’s coast-to-coast against Napoli in 1989. Still, Muriel would only hold his hands up in apology. An act of deference towards Sampdoria’s fans, but perhaps also their manager, Marco Giampaolo, whom he credits as the first coach ever to truly show faith in him. Muriel chose Fiorentina ahead of Milan this January in part because he got the sense that Stefano Pioli might become the second. “You’re the only one who reminds me of Ronaldo, O Fenomeno,” the manager is reported to have told him. “Now prove it.” Sunday’s game represented a pretty good start, even if it still was not enough to secure three points. Sampdoria have a phenomenon of their own in Fabio Quagliarella, who struck twice in five minutes to turn the game on its head. In doing so, he extended his personal scoring streak to 11 consecutive games in Serie A – the joint-longest run of all-time, matching Gabriel Batistuta’s run from 1994. Fiorentina dragged themselves level again in injury-time, Germán Pezzella poking home a deflected cross at the back post. The draw did not really suit either team, yet Giampaolo could not fight back a smile as he reflected on his “weakness” for Muriel – even now he is playing for an opponent – during his post-game interview. Football in Italy had shown us its ugliest side at the end of 2018. The new year began with a reminder that the sport can be beautiful, too. Napoli 2-1 Lazio, Cagliari 2-2 Empoli, Fiorentina 3-3 Sampdoria, Spal 1-1 Bologna, Frosinone 0-5 Atalanta, Inter 0-0 Sassuolo, Udinese 1-2 Parma, Roma 3-2 Torino 