It is often difficult to get in the mindset of an era other than our own. To understand why certain events happened, you have to accept that cultural values, which might seem shocking by today’s standards, were once commonplace. With this in mind, cast your mind back to 1999, a time in which Travis were both popular and relevant. It was this summer, when the band were at the height of their powers, that they started adding a cover to their setlist. Travis were – I know this is hard to believe now, but trust me – at the time a coolish rock band who played what was then considered real music. The choice was a shock: Britney Spears’s … Baby One More Time. “We did it for a laugh the first time,” said Fran Healy in an interview in 2005. “And as we played it, the irony slipped from my smile. It’s a very well-crafted song. It has that magic thing.” Travis’s cover began a bizarre part of musical history. It was a time in which bearded menage the Magic Numbers took on Beyoncé’s Crazy in Love, replacing its searing horns with contrite melodicas. Keane performed a mash-up of Christina Aguilera’s Dirrrty and Destiny Child’s Bootylicious (they adapted the lyrics to namecheck the members of the band so the opening lines became: “Tim, can you handle this? Richard, can you handle this?”). Inherent in these performances is a horrible indie smugness. Like a supply teacher telling an English class that Shakespeare, was, in a way, the first rapper, guitar boys truly believed that this was the way to reveal that pop had some artistic merit, but it could only be discovered by removing all the nuance and having it performed by a strummer from the home counties. Things reached a particular apex when Ryan Adams, the patron saint of slamming your bedroom door and crying into your pillow, covered Taylor Swift’s entire 1989 album. The record was a perfectly reasonable thing to have on the background during a shiva but, as the New York Times wrote at the time, it’s “remarkable only if you feel more comfortable taking your shots of pain from a tortured middle-aged man than an in-control young woman”. However, Ryan Adams is now something of an anomaly in the musical landscape, a man so identifiably indie that hearing him cover pop songs felt novel. When guitar band the 1975 covered Ariana Grande’s Thank U, Next last month it sounded no more or less earthy than their own pop-indebted sound. With the lines permanently smudged between pop and alternative, we might be witnessing the death of one of the defining musical art forms of the past couple of decades. But, thanks to YouTube, we will always have a record of crimes that were committed by, say, the Automatic’s screamo version of Kanye West’s Gold Digger.