For a man whose position is strictly non-partisan, the Commons Speaker, John Bercow, has provoked more fear, anger and adoration than any other in the role in recent history. His critics, who suspect he is an opponent of Brexit, have tried many tactics to oust him from the Speaker’s chair. More seriously, he has been the subject of multiple allegations of bullying, which he denies. A report by Dame Laura Cox suggested he should quit over the culture of “deference and silence” concerning bullying in parliament whereby senior management “actively … cover up abusive conduct”. Yet he has escaped serious sanction because of the allies, many of them in Labour, who see him as one of the most reforming Speakers in a generation – one who prioritises the will of MPs over any deference to the government. Bercow provoked fury from ministers and Brexit supporters on Wednesday by accepting an amendment which radically curtails the timetable for Theresa May to prepare a “plan B” to present to parliament should she lose the vote next week on her Brexit deal. Tory backbenchers were visibly enraged during the points of order after Bercow permitted the controversial amendment. Crispin Blunt, a Brexiter, told Bercow: “Many of us will now have an unshakeable conviction that the referee of our affairs, not least because you made public your opinion and your vote on the issue of Brexit, is no longer neutral.” Despite the visceral dislike from many in the Conservative party, Bercow has the firm support of many Labour MPs, precisely because of his willingness to hold the government’s feet to the fire over significant Brexit legislation. He has dramatically increased the number of urgent questions which he grants to allow backbenchers to call cabinet ministers to the Commons. May has regularly been kept on her feet for up to three hours during statements until the Speaker has been certain that every backbencher wanting to speak has had the opportunity. Though Bercow has long been a thorn in the side of the government, it was his admission to a group of students in early 2017 that he had voted remain which set him at odds with mainstream Eurosceptic Tory backbenchers. “Personally, I voted to remain. I thought it was better to stay in the European Union than not,” he told students at Reading University. He also referred to untruths during the Brexit campaign, when “promises were made that could not be kept”. Bercow was at the time already facing a vote of no confidence after describing the US president, Donald Trump, as racist and sexist, effectively banning him from addressing parliament during his state visit. That attempt was unsuccessful, gathering little steam among the majority of Tories or getting any backing from Labour. Though Bercow was elected for the Speaker’s position while a Conservative, the historic role is non-political – a Speaker is intended to be a representative and servant of the will of parliament. Yet the Speaker also has extraordinary influence, deciding which amendments submitted by backbenchers to government motions and legislation are chosen to be put to a vote. In a hung parliament, Bercow’s role has become one of the most important in the country. In choosing amendments he has appeared to give preference to ones which command significant cross-party support. Examples include Dominic Grieve’s amendments to the EU withdrawal bill, which gave parliament a meaningful vote on the final Brexit deal, as well as the latest amendment to the business motion which instructs ministers to return with a plan B within three days of the deal’s defeat. That preference has often made Bercow an asset to Labour – though Eurosceptic Tories insist that his is a personal anti-Brexit agenda. His relationship with the Commons leader, Andrea Leadsom, is at rock bottom. She has challenged him publicly for calling her “stupid” and on Wednesday insinuated that he had made his call about the amendment against the advice of senior House of Commons clerks, which he denies. Some Downing Street aides are convinced that Bercow has regularly let at least one hour go past when May has been in the chamber without calling a single Tory MP who would back the prime minister’s Brexit deal – which they privately argue makes the deal look even more unpopular than it was. Bercow’s judgment is likely to be crucial in the coming days. May must return to put a motion to the Commons on the way ahead, and that motion can also be amendable. MPs could, for example, attempt to amend it to mandate a second referendum or a Norway-style Brexit deal. It is because of this power to shape the future of Brexit that some MPs have protected Bercow after the damning criticism in the Cox report. Labour’s Margaret Beckett put it starkly: “If it comes to the constitutional future of this country, the most difficult decision we have made … it trumps bad behaviour.”