I’d often felt the markets had failed to live up to their promise. There’s a scene in Julie & Julia, where Meryl Streep, embodying food writer Julia Child, breezes through a row of Parisian street stalls. Overwhelmed by the offerings – cured pigs heads hanging from hooks, a literal tower of cheeses – she holds her hand to her chest, before clutching a pile of fresh parsley and getting high off the herbaceous supply. The produce is bountiful, spilling from wicker baskets, and the stallholders are all in good spirits, throwing their arms up with delight whenever Meryl so much as glances in their direction. The scene is pure Hollywood, a Nora Ephron fairytale and yet, to me, always represented the quintessential market experience – simple yet pretentious, indulgent yet wholesome. Growing up, the only markets I encountered were the sort you might find in a beachy tourist town. Targeting the seasick and sunburnt, they hawked jars of coloured bath salts, knitted coathangers and other gifts you give to people you love but don’t care enough about to really get to know. I’d heard about farmers markets, but they seemed to only exist in other places, for other people. For the longest time, I knew two things to be true – markets were largely glorified carboot sales, and try as you might, you could not buy asparagus outside of a tin. It all changed a year ago, when I moved to Brisbane’s West End and discovered the bustling markets at Davies Park. Where some markets feel akin to a hedge maze, these border a football oval and follow a comforting L-shape. Aside from the secondhand book stall and the man selling holistic healing from a card table, the markets are occupied by fruit and vegetable growers, bakers and buskers. One busker belts Pretty Vacant by the Sex Pistols at the exact same time each Saturday, while another has taken to playing John Williams’ Indiana Jones theme on the flute. Toddlers scream and dogs yelp as they come nose-to-nose in the crowd. It’s nothing like harmony, but it’s a pleasant punk chaos. As I stumble toward my 30s, the whole experience feels suitably grownup Going to the markets has become part of my Saturday routine. And like any good ritual demands, I sacrifice for it, drinking less the night before to ensure I’m an early riser. As I stumble toward my 30s, the whole experience feels suitably grownup. The markets have taught me patience. They operate at their own speed. One minute, as if pulled into a rip, there is a phenomenal rush and sense of urgency. You are holding up a line, you sort through your wallet looking for exact change. You’ve become your worst nightmare, one of those people. Then, the next minute, you are merely treading water, stuck between two pensioners rigorously fingering a custard apple. I love the stalls that can exist by selling just one product – only blueberries or just roasted almonds. I suspect everyone you meet thinks they could be a similar market success. I remember my mum once calling to ask if I thought people might want to buy potted succulent cuttings from her yard. I don’t think she’d ever touched soil in her life. But that’s how the markets make us feel. The next big hit could be anything and belong to anyone. Each week I set myself a budget of $20 and, like one of those drab Poms in a blue fleece on Bargain Hunt, I see how far my dollar can stretch. Still, I never haggle, as bartering seems like a concept Australians have never really embraced outside of Kuta. Occasionally a man selling stone fruit will ask if I want to play “fruit lotto” – guess the weight of a bag of nectarines within 100 grams and get the bag for free. Using the same skill I bring to my bathroom scales, my estimations are only out by several kilograms. I’ve learnt the markets aren’t for any one type of person. In West End, you’re shoulder-to-shoulder with older Greek couples, hipsters, Dilfs, broke students and yes, even wankers like me. I’ve joked that I feel most myself cradling a loaf of bread while walking through the markets, but it’s not really a joke. At least I feel most like the person I wish I was – some terribly virtuous and chic man with thick hair, carrying a tote overflowing with fresh, seasonal produce. He’s accomplished, he clearly has it all together and he probably even knows what a “bouquet garni” is. Does such a man exist? I’m not sure, but I play him on a Saturday. Sometimes I see others playing him too. And while they might look more the part, I’m confident my performance is more nuanced. When I reach home and unpack, the reality of the day soon creeps in and the fantasy dissolves. It isn’t entirely victimless. Too often the more adventurous fruit and veg, purchased on a whim to be baked or pickled by my other, more capable self, are abandoned in the crisper. But then again, it’s not really my fault – it’s his. • Peter Taggart is a writer and podcaster from Brisbane, Australia