Late-night hosts assessed the “centrist independent” presidential candidacy of former Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz and Roger Stone’s visit to Fox News. On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert acknowledged another hat tossed into the 2020 presidential ring: Howard Schultz, who announced over the weekend that he was strongly considering a run as a “centrist independent” candidate. What’s a centrist independent? It’s “the politically correct term for most obnoxious guy at the dinner party”, Colbert said – someone who would proclaim: “I think most Americans just want to find a middle ground between baby cages and not baby cages – baby handcuffs?” And if you’re wondering what a centrist independent believes, Colbert continued, you’re going to keep wondering, because in his media tour this week, Schultz has dodged policy specifics. For example, when asked what the corporate tax rate should be, Schultz responded that he didn’t “want to talk in the hypothetical about what I would do if I was president”. “That’s literally the only thing you’re supposed to be doing while running for president,” Colbert exclaimed. “What, instead of ‘Yes we can’, it’s ‘What will we?’” Schultz’s nascent presidential run illustrates a particular strain of confidence, Colbert said. “It never ceases to amaze me how money makes people think they know things they don’t know. This is a guy – maybe a nice guy, maybe a smart guy, I don’t know him – but he made his money giving confusing fancy new names to already established cup sizes, and then cake pops. Next natural step? Give me the launch codes.” So he wasn’t surprised that Schultz was encountering resistance to his presidential ambitions, such as a heckler at a New York book launch on Monday. “Nobody has ever been in a Starbucks bathroom and thought, the guy in charge of this should be in charge of everything,” Colbert said. “The presidential election is now 643 days away, which is super close,” Trevor Noah said on The Daily Show Tuesday night. That’s “barely enough time to have two babies, or three really unhealthy babies”, which means it’s high time for some shake-ups in the 2020 race. On Tuesday, Jeff Flake declined to take on Trump in the Republican primary and West Virginia Democrat Richard Ojeda dropped out of the race, but “the big news in the Democratic race isn’t even coming from a Democrat right now”, Noah said. Howard Schultz’s potential run as a “centrist independent” is “making the Democrats shit themselves, which usually only happens after you drink his coffee”, Noah joked. The sentiment is shared with potential voters, as well – at a speaking event Tuesday, attendees let Schultz “know how most people feel” by shouting: “Don’t help elect Trump, you egotistical billionaire asshole!” “That’s really harsh,” Noah panned. “I mean, not for New York, that’s just how we greet each other here, but for everywhere else.” Though it seems that neither Democratic leaders nor potential voters want Schultz as a third-party candidate in the race, Noah observed that “there is one person who definitely wants him in: the make-believe billionaire in the White House”. Trump, who initially tweeted that he didn’t think Schultz had the guts to run for president, reportedly told a crowd at a Trump Hotel fundraiser Monday that he actually intended to get Schultz into the race because he believes it would help him. In other words, Noah said, “Trump is so smooth, man – tries reverse psychology on Howard Schultz, and then tells everyone he’s doing reverse psychology.” And over in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel was still processing the arrest and subsequent not guilty plea of Trump associate Roger Stone. Stone’s over-the-top, attention-seeking persona makes it “almost hard to believe he’s real”, Kimmel said. “First of all, he’s got a tattoo of Richard Nixon’s face on his back. Secondly, we know that he’s got a tattoo of Richard Nixon’s face on his back.” Even more ridiculous, Stone appeared on Sean Hannity’s show Tuesday to purport an unfounded claim that Robert Mueller’s investigation intended to do off with Trump and the vice-president, Mike Pence, so that Nancy Pelosi would become president and appoint Hillary Clinton as her vice-president. “Oh, that’s totally what’s happening,” Kimmel dead-panned before laying out the rest of the conspiracy plan: get rid of every cabinet secretary until there’s just “President Dr Ben Carson” left, “who will be so sleepy throughout the remainder of his term the diabolical bandits who planned this will be able to tip-toe in and do whatever they want”. If you don’t believe him, Kimmel joked, “check Infowars – it’s all right there.”