Scored in Rotherham’s 2-1 win over Southampton in 2002 and now their assistant coach I never get tired of talking about my goal against Southampton. Beating a Premier League side is one thing but the way the goal was scored was special, too. It was a diving header and somebody managed to do a good job of selling the photograph, because it made it to a newspaper in Sydney. I know because someone sent me a copy from Australia. We were confident about playing them at Millmoor. That stadium was almost worth a goal start for us. Sustaining Championship football for as long as we did was partly down to it. People didn’t fancy it there. Teams didn’t want to use the changing rooms and I’m sure Southampton had that mindset. The longer the game went on, the more we saw it was possible to win. We have to believe we can do something similar against City. I’ve studied Pep Guardiola for 10 years. It will be a great experience just to study him from the next technical area and it would be nice to have a chat. It won’t be easy but Wigan knocked them out last year. Who knows? Oldham’s match-day press officer for 56 years I got my first season ticket in 1947 and volunteer at the club for nothing now. One of my most memorable moments is when we beat Everton after two replays in the fifth round in 1990. It was in the days without mobile phones so the press agencies would phone their copy over from the press box. But on the morning of the second replay, somebody had ripped out all the phone wires in the press box. Luckily the commercial manager jumped in his car, got on to the bosses at BT and managed to get the phones back on. Then there was the run to the semi-finals in 1994. We played Manchester United at Wembley and were 1-0 up with a minute to go in extra time. But Mark Hughes turned and volleyed in that equaliser. The next day Joe Royle told me it wouldn’t have gone in if it had been anyone else. I went with friends and they were standing on the seats and singing to United. I remember saying: ‘It’s not over yet’. Sure enough, in it went. Then we lost the replay.” Barnet’s caretaker manager and nephew of Tony Currie, Sheffield United legend and director I was at home with my wife and children for the draw and the phone didn’t stop ringing when it turned out it was Sheffield United away. All the family have been in touch and we’ve been talking about it ever since. I’m really looking forward to it. My slight change in title since John Still’s retirement as manager has added even more to the occasion and we have a chance to go up there and upset my uncle. I had a chat with Tony after the draw. We were excited to draw each other. He’s been singing the praises of Chris Wilder and the team up there. He said some of United’s football has been terrific. They’re doing so well in the Championship. We’re under no illusions. It’s a really difficult game but we want to enjoy it. I look forward to seeing Tony. We’ll embrace – we’re family. I’m sure we’ll meet up after the game whatever the outcome. Let’s just hope it’s him congratulating me. Newport’s PA announcer I’ve been doing this job since the mid-70s and I’m also the official commentator for away games. My late father, John Thraves, was a director of the club in the 60s and 70s. Last season was our first run for a long time. We knocked Leeds out in the third round and almost beat Spurs. They both found it hard because our crowds are very noisy. Leicester will find the Welsh are very passionate on these occasions. I’ll be pitch level with the radio mic. I have a phrase before kick-off – “Let’s get behind the boys and let’s make some noise” – and I really go for it. The fans respond to it and my job is to get them whipped up. I remember the public address system failing at a game against Swindon at our old ground. I went around the track announcing the teams with a loud hailer. It was very amusing for the away fans.