I would love to see Ole Gunnar Solskjær kept on as permanent manager with an experienced team of coaches. The positivity he has brought to players is evident, with the team playing with smiles and an obvious desire to work hard. I’m desperate for a manager to be given time – I would have liked to have seen David Moyes and Louis van Gaal given more than they were allowed, though José Mourinho made his position untenable with his negativity in the press and losing the dressing room. I would like the new manager to build for the future, targeting the Premier League within the next three to five years, developing our talented crop of young footballers and continuing to bring youth players through the ranks playing the United way. Mauricio Pochettino is the best available and United should be able to attract the best. I love Solskjær and my heart says give it to him but hearts rarely make the best judges when it comes to football. Regarding those who preceded Solskjær it is easy to say, with hindsight, that they were all bad choices but, at the time, there were few dissenting voices against. All of them could have succeeded but clearly the trick was missed in not getting José Mourinho in to replace Alex Ferguson [in 2013]. Regarding whoever does replace Solskjær it is quite simple: I want my five-year-old son to stop asking me why he has to support United when his best friend supports Man City and “they win all the time”. My choice would be Mauricio Pochettino, who has worked hard to develop players at Spurs and opts for an attractive style of football. I have worries about how he will respond to the attention that comes in the Old Trafford goldfish bowl but I can’t think of a single candidate that ticks every criteria. Solskjær has overseen a reaction from the players – however I suspect that may have been the case with a number of managers considering the mood around the club since August. In hindsight, David Moyes was completely out of his depth, while Louis van Gaal had encouraging traits, particularly his tactics against top opposition and attitude towards younger players. José Mourinho had the required record to command respect but seemed a poor fit. The mood among most United supporters is they want to see attractive football, the development of players and intelligent signings. There are no clear favourites as it stands. Mauricio Pochettino is the name most bandied around and you can’t argue with how things are looking at Spurs but the question of him not winning a major trophy with a decent team needs considering. I have to admit to being surprised by the appointment of Ole but you can’t argue against how he has performed so far. On the proviso that United keep playing with the same freedom I’d be happy to see him continue. It was incredibly amateur for Ferguson and David Gill [the former chief executive] to be allowed to leave at the same time and the club has been rudderless since. We need a technical director working in harmony with the new manager/coach. The new manager doesn’t need to surround himself with faces from the Ferguson era but needs to understand the ethos of club. After the bleak midwinter where we all felt drained by José it’s just nice to have a bit of fun and start smiling. So the time for bigger decisions can wait. We expect hiccups but let’s see how the next two months go. I was advocating going back to United men a month ago: what have we got to lose? We have to start making proper title bids and from that European chances will grow. Is Ole the man to do that? Time will tell. We have tried the Scottish replica one. The one who had a great reputation. And the one who had multiple successes in the last 10 years. But a combination of their weaknesses with the club’s own failings created a hell of a mess. We didn’t learn from the history post-Busby. Whoever is the new permanent No 1 must ensure there are smiles on faces and get teams more concerned about us and players performing again.