Thursday’s papers have gone after the Speaker of the House, John Bercow, whose decision to allow a vote giving Theresa May three days to present a Brexit “plan B” if her deal is defeated was considered at best “controversial” and at worst a demonstration of “flagrant prejudice”. The prejudice line came form the Mail, which ran its story under the headline “Out of order!” and called Bercow an “egotistical preening popinjay [who] has shamelessly put his anti-Brexit bias before the national interest – and is a disgrace to his office”. Thursday’s @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/MGNxMcF5mD Similar sentiments from the Express – “You’re so out of order!” – which suggested Bercow was now facing pressure to quit “after ‘disgracefully’ flouting parliamentary rules to help Remainers seize more control over Brexit”. They cited ex-ministers, the former speaker Betty Boothroyd and constitutional experts, whom the paper said were “united in a chorus of anger over the Commons ‘stitch-up’ that led to a government defeat”. Thursday’s @Daily_Express front page- Commons Speaker Bercow accused of flouting rules to thwart #Brexit- EXCLUSIVE End of an era - Is Queen’s most dutiful aide stepping aside?- Amazon boss and his £110hn divorce#tomrrowspaperstoday #frontpages pic.twitter.com/1UBEe6vPWf The Guardian’s front page features a striking picture from parliament, with Bercow at the centre, and reports “furious scenes in the House of Commons as the Speaker John Bercow took the controversial decision to allow a vote on the amendment, tabled by the former attorney general Dominic Grieve”. The paper’s headline: “May’s power ebbing away as she suffers another humiliating defeat”. Guardian front page, Thursday 10 January 2019: May’s power ebbing away as she suffers another humiliating defeat pic.twitter.com/XDODz18l6s The i has a similar focus, writing: “May losing control of Brexit”, adding “Tories outraged after Speaker is accused of ignoring his own officials about rebels”. The Sun labelled Bercow “Speaker of the devil” and reported on the “fury at Bercow bid to scupper Brexit”, saying “the controversy sparked a near riot in parliament”. Tomorrow's front page: Commons Speaker John Bercow accused of trying to sabotage Brexit https://t.co/AC3wgoiGpu pic.twitter.com/goRxDferHm The Telegraph follows its precedent of recent weeks on Brexit stories, offering a neutral headline – “Mr Speaker takes control” – but then sticking in the knife in the body copy, saying: “The Speaker ignored legal advice and parliamentary precedent to allow a vote that gives Mrs May just three days to present a plan B for Brexit if she loses the ‘meaningful vote’ next Tuesday.” The front page of tomorrow's Daily Telegraph 'Mr Speaker takes control' pic.twitter.com/SyJaQmSLleTo ensure the executive is held to account and democracy prevails - however, some were throwing their toys out of their prams RT The Times – “Tory rebels join forces with Labour over Brexit” – doesn’t lead with Bercow’s role in the vote, instead focusing on how May’s “Brexit strategy was in tatters last night after Tory Remainer rebels opened talks with Labour”. But it didn’t spare the Speaker, saying he had “outraged ministers by overruling advice from officials in order to help an alliance of rebel Tories and opposition MPs to inflict the defeat, the second for the government in 24 hours”. THE TIMES: Tory rebels join forces with Labour over Brexit #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/S8jtW64oqG The Mirror claims it as a victory for Labour, saying: “May caves in on workers’ rights to save Brexit deal”. The paper says “Desperate Theresa May is ready to give in to key Labour demands on workers’ rights in a bid to salvage her Brexit deal”. Tomorrow's front page: May caves in on workers' rights to save Brexit deal#tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/ubrhR67pR6 pic.twitter.com/A9Dd5vXxGu The FT has “May offers MPs ‘backstop’ veto after second Commons defeat” and says the Speaker came “under fire”. It reports that “Eurosceptic Tory MPs were furious that yesterday’s vote was allowed by Commons Speaker John Bercow, who they view as an opponent of Brexit.” Just published: front page of the Financial Times UK edition, Thursday January 10 https://t.co/ubVGlRTiHz pic.twitter.com/Dt1jcHRfPc