Roma and The Favourite will go head to head at the Oscars after they received 10 Academy Award nominations each. Roma, Alfonso Cuarón’s memoir of childhood in 1970s Mexico City, topped many critics’ lists of 2018 (including the Guardian’s) and has scored 10 nominations, including best film and best director for Cuarón. Roma’s success demonstrates the Oscars’ acceptance of streaming giant Netflix, which it had had hitherto treated with suspicion. Netflix has launched an expensive awards campaign which appears to be have paid off. Scabrous period comedy The Favourite, about political power games at the 18th century court of Queen Anne, also received 10 nominations, including best actress for Olivia Colman. With 12 Bafta nominations, and a single Golden Globe win for Colman (for the best actress, musical or comedy), The Favourite emerged as much liked contender as awards season has progressed, and a powerful vehicle for its cast which includes Rachel Weisz and Emma Stone, who were both nominated for best supporting actress. A Star is Born, Bradley Cooper’s directorial debut about a waning country icon and the unknown singer (played by Lady Gaga) he mentors, picked up eight nominations. The film, which premiered at the Venice film festival last August, began awards season as frontrunner, before losing momentum. Also on eight nominations is Vice, the comedy about Dick Cheney, vice president to George W Bush and architect of the war on terror. Christian Bale is nominated for best actor. Black Panther, the Marvel superhero film starring Chadwick Boseman, clocked up a surprise seven nominations, including best picture. Green Book, the early Oscar frontrunner about the burgeoning friendship between African American pianist Don Shirley (Mahershala Ali) and his Italian-American driver Tony Vallelonga (Viggo Mortensen) scored five nominations, including best picture and best supporting actor for Ali. Its awards campaign has become dogged by controversy, after the film’s director Peter Farrelly apologised for sexual harassment and co-writer Nick Vallelonga apologised for an anti-Muslim tweet he sent in 2015. However, Green Book remains a strong contender, especially after winning the key Producers’ Guild award. Bohemian Rhapsody, the hit biopic of Freddie Mercury and Queen, emerged unexpectedly strongly from the Golden Globes, where it won best drama and best actor, drama, for Rami Malek. It has continued its successful streak at the Oscars, with five nominations, including best picture and Malek up for best actor. Its credited director Bryan Singer, who left the production in controversial circumstances before the end of filming, has not been nominated. First Man, which stars Ryan Gosling as astronaut Neil Armstrong, was considered a safe bet for Oscar success when it was first premiered at Venice, with La La Land director Damien Chazelle behind the camera and support from The Crown’s Claire Foy as Armstrong’s wife Janet. It came up short at the Golden Globes with two nominations (one of which was for Foy) and one win, for its score. It now receives four nominations for the Oscars. Black Sheep, a short film commissioned by the Guardian, received a nomination for best short documentary. Free to view on the Guardian website, it describes the lengths that a black 11 year old, Cornelius Walker, went to fit in with a racist gang after his family moved away from London. For only the second time in their 91 year history, the Academy Awards will not have a host, after the resignation last December of Kevin Hart, following a backlash to re-emerged homophobic comments. Speculation had been rife that Hart would return to the role; after he declared himself uninterested earlier this month, the Academy opted not to replace him and instead opt for a rolling cast of A-list presenters. Key awards ceremonies still to come before the Oscars include the Screen Actors Guild awards on 27 January and the Baftas on 10 February. This year’s ceremony will take place on 24 February in the Dolby Theater in Hollywood. • More details to follow …