The Department of Health has signed two contracts for warehouse space to store drugs in case of a no-deal Brexit. With 10 weeks to go before the UK officially leaves the EU, officials are still planning on trying to secure another warehouse for storage. With the government also suggesting there could be a rise in food prices and supermarkets stockpiling tinned food and warning that supplying fresh food could be an issue under a no-deal Brexit, we asked you to tell us what, if any, actions you were taking. Several readers said they were stockpiling store cupboard items such as tinned food and dried milk. Families with concerns about medicine supplies said they were doing what they could to get more information, but that in some cases actual stockpiling would be impossible. We also heard from many readers who were pragmatic about actions necessary at home but increasingly frustrated by perceived lack of a unified “plan” from the government. You can read some of your stories below. I’m already stockpiling. I’ve got a healthy backlog of legumes and dry goods. Closer to the time I’ll get some proteins (European cheeses and meat substitutes mostly) and some high demand groceries we don’t grow much of – onions and tomatoes, for example. I started hormone replacement therapy in September as a trans person. I had to do this myself; ‘DIY’d’ without a prescription so I’ve also started stockpiling medicine. I’m sitting on the worse side of a 16+ month waiting list (which I’m told usually looks more like 24, once all the tests and paperwork have sat on someones desk for long enough). I also have very bad anxiety and I can’t really wait another two years. It’s such a helpless feeling – watching your life and body and years go in the wrong direction. I have about four months left of medication at this point. I’ve no idea how much I should order to stockpile. There is the possibility of a bridging prescription; a harm reduction prescription that goes between ‘DIYing’ and a gender identity clinic prescription. Whether my GP in particular will issue one is doubtful. I’m so happy to be on HRT at last, but having to do it in this way, in the current climate, it’s a scary thing to do. Lilidh, Aberdeen We have been buying extra tins of food alongside pasta, rice, water and other goods and we have a specific cupboard in our tiny kitchen that we call the ‘Brexit cupboard’. Everyone, including myself, jokes about it but I feel a responsibility to make sure we have a months supply of food in the event of worst case scenario. We have a food budget each week of £50 for four people. Inevitably we end up buying own brand supermarket goods, including a lot of tinned goods and dry pasta and we cook from scratch, but it’s unclear what supply chain changes will have for these. I’m also buying cheap medicine such as liquid paracetamol for the children. I have faith that a deal will be done, but I think it’s prudent to make sure we can survive in a worst case scenario. I don’t understand how people find this laughable because to me it just seems like common sense. We live in unprecedented times so unprecedented things can happen! Preparing for Brexit by stockpiling is the only way I feel I can have any control over what happens to my family in the event of a no-deal situation. Louise, Cotswolds My wife is disabled with secondary progressive MS. It has many effects but one of the most depressing is urinary incontinence. To deal with this, she has to perform intermittent catheterisation when she goes to the lavatory. She uses about six catheters a day. The catheters are manufactured by a Danish company, Coloplast, whose factory is in Hungary. We are naturally concerned that these could be in short supply in the event of a no-deal Brexit so we are asking our GP for a three month supply ahead of 29 March. We voted remain and the irresponsibility, mendacity and selfishness of those pressing for a no-deal is breathtaking, frightening and makes us ashamed to be British. Nigel, Oxfordshire One of my adult children has type one diabetes. We do not trust the government to ensure the availability after a no-deal Brexit of the two types of insulin he requires every day in order to survive. Very little insulin is manufactured in the UK and not the types that he uses. Daily insulin doses are variable, depending on various factors; carbohydrate intake, activity levels etc. For the last five months we have been ordering the maximum amount of insulin allowed on his repeat prescription, which is about double the amount he typically uses. By March we should have enough insulin to last up to eight months. I hope this will be sufficient. We do not feel selfish about this. At the moment insulin is freely imported into the UK, so the fact that we are stockpiling does not make less available to others. We will not waste any of the insulin as it has a long shelf life. Jane, Derbyshire I started stockpiling a few months ago, buying tinned and long life products each week when they were on offer. I am treating it like a sensible insurance, although I have been accused of acting irresponsibly, which I thought was slightly odd? I am planning to buy a chest freezer and to start building up a supply of frozen meals I have made. My plan is to have three months food supply by the end of March. I decided to become vegan two years ago as a direct consequence of Brexit. That may sound odd, but my thinking was if it does go pear-shaped I better do everything I can to remain healthy as long as possible. Who knows what the state of the health service and social care will be in 20 years time? I am hopeful Brexit can be stopped. If it can’t I am lucky I could just about manage financially. Longer term I don’t see a future for myself in the UK if we eventually leave. David Ivory, Wymeswold We have a ‘Brexit shelf’ which we’ve slowly been adding to over the last couple of months. This is slightly tongue-in-cheek, but my partner and I have made a conscious decision to buy extra groceries and we now have a good stock of all the essentials. Newspaper headlines become self fulfilling very quickly: I foresee panic buying once no deal is the most likely outcome and so it is good to be prepared. My main worry is about my youngest son, who has to have regular medication after being diagnosed with Crohn’s disease. It is not however something we could buy or store, it’s an infusion the hospital administers. A drug called Infliximab is successfully keeping his symptoms at bay – but we just have to hope for the best. Nigel, 56, Twickenham How can you prepare for Brexit when the politicians seem to have no idea what it entails? I run my own joinery business and have asked suppliers about what happens to the timber imports etc in March next year and they can’t say. What use is HMRC in sending letters out so recently: surely this should have been thought about a little bit sooner? At home we will probably stockpile formula for our toddler (he has a milk protein allergy so needs specific formula and food). The fearmongering is starting again, with Michael Gove saying food prices will rise in event of no deal etc, all to get MPs scared to vote through May’s deal, but we are not going full scale prepper yet. John, Wales Financially, we’ve fixed our mortgage for five years. I’m splitting all our cash savings between four bank accounts, each under different banking licences to mitigate against online banking outages, failure of banks or runs on the banks. We’ll also be holding a larger than normal amount of cash at home. Power and heat is another major thing for our rural lives. We’ve stocked up on firewood and are considering options for a back-up power supply in the event of power outages. Finally, fuel shortages (which we have seen before) – we will keep our cars filled up with fuel, though we are not planning to stockpile. In the next few weeks I’ll be building a three month supply of ambient food (tins, pasta, dried milk etc) and bottled water plus six-months-worth of common medicines and first aid items. Rachel, Wiltshire As I am living on my small pensions I quickly realised post-Brexit vote that money may become an issue. I have had an allotment for many years growing both vegetables and flowers. In June 2016 I started reorganising things to incorporate both a polytunnel and greenhouse, with the hope that I can become close to self-sufficiency in most fruit and vegetables for much of the year. I have only recently been diagnosed with high blood pressure and have concerns that my treatment regime will not be settled in time for me to start stockpiling at the moment. Although I rarely use painkillers, I will be buying some just in case, along with ointments and anti-histamine creams and aiming to have a good selection of first aid dressings etc. Pam, 68, Isle of Wight