As usual, Tom Brady knew something we didn’t. As the alarm bells rang this season – Brady doesn’t look right; he doesn’t have enough weapons; the defense isn’t quick enough – the New England Patriots kept chugging along, clinching a playoff bye and a home playoff game. And, lo and behold, the quarterback was at his methodical best against the Los Angeles Chargers on Sunday, completing 34/44 for 343 yards, and a touchdown. Brady’s tendency to throw quick and short helped negate the impact of the Chargers pass rush, who had zero sacks and rarely applied pressure on Brady in the pocket. Indeed, LA were outclassed and bullied as they went down to a 41-28 defeat. You have to be near-perfect in the postseason to beat the Patriots, particularly in Foxborough, and LA looked out of sorts from the opening kickoff. There were no schematic or personnel changes they could make to slow down Brady and Co. And they continued to stub their own toes, with multiple delay of game penalties, and a muffed punt return that was recovered by the Patriots. Patriots coach Bill Belichick is the master of morphing his gameplan week-to-week to suit an opponent, and the Patriots beat the Chargers by doing what they do best: adapting to an opponent’s weakness. Belichick has also made his reputation out of shutting down historical offenses in big moments. As defensive coordinator for the Giants, he stifled Buffalo’s infamous (and ahead of its time) K-Gun offense in Super Bowl XXV. His first championship with the Patriots came after he slowed down the self-proclaimed Greatest Show on Turf. Belichick has rarely seen anything like what awaits next week though, when the Patriots face the Kansas City Chiefs for a place in the Super Bowl. Patrick Mahomes’ arm; Tyreek Hill’s pace; Travis Kelce’s size and speed; an utterly overwhelming offensive line; and a creative scheme that takes advantage of all of the modern rules. Mahomes’ exploits this season are well known. He’s able to make throws others can’t even imagine, let alone attempt. It’s not inconceivable that he was at Hogwarts before he starred at Texas Tech. Take this doozy from KC’s beatdown of the Colts on Saturday: Patrick Mahomes is one crafty dude with the football.pic.twitter.com/Ggv4detqFN It’s almost impossible to defend a throw like that. The gap between the Chiefs offense at the top of weighted DVOA (opponent-adjusted down-to-down efficiency that weights recent performance) and the second-placed Rams – themselves considered a historic unit – is the same as the gap between the Rams and Atlanta in 11th. The Chiefs’ offense is that much better than everyone else’s. Worryingly for the Patriots, not even Belichick could contain that Chiefs offense when the sides met for an epic 43-40 shootout in Week Six. But the coach was able to confuse Mahomes a couple of times in just his sixth outing as a starter. Baiting him into a pair of mistakes would likely prove decisive in a winner-take-all playoff scenario. The game will be billed as a matchup between Mahomes and Brady. It’s the MVP v the GOAT. The upstart v the legend. It will also be the biggest age difference between starting quarterbacks in NFL postseason history, Brady at 41 and Mahomes at 23. Prepare for hours of passing-the-torch conversations. Ordinarily, that kind of coverage obscures the nuances that decide such big games. But given that one offensive mistake may be the difference between the two teams (both have holes on defense), pitting it as a quarterback v quarterback match-up isn’t unreasonable. This will be the juiciest conference championship game in recent years. Kansas City are the best team in the AFC; the Patriots are the Patriots. Can Belichick outwit Mahomes? Can Brady keep up? Is either defense for real? Any outcome is plausible. Now this is a nice fake punt!*sassy look at Nick Saban*pic.twitter.com/60dbi1n32L Earlier this week, we were treated to one of the best stories of the season. Saints head coach Sean Payton brought the Lombardi Trophy and the $225,000 each player would earn by winning the Super Bowl into a meeting room and told the team, “You want this? Win three fucking games.” It was a move of supreme hubris. Yet the coach backed up that Big Payton Energy with a pair of huge calls in the second quarter of the Saints’ victory over the Eagles on Sunday. Down 14-0, and unable to get much going on offense, it felt like the game was slipping away. Payton went to his bag of tricks, calling on do-everything QB/return-man/H-back Taysom Hill. Hill promptly picked up a fourth-down conversion on a fake punt from the Saints’ 30-yard line, kickstarting a drive that led to the team’s first touchdown. Payton had another gutsy fourth-and-goal call, which helped spark a 20-to-nothing run and secured the Saints’ come-from-behind victory. Todd Gurley/CJ Anderson, RBs, Los Angeles Rams. The Rams one-two punch carved open the Cowboys defense on Saturday night. LA took it to Dallas early and often, totaling 273 yards rushing and three touchdowns on 48 carries. Gurley is the superstar, with a decent claim to the title of best running back in the league, but it’s Anderson who is quickly becoming one of the stories of the postseason. This season, Anderson was cut by the Broncos then waived by the Panthers and the Raiders, before signing with the Rams in December. He has averaged 149.6 yards per game since arriving in LA, and was crucial in the Rams’ victory over the Cowboys. The Patriots have now reached their eighth-straight AFC Championship game. Only three other AFC teams have been to eight Championship games in league history, let alone in succession. Brady’s eight appearances since 2010 are also more than any other quarterback in history. We will never see this kind of postseason dominance again. I know everybody thinks we suck and, you know, we can’t win any games, so we’ll see. It’ll be fun” -- Tom Brady to CBS. This. pic.twitter.com/9xosabF1V6 Tom Brady is trying to make the Patriots this year’s nobody-believes-in-us team. Amazing. -- Sarah Thomas made history on Sunday in the Patriots-Chargers game. She became the first woman to work an NFL playoff game as an on-the-field official. Terri Valenti was the replay official in Saturday’s playoff game between the Colts and Chiefs, also a first. -- In Sean McVay, Andy Reid, Sean Payton and Josh McDaniels we have four of the league’s five-best offensive play callers. We’re going to get some barnburners over the next few weeks. -- Led by a career night from Damien Williams, the Chiefs rushed for 180 yards against the Colts, their fourth-highest total in franchise postseason history. Williams, who took over starting back responsibilities after Kareem Hunt was released midseason and Spencer Ware sustained an injury, racked up a career-best 129 yards on 30 touches. -- Michael Thomas continues to make a compelling case for being the top wide receiver in the league. Thomas, who leads the league in catches over the past three seasons, caught 12 balls for 171 yards and a touchdown against the Eagles. He’s reached the rarest level of wide receiver play: everyone in the building knows the ball is going to him, yet the defense is still powerless to stop him. -- The Cowboys are ready to offer Jason Garrett a new, long-term contract, per NFL Network’s Ian Rapoport. Keeping Garrett is an acceptance of mediocrity. He is the longest tenured coach to not reach a conference Championship game. Garrett isn’t the Cowboys’ biggest problem, but he’s not the solution either. In his eight seasons as coach, the Cowboys have averaged one playoff win every four years. See you in 2022, Dallas. -- Reportedly, Patriots defensive coordinator Brian Flores is the Dolphins’ top target for their head coaching vacancy. Flores is expected to be announced as the team’s new coach once the Patriots’ season ends. If Miami buck the trend this hiring cycle, the NFL would finish the season with only four minority head coaches, including three who are black, down from eight at the start. -- Group think is alive and well in the NFL. The league’s infatuation with finding “the next Sean McVay” has now reached comedic heights. The Cardinals hired Kliff Kingsbury late last week, a coach who was fired from his collegiate alma mater (Texas Tech) with a sub .500 record, despite a trio of seasons with Patrick Mahomes and Baker Mayfield as his quarterbacks. Kingsbury was hired because he’s cool: he’s young, runs a fun offense, looks good, and is liked by everyone in the football world. He may wind up being great, but nothing on his CV suggests he is qualified for the position. Hot-shot, so-called innovative coaches are all the range, thanks to the success of McVay and Matt Nagy. And teams are going to laugh-out-loud lengths to draw some similarity between their young coach and the NFL’s wunderkind. “Kingsbury is friends with Rams coach Sean McVay,” the release announcing the hire on AZCardinals.com originally stated, without irony.