A woman, emaciated and filthy, worms her way beneath barbed wire that may be electrified. We know this scene: we’ve watched or read it scores of times. In Luce d’Eramo’s variation, the woman beneath the fence is not trying to escape from a Nazi prison camp. She is trying to get in. D’Eramo died in 2001. Deviation, her autobiographical novel, first published in Italy in 1979, covers her experiences between the summer of 1944, when she went voluntarily to join the slave labourers in the IG Farben factory in Mainz, and late 1945 when, paralysed from the waist down, she returned to Italy. The book came together by fits and starts. Two sections were written in the early 50s as autonomous stories. Twenty years later D’Eramo added two more, in a more distanced tone. In her triple role as author, narrator and protagonist, she is repeatedly at odds with herself. She adopts the third person. She gives herself different names – Lucia, Luzi, Lulu, or just l’Italiana. Repeatedly she questions her own integrity. In the fourth section, written in 1977, she performs a kind of autopsy on her own text, laying open not only its untrustworthy content, but also the circumstances in which it was written. In early passages, she says, she detects a “sexual anxiety” that belongs not to the young runaway but to the writer – the “betrayed woman in her thirties” who “views the deportees’ acts of intercourse as slimy tangles of snails with monstrous antennae”. This, with its chronology (kinked and convoluted in the book) straightened out, is D’Eramo’s story: her parents were fascist officials; in 1944, 18-year-old Luce, a member of the Fascist Students’ Association, volunteered to work in a German labour camp, expecting to find that the ugly rumours about those camps were just hostile propaganda. She was disabused, and her world view changed. She agitated for a strike. It failed. The organisers were transferred to concentration camps, all but D’Eramo, who was repatriated with the help of the Italian consul. She arrived in Verona, with instructions to take a train to Como, where her parents awaited her. Instead she wandered until she saw a group of detainees being herded towards the station by SS guards. She threw away her identifying documents, and allowed herself to be taken along to Dachau. There she was assigned to a work party clearing the sewers of nearby Munich. During an air raid she slipped away. Deviation has a fierce compelling idiosyncrasy to it – D’Eramo’s account of the camps is full of surprising nuances Perversely, she repeatedly sought refuge in the heart of the labyrinthine Nazi system, first in a labour bureau, and then in a transit camp only a few metres from Dachau. With the help of a Polish prisoner who loved her, she found work under an assumed name. The allied bombings continued. D’Eramo was trying to rescue people trapped in rubble when a wall collapsed on her. She recovered, but never walked again. In 1945, aged just 20, she returned to Italy. She had repeated surgery, becoming addicted to morphine as a result. She married and had a son, but soon divorced. She became an author and academic, making money from writing other people’s dissertations, a fraudulent practice that chimes well with the chameleon nature of this book, with its unstable viewpoints, evasive narrator and gradual uncovering of one misrepresentation after another. D’Eramo can be romantic. Her description of the thief who protected her when she was on the run in Munich has a desperate charm. She can be brutal. She can be sardonic, but she can also be self-adoring. The section in which she describes her crippling injury reads like an example of a previously unknown literary genre, auto-hagiography. She describes her younger self as prodigiously clever and resourceful, as well as being so adorable that men fall in love with her, while women weep at the pathos of the radiant girl so cruelly struck down. Her hospital room, she tells us, was known as the Good Mood Room. A far cry, this image, from the one she paints of herself in the 70s, creeping down a corridor in her wheelchair, stupefied by pain and drugs and raging with jealousy, to listen at the door of the room where her husband is making love to his research assistant. She offers various mutually inconsistent explanations for her self-destructive behaviour. Some are high-minded and political: she wanted to become one with the sufferers of the world. Some are ludicrously petty: she fled her family because her mother made her attend such tedious tea parties. She is not wise: readers are likely to wonder whether she is even sane. Her thinking is incoherent. Her story-telling is muddled. Her prose is uneven. For all that, Deviation has a fierce compelling idiosyncrasy to it. D’Eramo’s account of the camps is full of surprising nuances (it is not the Nazi guards who beat her up, but the political prisoners who disapprove of her and her fellow “Asocials”), and it explores an unfamiliar aspect of the Third Reich. She estimates that by the end of the war there were 3 million escapees from the camps within Germany. Her account, solipsistic as it is, provides glimpses into their secretive and desperate world. • Lucy Hughes-Hallett’s latest book is Peculiar Ground (4th Estate). Deviation by Luce d’Eramo, translated by Anne Milano Appel, is published by Pushkin. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com.