Years after writing his breakout musical In the Heights in the basement of New York’s Drama Book Shop, Hamilton composer Lin-Manuel Miranda has saved it from closing by buying the shop. The actor and lyricist has teamed up with two of his colleagues from his hit musical Hamilton to purchase the Drama Book Shop, a 100-year-old script, sheet music and theatre-related bookseller currently located in Midtown Manhattan. The move is a joint effort between the three men and the city to save the cultural institution, with the hunt now on for a new location nearby. Miranda told the New York Times: “When I was in high school I would go to the old location and sit on the floor and read plays – I didn’t have the money to buy them … when we heard that the rent increase was finally too precipitous to withstand, we began hatching a plan.” It is not the first time Miranda has shown his love for the shop. In 2016, after a burst pipe wiped out a third of the shop’s stock, Miranda appealed to his fans to help with the Twitter hashtag #BuyABook, writing at length about his memories of the shop. Subsequently, the shop reported a dramatic increase in sales; manager Shawn Verrier told PIX11 that customers were ringing to place large orders without specifying any titles: “People are calling in, saying can I buy $200 worth of books, you guys pick them out and just send them to me.” However, in October 2018, the shop’s vice-president Allen Hubby announced that it would be closing its shop in midtown – the home of the shop for two decades – due to rising rents, with the current lease set to end on 31 January. The three new owners – Miranda, Hamilton director Thomas Kail and James L Nederlander, president of the Nederlander Organisation, which owns the Broadway theatre where the hit play is currently running – purchased the store from Rozanne Seelen, whose husband bought the shop in 1958. She told the New York Times that she had sold it for the cost of her remaining stock, rent support for the next few weeks and the promise that she would stay on as a consultant. “It’s the chronic problem – the rents were just too high, and I’m 84 years old – I just didn’t have the drive to find a new space and make another move,” she said. “Lin-Manuel and Tommy are my white knights.” After the purchase was announced, Miranda wrote on Twitter: “In 2002, I met with Tommy Kail in the Drama Book Shop. It gave us a place to go. Proud to be part of this next chapter. A place for you to go.” The bookshop will temporarily close on 20 January, before reopening in its new home.