Announcing words of the year has become a competitive sport. The season began early in November, with rival dictionary publishers pursuing social media shares and column inches by dubbing some small bit of language the epitome of 2018ish-ness. Those in the know call them WotYs. On my Separated by a Common Language blog, WotYs have a transatlantic twist. Honours are bestowed on expressions that have moved from the US to the UK and vice versa. The vice versa often surprises people – at least those convinced of the virulence of ugly Americanisms. 2018’s US-to-UK word of the year is “mainstream media” or MSM. Its UK-to-US counterpart is “whilst”. Both tell stories of how and why words travel to other nations and what happens when they get there. “Wait!” I hear some cry. “Mainstream media is two words! Disqualified!” But I ask: how do you know it’s two words? Because it has a space. How do you know where to put the space? Between the words. The reasoning is circular. When lexicographers consider what to include in dictionaries or WotY lists, they consider pieces of language that need defining – expressions that are more than the sums of their parts. “MSM” is more than the sum of “mainstream” and “media”. Before “media”, “mainstream” takes on connotations of “pre-internet” and “corporate”. The very use of the term (especially abbreviated) conveys what i columnist Mark Wallace calls “a sign of slight nuttiness”. This decades-old term gathered speed in the US in the early 2000s, with 9/11 and the rise of Fox News. In the UK, MSM has become much more common since 2016, only just meeting my WotY criterion that the word should be established in one country before having significant usage in the other. The UK-to-US WotY is far more established in its home country – dating back to Middle English. English colonists took “whilst” to America, but within a few decades of independence, their progeny had dropped it, favouring the more common and older form “while”. In the 2010s, American language commentators have been noticing “whilst” in the writing of younger Americans – first in university essays, and now on social media. These WotYs give interesting glimpses into the transatlantic word trade. In 12 years of US-to-UK WotY-choosing, I’ve mostly observed adoption of words that bring new meaning or nuance, rather than like-for-like replacement. MSM is such a case, as are bake-off (2014’s WotY), which signals more than a simple baking competition, and Black Friday (2013), which may be an abomination but poses no threat to British words. Everyday British (and non-American) words – the motorways, jumpers and aubergines – rarely budge. Britain borrows words from the US for the same reason it borrows German or Arabic words – to add to the range of meanings that can be expressed concisely in the language. When words change place, meanings often shift too. For instance, 2007’s US-to-UK WotY “cookie” has a British meaning that is far more restricted than its American namesake’s. It had to carve out its own space in a different baking culture. When MSM landed in a different political and media environment, it seemed to shift as well. In recent US usage, MSM mostly signals a rightwing belief in a leftwing bias in allegedly neutral sources. But in the UK environment, MSM is prevalent in the internet commentary of Tommy Robinson and Jeremy Corbyn supporters alike. The “we’ll all talk like Americans soon” myth depends on the belief that the trade in words is unilateral and eastward, US to UK. But the case of “whilst” demonstrates that Americans are exposed to British words enough to use them too. Some UK-to-US WotYs have added new meanings to American English, for instance “vet” (a candidate; 2008) or “gap year” (2014). Others, like “ginger” (redhead; 2010), “bum” (bottom; 2013) and “gutted” (2016), express meanings that already have words in the US. It’s tempting to think of this as the Harry-Potterification of American English, with younger Americans exposed to words that their parents don’t use, and then adopting them – either because they don’t perceive them as foreign or because they have British cultural cachet. Transatlantic WotYs differ from dictionary WotYs in that they are typically less “of the year”. Occasionally a transatlantic word parachutes on to new shores with a splash, but mostly they swim in quietly, building up usage. It’s when people start to complain about them that you know they’ll probably stay for a while. • Lynne Murphy is professor of linguistics at the University of Sussex and author of The Prodigal Tongue: the Love–Hate Relationship between British and American English