England have kept faith with Elliot Daly at full-back and named Jack Nowell on the right wing in their starting XV to face Ireland in Dublin on Saturday. Henry Slade and Manu Tuilagi have been paired in midfield with Owen Farrell captaining the team from fly-half. Head coach Eddie Jones has also opted to kick off the Six Nations by recalling George Kruis alongside his Saracens team-mate Maro Itoje in the second-row and shifting Mark Wilson to blindside flanker in a team showing six changes and one positional switch from the starting side which beat Australia 37-18 in November. The Wasps scrum-half Dan Robson is in line to win his first cap off the bench but there is no place in the matchday 23 for Mike Brown, who had been hoping for a recall at full-back, or Joe Launchbury. Instead Jones has retained Daly at 15 and invited Tuilagi to make his first Six Nations start for six years in the absence of the sidelined Ben Te’o. Injuries have severely restricted the Leicester centre’s Test opportunities in recent times but he remains a formidable physical presence. Slade and Nowell have both been rewarded for their good recent form for Exeter, while Kruis’s specialist lineout skills have earned him the nod ahead of both Launchbury and Courtney Lawes. England have not won in Dublin since 2013 and have not scored a try at the Aviva Stadium on their last three visits. “It is well documented no one thinks we can win but I can tell you everyone inside our camp believes we can win,” said Jones. “We are hugely looking forward to the weekend. I think it is quite clear to beat Ireland you have to beat them in the contest area. They are very good at the breakdown and in the air. Both those areas are a priority for us. “Traditionally England and Ireland games are always very close, they are tough affairs, there is a lot of emotion in the games so our ability to finish the game strongly is going to be vital.”On Tuilagi’s selection Jones said: “I just felt for this game the best option was to play Owen Farrell at 10 and Manu as a like-for-like replacement for Ben Te’o. Manu has impressed us at the training camp and is right to play.” E Daly (Wasps); J Nowell (Exeter), H Slade (Exeter), M Tuilagi (Leicester), J May (Leicester); O Farrell (Saracens), B Youngs (Leicester); M Vunipola (Saracens), J George (Saracens), K Sinckler (Harlequins), M Itoje (Saracens), G Kruis (Saracens), M Wilson (Newcastle), T Curry (Sale), B Vunipola (Saracens). Replacements: L Cowan-Dickie (Exeter), E Genge (Leicester), H Williams (Exeter), J Launchbury (Wasps), C Lawes (Northampton), D Robson (Wasps), G Ford (Leicester), C Ashton (Sale).