Four people died in a massive explosion caused by a “pocket of gas” in a six storey building in Paris. Two of the dead are firefighters called to investigate a gas leak. Another 32 people were injured in the blast in the 9th arrondissement of the capital, eight of them critically. One of the firefighters was trapped under the rubble of the destroyed building for two-and-a-half hours before being rescued by colleagues. The French interior minister, Christophe Castaner, told journalists at the scene four people “two firefighters and two civilians” had died. “At 8.37am the fire brigade was called to 6 rue Trevise to investigate a gas leak. While they were there a dramatic explosion occurred.” He praised the courage of firefighters who risked their lives to save their lives to save victims. Rémy Heitz, the Paris public prosecutor said an investigation had been launched into the tragedy. The origin of the explosion was a “pocket of gas”, he said adding that experts would be verifying what had caused the build up in the building. The blast and subsequent fire completely destroyed a boulangerie on the ground floor of 6 rue Trevise and destroyed apartments above. It also seriously damaged several neighbouring buildings and shattered windows for a hundred metres around. Vehicles parked in rue Trevise were overturned and set alight by the force of the explosion. The blast happened as Paris prepared for a ninth weekend of gilets jaunes (yellow vests) protests across the city and elsewhere in France. The prime minister, Édouard Philippe, and the interior minister, Christophe Castaner, visited the scene of the explosion. The mayor of Paris Anne Hidalgo was also at the scene. The explosion, which happened just before 9am, was heard a mile away. Dozens of firefighters, police and ambulances rushed to the scene and rapidly sealed off surrounding streets, many of them cloaked in a thick cloud of acrid smoke. The boulanger, Hubert Beatrix, watched shocked as dozens of firefighters struggled to put out the blaze and evacuate residents of nearby buildings. #Paris gas explosion. Fire service evacuating people from buildings around after massive explosion in boulangerie. I heard it at home a mile away. pic.twitter.com/2ZCRqLcNoU “I have no idea what happened. There’s no gas in my shop apart from a small supply for heating. My ovens are electric,” Beatrix told the Guardian. “The shop was closed, luckily for me and my customers. Someone called me to tell me about this, but I still don’t know what happened.” Commander Eric Moulin, of the Paris fire service, said: “Of those who are in a critical condition, two fire officers and three civilians have life-threatening injures. One of the firefighters was out for several minutes and rescued by his colleagues.” The bakery was almost entirely destroyed, leaving a few columns holding up the rest of the six-storey building. Place de l’Opera nearby was cleared to allow three emergency helicopters to land in order to evacuate the injured from the explosion. One female resident said: “The neighbours called the fire service because there was a very strong smell of gas this morning. Fire officers knocked on doors to tell us to stay where we were and shortly after that there was an explosion. There’s nothing left of our apartment. Nothing.” Killian, a local resident, said it was carnage. “The windows were blown out. It was horrible.”