The heads arrive on a plate, John the Baptist-style, hot and crispy with a hint of grease. There are 10 of them, each covered in corn starch and deep fried, and stacked up in a sort of pyre. On the side, salt and sesame seeds for dipping and, if you are drinking, a beer. From a distance, they could be spiders in rigor mortis. Or facehuggers from Alien. The chef who brought the plate picks up a head. “I mean, they’re disgusting, really, that’s what they are,” he says, and with that he walks the thing across the plate to show me how “bottom feeders” eat. If you can ignore the optics, they taste a lot better than they look. Less a delicacy and more a byproduct at Koya City, in London – the brilliant Japanese fast food restaurant known for its udon noodles – the heads are offcuts, the bit you would normally chuck. But since Koya goes through hundreds of prawns every day, it made sense to save them, remove the juices – the sweet, flavoursome brainy bit that the Spanish sometimes suck out – deep fry them at 180C (356F) and turn them into an elevated bar snack. They used to be served off menu, but they could only remain there for so long. They are now served in the evenings only, with beer, and sell out pretty quickly. At £6.90, they work out at 70p per head. Nose to tail – or head to tail, whatever you call it – is a happy side-effect of a blustering economy and a vogue for turning the edible into the agreeable, for showing respect to the animals we eat by not wasting any of their parts. And while these taste great, it is really about the texture, about snapping the legs like twigs, about almost cutting your mouth because they are sharp. It is macho eating, but delicately done. Frying has a knack for rendering dull things great and, in this case, it is the corn starch that creates the crunch, says the head chef, Shuko Oda. Even as they cool down, they retain a bite, which means they are ideal as a snack with your Kirin beer at your local izakaya. The menu at Koya barrels through various parts of the prawn’s anatomy, but to keep things in the family, I order some prawn tempura. The prawns you find in tempura are misleadingly large. In fact, each of them is 20cm (8in) long, but dismembered, with the tendons cut and the cord severed, otherwise they’ll curl up when they cook. Oda thinks there is a high chance I am eating the body of one of the heads. I have tried some unusual bodies in my time: chicken feet, a scorpion flash fried and served in soy sauce, ants cooked three ways. Prawn heads are still a bit of a gimmick, but when they are cooked like this, you wonder why they are not the norm.