The leader of Ukip has formally written to the Queen, asking her to suspend parliament until after 29 March to ensure MPs cannot thwart Brexit. Gerard Batten’s letter also informed the monarch that she should never have approved the 1992 Maastricht treaty as it made her, and everyone else in the UK, citizens of the EU, and was thus unlawful and treasonous. “Your Majesty’s ministers were gravely in error and wrongly advised you,” the letter tells the Queen. Released publicly by Ukip, Batten’s letter begins by saying he is formally petitioning the Queen under the 1689 Bill of Rights, which established the notion of parliamentary supremacy. MPs were elected to uphold the 2016 referendum, and thus take the UK out of the EU, he argues. “It is evident that these same members of parliament are attempting by all and any means to thwart this result,” he writes. “They are accordingly in breach of their pledges to you and us, your citizens, and of a long-standing constitutional convention whereby parliament must implement the will of the people expressed in a popular vote and are bound by electoral manifestos which have received popular assent at general elections. “Therefore, I ask Your Majesty to thwart their efforts and to prorogue parliament from now until after 29 March 2019, which is the agreed date set aside in the Withdrawal Act of Parliament of 2018 when the United Kingdom will leave the European Union.” Batten is not the first politician to raise the idea but is the only one to have done so seriously. During a Brexit debate last week the Conservative backbencher Desmond Swayne proposed it to Theresa May, but as an apparent joke. In his letter to the monarch Batten also warned her about the Maastricht treaty, which brought closer integration to the EU, which was passed into UK statute in 1992. “This treaty and statute purport to make Your Majesty a ‘citizen of the European Union’,” he wrote. “The treaty states that Your Majesty as a ‘citizen of the Union’ will ‘enjoy the rights conferred by this treaty and shall be subject to the duties imposed thereby’. “To presume to convey rights on, or to impose duties on Your Majesty was, and remains, unlawful and treasonous under the Bill of Rights, and the Coronation Oath. Your Majesty’s ministers were gravely in error and wrongly advised you.” Batten, who took over as Ukip leader following the brief and disastrous tenure of Henry Bolton, has financially steadied the party but has also seen a series of leading members, among them Nigel Farage, quit due to his increasingly hard-right direction. Batten has repeatedly focused on Islam, which he refers to as a “death cult”, and has proposed policies including special checks on immigrants from Islamic countries and the possibility of Muslim-only prisons. He has also appointed Tommy Robinson, founder of the far-right English Defence League anti-Islam group as an adviser, which prompted Farage and others to quit.