A man, “XT”, is going cold turkey. He’s withdrawing from black market Xanax, which he’s been using to self-medicate feelings of loneliness, a breakup, a traumatic childhood. In another hemisphere, many time zones away, Ginger Gorman puts aside her day’s work to distract him from his physical and mental distress. They wind up exchanging funny dating stories until XT thinks he can sleep. “Mate, when you wake up can you tell me if you’re all right?” Gorman says. It’s an example of how the internet can be a lifeline between strangers. But XT is part of a trolling syndicate and Gorman is a journalist who, after writing a story for the ABC in 2010 about gay men choosing surrogacy, in which she unknowingly profiled two people who were later convicted for paedophilia, found herself besieged by predator trolls, the kind that move in on a target like a Swat team. As well as the barrage of tweets shaming her, a family photo wound up on the fascist social network Iron March, and she was mocked by a popular American conservative blogger who denounced her as part of a paradigm that “reduces reporters to the role of propagandists, whose job is to parrot the publicity of radical gay-rights activists”. Her new book, Troll Hunting, may sound like it’s coming in swinging, but her mission, as she tells Guardian Australia, is to “try and bring a humanity to it all, to the victims and the perpetrators”. If that sounds bleeding-heart lefty to you, well it’s something she’s grappling with, too. Gorman’s a feminist, her mother’s family is Jewish, and she has a Filipino-Australian husband. She’s everything trolls love to hate. To examine the “human fallout” of trolling, Troll Hunting draws on expertise from all sides, such as Mia Garlick, Facebook’s director of policy for Australia and New Zealand, and an investigative journalist, Luke McMahon, who some call “Australia’s number-one troll hunter” and who – with an SBS journalist, Elise Potaka – provided the AFP and FBI with the identity of Joshua Goldberg. She also talks to those close to the late TV presenter Charlotte Dawson, whose trolls have mysteriously vanished since her suicide, and her own husband, Don, about his misgivings about the book. There are a couple of trolls that Gorman has interviewed regularly who remain an unknown quantity; a mystery, an imminent danger. With others, like XT, there’s a strange kind of intimacy. Don calls one her “troll husband”. A friend compares the dynamic to Stockholm syndrome. But Gorman does go in hard with her subjects. As she explains, there’s a certain liberation that comes from being a journalist interviewing a troll – “as long as you’re prepared to get threats of being sent dick pics or be called a lying whore” – because all bets are off. If you drill right down deep, a lot of these guys fell through the cracks as kids She gives the example of having once interviewed Anu Singh, who murdered her boyfriend Joe Cinque in 1997. Psyching herself up to ask direct questions made Gorman feel nauseous. By contrast, with the trolls “I could ask the most offensive, personal stuff. And they never balk at it because that’s part of their culture.” In her book, Gorman covers off the online experiences of commentators Catherine Deveny and the Guardian’s Van Badham, but she says some feminists were unimpressed that she was amplifying trolls. “They said, ‘All they want is power. Why are you engaging with them?’ I found that incredible. I’m engaging with them because I want to know what they want. I don’t condone what they do, but you have to ask the question: ‘Why are they doing this?’ ” She attempts to answer this both through a psychologist who’s a psychopathy expert and, in a chapter titled “The Internet Was My Parent”, by prodding the trolls themselves. “If you drill right down deep, a lot of these guys fell through the cracks as kids,” she says. One, “meepsheep”, put to her that white men are seen as so privileged that they don’t need help. Yet as Gorman has observed, many trolls experience mental health and substance-use problems. “That was quite confronting for me,” she says. “As journalists we need to examine our own beliefs and take them apart in the context of what we’re writing about, not just like spit stuff out hook, line and sinker.” But while empathy can be dredged for the foulest behaviour, Gorman doesn’t forget that her subjects have targeted some of the most vulnerable people on the internet. “We can’t have marginalised voices driven out of these spaces,” she says. “If you’re going to be really idealistic about it, the reason that people like Vint Cerf created the internet was so we would all have access to information and we could all use our voices. I don’t think I can leave this [subject] behind until there’s a monumental societal shift to make it fairer and less terrifying.” When Australians targeted by trolls contact Gorman in despair, she refers them to the Australian eSafety Commission, which she considers to be groundbreaking: “They’ve got limited remit but it’s a step in the right direction.” Ahead of the press cycle for her book, she started a course of specialised therapy, referred by the DART centre for trauma in journalism. Trolls have been a major part of her life for nine years, yet writing Troll Hunting was “like being skinned alive”. It’s moved her to commission a tattoo – her first – of a complex design of lines down her side. “I feel so marked by the book that I need a sign on my body,” she says. Now, there’s an uneasy wait for the reaction from all quarters – those who might take umbrage with her collaborating with trolls, and those who might spur into action at the sight of her head sticking up above the parapet. To preserve herself somewhat, Gorman discussed with the trolls which of their conversations she would use, since many of them had sent thousands of messages, not just about trolling but general, personal chat. She calls it a “no sudden movements policy”. “They had no jurisdiction on my work in any way,” she clarifies, “not least because they wouldn’t ask me to change anything when, in the universe of trolling, everything is fair game. But I needed to protect myself from any possible retribution down the track, because I know from my own experience – and those of scores of victims – that getting adequate help from law enforcement or social media companies is nearly impossible. And you’ve got to remember, some of them are genuinely dangerous.” • Troll Hunting is out now through Hardie Grant