Tuesday’s vote on Theresa May’s Brexit deal is one of the most keenly anticipated Commons events in years. The result, and the scale of it, will trigger one or several of a series of outcomes. The precise choreography of what will happen is anyone’s guess, but here are some of the possible scenarios. The most straightforward, if unlikely, result of the vote. Should May somehow tempt enough rebels back to her view and prevail, there would be an agreed departure deal with which the EU could work, and it would be full steam ahead to 29 March. Yes, there would be more fierce and endless arguments on everything from the backstop to the future trade deal, but the basics would be there. Likelihood rating: 1/5 Barring a particularly big defeat for the prime minister, this is what many MPs believe will come next: May makes a rapid statement saying she will go back to Brussels and seek more concessions, notably on the backstop. The thinking is that once the EU has seen the concrete evidence of MPs’ views, it will be more likely to come up with something genuinely new, to try to avoid a no-deal departure. Those being most targeted for a change of heart would be the Democratic Unionist party, Tory waverers and Labour MPs from leave-minded seats. Likelihood rating: 3/5 Perhaps the most contentious issue. In order to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland, a backstop arrangement that keeps the UK in the customs union and requires Northern Ireland to follow single market rules would prevail until a free-trade agreement is reached that avoids such a frontier. The UK and EU negotiators have agreed the former should honour those commitments it made while a member of the bloc – finally settling on a figure of £39bn. The deal would secure a status quo transition period to negotiate the nature of the future relationship, and during which the UK could begin to make trade deals with third countries. A fraught issue at the outset, an agreement was reached relatively quickly that would see the UK respect the rights of EU citizens who arrive before the end of the transition period, which could be in 2022, and vice versa. The document is accompanied by a political declaration that sketches out the future relationship between the two parties – focusing primarily on trade and security. Seen as a necessary adjunct to the above tactic – and perhaps needed in just about any scenario – this has now been unofficially promised by the EU. The most likely variant would be a “technical” extension until July or thereabouts, to allow more time for a second vote, and to pass other Brexit-related legislation. But if there was something new afoot, whether an election or a second referendum, a longer timetable could be offered. Likelihood rating: 4/5 Some Conservative MPs predict that if the margin of defeat is heavy, May could finally decide – or be persuaded – to drop her long-held plan, seek an extension to article 50 and embark on a cross-party push for a more consensual Brexit, perhaps based on a Norway model. Given how vehemently and how often the PM has rejected such a course, it seems unlikely. More possible, though still marginal, would be the idea of backbenchers using parliamentary procedure to effectively take control. Likelihood rating: 2/5 Some speculation centres around the idea of a particularly heavy defeat seeing May pledging to plough on, at which point her colleagues act. They cannot formally remove her until December, as her win in the Tory MPs’ confidence vote before Christmas keeps her safe for a year, so instead the scenario has a delegation of cabinet ministers going to No 10 and telling the PM her time is up. She could well send them packing. Likelihood rating: 1/5 This has been the favoured Labour approach if May loses her Brexit vote. Under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, a specifically worded no-confidence motion against the government would be debated and voted on, for or against, relatively soon. If lost, there would be a 14-day period for a new government to be formed, but if this could not happen then an election would be called. However, while a number of Tories are likely to vote against May’s deal, it is another matter to ask them to vote down their government. Another option, which some Labour MPs are privately wary about, is May deciding to call an election herself, gambling that she could be able to present a more coherent Brexit approach than Jeremy Corbyn. Likelihood rating: 2/5 This has been the hope of a good number of Conservative and Labour MPs, supported by the energetic People’s Vote campaign, but has been vehemently opposed by May and others in parliament. Many argue that the most likely way to bring about a second referendum would be if Labour formally threw its weight behind the idea. However, Corbyn has made it plain that his preferred route would be to negotiate a different Brexit deal. Likelihood rating: 2/5 This has been simultaneously the default option – if May’s deal is lost and nothing is put forward in its place, then a no-deal departure would happen automatically on 29 March – and also something discounted as impossible by many MPs. The decision of the Commons last week to back an amendment to the finance bill tabled by Labour’s Yvette Cooper seeking to block no-deal has relatively little power but shows the arithmetic in parliament supports such an approach. Several Tories have vowed to quit ministerial jobs or even the party whip if no-deal becomes policy. All that said, as many commentators have noted, many events in history not actively sought by the majority have still happened because not enough people took action to prevent them. Likelihood rating: 2/5