At the beginning of the year, the UK government appointed a waste tsar. The idea would be for this chap – businessman Ben Elliott who happens to be a nephew of the Duchess of Cornwall – to end any waste going to landfills by 2030, manage the government’s £15m food waste fund and redistribute any surplus food. We waste a stunning 10.2m tonnes of food each year, so it’s a fine idea on paper. Don’t hold your breath, though. In 2010, the then Tory-led coalition government made the ironic choice of appointing Philip Green as its efficiency tsar. We’re probably better off having a go ourselves. Upcycling wasted food is an excellent place to start, and, thankfully, a small but steady movement of chefs is already having a go, turning kitchen waste into something new, the most appealing of which is uneaten bread made into ice-cream. Savoury ice-creams are not new – I started this column a year ago with a paean to stilton and Twiglet ice-cream, and AB Marshall, author of The Book of Ices, was making asparagus ice-cream in the late 19th century – but the focus here is more on the environment than anything culinary. Alex Bond runs Alchemilla, a restaurant in Nottingham. The clue is in the name; Alex, I’m told, hates waste, and has started mixing chunks of stale sourdough with butter molasses (made with leftover homemade churned butter) and a little coffee, and then freezing it. You can imagine the colour, but taste-wise it’s memorably creamy, with a malty base and a sweet and slightly yeasty finish. At the Oriental Club in London, chef Wesley Smalley has a similar trick, soaking leftover peshwari naan in milk, and turning it into ice-cream. It’s a little low on spice, but otherwise straddles the sweet and the savoury, and is equally great. Neither ice-cream is pretty, but, given almost every food trend is hinged around Instagram, it’s an ugly relief. Upcycling food waste on a micro scale is hardly an act of guerrilla activism, but it is worth pointing out that ethical consumption can be expensive. Caring has a tax (ask any vegan) and freeganism – dumpster diving which has an anti-capitalist, environmental edge – can be dangerous. By contrast, turning stale, uneaten bread into ice-cream, is doable and safe. Mrs Beeton made it, and so did my mum. Generally speaking, I go to great lengths to avoid wasting food. I once wrote about all the food I had frozen and forgotten, and just now rustled up a soup using all the old root veg in my fridge, the remnants of Friday’s curry, half a gyoza and a pot of anchovies, which I quickly scooped back out using my fingers because they went off before Christmas. If I die after eating this, at least I’ll die an environmental hero.