The EU has confirmed it will enforce a hard border on the island of Ireland in the event of a no-deal Brexit, despite the risk it would pose to peace. In comments that will be highly uncomfortable for Dublin, Jean-Claude Juncker’s chief spokesman told reporters it was “pretty obvious” that border infrastructure would be necessary if the UK were to leave without deal. Both the Irish and British governments have been wary about speculating on the repercussions of the UK leaving the EU without a deal. Ireland’s deputy prime minister, Simon Coveney, was caught on tape last week indicating that his fellow ministers should not talk about the resumption of checks publicly for fear of a backlash. In a private conversation, he had told the Irish transport minister, Shane Ross, that “once you start talking about checks anywhere near the border, people will start delving into that and all of a sudden we’ll be the government that reintroduced a physical border on the island of Ireland”. But the EU’s chief spokesman said on Tuesday that the likely enforcement of border checks could not be avoided. The spokesman said: “If you were to push me to speculate on what might happen in a no-deal scenario in Ireland, I think it is pretty obvious you will have a hard border, and our commitments to the Good Friday agreement and everything we have been doing for years with our tools, instruments and programmes will have to take inevitably into account this fact. So of course we are for peace. Of course we stand behind the Good Friday agreement but that is what a no-deal scenario would entail.” The European commission spokesman also echoed the complaints of many in the House of Commons about Theresa May’s statement on Monday by claiming that “at this stage we have nothing new to say from Brussels because there is nothing new from London”. “We continue to follow very closely the ongoing parliamentary debate in the UK. We urge the UK to clarify its intentions as soon as possible,” the spokesman said. During her appearance in the Commons, May insisted that she had listened to the MPs who had voted down her deal but was subsequently accused of failing to offer any new ideas to win round parliament. May’s deal was rejected last week by 230 votes, the heaviest defeat ever for a sitting government. Juncker’s spokesman said Brussels welcomed May’s announcement, in her statement, that the UK would waive the £65 fee for those seeking settled status in the country as the “only new element” in her update to parliament. However, he added: “This … doesn’t provide the sort of clarity of intentions that we are expecting as soon as possible on the broader picture of the orderly withdrawal of the UK from the European Union.” Of May’s plans to return to seek further concessions on the Irish backstop, which would keep the UK in a customs union to avoid a hard border, the spokesman said the deal agreed was “not open to negotiation”.