Ex-Pixar head John Lasseter has scored a top new position in Hollywood, leading to a backlash from within the industry. Lasseter took a leave of absence from Pixar and Disney after admitting “missteps” related to his treatment of female colleagues. The cofounder of Pixar Animation Studios and the animation chief of Walt Disney Company apologised for anyone upset by an “unwanted hug” or “any other gesture” that was perceived as crossing the line. The Hollywood Reporter has cited Lasseter’s misbehaviour as “grabbing, kissing, making comments about physical attributes” and his original leave of absence was later extended to a resignation. His new position sees him heading up Skydance Animation, a strand within Skydance Media, a production company run by David Ellison, who founded the company with inheritance money from his billionaire father Larry Ellison. The company, affiliated with Paramount Pictures, has released a string of hit films from World War Z to Star Trek Beyond. “Let me be clear: we have not entered into this decision lightly,” Ellison wrote in a company memo. “While we would never minimize anyone’s subjective views on behavior, we are confident after many substantive conversations with John, and as the investigation has affirmed, that his mistakes have been recognised. We are certain that John has learned valuable lessons and is ready to prove his capabilities as a leader and a colleague.” According to Variety, a town hall meeting is planned at Skydance for concerns while Lasseter is set to meet with staff this week. The news has led to anger from some within the industry, including Time’s Up, the organisation founded to stand up against sexual harassment after the rise of the #MeToo movement. In a statement, Time’s Up claims the decision “endorses and perpetuates a broken system that allows powerful men to act without consequence” while sharing concerns over what impact it will have. “At a moment when we should be uplifting the many talented voices who are consistently underrepresented, Skydance Media is providing another position of power, prominence and privilege to a man who has repeatedly been accused of sexual harassment in the workplace,” it reads. Melissa Silverstein, who founded Women in Hollywood, also shared her frustration. “This is a horrible message to the women at Pixar who stood up and told their truths about their experiences,” she said. “This is also a message to all that the bro culture is alive and well and thriving in Hollywood.”