Kent & Curwen, the London brand part-owned by David Beckham, has unveiled its latest collection – including a collaboration with the BBC drama Peaky Blinders. The ex-footballer watched Sunday’s show alongside his wife, Victoria, son Brooklyn and mother, Sandra. The designs included frock coats, tailoring and that Peaky Blinders staple, the flat cap. The chef Gordon Ramsay and the Dior Homme designer, Kim Jones, were also in attendance, and both Beckham men wore the TV-show inspired headgear. After the show, David Beckham – dressed in a camel coat and cosy knit - said he was excited by the Peaky Blinders collaboration because he was “a big fan of the show and our brand has always been about the look. It keeps that authenticity.” As for the family show of support, he said: “I always think these days are celebrations everyone can be part of … It makes them very proud to have them here.” He said the flat cap had a family connection. “I got that from my grandad. I wore his from a very young age. Brooklyn has taken it on as well.” The show was the brand’s second at London fashion week men’s, the capital’s biannual menswear showcase. The collection, designed by the brand’s creative director, Daniel Kearns, continued on the theme of British classics. It was strong – and had a pre-war influence without straying into the costume department. This is a well-pitched balance that works for young men of Brooklyn’s generation, who like their retro references in Insta-friendly bites. The rugby shirts, Crombie coats, argyle sweaters and striped mod-like skinny suits, all in a prep school palette of forest green, ivory and claret, could form wardrobe staples. The bright red socks, a tribute to the brand’s founder, Eric Kent, brought the required touch of irreverence. As well as working with Kent & Curwen, Beckham has also been the ambassadorial president of the British Fashion Council since last May. “I’m really proud of my involvement,” he said. “It’s so inspiring to see these talented young designers. My role has been even more enjoyable than I expected it to be.” Kent & Curwen was founded in 1926 by Kent and Dorothy Curwen, who were Savile Row tailors. It has been in the fashion spotlight since 2015, when Beckham became majority owner. Its previous collaborations have included the photographer Perry Ogden and rock band the Stone Roses. Other highlights from the men’s shows on Sunday included Chalayan, Cottweiler and new talent at Fashion East. LFW men’s continues on Monday with shows including Craig Green and A-Cold-Wall*.