Have you ever noticed how we crave sugary and carb-laden foods after a wild night out? Our bodies are great at demanding the fuels they need, when they need them. As I get older, I find I crave more vegetables than I used to (whoever heard of a teenager craving vegetables?), and far less meat. How great, then, that we celebrate vegetables so much more these days, not just because we know about their many benefits for health and the environment, but because we can make so many wonderful things with them. Silky, earthy artichokes, charred, tender cabbage, sweet chestnuts and a bright, piquant sauce – this is a real feast of flavours to drive out the January chill. Prep 6 minCook 40 minServes 4 400g jerusalem artichokes, scrubbed clean with wire wool120ml extra-virgin olive oilSalt For the cabbage4 tbsp vegetable or rapeseed oil1 january king cabbage, or 2 hispi cabbages, quartered through the stems1 tbsp sherry vinegar150g cooked chestnuts, roughly chopped For the green sauce60g olive oil1 tsp smoked paprika1 red onion, peeled and finely chopped2 large handfuls parsley leaves, finely chopped3 tbsp sherry or white-wine vinegar Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Cut the artichokes into bitesize chunks and put into a steamer. Steam until tender, around 20 minutes. Put into a bowl and pour in the olive oil. Blitz smooth with a hand blender, then season and set aside somewhere warm. Heat one and a half tablespoons of the vegetable oil in a large frying pan. When hot, add two of the cabbage quarters and press down hard so they have plenty of contact with the pan. Cook them for a few minutes until dark and charred, then turn, using a pair of tongs, to fry the other cut sides until charred. When done, sprinkle over half the vinegar, leave to bubble up then transfer the cabbage to a baking sheet. Repeat with the remaining quarters. Season the charred wedges and roast in the oven for 10-15 minutes, until tender in the middle. Meanwhile, wipe the frying pan and return it to the heat. Once hot, add the final tablespoon of vegetable oil. Add the chestnuts, then season and stir-fry until crisp and golden-edged. Transfer to a piece of kitchen paper to drain. To make the green sauce, gently heat the oil and paprika in a small pan. Once it begins to bubble, take off the heat and stir in the onion, parsley and vinegar. Season and leave to cool. Spoon the warm artichoke puree on to plates, put a wedge of cabbage on top, spoon the sauce over and scatter the crisp chestnuts on top. Use leftover chestnuts to make a stuffing for crown prince squash with sauteed onion, garlic and herbs, or blitz them with cream and rum and serve topped with grated dark chocolate. Leftover artichokes can be made into an incredibly silky, comforting soup with thyme, garlic and a touch of truffle oil, or go new wave and have them for pudding in the form of ice-cream.