It had been quite a weekend already for Callum Hudson-Odoi, what with the emergence of the story that he wanted his much-discussed move to Bayern Munich so badly he had submitted a formal transfer request. The noises around the 18-year-old Chelsea winger for much of January had been that he favours leaving over staying. This felt like confirmation – the realisation of the worst fears of the club’s support. “God’s plan is always the best,” Hudson-Odoi posted on Instagram. “Sometimes the process is painful and hard. But don’t forget that when God is silent, he’s doing something for you.” Bayern have made several offers, the biggest of which has added up to £35m, and it feels inevitable that they will be back again before Thursday’s deadline. Would Hudson-Odoi even play against Sheffield Wednesday in this FA Cup tie? The answer was yes and, with one flash of magic, he reminded everybody why he is such a coveted talent. Chelsea were one goal to the good, courtesy of Willian’s first-half penalty, but labouring to prise Wednesday apart when Andreas Christensen drifted a high ball from left to right in Hudson-Odoi’s direction. With the left-back Morgan Fox not tight enough, Hudson-Odoi’s first touch was true and his second was even better, a Cristiano Ronaldo-style chop inside that killed his marker and set up the shooting chance. He buried it with his left foot, Keiren Westwood getting his hands to the ball but unable to keep it out and, rather abruptly, the tie was over. Bayern’s scouts would have nodded their approval. Maurizio Sarri had given Gonzalo Higuaín, the loan signing from Juventus, his debut and although the striker struggled for space and opportunity, Chelsea had too much for the team that lags 17th in the Championship and will welcome Steve Bruce as their new permanent manager this week. Willian scored his second late on – a lovely finish following a one-two with the substitute Olivier Giroud – and Chelsea could enjoy a second cup tonic in four days, following their penalty shootout win over Tottenham in the Carabao Cup semi-final. Wednesday were well beaten, although they felt aggrieved when the tie turned away from them midway through the first half amid a whiff of conspiracy – certainly among the supporters who had packed the away enclosure. At one end, Wednesday thought they had a penalty to blow the game open only for the award to be overturned via VAR and, when Chelsea went straight up to the other end, the visitors conceded a penalty; their wounds well and truly salted. It should be said that the offence, committed when Sam Hutchinson, the former Chelsea midfielder, stamped in on César Azpilicueta, was crystal clear and it felt a little strange to see the decision also referred to VAR. Perhaps, it was merely in the interests of even-handedness. For a second, it felt as if the penalty might be the moment for Higuaín to open his Chelsea account. Willian had walked over to have a short conversation with him. Did he offer Higuaín the kick? In the end, it was Willian who assumed the responsibility. He stuttered as he approached the ball and side-footed confidently into the corner. Wednesday’s hearts had soared when Joey Pelupessy swapped passes with Steven Fletcher and charged into the box. Ethan Ampadu, who started in defensive midfield, came across to challenge and, in real time, he seemed to nick the ball away and connect with Pelupessy’s ankle at virtually the same time. The on-pitch referee, Andre Marriner, gave the benefit of the doubt to Pelupessy but, after the super-slow replays, it looked as though Ampadu’s tackle was fair. Just about. Tell that to the Wednesday supporters. “VAR is fucking shit,” they chorused. Chelsea dominated the ball but Wednesday’s back four were well-drilled. They were touch tight to Higuaín, who ran willingly but struggled for any space. He wriggled free on one occasion before the interval, fastening onto Mateo Kovacic’s pass, only for Tom Lees to make the block. Higuaín looked fractionally offside. Later on, he would flash a header well wide. Wednesday worked tirelessly but they could get precious little going as an attacking force. Adam Reach broke up the inside-left channel in the second minute after Barry Bannan had robbed Kovacic yet his shot from an angle was easy for Willy Caballero. That was basically it from them before half-time. Chelsea looked slicker, their touches more refined. It was always likely to be the case. But at 1-0, Wednesday knew that one break, one flicker could turn the tie upside down. They came to feel that Marriner was against them, preferring Chelsea in the 50-50s. They simply had the issue themselves. Reach sent a 50th-minute cross towards the top of the near post and watched as Caballero left it. The ball bounced away off the outside of the upright. It was risky from the goalkeeper. Reach also got in behind Marcos Alonso to win a corner. Slim pickings but they allowed Wednesday to dream. Hudson-Odoi delivered the reality check and thereafter, Chelsea coasted to the win. At full time, all eyes were on Hudson-Odoi, as he removed his shirt and made the long walk from the far touchline to the tunnel, tracked every step of the way by a TV camera. Chelsea’s FA Cup defence continues unchecked. Holding on to their starlet looks rather tougher.