Fernandinho has questioned Liverpool’s ability to deal with the pressure of being Premier League leaders after Manchester City’s 2-1 defeat of Jürgen Klopp’s side. City’s first win over their title rivals in five attempts reduced the gap at the top to four points with 17 matches remaining. Fernandinho, who was among City’s finest performers at the Etihad Stadium on Thursday, said: “Four points is going to be interesting for the rest of the season for both teams. They are still leaders and they have a lot of games to play as well. It is not easy to stay at the top because the pressure is so high. You have to win every game, so we will see what happens in the end.” The midfielder pointed to the manner of the victory, in which Leroy Sané scored the winner after Roberto Firmino had cancelled out Sergio Agüero’s opener. “I am so glad because the team started so well,” he said. “At the beginning of the second half we suffered a little bit and after that, even when they had the ball in possession, we defended so well, we didn’t concede many chances. “This is the best way to play. Whoever wants to be champions has to be able to attack and defend. I think all the big games are like this [tense]. You cannot blink. You get punished, so you have to be careful all the time and everyone who was involved had the same feeling. We had to play our football and try to defend as well as we did, not concede goals. “We had a chance to show our quality after a couple of bad results [defeats to Leicester City and Crystal Palace]. We’re back on track and on winning ways. “The team has been playing good games and this is the most important for us. If you play bad you can win the games, but you have to play good and get the three points. It was a nice game for everybody and of course for the fans. They were so excited, and I am happy for them.” Of Sunday’s visit of Rotherham United in the FA Cup third round he added: “We try to play the same intensity as always. Some teams come to Etihad and don’t want to play with the ball like Liverpool did, so we won’t have to defend like we did. But with the ball we try to play with the same intensity always. We try to find the spaces to create the chances and arrive in the box. When we play games like this we have to try and recover the ball as fast as possible.”