Turmeric is as delicious as it is nourishing, bringing sunshine yellow to everything it touches. We are used to jars of the bright-yellow ground stuff, with its earthy flavour, but fresh turmeric is also starting to make regular appearances on our shelves. It looks like ginger’s little cousin, with a light, almost citrus note to it. Both make their way into my soups, stews, curries and broths in winter, not to mention teas and flavoured milks. I eat this when I feel under the weather, and also when I want something satisfyingly warm and straightforward. I love the uncomplicated simplicity of the golden broth with chewy udon noodles. You could add seasonal veg, too: shredded greens, sugar snap peas, even roast squash, if you like. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4-6 1 tsp coriander seeds, toasted 5 black peppercorns 1 large onion, peeled and halved2 small carrots, halved1 small bulb garlic, halved 1 large thumb-sized knob ginger (55g), sliced1 small thumb fresh turmeric root (20g), sliced, or 1 tsp ground turmeric4 spring onions, plus extra, shredded, to serve¼ red chilli, deseeded1 litre clear vegetable stockA squeeze of lemonSoy sauce, or salt, to season600g thick udon noodles Chilli oil, to serve In a large lidded saucepan, toast the coriander seeds and peppercorns over a medium heat for two minutes. Add the remaining ingredients, apart from the lemon, soy, noodles and chilli. Pour over one litre of boiled water. Bring to a boil, then turn to a simmer for 25 minutes, to allow the flavours to infuse. Strain the broth and serve straight away, or keep with the veg and strain before reheating and serving. Squeeze in the juice of half a lemon, or more, if you’d like, and add soy or salt as needed. You should have a delicately flavoured, fragrant broth. When almost ready to serve, cook the noodles according to pack instructions, then drain. Place portions in bowls and ladle the broth over the noodles. Serve with extra spring onions and a little chilli oil. Less cloying and filling than those achingly trendy turmeric lattes. On writing days, I make a big pot to sit on the stove, and dip into it through the day. It’s understood in Ayurveda medicine that adding black pepper where you use turmeric activates its renowned properties. Prep 5 minMakes 2 cups 1 tbsp grated ginger1-2 lemons (depending on size)½ tsp ground turmeric or 1 tbsp grated fresh turmeric1 tiny pinch dried chilli flakesA few grinds of black pepperHoney (I use the raw stuff), to sweeten Put the ginger into a teapot. Squeeze in the juice of the lemons, add the ground or fresh turmeric, chilli flakes and black pepper, then pour 600ml just-boiled water over the mix. Leave to cool slightly, then sweeten with a little honey (this will make sure the amazing properties of the honey aren’t killed by the heat of boiling water).