One rainy Saturday morning in October, several hundred people gathered at a Manchester hotel for QED, the UK’s largest convention of science and skepticism (they prefer the American spelling). Pitched towards rationalists, the event is an opportunity to hear popular science communicators discuss the issues that concern skeptics the most: the rising tide of misinformation, the peril of credulity and the urgency of evidence-based facts. The event had sold out in July and those lucky enough to nab a ticket swarmed the hotel, roving the three floors across which it was held. In the convention’s main hall there were glitzy chandeliers and mirrors, and a stage backed by large screens, in the TED talks mould. Over coffee, some guests traded tales of pseudoscience. Others denounced quackery. In her opening address the convention’s MC, Helen Arney, a ukulele player and former physicist, expressed sympathy for hotel guests unconnected to the convention, as if they had unwittingly stumbled into a lion’s den of critical thinking. “I’ve already heard some amazing conversations in lifts,” she said, “between people who have no idea what is going on.” On the event’s website, QED, which stands for “Question, Explore, Discover”, is described as “a weekend of science, reason and critical thinking”, though it might justifiably be advertised as a get-together for the skeptical community. Lately their ranks have grown. In October, QED bagged its biggest crowd yet – in recent years, delegates have begun flying in from around the world, and turnouts have been steadily increasing at smaller events: panel discussions, pub meets, village hall gatherings. At QED, speakers gave presentations on topics with which most skeptics are familiar:the fallacies of the wellness industry, the history of poltergeists. But the underlining message related more to the skeptical process: how to become a more effective critical thinker, how to use that skill to better discern whether information is true or false, and how to share that information with a wider audience. “Skepticism isn’t just about saying Bigfoot isn’t real,” one skeptic told me during a break between talks. “It’s a tool set!” In anxious times, that tool set is important. In the wake of the 2016 US presidential election, a Pew Research Center study found that 23% of American adults had shared a false news story, sometimes knowingly. Shortly afterward, Oxford dictionaries selected “post-truth” as its word of the year because, following significant disinformation campaigns – Trump’s election, Brexit – the expression had evolved from “being a peripheral term to being a mainstay in political commentary”. (The Collins English Dictionary selected “fake news” for its list 12 months later.) Last year Wired magazine co-founder Kevin Kelly told the BBC: “Truth is no longer dictated by authorities, but is networked by peers. For every fact there is a counter-fact.” What is demonstrably correct, these days, seems negligible. This should be a scary thought for all of us, though the worry can sometimes slip from the forefront of our minds. The past few years have been rough – it is tiresome to evaluate information constantly, even when there are clues to suggest it might be inaccurate or, worse, deliberately distorted. It is easier, sometimes, to believe what you prefer to believe. But for skeptics, approaching information in any way other than with rational curiosity is counter- intuitive, particularly now, when dangerous untruths seep into the culture like water into earth. “Most people are not by nature critical thinkers,” Chris French, a British psychologist, told me. “It’s not a particularly natural way of thinking. So, skeptics, we’re kind of a weird bunch. We say, ‘Really?’ We say, ‘Show us the evidence!’” For a decade, French was the editor of The Skeptic, the UK’s go-to journal. To the question, “What should we believe?”, he responds: “Find out for yourself!” “I don’t think we’ve ever had a situation where fake news and claims of conspiracy have been so much a part of our political and wider culture,” he told me. “Fake news has always been there. But it’s not had the prominence it has now, thanks partly to the internet, and partly to Donald Trump. And there’s never been a greater need for people to try to make a distinction between claims that are true and claims that are false – no greater need for critical thinking!” I don’t like it that there are people out there selling ideas that aren’t true The American skeptical movement, which emerged in the 1970s and later spawned a UK counterpart, involves several large organisations, including the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry, which promotes “the use of reason in examining important issues” (Carl Sagan and Isaac Asimov were founding members). In contrast, British skepticism has a grassroots verve. There is no UK-wide organising body, and the community is eager and committed but haphazard. Some groups organise lectures or record podcasts. Others venture into activism, and co-ordinate stunt-like investigations to expose local charlatans: psychics, chiropractors, naturopaths (the charismatic health guru with a winning smile but no academic qualifications is the skeptic’s mortal enemy). In all cases, the aim is to debunk suspicious fringe claims: that the Earth is flat (it is not); that homeopathy is a viable treatment for cancer (untrue); that the MMR vaccine causes autism (nope); that, for a fee, a medium is able to retrieve loving messages from your childhood pet (nice idea, never proven). Skeptics often consider themselves a last line of defence against irrational beliefs. When inaccurate information has been accepted in the culture as truth and scientific agencies have brushed aside their responsibility to correct the incorrect, the skeptical community mobilises, though sometimes it can appear as if it’s using a ladle to bale out a sinking ship. In his book The Skeptics’ Guide to the Universe (sold out at the QED bookstall), the American skeptic and neurologist Steven Novella describes contemporary skepticism as “a generational struggle, one that will likely never end”. QED is reflective of skepticism’s rising urgency: among long-serving rationalists, the audience was peppered with people new to the movement. The convention is run by a five-person committee that includes Michael Marshall, a 35-year-old from Liverpool. I spoke to Marshall in the lead-up to the weekend, during a brief reprieve from what he called “the maelstrom of event management”. QED has been organised annually since 2011, around the time Marshall began to pursue a career in skepticism full-time (an English graduate, he had been working in marketing). He now describes himself as a “full-time skeptical investigator”, a position that involves “travelling around the country, encouraging groups of strangers to doubt stuff”. When he is not organising QED, Marshall works for the Good Thinking Society, a non-profit organisation established by the science writer Simon Singh that promotes rational inquiry. Much of Marshall’s skeptical work is campaign-based: he and Singh mull over curious claims, and Marshall investigates, sometimes undercover, until he has enough information to raise public awareness and bring about social change. Targets can be small or large – local healers or the NHS. A few years ago, Marshall exposed a Liverpool palm reader by revealing that her predictions tended to stick to a script. In 2015, he orchestrated a campaign that challenged NHS spending on homeopathic treatments – alternative therapies without medical validation – a situation Marshall described as “unlawful, and contrary to the best interest of local patients”. One by one, clinical commissioners nationwide terminated homeopathic funding until, in August, it ceased almost entirely. Skeptics don’t always achieve such success. “The barrier to entry is your willingness to participate,” Marshall told me, as though he knew not all campaigns had similar consequences. “I just don’t like the idea that there’s someone out there selling ideas to people that aren’t true.” This is true of most skeptics, who are often as much disciples of empiricism as ethical warriors. Marshall regularly works on projects he considers morally just. “I do a lot of investigations into alternative medicine,” he told me, because “in the worst cases, you actually see people turning down lifesaving medicine, convinced the natural treatment they’re given by an alternative practitioner is going to save them.” People have died, he said, but “if we watch each other’s backs, we’ll stop each other falling into these kinds of pitfalls. That, for me, is why skepticism is hugely important.” Marshall was due to give a talk at QED. He’d been assigned the after-lunch spot, typically an attention graveyard, though he seemed confident he could energise the audience. Earlier in the year, Marshall had visited the UK’s first Flat Earth conference, in Birmingham, and he was excited to share his findings. Before the talk he said his intention was not to pillory Flat Earth beliefs, but to explain what might turn a person against conventional science, and how their beliefs can become contagious. For much of the talk, Marshall was true to his word. An accomplished speaker, he prowled from one side of the stage to the other, tall and thin, dressed all in black and wearing a wireless microphone. But every now and then a comment would slip into derision, and the room would fill with a kind of patronising bellow. In those moments, the audience appeared less like a collection of truth-seekers and more like a group of smug know-it-alls. People believe in these things because they’re comforting. Do I really want to take that away? Ask a skeptic if they enjoy their informed position and, more often than you’d imagine, they’ll demur. These days, the truth can be a burden. French told me, “If someone’s into astrology, you can say, ‘Well, there’s no science to support that.’ If they’re into alternative medicine, you can say, ‘Well, that’s rubbish.’” He added, “People stop inviting you to parties.” I heard similar stories at QED. The convention had opened with a dramatic video in which a convincing David Attenborough impersonator voiced over a wildlife documentary pastiche, which mined the struggle of skepticism for laughs. “This rare creature swims against a seemingly overwhelming tide of irrationality,” fake Attenborough said, “in a quiet and almost entirely ineffectual way.” The audience chuckled, knowingly. He went on, “These skeptics can be identified by their almost pungent air of superiority.” This is the skeptic’s struggle. How do you tell a man whose wife recently died that there’s no proof his medium can offer contact? How do you convince a woman terminally ill with cancer not to spend the last months of her life ingesting a provably ineffective miracle cure? “It’s one thing to attack alternative medicine in the abstract,” French told me. “But people believe in these things because they’re comforting. Do I really want to take that away from them?” A week before QED, I went to a talk by Jonathan Jarry, a Canadian skeptic, who at the convention took part in a panel titled “#NoFilter: Scrutinising Social Media Skepticism”. At the talk, which had been organised by French, an audience member asked how to approach sensitive subjects with family members, and a discussion broke out. Jarry advised a friendly, open approach: be cautious, present the facts, but don’t push too hard. It was a position French agreed with, and the other skeptics in the room all nodded along. When I spoke to Deborah Hyde, The Skeptic’s current editor, she said, “I don’t think you attract anybody to your way of thinking when you’re a knob about it.” Later, Jarry told me, “Perhaps the hardest job of a skeptic is to persuade people.” Some find it so difficult they give up. “But there are a lot of people out there who just don’t know where the facts lie – what is real, what isn’t. And there are interest groups that are pushing disinformation on purpose, to confuse people, to sow doubt.” Jarry considers his work a kind of “Sisyphean struggle”. Every day he encounters new forms of misinformation: inaccurate newspaper stories, fabricated videos. “But for me,” he said, “it always boils down to: if no skeptics do this, then the other side wins.” And then what are we left with? “Falsehoods and lies,” he said.