European media and commentators were damning about the latest twist in the Brexit saga, accusing Theresa May variously of weakness, desperation and cynicism in putting party before country – and warning she could no longer be trusted. “To avoid the disintegration of her own Conservative party, Theresa May is now risking a major showdown with the EU and increasing the danger of a damaging no-deal departure,” writes Le Monde’s London correspondent, Philippe Bernard. “Two months before the divorce date, she hopes to question two years of discussions with the EU27 – ditching her own handiwork.” British MPs sent two contradictory messages, the paper says: “One majority rejected no deal; another mandated May to begin a renegotiation so hypothetical as to risk that very no deal.” As for the prime minister, she made her strategy very clear, Le Monde concludes: “As risky as it is, she intends to run down the clock so as to force the EU27 into making concessions before 29 March. And then, if necessary, blame the EU – an easy scapegoat – for eventual failure.” In Germany, Björn Finke in the Süddeutsche Zeitung says the most promising way forward for May would undoubtedly be to approach the opposition Labour party with concessions on a permanent customs union. “But that would lose her the support of hardcore Brexiteers in her own party, and risk splitting the Conservatives,” he says. “Since May lacks the courage and the leadership to take such a step, she prefers the seemingly simpler way: renegotiation. Brussels cannot trust her promise to win a majority if changes are made to the deal. May does not have her own party under control. May’s weakness is dangerous, for Britain and for the rest of the EU.” In an opinion piece for El País attacking May’s “startling disloyalty”, Xavier Vidal-Folch says bluntly the British prime minister “can no longer be trusted. Not because her judgment and arguments lack depth, but because she changes them at every step.” It is true that this “worries the Europeans”, Vidal-Folch says. “That’s why they’re drawing up contingency plans, which only remind them of the losses ahead. But those who’ll suffer the most damage are the British themselves. “The car industry, banks and technology sector are all putting the finishing touches to their own partial or total ex-Brit plans. It’s not abstract markets that will tip the balance, but real businesses, inventors, professionals and doctors. Because May can no longer be trusted.” NRC Handelsblad in the Netherlands is equally brutal. “To save her Brexit deal, avoid a split in her party and retain the minimum of control a prime minister needs, May aims to provoke a conflict with the EU,” it says. “What has not proved possible in the past two years now has to be sorted in a fortnight, before the next parliamentary vote … The job looks impossible; there is a very high risk of May returning empty-handed. In which case, a no-deal Brexit will be a real probability: the moment of truth approaches for British politics.” In Italy, La Repubblica says Tuesday’s votes in the Commons “revealed, more than anything else, the general refusal to take responsibility for the economic disaster that an exit from the EU without agreement would be. Nobody wants to be left holding the Brexit baby. Two and a half years after the referendum, we are back at the starting point. And it’s 60 days until Brexit.” Libération, France’s leftwing daily, detects a familiar British strategy behind Tuesday evening’s “utterly absurd” scenes in the Commons. “From now till mid-February, aided by the Eurosceptic press, she can deploy the classic British rhetoric: those intransigent, arrogant Europeans are refusing to give us what we want. “Then she can say, ‘I tried, but this is the only deal on the table.’ She is counting on fear of a no deal to win MPs round. It’s a very big gamble, and it could backfire, lamentably.”