Matt Goss is talking about rectangles. Rectangles, you may recall, were among a succession of unlikely topics that got him exercised in the documentary Bros: After the Screaming Stops, the saga of the 80s pop idols’ attempts to stage a 2017 reunion gig at the O2 Arena. That became Christmas’s most improbable television hit: an alternately hilarious, painful and moving riot of fraternal dysfunction, fallout from fame and gnomic, homespun wisdom. The thing is, says Matt, he had a valid point about two rectangles making a square, which in turn makes a fortress. “It’s not a defensive thing, but geometry. Two metres across, four metres down, two metres across, four metres down, what is that?” “A square,” offers his twin brother, Luke. “No,” Matt frowns. “It’s two rectangles. And if you put them together – side by side, I didn’t mean lying next to each other – it’s a square: four by four. And most fortresses, in my research, are square. I actually want to do a T-shirt with two rectangles on it, with the measurements, in a funny way.” He says he was right, too, about refusing to be superstitious as a result of Stevie Wonder’s lyrics. “We really were a superstitious family. Imprisoned by superstition. My literature was album sleeves, reading the lyrics and liner notes. And when I read: ‘When you believe in things that you don’t understand then you suffer,’ that was impactful to me. It sounds funny, but I’m not going to look at it and say I didn’t mean it. I abso-fucking-lutely did mean it.” Matt says all this, not in the exasperated tones of a man who feels he has been mocked and misrepresented, but with a good-humoured smile. Indeed, if you were Matt or Luke Goss, you would probably be in a good mood, too. They say they knew After the Screaming Stops was a good film. They declined editorial control (“I think that was fairly courageous,” says Luke) and at its first screening in the US endured the “uncomfortable” results, before the audience erupted into wild applause at the end. Even so, the reaction in Britain seems to have taken them completely by surprise. They spent Christmas together in the US, the appalling rows that punctuate the documentary long since passed (“The cameras didn’t exacerbate them,” says Matt. “Without the cameras, there would have been blood”), watching in amazement as Matt’s views on rectangles, conkers and how CNN is the thinking man’s reality TV became memes. Some people compared it to Spinal Tap. Others said it had reduced them to tears, victims of the film-makers’ brilliant bait-and-switch tactics. You spend the first part of the documentary laughing at their loftier pronouncements, before it hit you with the heavy stuff about the cost of fame, their mother’s death and fraternal bonds. By the end, you’re rooting for them. Some viewers were hit so hard, they tweeted about being inspired to repair broken relationships with siblings. In one of the documentary’s more perceptive moments, Luke noted: “Britain has never been proud of Bros.” Their 1988 debut album, Push, sold 10m copies and spawned five Top 5 singles, but Bros seemed to come and go without leaving a trace, except in the hearts of their notoriously banzai fanbase, the Brosettes. Almost uniquely among big stars of the era, the 80s revival never quite got around to Bros. There has been no attempt to critically rehabilitate their music, ironically or otherwise; you seldom hear their hits, even on radio stations predicated on nostalgia; their brief but dazzling flash of fame was apparently sealed in a box marked Things We Would Rather Forget. Until, it appears, now. They tell me they went to the National Television awards on Tuesday and were besieged by well-wishers. Dermot O’Leary introduced them onstage with the words: “They’re ours, and we love them.” When I tell people I’m interviewing Bros, they express delight and envy, a reaction it is hard to imagine their name provoking a few weeks ago. Perhaps, suggests Luke, it has something to do with the film’s honesty. “We’re in a world at the moment where fake perfection is being presented in all different mediums, so that degree of candour is refreshing, I think.” Certainly, if they seem slightly different in person to on camera 18 months ago – Matt more self-aware, Luke less fragile – they are nevertheless very similar. Matt is in a bespoke three-piece suit and hat, and remains fond of an extended metaphor (“Matt’s a great lyricist, and basically thinks that way after 30 years of doing it,” offers his brother); Luke is more softly spoken, in regulation designer rock star garb, albeit with his seemingly fathomless supply of grunge T-shirts exchanged for a plain black one. Like the crystal-owning meditators of After the Screaming Stops, both are occasionally given to talking in spiritual terms, something I assumed was a reaction to fame’s excesses, but apparently isn’t. “We’ve always been like that,” says Matt. “Our grandfather was a faith healer, our granny was a Romany gypsy, a clairvoyant. We’re not afraid of that conversation now.” Or perhaps it’s linked to the Goss brothers’ ability to take a joke. They seem blithely unconcerned that people were laughing at them. “Of course they were,” says Luke. “It’s inevitable.” “We made a conscious decision that we knew there were going to be some uncomfortable moments,” adds Matt. “In life, there are. It isn’t contrived.” Or maybe it has something to do with the film giving people a better understanding of what it was like to be in Bros. On arrival in 1987, they seemed like the perfect teen-pop confection: beautiful boys with a gimmick, who furthermore seemed of the moment. You would never have confused their music with acid house, but their image at least was cannily based on the clothes you would have seen at an illegal warehouse party of the era: ripped 501s, bandanas, quiff-y hair by London’s hippest salon, Cuts. Linking them, albeit tangentially, to a youth culture the police were actively trying to stop might have given them the faintest hint of rebellion in teenage eyes. “People don’t speak about how rebellious our fans were,” says Matt. “They would bunk off school to see us, they would turn up in their thousands, you had this mania.” Their lyrics made them seem cocky and hungry for success at all costs: “Drop the boy – I’m the man”; “When will I see my picture in the papers?” But then, the twins hadn’t written the lyrics – they were the handiwork of their manager, Tom Watkins, and a songwriter called Nicky Graham, who muddied the waters by crediting themselves as “the Brothers”. The people who sang their words seem to have been desperately ill-equipped to cope with vertiginous success, their woes compounded by the fact that at the time the British tabloid press was running riot. It was the era of headlines such as “Freddie Starr ate my hamster”, and “Pop idols sneer at dying kids”, when showbiz reporting and demented fiction seemed to be interchangeable. “We were continuously on our back foot, because we were constantly having to rectify what had been said,” says Matt. “Today, if a journalist writes a piece you can go online and dissect it immediately. Back then, if a journalist said something about me and Luke, we would have to wait until the next interview to correct it. If you’re constantly defending yourself, you can’t be yourself.” In fairness, there were positives to their fame. They both loved playing live. “Touring was attractive for me because the [record company] execs didn’t know how to fuck with it, they didn’t know how to play,” says Luke. “It was our zone. I was with my brother, playing and singing. It was as real as it can be, it was legit.” Also, they couldn’t help but enjoy some aspects of the mania. “It wasn’t a pop band with a couple of hits, it was a global phenomenon, it personified what rock’n’roll is,” says Matt. “Tens of thousands of fans everywhere, helicopters and bodyguards and craziness, being shoved into the back of meat wagons by police. We’re still the youngest men to headline Wembley stadium. That belongs to Bros. Whether it matters to anyone else, that’s OK, but it’s deeply important to us.” Nevertheless, watching After the Screaming Stops, it is hard to avoid the feeling that the traumatic aspects of Bros’s success might have outweighed the positives. In the documentary’s most disturbing moment, the brothers recall appearing on TV chatshow Wogan, performing and taking delivery of platinum discs, hours after being told that their sister had been killed by a drunken driver. “I think if someone had said: ‘Do you need a second after your big sister was killed?’, we would have probably said: ‘Yeah, that would be nice.’ We were 17-, 18-year-old boys. But at the end of the day, I’m enjoying this, and it’s taken a long time for us to have that. We have our own lives and we understand business and have good acumen. But I think back then … we lost the love of it, we lost each other, and in the end it did supersede the desire to get onstage.” The pair are keen to emphasise that the damage wreaked by their rise and fall as teen idols is in the past. Matt has a successful career as a Las Vegas entertainer, packing them in at the Mirage. Luke has reinvented himself as an actor, largely in action thrillers. And these are high times for Bros. They are playing another reunion gig at Brixton Academy in July; they seem to have missed a trick billing it as Bros Coming Home rather than Bros Coming HOME – four letters, as Matt says in After the Screaming Stops, that personify home – but it looks like a guaranteed sell-out. There’s talk of a new album, more TV, even – perhaps jokingly – of merchandise that reads MAKE CONKERS GREAT AGAIN. “How do I feel about it?” frowns Matt when the latter is mentioned. “I think it’s … you shouldn’t get me started on this,” he says, then gets started on it anyway. “I think Britain is known for its sense of humour. We’re cheeky, flirtatious, sadistic, sarcastic, there’s a sense of humour ingrained in all of us, and I think it’s important we don’t lose that. Talking about having to wear goggles when you play conkers is a way of saying let’s not become too careful. We’re meant to smash our knuckles with conkers, we’re meant to fall out of trees and break our wrists. Do you know what I mean? I think people get it when I go on about not wearing goggles.” “I think it could be a suggestion,” offers Luke. “But to insist that we do things …” “No,” interrupts Matt. “I don’t even want a suggestion. Goggles in chemistry lessons, fair enough, you might blow yourself up, but conkers …” He shakes his head. “I think you understand. I just want to say that I’m more concerned about North Korea than I am about conkers,” he says, then smiles. “But conkers are right up there.” Bros: After the Screaming Stops is on BBC2, Saturday, 10.45pm. Bros play the O2 Academy Brixton on 5 July