Once the empty feeling subsides and the lump at the back of his throat stops threatening to leap from his mouth, perhaps it will console Andy Murray to consider how much he means to people from all walks of life. Even at this early stage of the healing process, with the emotions swirling and his heart shattered as he contemplates how brutally his body has given up on him in the past two years, it might raise his spirits to know he is showered with affection not only for his achievements on a tennis court but also for what he represents on a human level. In an era of ugly public debate it is important to remember that Murray’s most endearing qualities – his sense of morality, his ability to separate right and wrong, his sensitivity and intelligence – have made him more than a tennis player. To appreciate him fully, to get to the root of why it hurts to see one of Britain’s sporting greats announce that his career is all but over, you have to understand that the connection many feel with him is explained by more than admiration for his skill and grit. It runs deeper than Wimbledon titles and Olympic golds, because Murray belongs to a select group of athletes who have managed to transcend their sport through their integrity away from the heat of competition. Above all it is the unapologetic feminism that has turned the 31-year-old into an unlikely global icon. The Scot’s championing of female athletes has elevated him above his peers – witness the American comedian Sarah Silverman raving about him on the Ellen DeGeneres Show – and makes him a fine example of what masculinity should be in 2019. Many bad judges of character have sought to portray Murray as a misery guts down the years. Yet criticisms of his supposed surliness could not be wider of the mark. In reality he is funny and kind, thoughtful and brave, scarily resilient with a racket in his right hand but never reluctant to weep in public. Watching him struggle to blink back the tears during that painful press conference in Melbourne, the thought occurred that the phrase “man up” should be replaced by “Murray up”. Even though it was the lowest moment of his professional life, there was something quintessentially Andy about this ferocious competitor’s lack of self-consciousness. Along with quashing the idea that big boys don’t cry, Murray has led the way in showing how men can stand up for women. Influenced by his mother, Judy, another tireless force of nature, he has used his position of power to start difficult and vital conversations. He has argued for equal pay in tennis and refused to listen to the sniffy comments that greeted his decision to hire a female coach, Amélie Mauresmo, in 2014. He has said Wimbledon should schedule more women’s matches on Centre Court and his comments have been a breath of fresh air, promoting inclusivity and equality, demonstrating that emotional maturity does not equate to weakness. At 6ft 3in Murray is physically imposing but there is nothing macho about the way he carries himself. He has gone to war against the misogynistic attitudes that still thrive in the tennis world and has also not hesitated to challenge casual sexism. Two years ago he was praised for correcting a journalist who said Sam Querrey was the first American to reach a grand slam semi-final since 2009. “Male player,” Murray said, highlighting the fact that Serena Williams had won a fair few women’s titles in that period at SW19. “I do not think there is a woman player who is not totally supportive of Andy Murray,” Serena Williams said. “He has spoken up for women’s rights, especially in tennis, forever. He has such a wonderful mother, who has been such a strong figure in his life and he has done so much for us on our tour. We love Andy Murray.” That episode followed a familiar pattern, as John Inverdale knows all too well after declaring in 2016 that Murray was the first person to win two Olympic gold medals in tennis. “Well, to defend the singles title,” Murray told the BBC host. “I think Venus and Serena have won about four each.” No wonder he has a fan in Billie Jean King, the former grand slam champion and a relentless defender of women’s rights, who used Twitter to urge Murray to remember that his “greatest impact on the world may be yet to come”. King’s words are a reminder that while Murray does not deserve to endure such a cruel ending, another story could be about to begin. The world needs more men like the shy boy from Dunblane.