Members of the EU27 have expressed their frustration with Theresa May while rejecting a game-changing renegotiation of the Irish backstop and calling for a convincing ‘plan B’ that could win round parliament to a Brexit deal. In a shot across Theresa May’s bows, Peter Altmaier, Germany’s economics minister and a key ally of Angela Merkel, appeared to warn both Labour and the Conservatives against abandoning their cross-party talks. “Sympathy, patience and readiness to wait until the UK’s position will be clarified are of utmost important to avoid the worst,” he tweeted. “They should not be misused for party politics. Large majority wants to exclude hard Brexit – in the interest of the UK and beyond.” The prime minister is expected to tell the Commons on Monday afternoon that she plans to return to Brussels to seek a substantive shift from the EU on the Irish backstop in order to win round pro-Brexit MPs to her deal. The move has been widely seen as May giving up on the cross-party talks that were aimed at breaking the parliamentary logjam, and instead going back to placating the Democratic Unionist party and the Brexiters in her own party. Arriving in Brussels for a meeting on Monday, EU27 foreign ministers expressed varying degrees of openness to making changes to the withdrawal agreement, but were sceptical of being able to offer anywhere near enough for May to secure the support of rebel MPs. Spain’s foreign minister, Josep Borrell, said the scale of defeat for May’s Brexit deal last Tuesday – by 230 votes – suggested she would need to rethink her strategy of ploughing on with the current withdrawal agreement and political declaration on the future relationship. “I do not think she can convince MPs by presenting the same agreement with some tweaks,” he said. “She has to bring something substantially different, but of course that would have to be approved by the EU, so we have to wait until this afternoon to see what she says.” Borrell said parliamentary support was essential. “We cannot continue negotiating something, as it has happened this time, and when everything is negotiated, the parliament rejects it. We have to have the guarantee that she has enough political support so that what is negotiated is not rejected at the last moment.” Jean Asselborn, Luxembourg’s minister of foreign affairs, said he hoped Downing Street could still move towards a permanent customs union, as backed by Labour. Heiko Maas, Germany’s foreign minister, said that with fewer than 70 days until the UK was due to leave the bloc it was “about time” Downing Street offered a new plan that could get through parliament. “We know what London doesn’t want,” he said. “We finally need to know what London does want, what they have a majority for in parliament, so that we can sit together with the colleagues from London and discuss how a … Brexit without a deal can be prevented. Because it seems like everyone wants this and therefore it has to be possible.” Maas said “nerves are raw” about the threat posed by Brexit to peace on the island of Ireland, after a car bomb exploded outside a Londonderry police station on Saturday. He said the Irish backstop, which would guarantee the avoidance of a hard border by keeping the whole of the UK in a customs union until a satisfactory arrangement was in place, was “a topic where I can only see little changes being made during the negotiations and talks”. “For the German government this border issue is – we are a country that also had a border running through it – one of special sensitivity and we will closely cooperate with our Irish colleagues,” he said. The comments came as Ireland’s EU affairs minister, Helen McEntee, ruled out bilateral talks with the British government, and the Irish deputy leader, Simon Coveney, held talks with the bloc’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier. Miroslav Lajčák, the Slovakian foreign affairs minister, said his country would not support any renegotiation of the withdrawal agreement. “I don’t think it is feasible, I don’t think it is good,” he said. “I think the agreement is very good, 27 member states support it very strongly and I don’t see any reason to open it. “It is not up to us, it is up to the Brits to express themselves. A hard Brexit would be hard but we are getting closer and closer to it. I hope for wisdom to prevail.” Lithuania’s foreign minister, Linas Linkevicius, said of the withdrawal agreement that there was “no willingness to open the Pandora’s box”, signalling broader concerns that any further negotiation would result in some member states pushing for their own changes, and the deal swiftly unravelling.