Born Donald John Trump in New York, 14 June 1946, the son of Fred Trump, a property developer, and Mary Anne MacLeod Trump. Nancy Patricia D’Alesandro in Baltimore, Maryland, 26 March 1940, the daughter of Thomas D’Alesandro Jr, a US congressman and Baltimore mayor, and Anunciata D’Alesandro. Proud children Donald Trump Jr is a cheerleader for the president on the campaign trail and could be in hot water over alleged collusion with Russia. Alexandra Pelosi is a documentary film-maker who said of her mother this week: “She’ll cut your head off and you won’t even know you’re bleeding.” Claim to political fame  Trump: First person without political or military experience to be elected US president. Pelosi: First woman to become speaker of the US House of Representatives from 2007 to 2011, re-elected in 2019. Claim to infamy Trump: Rich man hated by Democrats (“We’re going to impeach the motherfucker,” said newly elected congresswoman Rashida Tlaib). Pelosi: Rich woman hated by Republicans (Republican David Brat mentioned Pelosi and her “liberal agenda” 21 times at a debate). Blowing your own trumpet Trump: “I would give myself an A+, is that enough?” Pelosi: “I am a master legislator. I just love it.” Daily schedule Trump: Reportedly wakes at 5.30am and watches news in the White House master bedroom, then stays up beyond midnight. Pelosi: Reportedly wakes at 5.30am and works late into the night. Political acumen Trump responds to flattery from cabinet members and dictators and has no other discernible tactics or strategy. Pelosi played a blinder to quell a party rebellion – more than 60 Democratic candidates campaigned on a pledge to oppose her speakership bid – and ensure that she would reclaim the gavel. Oratory skills Trump: Incoherent, rambling, self-contradictory, zig-zagging, nonsensical. “Pelosi’s speaking style is less tangential than cubist, full of unexpected angles,” says the New York Times Magazine. “At times, she seems to be carrying on three or four different conversations at once.” Gaffes Trump: All the time, every day. Pelosi: Not quite so often, although her remark about Obamacare – “We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy” – was described by the New York Times Magazine as the most memorable gaffe of her political career. Where they stood on the 2003 Iraq war Trump was for it and then against it. Pelosi, then in Congress, spoke out against it. Where they stood on Obamacare Trump admitted in February 2017: “Nobody knew that healthcare could be so complicated.” Pelosi did know, having worked Congress with Lyndon B Johnson-like craft to get the Affordable Care Act passed. Where they stand on the media Trump: “The Fake News Media, the true Enemy of the People.” Pelosi: “I think the press loves him [Trump] … Mussolini, he didn’t care what they said about him, as long as they were talking about him.” Where they stand on impeachment Trump: You can’t impeach a great president but let’s talk about it and rally my base. Pelosi: I’m secretly all for it but let’s not talk about it so we don’t rally his base. Romantic life Thrice married Trump was caught on video explaining his approaching to wooing: “When you’re a star, they let you do it. You can do anything … Grab ’em by the pussy.” Pelosi married financier Paul Pelosi and moved to New York, then San Francisco, where they had five children in six years. Religion Trump is a self-described Presbyterian who enjoys the backing of conservative evangelicals. Pelosi, of Italian descent, is a devout Catholic. Fashion taste Trump favours a red tie, usually worn too long. Last month Pelosi walked out of the White House in a bright red coat and put on sunglasses to address reporters. Food taste Trump: Cheeseburgers. Pelosi: Chocolate. (“I don’t know what it is. But some call it dedication, some call it an addiction, others call it an affliction. I knew I loved my husband when I said I would give up chocolate for him. But I also knew he loved me because he’d never ask me to do such a thing.”) Most likely to watch Trump: Fox News. Pelosi: MSNBC. Twitter followers Trump: 56.9m. Pelosi: 1.85m A recent tweet Trump: “GREAT JOBS NUMBERS JUST ANNOUNCED!” Pelosi: “Always a pleasure to chat with @JoyAnnReid – and such a treat to have it happen at my alma mater, @TrinityDC. Be sure to watch tonight at 10 pm ET! #MSNBCTownHall.”