On Wednesday night last week, Nicholas Hada slept at Rome’s Termini train station, along with about 10 others hastily evicted from a refugee reception centre in a town close to the Italian capital earlier in the day. Originally from Guinea, he returned to the centre in Castelnuovo di Porto, the second-largest of its kind in Italy, the following morning to collect the belongings he had left behind, fearing they would be stolen in the train station. After an anxious 24 hours, he received good news: a local resident had offered him a room in her home. “I feel so grateful – thanks to God,” said Hada, who had been at the shelter since March 2017. “I don’t understand why they threw us on to the street. But there are those who throw you away, and those who take you in. That’s life.” Riccardo Travaglini, the mayor of Castelnuovo di Porto, said 20 of the 305 people evicted from the centre had been left homeless, owing to a measure contained within the rightwing populist government’s recently enacted hardline immigration law that scrapped humanitarian protection permits, which were granted to those not eligible for refugee status but who for various reasons could not be sent home. The remaining 200 residents, the majority of whom are awaiting the outcome of asylum requests, will be removed before 31 January after Matteo Salvini, the deputy prime minister and interior minister, ordered the centre to be closed. The interior ministry said on Thursday that nobody was “forced out” and that people were simply being transferred to “equivalent structures” in Italy. A spokesperson declined to reveal where these were, citing “security reasons”. As those waiting to leave fret about their future, Travaglini and his staff are working to rehouse others and have been touched by the overwhelming response from people offering shelter. “At the end of the day, this shows that in Italy welfare is done by citizens, not the government,” said one of the staff members as she waded through dozens of emails from across Italy, as well as London and Brussels. “This government has demonstrated that it has no humanity.” Compassion towards refugees irks Salvini, who often belittles “do-gooder” humanitarians, as he pushes forward with a ruthless strategy that will soon result in similar-sized centres being shut down. The new immigration law, named after the minister, who also leads the far-right League, the party ruling in coalition with the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, will suspend the refugee application process for those considered “socially dangerous” or who have been convicted of a crime, as well as strip naturalised foreigners convicted of terrorism charges of Italian citizenship. Salvini claimed the sprawling Castelnuovo di Porto structure, where Pope Francis washed residents’ feet as part of his Easter ritual in 2016, was a den for “drug-dealing and crime” and that he acted as “any good father would” when the first group of migrants were rounded up at short notice and transported by bus to destinations unknown. Travaglini, who is hosting a woman from Somalia and her two children, described the method by which the evictions were enacted as “brutal”, while Roberto Morassut, a parliamentarian with the opposition Democratic party, compared the removals to “deportations to Nazi concentration camps”. “This situation has been handled really badly,” said Travaglini. “They should have given us more time to organise things; these are vulnerable people.” José Manuel Torres, a priest protesting outside the centre, said: “This shouldn’t have been done in this manner – these people aren’t cattle.” The interior ministry also denied that children had been “torn away from school and their friends”, despite pupils at Guido Pitocco elementary school writing a letter to the president, Sergio Mattarella, that included the line: “For me peace means playing together regardless of differences in colour or race.” As well as causing homelessness, Travaglini said the centre’s closure will dismantle an integration project that had seen some of the migrants find jobs in the community and others thrive in the sporting realm, particularly Ansou Cisse, a 19-year-old from Senegal who was picked for the Vatican’s athletics team. “When I first heard about the evictions, it hurt me very much,” said Cisse, who arrived in Italy in 2017 after surviving the treacherous Mediterranean crossing from Libya. “I don’t know where they’ll send me or whether the Vatican will help. After seeing so many horrendous things in Libya, my life changed for the better. Now it feels as if the good experiences I’ve had will be wasted.” Cisse was among those outside the ministry of labour and economic development in Rome on Thursday protesting against the closure and the 120 jobs that would be lost as a result. Salvini said the move would save the government €6m (£5.2m) a year, money that would instead be spent “helping Italians”. “These [people losing their jobs] are people managing the centres, cleaners, caterers, social assistants … they [the government] want to get rid of these structures but by doing so another group of people will be stranded,” said Aldo Galli, a representative of the SPI-CGIL workers’ union. While Travaglini, who was elected mayor in June 2017, acknowledges there were issues with the centre in the past – migrants protested over poor conditions in 2014 – he denied there was an issue with crime. “We have focused so much on security,” he said. “The protests happened before I came and we worked with the prefect [the government’s local representative] to improve things. But since this government came there has been no more coherence regarding integration.” He said immigration should be removed from the political debate and no longer treated as an emergency but a “phenomenon that is with us”.