“He was a bit of a challenging boy, but there was a nice side to him,” says Andy Walker, founder of Southside Young Leaders’ Academy in Camberwell, south London, of Latwaan Griffiths. Griffiths joined Southside when he was seven years old; 11 years later he was dead – the 16th teenager, and 88th person, murdered in London last year. He was seen slumped while riding pillion on the back of a moped as it careered down Denmark Road, just streets away from Southside. After he slipped off at a junction, passersby heard the driver shout “Help him, he’s been stabbed” before speeding off. Residents emerged from their homes and attempted CPR, but Griffiths could not be saved. I don’t think kids in London feared to cross from one neighbourhood to another a decade ago – not the way they do now The teenager was “jokey and lively” but didn’t do well in school, recalls Walker. “Quite what happened after he left Southside, I don’t know. There are more and more families grieving: I went to his funeral, there was a crowd of 200 people there, and the message that came out loud and clear was ‘This community is suffering’.” A week after Griffiths was killed, his friend Siddique Kamara, 23, was found stabbed to death 10 minutes’ walk away on Warham Street. Another of their friends, 17-year-old Rhyhiem Barton, had been found shot dead on the exact same street in May. Violent crime is a constant in any big city, and crime statistics can be misleading shorn of context or recording methods. But as London approaches megacity status (its population is projected to pass 10 million in 2027), pressure on resources is increasing, as are certain types of violent crime. Last year was a grim one for the city: 135 people were murdered, which, although well short of of the 221 murders recorded in 2003, was the highest murder rate in a decade. Knife crime in particular is up. By 2035 another 15 cities will have populations above 10 million, according to the latest United Nations projections, taking the total number of megacities to 48. Guardian Cities is exploring these newcomers at a crucial period in their development: from car-centric Tehran to the harsh inequalities of Luanda; from the film industry of Hyderabad to the demolition of historic buildings in Ho Chi Minh City. We'll also be in Chengdu, Dar es Salaam, Nanjing, Ahmedabad, Surat, Baghdad, Kuala Lumpur, Xi'an, Seoul, Wuhan and London. Read more from the next 15 megacities series here. Nick Van Mead After 18 murders were recorded in February alone, London’s murder rate briefly eclipsed that of New York City. The US president, Donald Trump, declared London was “as bad as a military war zone hospital”. He mimed stabbing someone. “Knives, knives, knives, knives,” Trump said. “London hasn’t been used to that. They’re getting used to it. It’s pretty tough.” (He said nothing when New York’s murder rate once again overtook London’s.) Clockwise from top: Siddique Kamara, Latwaan Griffiths and Rhyhiem Barton. Much of the media coverage of the deaths of Griffiths, Kamara and Barton zeroed in on one thing they had in common. Griffiths was a member of the drill rap group Harlem Spartans, performing as SA, or Splash Addict (“splashing” is slang for stabbing). Barton and Kamara were members of an allied drill group, Moscow17, based a five-minute walk away. Drill music was barely familiar even to most music journalists a year ago. For the last 12 months it has dominated headlines. News bulletins, politicians, judges and senior police officers condemned it for inciting youth violence: “the brutal rap that fuels gang murder”, said a headline in the Spectator; “disturbing”, said the Daily Mail; the Times called it “demonic”. In May, the chief of the Metropolitan police, Cressida Dick, condemned “gangs who make drill videos” with “lyrics which are about glamorising violence, serious violence – murder, stabbings”, and said social media companies had a “social responsibility” to stop this virus spreading. That same month, the Met announced that it had successfully lobbied YouTube to remove 30 rap videos because of their violent content. The police continue to maintain and forensically scrutinise a database of thousands of music videos and YouTube comments for clues about the groups who make drill music: their changing local alliances, tensions and threats to kill. There are deeper problems going on in the communities, and until those problems are solved, the violence is going to keep going on Three days after Barton’s death in May, his grieving friends and family marched in his memory from Camberwell through to neighbouring Peckham. Some of the younger marchers chanted the lyrics to Moscow17’s anthem Moscow March, a track on which Barton raps about “chinging”, “blading”, “drenching” and “slashing” his enemy, the rival Peckham drill crew Zone 2. It is those highly specific references to hyper-local, real-world violence that marks drill out from its predecessors. In addition to the routine removal of drill videos from YouTube, with no oversight or right of reply, the Met and the Crown Prosecution Service have taken to issuing criminal behaviour orders to drill musicians: these extra-judicial instruments ban rappers from mentioning particular rival neighbourhoods or individuals in their songs. The threats make it harder for liberal voices to defend the genre, and in 2018 drill became London’s new bete noire, to match historical moral panics over video nasties and 90s gangster rap. Pretana Morgan, Rhyhiem Barton’s mother, walks with her daughter at the start of a solidarity march in May 2018. And yet the scapegoating of the genre has come at the expense of any concerted attempt to address the myriad problems at the roots of the violence. The marginal status of the working-class black boys and young men who make drill means there has been little high-profile opposition to the Met’s new experiments in censorship. “There are deeper problems going on in the communities, and until those problems are solved, the violence is going to keep going on,” the south London drill rapper AM said when I spoke to him in 2018. He pointed to the longstanding causes of gang crime and violence in working-class areas in London. For him, drill was finally documenting some brutal realities that had been ignored for too long: it was an act of catharsis and a cry for help as much as anything. “The media, the government – the people at the top – they don’t want public attention on those negative externalities of the economy, they don’t want people to see what’s going on,” he said. “But the public can see those problems right now, because drill music is drawing attention to it. Their attitude is, ‘If we can shut down the music, everyone will feel safer’, but that doesn’t mean [the violence] is not going to still go on.” It is easy to forget, with Brexit dominating the headlines and the Olympic summer of 2012 held up as the “good times”, that only one year before the Olympics the city was ablaze. Though the rioting and looting of early August 2011 began in north London, it quickly spread south: Camberwell saw similar scenes, and a fight broke out in King’s College hospital between rival gangs visiting stabbing victims. It is striking how much the London riots have been erased from political memory, especially as the marginalisation of the poor neighbourhoods where the riots took place has only intensified since. Austerity and gentrification have stretched the longstanding inequality between London’s rich and poor to grim new extremes. To keep cutting youth services after the London riots in 2011 is wrong. The underlying causes have not been addressed “When you think there were riots in 2011, to keep cutting youth services after that is just obviously going to be wrong,” says the Green London assembly member Sian Berry. “The underlying causes of the riots have not been addressed at all. Especially in work and housing, things have actually got a lot worse.” The city has transformed at a bewildering rate in those eight years. Even Brexit fears have only dampened London house prices a bit, and have done little to halt gentrification. A two-bedroom flat in a new-build block on Denmark Road, where Griffiths died, goes for £600,000, more than double the national average price of a home – despite the fact that the section of the Herne Hill ward in which it sits, alongside the Thorlands and Lilford estates, ranks in the highest 10% for deprivation in the country. When you Google those estates, the first photo that comes up is of a wall covered with black mould. In nearby Elephant and Castle, Southwark council has joined forces with two of the world’s biggest property developers, Lendlease and Delancey, to demolish the Heygate and Aylesbury estates and Elephant’s “town centre” to make way for luxury flats, sending working-class and ethnic minority communities scattering to the outer zones of London. Along the river to the west, a “major new cultural quarter” is promised in Vauxhall and Nine Elms – perhaps most effectively symbolised by the 50-storey St George Wharf Tower, home to 214 flats costing up to £51m, not one of them qualifying as the government’s definition of “affordable” (which itself is only 80% of market rate), and where most of the lights are never on. St George Wharf Tower at night in 2016. In the “pretty new blocks” described by the Harlem Spartans rapper Bis, out of 11,863 new homes in Southwark, only 456 (3.8%) were made available at social rent, according to the 35% Campaign, despite the fact that Southwark council’s own planning guidelines stipulate that 35% of new homes should be affordable. This is the world the violence came from: council estates rendered fortresses of poverty and social problems, where so-called postcode wars break out between groups of young people “caught slipping” outside of their turf, against the backdrop of pretty new apartment blocks and branches of Le Pain Quotidien. Southside Young Leaders’ Academy (Syla) was set up in Camberwell in 2007 by Andy Walker, a TV producer. The intention, then as now, was to pre-empt trouble between groups of young boys and men rather than trying to mop it up afterwards. “The thing that has really changed in the last decade is the level of security,” Walker says of the state of the city at the beginning of 2019. “It has really deteriorated for young people in London. I don’t think kids feared to cross from one neighbourhood to another – not in the same way they do now.” The degradation of the safety net has made matters worse. It has been a decade of ever more severe bureaucratisation and privatisation – and, above all, of harsh cuts to youth services. “Everybody’s struggling now,” says Walker. Syla provides mentorship and training to boys who are facing difficulties at school, helping them to acquire leadership qualities, self-discipline and practical skills in the hope of stemming a drift towards social exclusion – but there’s no money. “We’ve replaced what state-funded youth clubs used to do,” he says, “and we’re having to fight for every penny. We get no government grant, or council grant.” Instead, he chases short-term funds from groups such as Comic Relief or the Big Lottery, which have huge demands on them already and often have specific ideas about how the money should be spent. “The danger is you are pushed into doing the very specific work and programmes that the funders want you to do, and want to pay for,” he says. “There are very few funds that say, ‘Look, here’s the money, we approve of what you’re doing, get on with it.’” “The gentrification of the area means you can get a nice cup of coffee, and that’s nice, but I doubt any of our young people have been in any of the fancy new businesses here,” says Katie Worthington, who runs the Westminster House Youth Club in nearby Nunhead. “They’re excluded from classes at other centres aimed at the middle-class kids, which cost £7 or £8 a pop.” As we speak, a troupe of kids from the after-school homework club file past us – and past a substantial food bank collection, piled up on the pool table – for the evening’s “reward” activity: dodgeball in a small sports hall. Many of the families of the members have been uprooted from private rented accommodation when landlords decided to sell, and told to leave London entirely because there’s no affordable housing nearby. “You don’t feel like a citizen of your own city: it’s all so prohibitively expensive,” Worthington says. “Why would you feel like a Londoner if you’re excluded from all this?” The Westminster House Youth Club. Several people told me that good youth workers were being driven away from the profession altogether by the lack of funding and sustainable employment. Now, with data showing the highest proportion of teen stabbings takes place in the two hours after school finishes, some media attention has finally turned to the drastic cuts to youth work provision in the capital. Since the riots, London has seen 81 youth clubs close, and a 44% cut to the youth service budget at council level, following austerity measures handed down from central government. “Youth clubs are not a panacea,” says Sian Berry, who published the 2018 report that highlighted those cuts. “But they save a lot of young people from getting into trouble – and they also help others to thrive. It gives them new horizons, makes them feel like they’re worth investing in – all those things that create disaffection and alienation when they’re suddenly not there any more.” She wants something done about London’s extraordinarily high levels of rent (consistently the highest in Europe), including rent control, and about the badly paid jobs and zero-hours contracts that further drive young people towards petty crime, selling drugs, and, by extension, violence. “You can see how for a poor teenager, watching their older siblings and parents struggling with work and rent, the money pulled in by drug-dealing, organised criminals might be tempting,” she says. Above all, Berry wants money for youth services ringfenced from central government, and the cuts reversed. “It’s not an add-on, it’s not a bonus, it’s not an emergency service,” she says. “All this stuff about putting youth workers into A&E – that’s the last line of defence! That’s not building up the resilience of young people from the start.” When the next iteration of the London Plan, a projection of London’s future published by City Hall, comes out in 2019, most of its recommendations will be infrastructural, as usual. Major developments such as Crossrail and HS2 are uppermost in the planners’ minds, along with ideas to support environmental sustainability and attracting investment through boosting London’s enterprise and skills – a particular concern given the uncertainty of Brexit. As ever, the challenge for the mayor’s office will be to do what it can within its own budget. Westminster holds most of the purse strings and continues to fret over Brexit. Regardless, City Hall is working to a 20- to 25-year forecast; the problems of youth violence and social exclusion need addressing rather more rapidly. Among the 81 youth clubs that have shuttered since 2011 is Grove Park in Lewisham, south-east London, which closed in 2013 when the local council implemented central government cuts that have slashed 34% (almost £1.5m) from its youth services budget since 2011. Another £200,000 will go in this year’s budget. (Neighbouring Southwark and Lambeth have experienced cuts of more than 50%.) Property developers swooped in with plans to knock it down and build new flats. “It was built in 1966, and it’s served the community for almost five decades,” says Rob Clayton, chairman of the youth centre’s building preservation trust, which has been campaigning to get it reopened since 2015. “Nobody wants it demolished. All the locals are saying there’s a need for a youth club here – but all of a sudden it was gone, and the Labour MP Heidi Alexander was standing there, next to property developers, giving the local community this ‘There’s no magic money tree’ type of lecture.” Clayton refused to give up, helping organise tireless voluntary campaigning by the community, from public meetings and lobbying the council to working with architects and establishing its importance as a Bauhaus-inspired building. He and his fellow campaigners fitted the work around full-time jobs. “I put in about 40 hours a month on this,” he says. “I come from a working-class background, grew up on a council estate, and I’m not massive about youth clubs – but it’s just the general fabric of our society being broken down and asset-stripped. And I thought if I can’t do something nationally, I can do something on my doorstep.” The building was saved from demolition in August 2017. The party was attended by Alexander’s replacement as local MP, Janet Daby, who has been much more supportive, and although a lot of work remains to get the centre open again, it felt like something of a turning point, Clayton says. “It was just fantastic seeing the building come to life again that day, after all those years closed,” he says. “We had singers, rap artists, dancers, someone cooking jerk chicken – it was a sunny day and it was just a wonderful atmosphere. It was a taste of the future, and what we’re trying to get back. “And I think some of the local politicians have realised it’s not a good look closing youth clubs while young people are killing each other right, left and centre.” Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, and explore our archive here