The L word is in the news again, this time because of Democrat senator Elizabeth Warren’s decision to run for the US presidency. “A common observation of Warren is that she’s simply not likable enough to win the presidency,” said the Daily Beast. “There have been questions about whether Ms Warren is ‘likable’, a word that tends to be used in regard to female candidates rather than men,” said the Finacial Times. And Politico tweeted: “How does Elizabeth Warren avoid a Clinton redux – written off as too unlikable before her campaign gets off the ground?” And so on. Ironically, in 2016, Warren was perceived as “infinitely more likable than Hillary”. But now she has thrown her hat into the ring, commentators are lining up to remind us how uncomfortable they are with powerful women, and also how uncomfortable they are with admitting it – since their doubts are invariably couched in terms such as “there have been questions about …” In other words: “Many people say …” It got me wondering about what makes a character in the movies likable or unlikable. After all, an entire screenwriting manual, Save the Cat by Blake Snyder, is named after “the scene where we meet the hero and the hero does something – like saving a cat – that defines who he is and makes us, the audience, like him”. And no, I don’t think Lt Ellen Ripley would be nearly as popular a character if she had left Jones behind in the Nostromo to get blown up. But on GamesRadar’s list of 50 Most Likable Movie Characters, only seven are women, and of those seven, only Fargo’s Marge Gunderson strikes me as a genuinely likable person, as opposed to irritant, doormat or nanny. Yes, Mary Poppins has many fine qualities, but being likable isn’t one of them. Recently, we have been seeing a new wave of unlikable female protagonists. It kicked off with 2016’s highly divisive Nocturnal Animals, starring Amy Adams as a character who was “not easily likable”, in the words of film critic Barry Wurst. And not everyone, it turns out, is a fan of Yorgos Lanthimos’s The Favourite. Sure enough, reasons given include (and I didn’t have to dig deep for these examples) “Not liking any of the characters”; “wholly unlikable female characters”; and “everyone in this film is a varying shade of unlikable”. Yet I would contend that The Favourite’s three leading characters are likable – in small and volatile doses. None of them saves a cat, but we start off by automatically siding with Abigail (Emma Stone) because she is an underdog, and, from Oliver Twist to The Karate Kid to Harry Potter, we have learned to root for underdogs. Abigail’s likability is only confirmed when palace servants (with whom she is billeted) play a vile trick on her – we’re used to sympathising with victims. We are on safe ground here: Abigail is shaping up to be a traditional heroine. And we like her even more as she finds cunning ways to insinuate herself into the queen’s favours, because, from Elizabeth Bennett to Jo March to Hermione Granger, we are accustomed to siding with heroines who are clever. Yet that cleverness eventually curdles, until we are faced with the possibility that Abigail may not be so likable after all. Similarly, Lady Sarah (Rachel Weisz) veers between likability (she seems genuinely fond of the Queen) and steely-eyed ambition – a quality perceived as anything but likable in a woman, as Clinton and Warren have discovered. Even Queen Anne (Olivia Colman), initially depicted as capricious, self-absorbed and ridiculous, is shown to have suffered devastating heartbreak – and just like that, we find ourselves liking her more. In the end, much of The Favourite’s deliciousness as an entertainment stems from our emotional allegiances being tugged this way and that by women who are not simply good or evil but flawed, multifaceted human beings. Just like real people. If you think Abigail, Anne and Sarah are unlikable, get a load of Erin Bell in Karyn Kusama’s Destroyer. Our first view of Bell is pink-rimmed bloodshot eyes squinting out of sun-damaged skin. She is a Los Angeles detective ravaged by alcohol, cigarettes and traumatic memories of an undercover assignment gone horribly wrong, and Nicole Kidman plays her with the sort of fearlessness (and help from makeup designer Bill Corso) that makes her Oscar-winning fake nose for The Hours look like a party trick. The days of Jane Fonda being able to pass as an alcoholic in The Morning After (1986) just by mussing her hair are long gone. “You look terrible,” says a colleague of Erin’s, and so she does. And Kidman’s transformation is more than just grandstanding – her ruined face reflects her character’s story. In Destroyer, Kidman sacrifices one of the strongest weapons in a film star’s arsenal – her good looks (deemed more essential for actresses than actors), and with it a shortcut to securing our sympathies. According to innumerable studies, including this 2011 Harvard-related one, we are conditioned to see beautiful people as more likable and for every Hunchback of Notre Dame or Small Soldiers (1998), making your good guys ugly still amounts to a subversive act. Still, we think, Bell may look like a wreck, but surely she will win us over with her caustic wit, or by saving a cat? Nope. The kindest thing she does is give a handjob to a terminally ill man, and even then it is not an act of charity but a peculiarly sordid way of wringing a name out of him. While Melissa McCarthy isn’t as conventionally glam as Kidman, she brushes up nicely for chatshows and red carpets. So it is a little disconcerting to see her in a dowdy wig and unflattering specs in Can You Ever Forgive Me? She plays the real-life writer Lee Israel, whose career had slumped so much by 1992 that she began to support herself by forging literary letters and selling them to dealers. Even before the opening credits are over, this prickly, self-pitying alcoholic has already told a work colleague to “fuck off”, and stolen an overcoat and two rolls of toilet paper at her agent’s party. While Israel doesn’t save a cat, she does share her apartment with one; her criminal career is launched when the animal gets sick and she needs money to pay the vet. This definitely makes her more relatable, and it is hard not to sneakily admire her refusal to clean up her act and play the literary game (unlike Tom Clancy, whom she dismisses as a “jackass”). McCarthy makes us feel for her without softening her anti-social abrasiveness, but likable? Hell, no. Like Destroyer, Can You Ever Forgive Me? was directed by a woman – Marielle Heller. “Lee was flawed and complicated and fascinating,” Heller told Variety. “If she were a male character, nobody would bat an eye, but because she’s female, it feels radical.” The screenplay was co-written by Nicole Holofcener, while The Favourite was co-written by Deborah Davis. Many people say (see what I did there?) that one result of getting women’s voices out there, making more movies, means that audiences will get used to seeing female characters who are less likable, more human. And who knows? Maybe one day they will stop expecting female politicians to be likable, too. Destroyer is released on 25 January; Can You Ever Forgive Me? on 1 February