Good morning – this is Alison Rourke bringing you the first briefing for the week. There’s more evidence this morning of the biting austerity being felt by some communities with a report by the Centre for Cities thinktank saying local authority spending has fallen nationally by half since 2010. Areas such as Liverpool, Blackburn and Barnsley are facing average cuts twice that of their counterparts in the more affluent south. “Councils have managed as best they can but the continued singling out of local government for cuts cannot continue,” says the group’s chief executive, Andrew Carter. “Fairer funding must mean more funding for cities.” The five cities and towns that have suffered the biggest falls in spending over the past eight years are all in the north of England: Barnsley (-40%), Liverpool (-32%), Doncaster (-31%), Wakefield (-30%) and Blackburn (-27%). The British average is -14.3%. In Barnsley, 62% of the entire council budget went on social care in 2017-18, reflecting the “desperation and despair” of its residents. The Guardian’s social policy editor, Patrick Butler, has talked to residents facing crippling cuts about how they are coping ... and fighting back. Backstop impasse? – As Theresa May faces her crucial vote on Brexit tomorrow, Ireland’s last-minute effort to warn the PM off any attempt to unravel the backstop deal will be raising the temperature in Downing Street. Yesterday, the Irish foreign minster and deputy PM insisted the backstop – the mechanism to ensure there will be no hard border between the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland if Britain and the EU fail to strike a free-trade deal – was “part of a balanced package that isn’t going to change”. He said it was only part of the withdrawal agreement because of the UK’s red lines. As the Brexit wars continue, the UK has become “meaner and angrier” since the 2016 vote, according to the Edelman Trust Barometer, a long-established, annual survey of trust carried out across the globe. It says there is widespread unhappiness about the direction the country is heading with 40% thinking others are now more likely to take part in violent protests. One person in six says they have fallen out with friends or relatives over Brexit and 65% think the country is “on the wrong track”, the survey found. ‘Significant response’ – The US has warned that it will act if there is any violence against its diplomats in Venezuela. The White House national security adviser John Bolton warned on Twitter that “any violence and intimidation against US diplomatic personnel, Venezuela’s democratic leader, Juan Guiado (sic), or the National Assembly itself would represent a grave assault on the rule of law and will be met with a significant response”. In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Guaidó said his country had a chance to leave chaos behind and claimed his economically devastated nation was living through an “almost magical moment” in its newly revived quest for democracy. “Frustration has turned to hope. People are daring to dream again,” he said ahead of further rallies planned this week to step up pressure for a change of leadership. All rise – Half of magistrates courts in England and Wales have closed since 2010, leaving defendants, witnesses, police, lawyers and JPs having to travel huge distances to court. Since the coalition government came to power in 2010, 162 of the 323 magistrates courts in England and Wales have shut – a loss of 50.2% of the estate. Most have been sold. The controversial Ministry of Justice (MOJ) efficiency exercise is directly tied to the need to generate funds for a £1.2bn digital modernisation programme, which came under the spotlight following a meltdown of court computer systems. Lending boom – Britain’s biggest lender is to offer 100% mortgages to first-time buyers in a return to lending last seen before the financial crash – but only if the buyer has family that can stand behind the loan. Under the new Lloyds Bank “Lend A Hand” deal, a first-time buyer will be able to borrow up to £500,000 for a new home, without putting down a penny of deposit. It marks a major expansion into the first-time buyer market, as most other mainstream lenders demand a minimum deposit worth 5% of the property purchase price, although Barclays has offered a similar “family springboard” deal. Lloyds has priced the mortgages to undercut the Barclays offer. Bear necessities – A little boy lost in the freezing woods of North Carolina says a bear helped him survive two nights alone before rescuers found him. The Craven county sheriff, Chip Hughes, said three-year-old Casey Hathaway, “did say that he had a friend in the woods that was a bear that was with him”. The claim was reportedly repeated by the boy’s aunt Breanna Hathaway. “He said he hung out with a bear for two days,” Hathaway wrote in a Facebook post. Whether the grizzly was real or imagined, rescuers have hailed the boy’s tenacity given he was not dressed for the cold and temperatures dipped below freezing. What is it like to be the focus of an online conspiracy theory that goes viral? Four people whose lives were upended by conspiracists tell the Guardian’s Ed Pilkington how they dealt with it – and why it could happen to anyone. Plus: Jamie Fullerton on the monkey gangs of Kuala Lumpur whose jungle habitat is being swallowed by the city. Freida Pinto’s rise to fame in Slumdog Millionaire was followed by a string of films that essentially relied on her looks. And she’s sick of it. As Simon Hattenstone writes, the Indian-born star’s newest film, Love Sonia, about a desperate sex worker in a brutal tale of trafficking is everything viewers have come not to expect: a complex, edgy and selfish character caught in a brutal world. Pinto first saw the script a decade ago. But in hindsight, she says, she wasn’t ready for Love Sonia. She was too unworldly. “I thought it was exaggerated when I read the script. I couldn’t believe what I was reading.” Later, when she met trafficked sex workers advising on the film, she began to think that, if anything, the story had been understated. Off-screen, Pinto has been a force for good, consistently campaigning for the rights of women. Does she see a contradiction between her feminism and the films she has made? “Completely! There was no way I agreed with so much that I did in my early career.” As for now, Pinto could not be happier that nobody is likely to come out of Love Sonia discussing her looks. On its release in India, the film was not been warmly received. “People haven’t welcomed a film that exposes the underbelly of the country. It hasn’t done well.” But she says she is not going to judge the film’s success by its box office takings – highlighting the trafficking scandal is far more important. Mauricio Pochettino has defended his record at Tottenham and argued claiming silverware would serve only to “build egos” rather than maintain progress after seeing his team knocked out of a second domestic cup competition in four days. Novak Djokovic is the best men’s tennis player in the world: now, and for the foreseeable future, perhaps until he chooses to retire, which looks to be a few years away yet, he hinted after the Australian Open final. At the age of 21, Naomi Osaka has two grand slam titles and, when she wakes up on Monday morning, she will also find No 1 next to her name on the world ranking list. A return to the England side for Stuart Broad is on the cards with selectors having to respond not only to a batting collapse but also to a bowling attack that became ever more toothless and untrustworthy as the first Test against West Indies progressed. And the Premier League’s renewed hunt for a new chief executive is continuing to focus on the broadcasting industry, despite knockbacks from two leading TV figures, with several other top executives of major TV companies under consideration. In this crucial Brexit week, the Confederation of British Industry has warned businesses are “praying for an extension of article 50” rather than no-deal. In a gloomy assessment, it also says companies’ reported growth prospects were at their weakest for almost six years. Asian shares gained overnight on optimism over the Trump administration’s temporary deal on ending the US government shutdown. However, the FTSE100 looks like dropping 0.3% according to futures trading, while the pound is at $1.32 and €1.155 as it looks to build on its recent strong gains. The papers With the next vital Brexit vote coming up tomorrow, it’s not surprising that many of the papers splash on the story. “Trapped in the EU for ever” is the Daily Express headline. The Telegraph quotes Boris Johnson in its headline: “Boris: May is fighting to scrap backstop”. The Times has “Loyalists threaten to desert May in push for soft Brexit” and the i has: “Gone in 60 days?”. The Guardian’s headline is “No new deal on backstop, says Ireland” but it reserves its splash for “Half of all magistrate courts axed since 2010”. The FT’s Brexit story is: “Brexit puts brake on London housing market as sales fall back to 2008 lows” but its main headline is: “Beijing’s EU envoy rails at ‘slander’ against Huawei over security fears”. The Sun blows its own trumpet with: “Egypt Brit saved by the Sun”, reporting that Laura Palmer, from Hull, who was jailed in 2017 for smuggling painkillers, has been freed after being granted a pardon. The Mail leads on its great British spring clean campaign: “What a start to our big spring clean!”. And the Mirror leads on its own investigation: “Stop online giants who help kill our kids” is its headline. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com