Ederson Had little to do until recovering Mané’s shot from a post. From then was largely a spectator but had to stay alert. 6 Danilo Surprisingly chosen ahead of Kyle Walker he proved feisty for Mané and Robertson along his flank. 6 John Stones Saved a certain goal after mix-up with Ederson and did same again towards the end from Wijnaldum. 7 Vincent Kompany Was booked for two-footed lunge at Salah and lost Firmino too easily for Brazilian’s finish. 4 Aymeric Laporte Guardiola felt forced to play his best centre-back on the left and he struggled at times. Booked. 5 Fernandinho Was in enforcer mode, crashing into challenges and performing the dark arts with delight. 8 David Silva Was anonymous and missed a gilt-edged chance in first half. Has performed better for champions. 5 Bernardo Silva Struggled to get on the ball and offer control but snapped into the tackle and always available. 6 Raheem Sterling The top-scorer was off the pace initially but then engineered the winner with a sweet pass to Sané. 8 Leroy Sané Was as sharp as he can be, frightening the visitors before scoring the finest goal of his City career. 9 Sergio Agüero Willing to dribble and take game to opponents, finding a lethal finish just before the interval. 9 Substitutes: Ilkay Gündogan (for D Silva 65) 6, Kyle Walker (for Laporte 86) 6, Nicolás Otamendi (for Kompany 88) 6. Alisson Began with a miskick and will be upset at tight angle from which Agüero smashed past him. 4 Trent Alexander-Arnold Might he have gone with Sané’s run for the German’s finish? On plus side: his cross led to Firmino goal. 7 Dejan Lovren Was near-awful throughout. Booked for scything down Agüero and fell asleep for City forward’s strike. 2 Virgil van Dijk The Dutchman was some way below par and might have done more to wake his defence up. 5 Andrew Robertson Looked to join in when could but found Sterling elusive before his touch created side’s goal. 7 Georginio Wijnaldum Spent much of the contest chasing blue shirts and was shown a yellow. Had shot cleared off line. 6 Jordan Henderson Was unable to help his side establish a pattern as the contest largely passed the captain by. 6 James Milner Chased and pressed tirelessly but lacked the true creative schemer’s ability and was replaced. 4 Mohamed Salah Liverpool’s classiest attacker was fluid in patches, under-used in others: should have had greater impact. 6 Roberto Firmino Showed flashes of touch and artistry and was in the correct time and place to equalise. 8 Sadio Mané Hit post and was always a bright runner but should have been found more. Subbed. 6 Substitutes: Fabinho (for Milner 57) 5, Xherdan Shaqiri (for Mané 77) 6, Daniel Sturridge (for Wijnaldum 86 ) 6.