Erykah Badu has defended R Kelly after a TV documentary series reiterated multiple allegations of sexual abuse against the R&B singer. Kelly has repeatedly denied all claims. During a performance at the Aragon Ballroom in Chicago on 19 January, Badu told the crowd: “I dunno how everybody else feel about it but I’m putting up a prayer right now for R. I hope he sees the light of day if he done all those things that we’ve seen on TV and heard those ladies talk about. I hope he sees the light of day and comes forward.”  Then 27, Kelly allegedly marries protegée Aaliyah, then 15, in an illegal ceremony in Cook County, Chicago. Tiffany Hawkins files lawsuit alleging injuries and emotional damage from a three-year relationship with Kelly, beginning when she was 15 - it is settled out of court. A videotape passed to Chicago Sun Times journalist Jim DeRogatis appears to show Kelly urinating on and having sex with an underage girl, which Kelly denies. Patrice Jones alleges that Kelly had a sexual relationship with her than began when she was 16, and pressured her into terminating a pregnancy. It is settled out of court for an undisclosed sum. Kelly is sued by dancer Montina Woods for secretly filming a sexual encounter between them. Kelly denies it, and settles out of court. A Chicago jury found that the identity of the girl depicted in the child video was not conclusive, acquitting Kelly of the charges. Kelly is divorced from his wife Andrea. She had previously taken out, then rescinded, a protection order against him. In 2018 she details a history of alleged domestic violence during their marriage, that she says drove her close to suicide. Three former members of Kelly's circle claimed Kelly was holding six women in properties in Chicago and Atlanta, controlling every aspect of their lives. Kelly denied the claims. Jerhonda Pace told Rolling Stone that she lost her virginity to Kelly age 16, and that she ended the relationship after he allegedly slapped, choked and spat on her. In a BBC3 documentary, former girlfriend Kitti Jones alleged that Kelly groomed an underage girl as well as her and other young women. Kelly refused to comment. An unnamed woman told Dallas police that Kelly had given her an STD and attempted to recruit her into his alleged sex "cult" after the pair initiated a sexual relationship when she was 19. Kelly "categorically" denied all allegations. Video from a private event depicts Kelly apparently describing attempts to suppress his music as "too late". Kelly releases I Admit, a 19-minute song protesting his innocence. Numerous women including Andrea Kelly, Jerhonda Pace and Kitti Jones reiterate their allegations in Lifetime docuseries Surviving R Kelly. Prosecutors appeal for any further victims to come forward – three women come forward in the days that follow. Lady Gaga and Chance the Rapper apologise for working with R Kelly, and remove their collaborations from streaming services. She responded to boos from the audience: “What y’all say, fuck him? That’s not love. That’s not unconditional love. But what if one of the people that was assaulted by R Kelly grows up to be an offender, we gonna crucify them?” Badu continued: “They ’bout to R Kelly me to death on the internet, I’m like goddamn. I just want peace and light for everybody and healing for those who are hurt because everyone involved has been hurt, victimised in some kinda way. Love for everybody.” Badu responded to criticism on Sunday. “I love you. Unconditionally,” she tweeted, in remarks apparently directed at Kelly. “That doesn’t mean I support your poor choices. I want healing for you and anyone you have hurt as a result of you being hurt. Is that strange to you?” She concluded: “That’s all I’ve ever said. Anything else has been fabricated or taken out of context.” On Instagram, she captioned a photo: “Having eyes that can see all points of view is a blessing ... and a curse in the court of public opinion.” Responding to a fan who accused her of supporting Kelly, Badu said: “Correction, love has little to do with supporting others’ bad choices. Love is wisdom.” I love you. Unconditionally. That doesn’t mean I support your poor choices. I want healing for you and anyone you have hurt as a result of you being hurt. Is that strange to you ? That’s all I’ve ever said. Anything else has been fabricated or taken out of context. - eb Badu was among a number of celebrities who declined to appear in the Lifetime documentary Surviving R Kelly, according to executive producer dream hampton. Jay-Z, Mary J Blige, Lil Kim, Dave Chappelle, Lady Gaga and Questlove allegedly turned down interviews for the six-part series, which aired in early January. At the 2015 Soul Train awards, Badu introduced Kelly and said he “has done more for black people than anyone”, Pitchfork reports. Kelly’s alleged history of sexual abuse – largely involving young black girls and women – first surfaced in 2002. In January 2018, Badu gave an interview to New York magazine in which she declared her love for Bill Cosby and said: “I see good in everybody. I saw something good in Hitler,” and praised his paintings. In a subsequent interview with the Guardian, Badu said she didn’t regret her comments. Kelly’s long-term record label, RCA, a subsidiary of Sony, this weekend announced that it was terminating its relationship with the singer. The documentary prompted protests outside Sony’s New York headquarters last week. The action followed a wave of disavowals from the embattled star. Kelly’s daughter, Buku Abi, described him as “a monster”. Stars including Lady Gaga and Céline Dion have removed their duets with Kelly from streaming platforms. The French band Phoenix apologised for inviting Kelly to perform with them at the 2013 Coachella festival. Kelly’s ex-manager, Henry James Mason, turned himself into police in Georgia after a warrant was issued for his arrest for allegedly making “terroristic threats and acts” against the family of Joycelyn Savage, whose family claim that she has been brainwashed by Kelly and is being held captive in his alleged “cult”. Prosecutors in Chicago and Atlanta are appealing for new information about Kelly’s alleged abuses. Throughout 2017 and 2018, Kelly was accused of holding five women in a sex “cult”, with a former girlfriend alleging that he had sexual contact with girls as young as 14. In October, his ex-wife Andrea Kelly accused him of domestic violence. Earlier in his career, he was tried and acquitted on child pornography charges. Kelly has long denied any wrongdoing, even recording a song professing his innocence, singing: “I’m so falsely accused.”