There’s a lot of noise right now about vegan wines, as if they’re some huge new trend. In fact, these days a great many wines are already made in a way that makes them suitable, and have been for some time. The key requirement is that no animal-derived products are used in their production, ruling out isinglass (fish bladder), egg whites and milk protein during fining, a clarifying process. But how can you tell? Well, almost all supermarket own-label wines make it clear, plus an increasing number of producers put the information on their labels, and organic sites such as Vintage Roots list wines that are vegan. Yet this doesn’t guarantee that vegans will regard them favourably. Just as food can contain plenty of E numbers, it’s perfectly possible for a commercial wine that’s made in huge quantities to use additives in the winemaking process. If that concerns you, look out for natural or organic wines that are not fined or filtered. My latest find, discovered in the last days of 2018 and definitely one of my wines of the year, is a glorious Australian cabernet franc called – would you believe – Gertie, which is made in the Clare Valley and named after the winemaker Ben Marx’s great-aunt. It’s the antithesis of how most people view Australian wine: unfined, unfiltered, with vibrantly fresh, scrunchy fruit, made with natural yeasts and the minimum of sulphur. Just lovely. There’s also the question of the style of wine you might be looking for. If you’re eating a plant-based diet without vast hunks of protein, you don’t actually need a blockbuster red to set it off. Obviously, many vegan dishes have big flavours, but they don’t tend to have the effect that rare meat or dairy products, such as cream and cheese, have in taming tannin; though pulses such as lentils and beans will, to an extent, round off rough edges. Instead, it’s better to look for slightly lighter wines, particularly if you’re embarking on a post-Christmas retrenchment, eating more salads and vegetables, and cutting down on the carbs. Light red wines such as the Sicilian frappato, which is stocked by Ocado, and the same outlet’s Forte Alto Pinot Grigio Vigneti delle Dolomiti 2014, which is £9.79 and a modest 12% (it’s also stocked at the same price by Waitrose), would both make a refreshing counterpoint to healthy new year food. £8, 13%. The name exaggerates, but this organic and vegan wine is a perfectly nice, fresh, Spanish white that would be great with raw veg and dips. £5.99, Lidl, 13.5%. Incredibly well-priced, fragrant Rhône white made from muscat, but dry rather than sweet. Good aperitif. £9.79, Waitrose / £9.99, Ocado, 13%. Pale, delicate, delicious, beaujolais-like light red. Would go with Japanese food. £22, Oddbins, 13.5%. Glorious, exuberant, happy-making Aussie red that would be perfect with Tommi’s charred cabbage this week. • More at matchingfoodandwine.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.