Human Rights Watch has called on Australia’s government to clarify the status of the visa of the Saudi teenager Rahaf Mohammed al-Qunun amid concerns that it had been cancelled. The 18-year-old Saudi woman who barricaded herself in a Bangkok airport hotel room to prevent her forcible return to a family she claims will kill her, has been taken under the protection of the UN high commissioner for refugees in Thailand. Qunun was detained on arrival at Bangkok and denied entry to Thailand while en route to Australia, where she said she intended to seek asylum. The Guardian confirmed on Monday Qunun had a valid three-month tourist visa for Australia, issued to her Saudi passport. But there were reports from Qunun supporters that her visa to Australia has been cancelled. I’m very interested to hear from Minister Dutton if this is correct or not? I’ve seen Rahaf’s Australian visa which was valid - but yesterday when she was trying to log into her immigration online profile that appeared to no longer be working? Keen to hear more from the Minister https://t.co/5f0gNhZyQR Sophie McNeill, an ABC journalist who was with Qunun in her hotel room on Monday, later clarified that David Coleman, not Peter Dutton, was the immigration minister. Nourah Alharbi, a 20-year-old friend of Qunun who recently moved from Saudi Arabia to Australia, said the visa had been cancelled. “We found out they cancelled the tourist visa,” she said. “It was a tourist visa and now they’ve cancelled it. I don’t know [the reason] because they’re not answering.” The minister’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The Human Rights Watch Australian director, Elaine Pearson, urged the federal government to clarify Qunun’s visa status. “If the visa has been cancelled it would be very concerning,” she told the Guardian. “She’s not safe in Thailand … I don’t think she’ll be truly safe until she reaches a third country.” Pearson said Australia has a moral obligation to help Qunun. “Foreign governments, including Australia, that are concerned about human rights should be doubling down and offering support,” she said, adding that the response for the federal government and opposition had been disappointing so far. “The government has said that promoting women’s rights is a priority as part of its foreign policy; well here’s a concrete case where they can protect a young woman’s life, and the government should be seizing that opportunity and making its views widely known.” The Australian government said on Monday night Qunun’s situation was “deeply concerning” and it had lobbied the Thai government and the UNHCR to allow her to formally claim asylum. Labor’s immigration spokesman Shayne Neumann declined to comment on the visa. He told reporters in Brisbane on Tuesday he had been in contact with Coleman’s office and was satisfied with the level of support from the federal government. “She’s got an application she’s making with the UNHCR with refugee status. I won’t preempt the outcome of that particular process,” he said. It’s expected to take the UN about five days to assess Qunun’s application for refugee status. If successful, she will be sent to a third country. Alharbi said Qunun had been sustained throughout her “terrifying” ordeal on Monday by thousands of people who expressed support for her on social media. “Yesterday, they made the difference in Rahaf’s life. You saved Rahaf’s life yesterday: the people, the media.