Sitting in a Camden Town pub with a glass of water, immaculately turned out in a style he describes as “dressing casual, dressing like a millionaire, dressing a bit like an American dad” – neatly tucked-in polo shirt, Burberry jacket, spotless trainers – Timothy Gonzales is insisting that what he does is not a joke. “It pisses me off when people say that, because it’s like … this is something, in a way, that’s not really been done before which is: self-taught; directs his own videos; does his own instrumentals; doesn’t use samples; gets his friends to do this and do that; puts work into it – and then someone says it’s just a joke. So that really, really offends me when people say that.” He thinks for a moment: “But if people think that, I’m not going to be upset with them, it’s fine to think that, do you know what I mean?” In fairness, you can see how people have jumped to that conclusion in the 18 months since Gonzales posted a video on YouTube for a song called Getting Busy!, as Jimothy Lacoste (a name he adopted because “I always want to be unique and it just sounded nice to my ears”; he has subsequently dropped the Lacoste). It was the first of a succession of viral hits, followed, in short order, by FUTURE BAE, Subway System, DRUGS, Fashion and I Can Speak Spanish. Their online success has led to media attention, European tours and a record deal with Black Butter, home to Rudimental, DJ Khaled, Zara Larsson and J Hus. Everyone seems to agree that Jimothy is now, officially, A Thing, although precisely what kind of thing has been the subject of much debate. His tunes – created at home, although the equipment he uses is “a secret” – are infernally, inescapably catchy, clearly the product of someone with an intuitive understanding of how pop works. If his music doesn’t really sound like anything else, the fact that a recent Spotify playlist he curated featured lushly melodic 80s soul by the Jones Girls and Loose Ends among the hip-hop tracks seems to give an indication of his inspiration. Over the top, he sings and raps in a soft, guileless tone that’s more or less the same as his speaking voice, dispensing idiosyncratic homespun wisdom and positivity – “You can’t be doing more drugs than Kate Moss”; “I’d rather know a language than learn boring maths”; “Let’s make some money, let’s make mum happy” – and outlining his vision for his future, in which he becomes hugely successful, makes money and shops “at Waitrose almost every single day”. “Life,” runs his deadpan catchphrase, “is getting quite exciting.” In his self-directed videos, meanwhile, he wanders around London, dancing with gleeful abandon on the top of bus shelters and with pensioners in an Ikea car park. “Those dance moves come from the same thing that the music comes from, where it’s like: I’ve got no rules, I’ve not been taught anything so I’m just going to make up my own thing,” he says. “A lot of the moves that you see in the videos, I really can’t do again, because it was just freestyling, done in one take.” There is also a lot of perilous-looking messing around on tube trains, something that caused Transport for London to intervene and have the video for Subway System (“Damn, yes, my Northern Line is running / Peng little line, goes far to Morden, man – that’s something”) taken down. “The first thing to say is: I do not encourage that,” frowns Gonzales, when subway surfing is mentioned. “That was in the past, and I only did it to, you know, release tension, relieve stress. It’s something from my culture that I was doing, so I put that in the video.” Reading the comments underneath them, you get the full range of opinions about what he may or may not be doing. Some people think he’s a witty, autodidactic pop genius. Some people think he’s an outsider artist. Some people think his videos are one of those wearyingly self-conscious millennial jokes, where irony is piled on to irony until it’s unclear whether it’s meant to be funny or not. Some people think that, with his clear diction and smart clothes, he’s a posh kid parodying UK rap, which particularly infuriates him. “When someone says: ‘Oh, he’s just a rich kid, he got money from a budget.’ And it’s just like: it’s the complete opposite of that.” You can certainly see why the latter accusation might rankle. Gonzales was born not far from the pub we are sitting in. His dad left the family early on “because he had issues and whatnot … big weed smoker, never had a job in his life, lots of paranoia, a bit angry”. You could infer a lot about this from songs such as FUTURE BAE, in which Gonzales approaches the decidedly un-hip-hop subjects of monogamy and settling down with a wistful earnestness. Certainly, he attributes his insistence on being in control of everything he does to his father’s absence. “When you don’t have a father, you kind of make yourself. I’ve not got a dad to say to me: ‘I’m proud of you, son,’ so I’ve got to make myself proud. I’ve got to make sure this song was all produced by me, the video was all directed by me, just because I’ve never had that thing of: ‘Yeah, well done.’ Of course, my mum says that, but, you know, there’s not the father figure there.” His mum worked as a cleaner and an upholsterer, before becoming his young brother’s full-time carer. Gonzales was so profoundly dyslexic he was sent to a special-needs school, surrounded by kids with “severe, severe” behavioural and social difficulties. He says he doesn’t want to talk about it – “That’s a story for another day”– but ends up discussing it anyway, with an intriguing equanimity. On one hand, he says, it was a nightmare: he found it impossible to make friends. On the other, “if you’re in that environment, you’re not in an environment where you get bullied if you dress this way or that way; there’s no phones, no social media. You’re kind of in a place where you’ve got more freedom. If I went to a mainstream school, I think I would have probably ended up selling drugs, because I’ve got an entrepreneurial mind. If I saw someone making money in that way, I’d be like: ‘I can do that myself; my mum’s clearly not making money, I’ve got no GCSEs, I’m not doing well in school with my dyslexia, I’m either going to be on benefits – which is kind of like prison – so if I do sell drugs and go to prison, same thing.’ But I didn’t get that mindset, because I didn’t go to a normal school.” When not at school, he “fell into graffiti culture”. It provided him with “mentors: when I was 13 or 14 I was hanging around with 25-year-old graffiti writers” and left him with both his look (which, as he points out, isn’t far removed from the way the kids dressed in the 1983 documentary Style Wars or the book Subway Art) and, presumably, his now-abandoned penchant for fooling around on tube trains. Outside of graffiti, all his other friends were rich and privately educated. His mum “was given a council flat in a very, very rich area in London”, and he met them in the local playground, reconnecting years later, when a parent asked his mum to re-upholster a chair. “I went along with her, and I said to this guy Tayo: ‘How’s private school? It must be mad, do you go to loads of house parties?’ He was like: ‘Bro, we’ve got one every weekend.’ So I went along with him and I just thought to myself: ‘Wow, this is fun; private school kids know how to party.’ I was really social and within three months all my friends were private school kids: big houses, loads of GCSEs. I don’t have any friends that are in my situation. Sometimes I do feel quite isolated because sometimes they can’t relate, which is fine. At the same time, we’re all humans, we’re all the same.” He says he started making music as “literally for me to listen to myself in my room”: he was more interested in melodies and arrangements than lyrics because “I used to listen to rap songs, and because of my dyslexia, I wouldn’t know a thing that they were saying, but I’d just love the sound of his or her voice, that kind of melody; I’m more of a sound man, you know?” The videos, meanwhile, were initially made just to show his friends: he enlisted a mate to shoot them, startled him by announcing that the results weren’t right and needed to be completely re-shot, and edited them himself “on Movie Maker, this weird free program I downloaded on Google”. “The music came out of shyness, having a bad time at school, finding a way to express myself and experiment with my emotions and stuff but, at the same time, there was a confidence there that made me put it out: ‘I think this is amazing, I’m sure other people will find it amazing.’ In my group of friends I was always seen as the dumb one, you know?” he says. “They would always have this joke, if they saw something a bit amateur, they’d say: ‘That’s so BTec’. At school at the time, I wasn’t even able to do a BTec, I wasn’t on that level. So when I started doing music, I put it out there and I was kind of like: ‘This is going to shock people, I bet they didn’t know I could do this.’” He starts talking about his ambitions, which, for all the stuff in his songs about “counting your stacks and making them bounce”, he says are “basically small”. He recently modelled in a campaign for Adidas, but says he has turned down “like 10 grand” from other companies because he didn’t like the clothes: you can’t sing about looking like a million pounds if you’ll wear any old tat. He has rebuffed attempts by his new label to get him to work with outside songwriters and producers. “I was like: ‘No, no, no, no!’ I have to focus on making sure they don’t change who I am.” He thinks people who believe his music is a joke are going to be disappointed when they eventually hear his album – “There’s songs there for my pure fans that just like my voice and especially my instrumentals, so those other people probably won’t enjoy it; ‘Oh, he’s not saying anything funny’” – and seems genuinely nonplussed when I tell him I’d assumed Jimothy Lacoste was a kind of character he’d invented. He shakes his head: no, he says, it’s him. “I’m just there being me, really. In the videos and the live shows, it’s literally like … my most powerful me, coming out.” Jimothy performs at KOKO, NW1, 14 February