Philip Brook, who retires in December after nearly 10 years as Wimbledon chairman, has made a rare foray into tennis politics, describing as, “nonsense” scheduling that will pit the Davis Cup against the new ATP world team competition. The competitions have already divided loyalties, with most of the leading players abandoning the 119-year-old Davis Cup – relaunched by the ITF in a fortnight-long team format in November in Madrid - in favour of more money, as well as ranking points, in the ATP’s World Team Cup, which will be held in Perth, Brisbane and Sydney ahead of the 2020 Australian Open. “What we have seen in recent years has been quite a lot of turmoil, quite a lot of change,” Brook said in an interview on the Two Barrys Tennis Takeaway podcast, run by former player Barry Cowan, and broadcaster, Barry Millns. “It makes no sense organising the tennis calendar in the way that tennis is going about it. Probably both events won’t do very well because of it. What seems to be missing is enough goodwill in the system to enable that to change. “It’s better for the sport as a whole for some of things at the heart of the sport to be owned by everybody and not by individual parts of it. The calendar would be a good example, but the ranking system would be right up there as well. It cannot be right that the Davis Cup will not have ranking points and yet this new tournament that is part owned by ATP will. The reason is because of who owns the ranking system [the ATP] - and that’s a nonsense.” Brook had more upbeat views about what will be regarded as a legacy after he steps down: the acquisition and development of the 73 acres of the Wimbledon Park Golf Club, directly opposite the home of tennis. He said it would give both players and fans greater access to the championships. “Most of the people who play in the qualifying lose and don’t step inside the grounds of SW19,” he said. “I think that’s a shame and something we would like to change. Church Road [which runs between the golf and tennis venues] will always be there, but imagine if it was either sunk or somehow you bridged over it. Imagine it being one site rather than two. “With a secure boundary at the edge of the site, you can then start to imagine how we could make the queueing experience so much better. At the moment we rush it, because we have a week to do it. In the future we can build permanent queueing facilities into the grounds. Imagine a second Henman Hill, another area where people can come in, and there may be some extra championship courts. Whatever we do, we will do with the agreement of Merton Council, but we would like to do it very much in sympathy with the park and its heritage.” Brook said the All England Club are also considering changes to the ballot system for tickets. “It is hard work,” he said. “You have to send in a form with a stamped addressed envelope. We have for the last three or four years put our overseas ballot online. This is a bit of a test to see what happens. We are looking closely at the whole question of the ballot and whether we might move it online. We are a bit worried about that, [as] we might be completely swamped with demand. Secondly, we think with a paper-based system it is harder for people to cheat.”