Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has yet to discuss any potential transfer targets for Manchester United in the current window but will offer an opinion when required. While the interim manager also suggested Paul Pogba might not be fit for Saturday’s FA Cup third round tie with Reading Solskjaer indicated that if any players are recruited in January this will be a product of a longterm strategy. “The club’s probably had a plan - you don’t just plan the next day and next month but this transfer window has probably been planned since the summer and year before. The structure [here] is phenomenal. I’m sure they’ve got their targets,” said the 45-year-old. “I’m here to voice my opinion on that and I’m sure we’ll sit down, me and Ed [Woodward, executive vice-chairman] if we’ve got anything in the pipeline. “I’m here to work with the ones I’ve got, they’ve all performed and as long as they perform they should get a chance but that’s my job to improve players and individuals.” While it is understood the club retain the view that January is a difficult month strengthen, of Pogba Solskjaer said: “I’m not sure if Paul’s going to be ready - he got a knock against Newcastle. [Marcus] Rojo, [Chris] Smalling out. If [Maraoune] Fellaini gets through the session today [Friday] it’s more or less a full squad.” Alexis Sánchez and Romelu Lukaku will start against Reading, which will kick-off at 12.30 on Saturday. “Lukaku, Sánchez will start - that’s important for them because they need more game time,” he said. “Definitely, there’ll be a few changes and some of them - they’ll get a chance - some are itching now to play of course.” Solskjaer is aiming for a fifth consecutive win. After Reading his squad fly to Dubai for warm-weather training ahead of the trip to Tottenham Hotspur on 13 January. Solskjaer warned the break is not one for relaxation. “If any of the players think it’s a holiday they’re wrong, we’re there to stick together, to work hard on the physical part of it ahead of the Tottenham game.”