With the majority of sports people what you see is essentially what you get. With Maro Itoje it is more complicated. “Are you asking about Maro the person or Maro the rugby player?” he says, more than once. Not everyone would draw a major distinction but, in Itoje’s mind, there is clearly a sizeable gap. That familiar terrace refrain – “There’s only one Maro Itoje!” – is not really applicable in his case. This is no identikit jock, thinking only of his next training session. He may be a multitalented athlete, potentially the standout player of his generation, but talk too much about rugby and his eyes glaze over. He is far more animated when discussing his favourite political podcasts – “My political persuasion is centre-left so I have a natural leaning towards that side of things” – the writing of Afua Hirsch and Simon Sinek or the West End shows – “I love Les Misérables!” – he has enjoyed most. It makes him the most multifaceted member of England’s squad heading into the Six Nations. Should England enjoy an outstanding 2019, culminating in a successful World Cup in Japan, the 24-year-old could begin to be mentioned in the same breath as his friend Anthony Joshua, the world heavyweight champion. Both grew up in north London and share a similarly proud Nigerian heritage; both could be national sporting icons by Christmas. English rugby has not always been great at inspiring black inner-city youth but Itoje could change all that. As anyone who saw him play for Saracens against Glasgow recently will testify, there is little this versatile octopus cannot do. At one point he stole a lineout ball, shaped to kick before dummying instead and then rampaged away upfield, a dazzling medley not normally the preserve of 6ft 5in tall, 18st English forwards. It is probably just a matter of time before he relieves Owen Farrell of the kicking tee. Up high, down low, no northern hemisphere second-row has such a ridiculously broad skill palate. To date it has delivered him 26 England caps, a starting Test role for the Lions and an impressive stack of domestic and European trophies with Saracens. Last week he finalised a hefty new club contract until 2022, prompting a resigned sigh from everyone else in Europe. His enforced six-week injury layoff over Christmas has, if anything, refreshed him and sharpened his appetite for the challenges ahead. Maybe that is why he is in such a good mood at a Land Rover off-road driving day near Luton. In many ways he has the ideal level of celebrity; famous enough to be highly paid and asked to grace the front cover of the October edition of Tatler with his shirt off but not such public property that he is hassled in the street. “I’m not saying I go unrecognised but I reckon some of the guys in Leicester, Exeter or Gloucester – proper rugby towns – might be disturbed a bit more than I am. I’ve got a little bit of a profile but in London there are so many other things going on.” He lives with his brother Jeremy in Mill Hill, not far from Allianz Park, and is so laid back on occasions that even holding a book open can be a struggle. “I like reading but books put me to sleep. I read them, it makes me feel a bit tired and I end up napping. I’ve started listening to audio books instead.” Can this really be the same relentlessly energised competitor who drives opponents, particularly Glaswegians, to distraction? Does he sometimes even recognise the guy wearing No 4? “I’m the same person but the characteristics are different. On the pitch I just want to win and do my thing to help the team succeed. That’s my main driver most of the time. As much as possible – and it’s not always possible – I try to direct my energy towards my team. Sometimes, though, it does spill over towards the opposition.” He emits a throaty chuckle. “I suppose it’s just part of me.” Does that perhaps suggest a sizeable ego? “If you don’t have a little bit of ego you’re not going to get very far. All top players have a bit of an ego. It’s about making sure it’s not detrimental to the team or blocking your ability to learn. You need a growth mindset.” Rugby union, and England, can consider themselves lucky to have him, given his parents were not remotely rugby people. Despite attending a school just 150 yards from Bramley Road, Saracens’ old amateur base, he recalls “only touching a rugby ball once when we played tag. We used to do our PE sessions there but I didn’t really know what was going on. A lot of England players started at four or five years old. I never played mini rugby.” How much other black or immigrant talent never even makes it to a rugby pitch, let alone Twickenham? Plenty, Itoje reckons. “I definitely think there is untapped potential within that community. It’s just about enticing them to join their local club. And playing more rugby in state secondary schools. There’s a lot of rugby played in London but it very much depends what school you go to.” Itoje went to Harrow on a sports scholarship and his parents, Efe and Florence, now cannot get enough of rugby. “They are superfans. When they are in the country they come to every Saracens game. They even come to second-team games when I’m not playing. They live for England games.” It was different back in the day. “They just saw it as a hobby. They’d say: ‘As long as you get good grades we’ll support you.’ Luckily I was able to do that.” Now, though, some daunting physical tests await, starting in Dublin on Saturday. Last year England trailed in fifth in the Six Nations while Ireland completed a famous grand slam. From an English perspective, no further incentive is required. “We want to win the Six Nations – and to do that we need to beat these guys. There’s no two ways about it, we need to beat them. It won’t be easy but we’ll be ready.” And the World Cup? If Joshua is ready for some big world title challenges this year, so is Itoje. “The equivalent for me is winning the World Cup. That’s definitely the goal. I’d be lying if I said there was anything else I’m aiming for in 2019. There will be a lot of big moments for club and country this year but we need to make sure we get the job done.” He may occasionally feel like two different people but, right now, both share the same objective. Maro Itoje is a Land Rover ambassador. Land Rover has a heritage in rugby, sharing and understanding the values of the sport. @LandRoverRugby