“I’m so sorry,” people often say to me. “I’m not very good at funerals.” “You’re not supposed to be,” I tell them. “It’s a funeral.” The existing £2bn-a-year UK funeral industry is under serious pressure. It’s being investigated by government watchdogs who believe that considerable price rises for funeral services do not appear to be justified by cost increases or quality improvements. Co-op Funeralcare is the UK’s largest funeral director, conducting almost 100,000 funerals every year from 1,000 funeral homes. Last year, it launched a large-scale national study looking into British attitudes around death and dying. The survey revealed that 41% wanted their funeral to be a celebration of life rather than a sad occasion. As a progressive funeral director in London, I am appointed by clients who feel the existing funeral industry’s approach doesn’t work for them. That doesn’t mean I’m the wedding planner of funerals, and it doesn’t mean I think funerals should be turned into parties. In my experience, “putting the fun into funerals” very rarely helps anyone to deal with the devastation of death and the complexity of grief. As a society, we’ve kept our grief suppressed for far too long. Britain’s stiff upper lip is no longer serving us. Most of our popular funeral poetry tells us not to feel what we’re really feeling. We’re told not to cry, but to smile. We’re taught to forget our sadness and to continue as though absolutely nothing has changed. But when someone has died, everything changes. Bereavement is what happens to us. Grief is what we feel. Mourning is what we do. Unless we find a way to express our grief – to mourn – it may eventually leak out in other ways; cue an increase in anger, alcoholism, addiction and depression. As a society, we need to find a modern way of mourning. One that says it’s OK to cry, with helpful and supportive funerals that let us mourn. We need funeral poetry that encourages us to feel whatever it is we’re feeling. I’m one of a new breed of funeral directors all over the UK, almost exclusively women, doing death differently by offering a highly personalised, emotionally intelligent, sensitive and creative funeral service. We believe that personalising a funeral involves so much more than changing the colour of our ties. It might be that a multicoloured coffin, fireworks and champagne are relevant and meaningful to the person who has died, as well as suitable for the circumstances of their death. But it might be that a funeral that allows people to express the extent of their sadness while acknowledging the wonderful life the person may have lived is more helpful. A good funeral is created with the belief that funerals are about the dead but for the benefit of the living. Grief is complicated – a mix of sadness, regret, confusion, longing, anger, resentment, guilt and gratitude with no set timeline or structure. The work we do as modern funeral directors is underpinned by the importance of allowing space at a funeral for all those emotions to be present. Death is often described as the last taboo. But lots of people want to talk about it. As a new generation of people begin to address their emotions, the desire to explore our mortality increases. As a society, we’re now going to therapy, spending time on the yoga mat, meditating, embracing sobriety and caring about our mental health. In London, I host events exploring a new approach to death and dying. The events always sell out, because people really want to talk. They just don’t know how. From this comes a more hopeful future. Emotionally bold, brave and honest funerals might help us to deal with ourselves and our feelings. We need an emotionally literate funeral profession too, to create the kind of event we really need. Until we change the way we deal with difficult emotions as a society, our funerals will stay the same. Changing the colour of the coffin is not the progress we need. There should be less emphasis on the personalisation of funeral hardware (coffins and cars) and more emphasis on funeral software (how we deal with how we feel). Funerals can play an important role in our grief. We can’t deny our grief, and we can’t allow the avoidance of it to be turned into a business ploy for funeralcare providers. So yes, celebrate a life, but don’t forget to mourn a death. • Louise Winter is a progressive funeral director and the founder of Poetic Endings @poetic_endings