Perhaps the quintessential box-set show. 24 was so propulsive and relentless, swinging from cliffhanger to cliffhanger, that you’d almost always feast on more episodes than you intended and wind up groggy and unresponsive the following day. This even goes for the years when it became a carnival sideshow version of itself. This saga of two Russian agents posing as a married couple in 1980s Washington, DC is the thinking person’s spy thriller, elegant and cerebral but with tense jeopardy in every scene. A precisely judged blend of jittery espionage action and the timeless drama of everyone living their own lie. The Easter egg-filled US sitcom, cancelled by Fox back in 2006, got a second wind via DVDs (remember those?) and a little website called Netflix. With its frantic, reality TV-inspired pace, constant callbacks and bizarro bit-parts for everyone from Liza Minnelli to Ben Stiller, it gave the family comedy an injection of meta weirdness. Donald Glover’s dramedy about a wannabe rapper and his drifter cousin is a rare thing, mixing malleable realism with smart pop culture references to everything from former child stars (Teddy Perkins) to Rachel Dolezal-in-reverse transracialism (B.A.N). Its scattergun approach to genre makes for a superficially easy watch, but its themes will rattle around in your head long after the credits roll. He was a former British soldier with PTSD, she was the home secretary – can we make it any more obvious? The show that marked the return of appointment viewing spliced together terrorism, political intrigue, mental illness and a “will they/won’t they” tension to create disarmingly brilliant TV with a deeper message. Forget its cultural significance, and forget about its presence on Netflix; there was once a time when Breaking Bad was the best-kept secret on television. Not for too long, however: the show ended up winning 16 Emmys and spawning surprisingly successful spin-off Better Call Saul, and is a pivotal series in the history of TV. It was one of the first to be credited as inflicting the “bingeable” box-set curse on its viewers. The post-Friends spotlight was on Matt LeBlanc’s Joey and the offscreen romances of Jennifer Aniston. But Lisa Kudrow stole a march on both as Valerie Cherish, the washed-up comedy actor given a second bite at the entertainment cherry with an unforgiving reality vehicle. Cherish is so scintillatingly close to nervous breakdown, so in love with the diminishing returns of the old star system that, by the time she gets to record I Will Survive for the show’s theme song, there is nothing but lunacy left in her eyes. Twenty-five years after Robert De Niro found the profound sadness of becoming the King of Comedy, Kudrow immortalised its hollow Queen. Seinfeld co-creator Larry David played his misanthropic personality for laughs in Curb, which began life as a one-off mockumentary in 1999. While its 2017 comeback received patchy reviews, its outrageous, largely improvised misunderstandings on everything from paedophilia to the Holocaust remain some of the most brilliantly wince-worthy TV ever made. Based on the 2014 film of the same name, this dramedy centres on race relations and intersectionality at a fictional US Ivy League college. It also boasts a teen soapiness and references to everything from Stacey Dash’s career missteps to Scandal that remind us that this is a show about the black millennial experience as well as activism. Swathe your sofa in plastic: this is the perfect sinful binge, with Michael C Hall as the emotionless forensics guy who kills the killers his cop colleagues can’t catch. The cliffhangers, the crimson-black humour and the stream of richly satisfying antagonists (most memorably John Lithgow in season four) make resistance impossible. You know the drill. What begins as dragony hoodoo quickly becomes an arena for smart dialogue and some of the most seductive performances on TV. The women and men are equally appalling/murderous/incestuous. And sometimes naked, yes. Society would rather watch Westeros descend into petty, horny tribalism than the real world any day. Lena Dunham’s crass public behaviour makes it more miraculous that she is the master of the modern half-hour dramedy. So many young TV auteurs have failed to emulate Dunham’s knack for elliptical, off-kilter scripts that tell you everything you need about characters who don’t fit any stereotype. With the stories artfully leaving gaps for online debate to fill, the reaction to Girls at times made it feel like a modish provocation, but beneath the observations about the alien world of pampered millennial Brooklyn is a rare emotional intelligence and humour. Set in a pastel-hued afterlife populated by virtuous, philanthropic sorts who can’t even swear and, er, someone who got in by accident, The Good Place was Parks and Recreation co-creator Michael Schur’s attempt at channelling Lost, via the great philosophers and, presumably, The Sims. The result is a meta comedy that’s forking great. Margaret Atwood’s tale of near-future oppression was never going to make for a sunshine-and-rainbows kind of show. However, the second season of The Handmaid’s Tale – packed with forced labour, sexual violence and even a suicide bombing – was particularly demanding. Stick to the first run, however, and the scares are among the most prescient of recent times. The work room’s running out of bias binding and Miss Evie’s sleeping with that married man again. This 1920s-set drama about a pair of fashion-pioneer sisters in roaring London takes the inconsequential and elevates it to high drama. Love among the mannequins, stolen designs, horny aristos. Its own French and Saunders parody, but joyful escapism. Return to Britain’s south coast in the mid-1980s and relish the salty thrill of hobnobbing with the Hampshire yachting set. Huge hair and piratical fashions swamp the senses as the Howard family win yacht races, the women glisten like sexy dolphins and the men take their seduction tips from coffee adverts. Delicious. Back in the golden age of the webseries, an aspiring actor named Issa Rae created The Misadventures of Awkward Black Girl (“The awkward white girl is nothing new. It’s time for a change,” she noted at the time). It went viral, with Rae collaborating with HBO to bring the story to TV. Focusing on the lives of messy, weird and ordinary characters, Insecure brought the black sitcom into the mainstream without compromising its integrity. Its third season was more watchable yet bleaker than ever, with fictional Issa in a sea of ghosting and breakups. Based on Israeli series BeTipul, this is drama in its purest form, starring Gabriel Byrne as a therapist, working on a roster of four clients per season and slowly revealing each one to be a complex, painfully relatable human. It rarely deviates from two people talking in a room: with dialogue this finely crafted, nothing else is needed. A murder mystery so strong it inspired an entire genre. Budget demands meant that Danish producer DR had to go low and grainy while attempting to meet the new watermark for tension TV, 24. In its first season, Detective Sarah Lund rewired the police procedural with the deft plot twists of a prize-winning novel in a Faroese knit. Scandi-noir was born. When Phoebe “Fleabag” Waller-Bridge announced that she was working on a thriller about an assassin (Jodie Comer) and her MI5 agent foe (Sandra Oh), few knew what to expect. What we got was a series as darkly funny as it was compelling, with a comic book-style pace, gore that never felt too gory and a queer subtext to boot. Nothing can fully replicate the experience of watching the broadcast run of Lost – back when online recaps and deep-dive Easter egg analyses were in their infancy – but the box sets run a close second, not least because they allow you to pummel your way through the hellish third series in a single weekend. Julia Davis has been funnier and more disgusting since, but Nighty Night still stands out as her best work. It is a comedy of relentless, almost irredeemable depravity, and yet there is something very recognisably human about each of the characters. Deep down, we are all two bad decisions away from becoming Jill Tyrrell. The Office took the mockumentary genre and turned it into something funnier, cringier and more tender than it had been before. Without “chilled-out entertainer” David Brent we may never had a generation of deluded Apprentice contestants who thought they were also “the reflection of perfection”, or indeed the “sadcom” trend that has dominated the past decade. When an old college frenemy goes missing, four Brooklyn stooges step in to sketch the story out. Like Scooby Doo-conceived by the cast of Girls, the drama wide-frames out in inch-perfect pincer movements to become a satire on the vainglorious inflate/deflate culture of social media. The chasm between what we say we are and what we really are in the digital age presides like the hangman’s arch over two seasons of drama and wit. The Sopranos is still a top-five-of-all-time television series. Imbibe it via box set and you can watch the thing expand in real time, from a drama about a mob boss in therapy to a genuinely poetic meditation on life and death. Where the hell was Jesse Armstrong’s resplendent family saga at the Emmys? This contender for best show of 2018 stars Brian Cox as an irascible Murdoch-alike, keeping the ambitious teeth of his offspring from his ankles as his health fails. King Lear in New York with Armstrong’s trademark The Thick of It smart talk and ugly truth. Pure gold. Chris Lilley essays the Australian school system through three malfunctioning antiheroes: Ja’mie King, the monstrous private school girl going public; Mr G, the egomaniacal musical theatre darling; and Jonah Takalua, the aggro boy for whom education has failed. These dissonant character sketches bring class warfare, horror, humour, occasional warmth and all the raw terrors of being a teenager. Fleshed out from Shane Meadows’s stunning film, the director spans the late 80s with a bunch of friends negotiating adulthood. In every graffitied strip-mall there are echoes of This Is England’s casually destitute braying youth who learned survival from one another while successive governments looked purposefully away. The “Is” in the title was always its pertinent masterstroke. Although it doesn’t stand up to scrutiny as much as many other shows – even before Aaron Sorkin left, it often functioned as a wheelbarrow for his hubris – The West Wing was nevertheless capable of hitting extraordinary heights. And, you know, why not wallow in a show with an American president whom people actually like? Artfully fleshed-out characters, institutional corruption, skilful story arcs … the Baltimore-set series was likened to a Greek tragedy by its creator David Simon, a comparison that perfectly encapsulates the themes of fate and futility at its core. As well as seriously upping expectations for cop shows, it also introduced the world to one Idris Elba as Adam Smith-reading gangster Stringer Bell.