I have a love-hate relationship with porridge. It’s easy, it’s warming on cold days and it’s a nourishing family staple. But I struggle with its blandness. These two recipes, though, are on pretty heavy rotation at home. The cherry-topped porridge has serious hits of flavour, texture and an almost white-chocolate creaminess thanks to the cashew butter. The other, a quick fix on a rushed morning, is coconut-laced instant porridge: think gourmet Ready Brek. Hands down my favourite bowl of porridge. Frozen cherries are a great freezer staple during winter – cooked this way, they are also good on pancakes, waffles, and granola and yoghurt. If you have time, soak the oats in the milk and 250ml cold water overnight. Prep 10 minCook 10 minServes 2 For the cherries150g frozen cherries1 tbsp maple syrup For the porridge100g rolled oats250ml oat or nut milk1 tsp vanilla paste or extractZest of 1 lemon2 tbsp mixed seeds (I use a mixture of poppy, flax and linseed)2 heaped tsp cashew butter Put the cherries into a pan with one tablespoon of water and the maple syrup, and heat gently. Cook for 10 minutes until the cherries are soft and you have a thick, deep‑purple cherry juice syrup. To another saucepan, add the oats, milk and 100ml water with the vanilla, lemon and seeds, bring to a gentle simmer and cook for five minutes, stirring from time to time, until you have creamy porridge. You may need to add a splash more water to thin out the porridge to your desired consistency. Spoon the porridge into a bowl, top with the cherries, cashew butter, a few more seeds and a little lemon juice, if you like. This is a quick morning option for our family, bridging the gap between porridge and muesli. It’s good with cold milk in summer, too. Grind the oats well if you’d like a smooth porridge – I like to keep a little texture, so grind it until about half the oats are powdered. Some of my favourite serving suggestions are: ground linseeds, toasted sesame or pumpkin seeds, toasted coconut, shaved apple or pear, slices of citrus, toasted coconut flakes, nut butter or berries. Prep 2 minCook 2 minServes 4-6 250g rolled oats30g coconut milk powderSalt1 tsp ground cardamom ½ tsp ground cinnamon750ml warm almond or oat milk, or waterSeeds from a vanilla pod (optional) Blitz the oats, coconut milk powder and a pinch of salt briefly in a food processor, to grind the oats down a little. Fold the ground spices through evenly. Distribute 40g-70g into each bowl, or keep the oats in a sealed jar until ready to serve. Heat the milk or water with the vanilla pod (or without it if you aren’t a huge fan of vanilla). Pour over the porridge and stir quickly to thicken. Serve with any toppings you love (see ideas above). You can also cook this in the usual way, slowly, on the hob. • The creamy porridge with cherries and cashew butter is one of the recipes included in Anna Jones’ 7 Day Reset for January.