Theresa May is likely to be offered an “exchange of letters” confirming the EU’s intention to conclude trade talks with the UK by 2021, as Brussels seeks to help the prime minister in the run-up to next week’s Commons vote on her deal. The correspondence under discussion would flesh out language already included in the withdrawal agreement but it is hoped its clarity could persuade some MPs of the EU’s intention to avoid triggering the Irish backstop. Should talks on a sufficiently comprehensive and deep future trade deal be agreed and ratified by the the start of 2021, it is hoped there would be no need for the whole of the UK to fall into the customs union envisaged by that “all-weather” solution for avoiding a hard border on the island of Ireland. The target-date cited in the mooted correspondence would not constitute a deadline for concluding the trade talks, however, and EU officials are sceptical as to whether the gambit will be sufficient to win over enough MPs to get May’s contentious deal through parliament. An EU official said: “We have to stick to what is in the withdrawal agreement. We can copy and paste – but what is the point if it is a copy and pasting exercise?” Downing Street indicated it was hopeful of securing written political and legal reassurances from the EU in the coming days, before the meaningful vote anticipated on Tuesday next week, although insiders would not say what form they expected the reassurances to take. But the all-important document is not expected before the Brexit debate begins on Wednesday, raising questions as to whether MPs will be discussing May’s deal with all the available information at the beginning of what is expected to be a five-day debate. The UK wants the EU to stress its intention that a future trade agreement would begin by the end of 2021 at the latest, so rendering the unpopular Irish backstop irrelevant, but it is unclear whether it would be enough to win rebellious Tory MPs over. No 10 recognises it will be very difficult to negotiate a free trade deal by the the time the post-Brexit transition period ends in December 2020 – but wants to see if it could get a commitment to a firm start date one year later. “If we can’t get a free trade deal agreed by the end of 2020, then what’s the next jumping off point,” a Whitehall source said. “That’s the area we are poking about in.” An appeal by Downing Street for a stronger legal commitment by the EU to finalise the deal by the later date of the end of 2021 – ensuring the backstop would be in place for a year at most – has so far been roundly rejected in private discussions before and after Christmas. “They cannot expect a legal commitment to land complicated negotiations by December 2021,” the EU official said. “We do not want to make ourselves legally culpable for a situation that we can’t control.” The prime minister insisted over the weekend that the delayed vote on the deal would take place in the Commons next Tuesday despite widespread doubts that Downing Street has any hope of success. A deadline is one of three elements of a package – along with strengthened parliamentary oversight and a commitment to keeping open trade between Northern Ireland and Britain – designed to address MPs’ concerns that commitments to avoid a hard Irish border will shackle Britain to Brussels indefinitely. A clause in the 585-page draft treaty already stipulates that the “union and the United Kingdom shall use their best endeavours to conclude, by 31 December 2020, an agreement which supersedes this protocol [the backstop] in whole or in part”. The correspondence between Brussels and London, which has become the focus of behind-the-scenes talks, would highlight and elaborate on the meaning of this clause and the arbitration process that would ensure that both sides stuck to it. “We agree with the UK – we don’t want to use the backstop and it will be temporary – but we will not reinterpret what is in the withdrawal agreement,” the EU official added. On Monday, the European commission’s chief spokesman repeated that a phonecall last Friday between May and Jean-Claude Juncker, the commission’s president, had been “friendly” and that a further conversation would be held later this week. “The deal that is on the table is the best and only deal possible,” he said. “This was confirmed by the EU27 in our December article 50 European council and this deal will not be renegotiated.” The spokesman added that Brussels would monitor developments in London and examine “the need for additional action on contingency” plans to mitigate the worst repercussions of a no-deal Brexit. “There is no negotiation because everything on the table has been established, approved, achieved, so the priority now is to await events, monitor what is happening [with] the ratification procedure on the UK side,” he said. “And, no, there will not be any meeting between the commission and our negotiating team. There will not be any meeting as such because negotiations have been completed.” Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn has tabled an urgent question for 3.30pm this afternoon, demanding that she tell MPs what progress she has made in the Brexit negotiations, complaining that the Commons is not being kept abreast of developments. Labour insisted that the prime minister come to the house and answer Corbyn, but there is no requirement on her to attend as long as a relevant minister is sent instead. The prime minister’s official spokesman said that in addition to May’s conversations with Juncker she had also spoken to France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, on Friday , at the conclusion of a week of high-level diplomacy in an attempt to obtain fresh language to get her deal over the line. May also spoke to Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, on Wednesday, in addition to previously disclosed calls to the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and Donald Tusk, the European council president. She was also “in contact” with the Irish prime minister, Leo Varadkar, her spokesman said.