The moment on Tuesday when Fernandinho dawdled in his own box at St James’s Park like a lost tourist checking a map was the prelude to raucous celebrations not only in Newcastle but also in Liverpool, including, perhaps, the home of Idrissa Gueye. Because that moment may have reminded Manchester City that they could do with another holding midfielder sooner rather than later and thus intensified their interest in the Senegalese player. The good news for Everton is that interest could drive up Gueye’s price, prompting a bidding war between City and Paris Saint-Germain before Thursday’s deadline. Arsenal are also interested but their offer of a loan deal plus a photo with Gunnersaurus is not considered to be a genuine contribution to said war, more like a request for a slap. If PSG do get their Gueye, at least that will improve Arsenal’s chances of prising Christopher Nkunku from the French club, who will only let the 21-year-old go if another midfielder arrives first. Leicester are on the verge of striking a blow for the bartering economy by swapping one barely used 29-year-old central midfielder, Adrien Silva, for a highly promising but somewhat inconsistent 21-year-old one, Youri Tielemans. Arsenal are trying to muscle in on that deal, too, as are West Ham and Newcastle, but word is Monaco prefer what their old stalwart Claude Puel has to offer. In a development even more sensational than their victory over Manchester City, Newcastle are to complete two major signings, with the left-back Antonio Barreca arriving from Milan on the same day that Miguel Almirón is expected to land from Atlanta. Chelsea are being linked with a £40m bid for Nathan Aké, whom they sold to Bournemouth for half that fee less than two years ago. But they’re going to have to widen their search because Bournemouth are not minded to sell. West Ham’s hope of signing Maxi Gómez have taken a dive after Celta Vigo decided they want to hang on to the Uruguayan striker, after all, but will listen to offers again in the summer. One deal that West Ham look poised to completing is for Mesaque Dju, a 19-year-old winger from Benfica. Aston Villa do not seem to think that Scott Hogan can contribute much to their promotion push but Sheffield United reckon the striker could help theirs, so a loan deal is in the offing. Real Madrid think that Benfica’s 21-year-old striker Luka Jovic, currently on loan at Eintracht Frankfurt, might just be the new Karim Benzema. Southampton are having a deep conversation with Olympiakos about the meaning and, more pertinently, the price of the Norwegian defender Omar Elabdellaoui. Martin O’Neill wants to hook up again with James McClean, who he is proposing to bringing from Stoke to Nottingham Forest in exchange for Ben Osborn. Finally, if Spurs want to sign the winger Jack Clarke, then they’re going to have to wait until after he has helped return Leeds United to the top-flight. If Mauricio Pochettino tries to force the issue before the summer – for Leeds will be back by then, you can count on it – then Marcelo Bielsa mighty just invite the nation’s media to a PowerPoint presentation about the shortcomings of his former charge Mauricio Pochettino, which, at least, would be a fine way to keep the younger Argentinian’s ego in check.