I wonder how many times over the last 40 years someone eyed the cache of tapes containing 100 hours of interviews with Ted Bundy – conducted by the journalist Stephen G Michaud after Bundy claimed wrongful conviction and offered his story in return for a re-examination of his case – before the decision was made that they couldn’t be made public? Those days are over. Into Netflix’s gaping maw and down the gulping true-crime documentary gullet they have gone, emerging at the other end in the form of the four-part series Conversations With a Killer: the Ted Bundy Tapes. When your first thought is how much the murderer would have loved to see this day, you know you’ve got a problem. The main one is that “conversations” isn’t accurate. The tapes are, in effect, a Bundy monologue, describing first his idyllic childhood (it wasn’t), high school years (“I was one of the boys,” he says, “not a social outcast in any way”) and on through his college days and girlfriends – a stream of revisionist, self-aggrandising words anatomising everything about him. Except, quite notably, any of the murders, assaults or kidnappings he had been convicted for or the many more of which he was suspected. Until, that is, Michaud suggested he hypothesise about what happened (a gambit that OJ Simpson ran with a few decades later in his book If I Did It, about the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman). Moving into the third person, Bundy “imagines”, amid much cod-philosophising and grandiosity, a man who kills in the hope of fulfilling “an appetite”. One of the tragedies (for others) of Bundy’s life is that he was never as bright as he wanted to be, never marked for greatness as he thought he should be – but he is bright enough not to be lured anywhere near to confessing. In that 100 hours he yields no ground. Unlike some of Netflix’s best true-crime TV series – such as Making a Murderer and The Keepers, or last year’s The Innocent Man – there are no narrative twists awaiting us here. No miscarriages of justice straining to be heard. No insights into the complexities of an unfolding case or scandal of corrupt policemen, judges, clergy or politicians. The tapes themselves are the USP here and that’s just Bundy revealing his inner thoughts, which are about as profound as his murderous motives. Contemporary footage of the crime scenes and mothers grieving is harrowing, but pointlessly so. Everything Bundy could teach us as a society has long been absorbed into our fabric. He taught us that serial killers exist – the term was coined around the time of his spree from 1974 to 1978 – and that they probably always have and probably always will. Shakespeare may have known that there is no art to find the mind’s construction in the face, but the handsome Bundy, who charmed his victims into leaving the crowd, proved it to the world. But we know about serial killers now. The only truly chilling thing about Conversations With a Killer was how unchilling it was, so much of a callus has grown over our collective psyche since to allow us to endure such knowledge. What does massing those who knew him as a friend, as a lover or who suffered at his hands really do, except add to his mystique and the glamour of such crimes? That’s not to say there isn’t a good documentary to be made about Bundy. Any cursory reading of any of the many books, or even the Wikipedia entry, about him throws up questions and opens avenues of pursuit. Some of them are glossed here – the ineffectiveness of an investigative system that doesn’t demand that the US police share information across state lines along with the profound mental shift in a nation and curtailment of freedom that occurred in a single man’s wake – but Bundy is the focus. And, as I say, you can’t help but feel that he would, this murderer of an estimated 30-plus women, some of whose bodies have never been found, have been thrilled.