France and Germany have renewed their vows of postwar friendship, aiming to show that the traditional engine powering the EU project is still strong but drawing fierce criticism from the nationalist and populist parties advancing across the continent. President Emmanuel Macron and Chancellor Angela Merkel signed the 16-page update to the 1963 Elysée treaty on Tuesday in the German border city of Aachen, residence of Charlemagne, the “father of Europe” who managed to unite much of western the continent in the ninth century. “Populism and nationalism are strengthening in all of our countries,” Merkel told French, German and EU officials at the ceremony. “Seventy-four years – a single human lifetime – after the end of the second world war, what seems self-evident is being called into question once more.” Macron said those “who forget the value of Franco-German reconciliation are making themselves accomplices of the crimes of the past. Those who ... spread lies are hurting the same people they are pretending to defend, by seeking to repeat history.” The two countries’ “friendship, common project and ambition for Europe are what really protect us, and what allow us really to take back control of our lives and to build our destiny”, the French president added. With the EU under unprecedented pressure from Brexit, Donald Trump and strident, nationalist governments in Italy, Poland and Hungary, Macron and Merkel sought to renew their nations’ commitment to bloc and limit the gains eurosceptic parties are expected to make in European parliamentary elections in May. But the text, promising enhances security, economic and practical cooperation, was heavily criticised by domestic far-right opponents in France and Germany as signing away national sovereignty, and derided by eurosceptics abroad as a symbolic and irrelevant gesture by two significantly weakened leaders. Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s National Rally, accused Macron of “an act that borders on treason”, while Alexander Gauland of Germany’s Alternative for Germany (AfD) said Paris and Berlin were trying to create a “super EU” within the bloc. “As populists, we insist that one first takes care of one’s own country,” he said. “We don’t want Macron to renovate his country with German money … The EU is deeply divided. A special Franco-German relationship will alienate us even further.” Eurosceptic leaders abroad have been similarly critical. Italy’s far-right interior minister, Matteo Salvini, said earlier this month that he intended to challenge the text’s pro-European message, and indeed the whole idea of a “Franco-German motor”, with a eurosceptic “Italian-Polish axis”. Far-right opposition to the treaty has spawned a raft of conspiracy theories online, including the claim that Macron plans to cede control of Alsace and Lorraine, partially annexed by Germany in 1871 and returned to France after the first world war. Other false rumours circulating online include the claim that France aims to share its permanent seat on the UN security council with Germany, part of broader accusations that the centrist president – as the far-right leader Marine Le Pen alleged – is determined to “dismantle the power of our country”. Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, who attended the ceremony, said he would “like to believe” the new Franco-German treaty would “revive faith in the meaning of solidarity and unity”, but Judy Dempsey of the thinktank Carnegie Europe said it “lacked strategic depth” and was a shadow of its 1963 forerunner. “Maybe the expectations for France and Germany continuing to shape Europe have become too high,” Dempsey said. “Maybe new groupings of countries, big and small, are needed to galvanise support for setting a strategic course for Europe.” Macron came to power in May 2017 promising to win Merkel’s backing for major EU reform in an effort to restore confidence in the European project, but has made little progress, partly because the chancellor was herself weakened by poor election results. Merkel has since announced she will step down as chancellor in 2021. The French president, meanwhile, has come under fierce domestic pressure in the form of the anti-establishment, grassroots gilets jaunes (yellow vests) protest movement and plummeting approval ratings. The text provides for closer security cooperation, with France and Germany pledging to come to each other’s defence in case of military attack, create a joint defence and security council, harmonise their rules for military equipment exports and work together on procurement. The pact aims to build a Franco-German “common military culture”, Merkel said. “By doing so, we want to contributes to the creation of a European army.” Macron last year urged the EU to reduce its military dependence on the US, calling also for a “real European army”. The treaty also promises a commitment to economic convergence, aiming to form “a German-French economic area with common rules”, set up a panel of experts to give economic recommendations to each government and boost research cooperation in the digital economy and renewable energies. Finally, the treaty seeks to strengthen concrete ties across the 280-mile Franco-German border, supporting city partnerships and bi-national initiatives in culture, health, transport and language-learning, with some cross-border regions to be granted greater autonomy to cut through rules and red tape.