“I don’t know if you want me to talk about that picture,” rugby lad Shaquille asks politics student Demi. “You’ve got something in your mouth …” His date looks mortified. And so begins Phone Swap, a new dating show in which two singletons exchange phones with potential partners. Now I know what you’re thinking: if you were going on a programme where someone had to look through your phone, wouldn’t you clean it up a little? Check your camera roll, add some things to make you look like a better person – meditation sounds, language apps? But alas, it really does appear that the show-makers stopped their charges having a quick blitz … or perhaps Demi just forgot to bin her nudes. BBC3 has been playing with this conceit for a while now, with previous shorts featuring colleagues and family members swapping phones. But it’s the dating show format which best suits this kind of close surveillance – do you really want to know that your workmates have been Googling double-ended dildos as a ‘joke’, as seen in a pilot? As a TV premise for single people, it is current (who doesn’t have their phone on them 25 hours a day?) and intimate (who doesn’t have at least one thing on their phone they wouldn’t want a relative to see?) Actually, the answer is Maisie, who only saves things that she would be ok with her dad or gran seeing; Shaquille, who has matched with half of Buckinghamshire on Tinder, is perplexed, describing her phone as “quite PG”. Interestingly, Phone Swap is actually a “twin show”. Snapchat’s series of the exact same name, also shown on Fox in the US, offers a similar window into millennial dating habits, albeit in a slightly more stylised way, with the dates taking place in a shiny bar rather than on picnic benches. Fox exec Stephen Brown has dubbed it “a profound social experiment that speaks to the need to find love, to what we hold close to us and this phone being the repository of everything in our lives”. In reality, though, this social experiment translates into rifling through porn and texts from exes, and dealing with the odd overly-sentimental date. Because, really, the phones are just another gimmick in what are effectively a set of blind dates. The fact that Shaquille and Maisie get on in the BBC series isn’t because she doesn’t have an album full of other peoples’ nudes, but because of a shared interest in musicals. If anything, trawling through each others’ phones is little more than a drawn-out icebreaker. Unlike Channel 4’s recent hit The Circle – in which contestants created their own potentially fake social media avatars, and questioned the nature of online connections – both the US and UK iterations of Phone Swap treat the content of peoples’ mobiles as an opportunity to gawp, flirt and jump to conclusions about everything from sexual preferences to drinking habits. And contrary to the likes of MTV’s Catfish – the show that gave rise to the term for creating a fake online persona – it cuts to the chase, something Shaquille appreciates. “I guess you save yourself a lot of time and grief by just having a quick look through their phone,” he says, sounding worryingly au fait with the whole thing. While these twin shows do seem perfect fodder for our constantly tech-craving times, swapping phones may well prove too repetitive a conceit to underpin a long-standing dating programme. Besides, you get the feeling that participants of such hyper-social shows are probably as motivated by finding fame as they are finding love: Shaquille repeatedly mentions his “secret” interest in performing arts, while Steven Brandon from the US Phone Swap has featured on another, equally self explanatory show named Dating Naked. However, as a short, sharp social media experiment it is charming in its way. Just don’t expect flicking through someone’s dating apps to be an efficient replacement for actually going on one yourself.