Yvette Cooper and Dominic Grieve may have defeated the increasingly beleaguered Theresa May with their respective Brexit amendments over the last 24 hours – but each victory has been the product of months of backbench conversations. At the heart of it all is a group of Labour backbenchers – and a growing number of Conservatives – who have been campaigning for a second referendum for over a year, and who are described by one MP involved as “an executive in exile”. Key figures such as Chuka Umunna and Chris Leslie for Labour and Anna Soubry for the Conservatives meet to discuss tactics on a daily basis when parliament sits, and test and share ideas via WhatsApp. But what has changed recently is that the anti-Brexit argument has been broadened to encompass opposition to a no-deal scenario – which some see as a strategic opportunity. “It’s been obvious that you can reach quite deeply into Tory ranks once you switch the argument to ‘no’ to no deal,” one anti-Brexit campaigner said. Cooper’s amendment to restrict spending on a no-deal Brexit won the support of 20 Conservative MPs on Tuesday, including traditional party loyalists Oliver Letwin and Sir Nicolas Soames, who had previously only ever once voted against the Conservative whip between them. There have been clear signs for weeks that while there is no majority for a second referendum, May’s Brexit, or a Norway deal, there is a firm opposition to a no deal –even though the possibility that the UK could walk out represents a key part of the prime minister’s negotiating strategy with the European Union. Conservative Dame Caroline Spelman and Labour’s Jack Dromey came together to organise 209 MPs to sign a letter to May on Tuesday, telling the prime minister: “We are united in our determination that the UK must not crash out of the EU without a deal.” That followed weeks of private conversations, which began in the autumn among an informal group of MPs with Jaguar Land Rover plants in their constituencies, which then broadened out to include those with manufacturing interests in their seats. But the crucial development was, as Dromey put it, to get MPs to agree that “whatever their preferred Brexit destination, people should agree that if May’s deal goes down, we cannot plunge over a no-deal cliff”. It was an issue on which signatories and pressure could be amassed from the end of last year, which in turn helped generated support for Cooper’s amendment. A hundred of those MPs turned up on Tuesday to voice their concerns about the risks of no deal directly to the prime minister in a meeting in the Commons. A couple of hours later MPs voted in favour of Cooper’s amendment by 303 to 296. Those involved in the backbenchers’ rebellion say that trust between Labour and Conservative remainers and other anti-Brexiters in parliament has been building for months, giving MPs growing confidence to test ideas, and lay the ground for amendments that can take days or more to come together – without the Tory whips office becoming aware they are about to emerge. A succession of ministerial resignations – Justine Greening, Philip Lee, Jo Johnson and Sam Gymiah – have also boosted the number of pro-remain MPs on the Tory side, with each departure coming after weeks of discussions aimed at first persuading, then at achieving maximum impact. The result, says Leslie, is that “if there is one silver lining to this dire Brexit situation, it’s finding increasing common cause across the centre ground of British politics. MPs are beginning to show greater independence and I hope this can help save the country from some appalling mistakes”. The belief – and concern for the Conservative whips – is that rebellions can become habit forming, particularly if it is clear that there are now enough pro-remain Tory rebels that, when allied with Labour and other opposition front benches, they could form a majority in parliament. Until the last two days that majority has simply not existed. But on Wednesday, a day after Cooper’s amendment was carried, Grieve’s amendment, designed to give May only three days to respond if her deal is voted down in the Commons, attracted 17 Tory rebels. The Grieve clause was carried by 308 to 297. Complicating the picture, however, are the tense relations that exist between the Labour leadership and the Umunna/Leslie grouping who are suspected of wanting to start a new, centre party after Brexit. Intermediaries are required – Diane Abbott is seen as a route to communicating with the party’s leadership, while MPs such as Cardiff Central MP Jo Stevens are deemed able to rally round Labour backbenchers. Not all MPs who backed the Cooper amendment want a second referendum, but the argument is that by coming out against a no deal, they will ineluctably be drawn into supporting a general election or a second referendum, given that May’s deal does not appear to have the support to pass the Commons next week. According to one MP involved: “Avoiding no deal would require the UK to renegotiate Brexit, which in turn would require an extension to article 50. Well, the only way the European Union would allow that is for a really important constitutional or democratic reason: a general election or a people’s vote.”