When the prime minister’s Brexit deal received its crushing defeat in parliament, European council president Donald Tusk tweeted: “If a deal is impossible, and no one wants no deal, then who will finally have the courage to say what the only positive solution is?” This wasn’t the first time that Tusk has suggested the UK could remain in the EU. After the 2017 general election, Tusk discussed reversing Brexit. He said: “The European Union was built on dreams that seemed impossible”, and then quoted John Lennon’s Imagine, adding, “You may say I’m a dreamer, but I am not the only one.” But is the EU serious about this? Have Brussels and member states really thought things through? If a new remain campaign focused on the benefits of EU membership, a new vote to leave would be a definitive rejection Stopping Brexit would almost certainly require a new referendum. Let’s put aside the fact there seems no clear parliamentary path to a second referendum at present (even if Jeremy Corbyn backed it, my Open Europe colleague Dominic Walsh believes it’s well short of a majority). Let’s assume the EU agreed to extend article 50 beyond June to make time for a referendum (something ex-European Council president Herman Van Rompuy and the European Parliament’s Brexit coordinator Guy Verhofstadt both oppose). And let’s assume the ballot paper offers a choice of leaving the EU with Theresa May’s deal or remain (and so MPs have ensured no deal is not an option). Even if those hurdles were to be overcome, while some polls have shown small leads for remain, it’s impossible to know which way a second referendum would go – a fact often overlooked by advocates of a so-called people’s vote, who seem to forget that people voted the other way last time. Many Europeans may well be delighted if the UK voted to remain in a new referendum. Almost no one in the EU wanted Brexit, and many see in it a profound challenge to the project itself. There is a small contingent in Brussels who spied an opportunity to accelerate the path to closer union without the recalcitrant UK. But for most in EU institutions and member states, the reaction to the 2016 referendum was sorrow and disappointment. Yet there is concern among some members and in Brussels that if the UK voted to stay in after a second referendum, it could become a rather unstable member. There are worries there would be demands for yet another vote – a best of three. Or that a future government could simply take the UK out without a referendum at all (precisely what Labour’s 1983 manifesto committed to do, less than a decade after our 1975 referendum on membership). And above all there are major concerns about how the UK would behave in the EU, particularly if it was dealing with widespread domestic discord due to a perceived “establishment” betrayal of Brexit. There are already jokes in Brussels that the UK could elect 73 Nigel Farages if it took part in the European elections in May. But if the UK voted narrowly to remain in the EU, what would its ministers do in the EU council? Some member states are worried we could become very difficult partners, adding to their existing problems with Hungary, Poland and, to some extent, Italy. Of course, a second referendum could well go the same way as the first. And there’s been much less focus given to this. On the continent, the dominant narrative is that voters were lied to in 2016 and the facts about Brexit have only become clear since. As President Macron put it last September, Brexit was “a choice pushed by those who predicted easy solutions … they are liars”. He went on to warn: “It’s not so easy to leave the EU.” But if the UK voted again to leave, this argument would be holed below the waterline. And if the new remain campaign sought to focus on the benefits of EU membership rather than the economic risks of leaving, a new vote to leave would indicate a more definitive rejection. The campaign couldn’t even rely on David Cameron’s renegotiation – which fell away after the leave vote in 2016. In 2016, Cameron’s team were desperate to dissuade European figures from campaigning in Britain. Who could stop them this time? And it’s not as if the public’s image of Brussels has improved. From Jean-Claude Juncker’s bizarre hair-flicking antics to his silly comments that “English is losing importance” in Europe, it would be easy to see how personal things could turn. Since the 2016 vote, we have also seen a series of demands for more European integration – including in areas such as defence – for which there is no UK appetite. And while there are a few impressive MPs pushing for a second vote, the danger is that a new remain campaign would be dominated by its highest-profile backer, Tony Blair – with all the baggage that he brings. A new referendum still doesn’t seem likely. As a European diplomat put it to me, they are certainly “not putting their eggs” in that basket. They’re right not to – but not just because it seems unlikely. A second referendum would pose “formidable risks” for the UK, but also for the EU. The EU can clearly weather Brexit, but a second referendum campaign would likely be far more damaging, whichever way it went. It offers no safe path out of the current impasse. And so, member states should reflect carefully on how best to address the concerns of parliamentarians about the current agreement and decide what concessions can be made to get this deal over the line. • Henry Newman is the director of Open Europe. He has worked in the Cabinet Office and Ministry of Justice