Marks & Spencer Oat Drink1l, £1.55, marksandspencer.comA slightly creamy colour. There’s very little smell. My fear always with these types of milks is that they’re bland and this is not. I have a very sweet tooth and this is just right. There’s enough oat in there to keep me happy. ★★★★ Innocent Oat Dairy Free750ml, £1.49, innocentdrinks.co.ukI think this is the oatiest. Is there such a word? It lacks a sweetness. There’s a slight grittiness … it could be that it’s got more oats in it ... which could be a good thing.★★★ Provame Organic Oat Drink1l, £1.89, ocado.comA bit boring. It’s not quite as oaty as I would like. There seems to be something else … a flavour that I can’t quite describe. It’s quite creamy. Average.★★★ Oatly Oat Drink Semi1l, £1.80, oatly.comThis is real, isn’t it? You’re setting me up! I don’t know what real milk tastes like but this tastes creamy to me. I can’t taste the oat… it’s is overwhelmed by the creaminess.★★ Rebel Kitchen Original Dairy Free Organic Coconut Yogurt400g, £4.49, ocado.comThis one’s not bad actually … It’s light, I can taste coconut, and there’s enough sweetness in there for me.★★★★ The Coconut Collaborative Dairy Free Natural Coconut Yogurt Alternative350g, £2.75, coconutco.co.ukThis one is not as light as some, but it’s filling … thicker. There is an OK hit of coconut.★★★ Pudology Dairy Free Natural Coconut Yogurt 350g, £3.55, ocado.comThis is the runniest yogurt of the four. And I would like to taste more coconut in it.★★ CO YO Organic Natural Dairy Free Coconut Milk Yogurt Alternative400g, £4.99, coyo.comThis has a thick consistency. But the coconut has not hit me … I want to taste coconut! It’s just not coconutty enough.★★  Naturli Vegan Spreadable225g, £1.80, sainsburys.comIt’s spreadable and on its own more edible … there is the poet in me coming out now. I like this one … really light and melty. ★★★ Tesco Light Olive Spread500g, 95p, tesco.comThis is so alien to me. It’s not particularly salty … it disappears on my tongue. But I don’t really taste anything. ★★ Naturli Vegan Block200g, £2, sainsburys.comI guess I could see myself putting this in a cake, but I can’t see myself eating it on bread. I don’t want to taste it too much.★★ Pure Dairy Free Sunflower Spread500g, £1.50, purefreefrom.co.ukI don’t want to be too harsh because it probably does a really good job in cakes and stuff, but if someone was going to give me that on bread, I would say don’t bother.★  Pip & Nut Smooth Almond Butter225g, £4.20, pipandnut.comMmmmmmmm … I could just sit and eat this. It’s nutty, it’s got the right texture … it feels very homemade in a good way. ★★★★★ Meridian Smooth Almond Butter170g, £3.29, ocado.comIt tastes almost chocolatey? Maybe it has a hazelnutty taste and that’s why. It’s got a good consistency, it would spread well.★★★ Sainsbury’s 100% Smooth Almond Butter340g, £4.50, sainsburys.comIt’s rich. To me this one feels a bit less nutty than the others. It’s not that I don’t like it, though. I can taste almond and it has a good consistency. ★★★ Raw Health Organic Almond Butter170g, £6.19, ocado.comReminds me of the nut butters hippies would give me. I’ve got a feeling this is the healthiest one but it’s not as tasty.★★  Asda Free From Mature Cheddar Alternative200g, £2, asda.com I don’t really know what cheese tastes like – I was vegan at 13 – but I like this the most. Smells cheesy to me … nice texture.★★★★ Tesco Free From Mature Cheddar Alternative200g, £2.25, tesco.comNot bad. It’s chewable. It’s probably, from the descriptions I’ve heard, a good imitation of cheese. It doesn’t taste particularly salty – there’s a flavouring I can’t quite pinpoint. ★★★ Violife Non-Dairy Cheese Alternative200g, £2.30, ocado.comWhen I first put it into my mouth, it tasted plastic, but when I chew into it, it’s not too bad … I could imagine this melted on toast.★★★ Morrisons Vegan Cheddar200g, £2.25, morrisons.comI don’t like the way it looks that much, I don’t like the way it cuts, it’s quite salty and there’s not much texture to it. It is just like … a block of something.★★  Eat Your Hat Dark Chocolate 70% Cocoa91g, £3.95, eatyourhat.comThis one is bitter, but not too bitter. It doesn’t cling to my teeth. Quite fruity and the sweetness is just about right. Smooth.★★★★ Marks & Spencer Plain Chocolate80g, £1.50, marksandspencer.comI like that … mmm. Slightly bitter but in a nice way. Because of its bitterness, it’s not a type I would eat all of the time … it doesn’t feel too decadent. ★★★ Raw Halo Pure Dark Bar70g, £3.99, ocado.comThis one seems pretty average. Doesn’t taste sweet enough to me. It’s staying in my mouth, strong aftertaste.★★★ kAAKAO Original Chocolate40g, £3.59, ocado.comIt’s really clinging to my teeth! A bit bland. I probably would prefer something sweeter. It’s a bit boring.★★  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.