Darren Currie, the Barnet caretaker manager, praised the fearlessness of his side after they provided the biggest shock of the day in the FA Cup to reach the fourth round by beating Sheffield United at Bramall Lane. The National League side will be the lowest-ranked team in Monday’s draw after a famous 1-0 victory thanks to a first-half penalty by Shaquile Coulthirst and will be joined by Oldham Athletic and Newport County in the hat after both overcame Premier League opposition in the form of Fulham and Leicester respectively, with the Welsh club recording a victory over top-flight opposition for the first time since 1964. But for Currie, the nephew of the former England midfielder, Tony, who is now a director at the Championship club, it was a day to remember after he was handed the manager’s job on a temporary basis only last month. “I’ve been fortunate to have this tie and have it personal to me and now I hope the boys get something they feel is a suitable reward for their efforts,” Currie said. “As soon as I went in the changing room the boys decided to cover me with a bucket of water. I’m so proud; they’ve been brilliant for me the way they performed. I was proud of them in the two previous games but this takes it to a whole new level.” Oldham, who faced opponents who were 59 places ahead of them in the league pyramid, came from behind to defeat Fulham thanks to Callum Lang’s late winner. “It means a lot to me and my family. We’re all Oldham people,” said the caretaker manager, Pete Wild. “We’re from a small town overshadowed by big neighbours and I’m so proud to give something back.” Sheffield United came unstuck after making 10 changes for the third-round tie, while Currie named the same team that drew with Boreham Wood on New Year’s Day. “I don’t really buy into all that resting, if they are tired, they can go to bed early,” Currie added. “I’m absolutely thrilled with the result but I don’t want to get too carried away. We will become the favourite when we host Dorchester next week in the FA Trophy so it’s straight back down to earth.” A seething Chris Wilder ripped into his players after defeat, accusing them of complacency. “I’ve just said to the boys: ‘Don’t go out through the main entrance, you don’t deserve to go out of the main entrance. Try and find a door to sneak out of.’ Because that’s what the performance was. It was one of arrogance; it was off-plan, doing what they wanted to. “The support that our fans gave to the Barnet players was first-class and fully deserved, but they should have booed our own players louder. I knew Barnet would bring their A game to the table, we told the players they would be up for it and raise their game. I should imagine the Barnet players are getting back on the coach are possibly saying: ‘How the hell are they third in the division?’ And what I will say, well, we are third because none of those players that played today are going to force their way into the first team.” The Newport manager, Michael Flynn, added: “It’s almost Roy of the Rovers stuff, I can’t believe it. It’s the first time I’ve beaten a Premier League club as a manager so it’s one I’ll never forget. I’ll have a few drinks with the wife tonight. It’s about being with the people who support you and are with you when times are bad as well, and my wife does that for me.”