England left the field on a sunkissed evening frustrated and aware that the series could be decided here in Antigua. On a surprisingly spicy surface upon which the tourists had been dismissed for 187, they had bowled 21 overs and the West Indies openers were still intact. The bat had been beaten frequently, especially when the recalled Stuart Broad was bowling, but no edges were forthcoming as Kraigg Brathwaite and John Campbell nobly eked their way to 30 without loss. So West Indies had the better of a captivating day during which batting was always a trial. But for fine efforts by two of England’s more mercurial cricketers, Jonny Bairstow and Moeen Ali, the situation could have been far worse. Bairstow hit a sparky 52 in the morning, Moeen a vital 60 in the afternoon to keep England afloat. The wonderful thing about Moeen is you never know how he’s going. In Barbados he registered his first pair in Test cricket and it was not a good one. A hoick against Shannon Gabriel and a slap against Roston Chase sent him back to the pavilion, hapless and runless. When Moeen strolled out to the middle in Antigua straight after lunch with England on 78 for 5 there may have been the odd stifled groan among English supporters. Given his recent struggles would not Ben Foakes be a better bet to stabilize a sinking ship? Well, Foakes played in a manner to justify that thought but Moeen remained alongside him long enough to avoid further humiliation in conditions far more testing for batsmen than in Barbados. Moeen did not suddenly produce a flawless knock. His first defensive shot lacked any foot movement – perhaps he was expecting another bouncer as he managed little more than a twitch of the knees before sticking his bat more or less in the right place. A pushed drive for two gave him his first runs of the series but the next scoring shot was a miscued pull, which ballooned unconvincingly on the leg side; there were a few slices between or over the slip cordon. But in between there were silky drives, straight and square on the offside, punctuated by a few defensive strokes of much greater conviction. His runs may have come as a surprise although we have become accustomed to the notion that every Moeen innings is an adventure into the unknown; the force may be with him or it may be in another country. No one, including himself, one suspects, can tell. The usual rules of being in or out of form do not seem to apply to him. There were other surprises here. The mower was left in the shed and the pitch was greener than expected, which prompted Jason Holder to bowl first, just as he did in 2018 when Bangladesh were bowled out for 43 within 19 overs on the first morning. The ball misbehaved. There was extravagant bounce, which can be a problem. However, it is uneven bounce that undermines batsmen the most and there was a bit of that as well. Batting was obviously going to be a challenge. So this was a tricky time to make a debut for Joe Denly, one of four Josephs in the match, which might be a record. Denly looked on as Rory Burns edged a fine delivery from Kemar Roach to Holder at second slip. Then before scoring he just survived an lbw shout by virtue of an umpire’s call. A dabbed single got him off the mark but he will not remember his dismissal to Alzarri Joseph’s first ball with any fondness. The delivery was very wide and Denly just managed to reach it. Soon Joe Root received a snorter from Joseph that reared from a length. From the bat handle the ball ballooned high above the slip cordon. Diving backwards, Campbell parried the ball, whereupon Shai Hope, running around from second slip, took off to complete a spectacular catch. Bairstow responded superbly to an impending crisis. He left the ball well; more obviously he struck it superbly when it was in his arc and this prompted the West Indies’ pacemen to lose their length against him. At one point he struck five fours off Holder and Joseph in eight balls. Bairstow may not like the idea of batting at three for England that much but he looks as well equipped to do so as anyone else at the moment. One stroke, a drive off Holder, was stunning; it went for six over wide mid-off. But for Bairstow England’s total might have resembled that of Bangladesh last year. By lunch he had a half-century out of 78 for four since Jos Buttler, caught at second slip off Holder, had not been able to accompany him for long. However, Bairstow could not kick on after the break when he was immediately lbw to a full-length delivery from Roach. Ben Stokes sparred with Gabriel with bat and tongue. The tone of their conversation did not appear to be very angelic and the umpires began to intervene but then there was a little glove punch between the two of them and peace was restored. Gabriel had the last word (unspoken) when Stokes edged to the keeper. There followed the only substantial stand of the day – 85 – before Moeen somehow lobbed a catch to mid-on off Roach. It was inevitably an odd-looking dismissal but perhaps the ball had misbehaved. Meanwhile Foakes had been impressively busy. Once he had been bowled for 35 off his right hand when attempting to hook Gabriel the innings subsided rapidly, Roach finishing with four for 30. That hand was badly bruised in the process so Bairstow came out with the gloves on, a move that may not have required much persuasion.