Unai Emery’s first taste of the FA Cup began with a disgruntled Blackpool fan sitting on top of the Arsenal team coach but ended with a comfortable journey into the fourth round. Upset shaped only the back-drop to the cup tie, not the contest itself, as the 19-year-old Joe Willock scored twice to confirm Premier League superiority. Willock, the England Under‑20 midfielder making only his third senior start of the season, gave Arsenal a comfortable interval advantage before Alex Iwobi sealed victory late on. Blackpool had their moments and staged a second-half recovery but were always chasing an insurmountable gulf in quality. “Arsenal were just too good for us on the night,” Terry McPhillips, the Blackpool manager, had to concede. For Arsenal’s goalscoring teenage midfielder this was a night to savour. For the League One club, in contrast, what should have been a showpiece occasion was sullied by the toxic ownership of Owen Oyston. Only two sides of Bloomfield Road were occupied by outnumbered Blackpool supporters as the fans’ boycott of home games held firm. Some gathered as usual outside the main reception in protest, while Arsenal’s arrival was delayed by the bus-top dissenter outside their team hotel in Preston. The interruption had no impact on the Arsenal performance, and likewise the late withdrawal from the starting lineup of Laurent Koscielny with a back problem. “There was no change for us,” said Emery of the delay. “We prepared as usual and I am proud of our work today. We had big commitment, good concentration, we were competitive and we imposed our quality little by little.” Emery’s changed team were immediately in control and could have been two goals ahead before taking the lead in the 11th minute. Eddie Nketiah had two clear openings but the 19-year‑old dragged a poor finish wide when sent clear by Ainsley Maitland-Niles and was also off-target when connecting with a low cross from Carl Jenkinson, Koscielny’s replacement, at full stretch. Despite their command, Arsenal were defensively vulnerable and Petr Cech saved well from Armand Gnanduillet when the powerful forward burst through a crowded penalty area. The visitors, however, took a merited lead after Nketiah, a quick and dangerous presence, was fouled yards outside the Blackpool area. Aaron Ramsey’s resulting free-kick struck the inside of Mark Howard’s post via a slight deflection off the Blackpool wall and Willock reacted quickest to head home the rebound. The teenager made it three goals in three senior appearances this season before the interval. Jenkinson broke down the right wing and exchanged passes with Iwobi, who appeared to handle in the buildup. Nketiah met his low cross at the near post but was unable to convert. His shot squirmed across goal for Willock who, arriving unmarked at the back post, squeezed his finish past the despairing lunges of Michael Nottingham and Howard. It should have been three before half-time but the Blackpool goalkeeper produced a fine save to deny Nketiah from close range. The young striker may have lacked a clinical touch but his tireless effort and intelligent movement earned him strong backing from the 5,218 travelling supporters. There were also chants of “Aaron Ramsey, we want you to stay”, with the Wales international seemingly headed for Juventus when his contract expires this summer. “I’m thinking about each match,” said Emery when asked about a possible U-turn on Ramsey’s contract offer. The Arsenal manager did confirm he wanted a central defender and a winger – possibly Barcelona’s Denis Suárez – in this transfer window. Blackpool improved as an attacking unit in the second half and should have reduced the deficit when their captain, the former Liverpool midfielder Jay Spearing, released Marc Bola down the left. His cross evaded everyone inside the penalty area but fell perfectly for fellow full-back Nottingham who, unmarked and with time to pick his spot, side-footed over Cech’s crossbar. Gnanduillet then almost capitalised on a slip by the Arsenal keeper, while Liam Feeney produced an air-shot when shaping to volley home and Paudie O’Connor headed well wide from a corner. Blackpool were made to pay for their profligacy. Willock was denied a memorable hat-trick by a legitimate offside call against Sead Kolasinac. Moments later the substitute goalkeeper Christoffer Mafoumbi, on for the injured Howard, saved well from Ramsey’s angled drive but the rebound fell for Iwobi to convert with ease.