Nuno Espírito Santo opted to punch the air rather than risk another £8,000 fine for sprinting on to the pitch in celebration of another stoppage-time goal, but his relief was unmistakable. The pain was equally plain for Shrewsbury Town. Their manager, Sam Ricketts, convulsed with agony on the sideline. Supporters who had yelled “six” in disbelief when the amount of additional time was signalled screamed once more. It was the 93rd minute and Wolves, two down with 15 minutes left, were reprieved. Matt Doherty delivered Wolves’ latest stoppage-time goal to shatter the League One side’s dreams of a place in the fifth round. Ricketts made the strange claim that six minutes of stoppage time stemmed from ball boys being removed from a section of the ground where rival fans exchanged insults shortly after Luke Waterfall headed the home side into a two-goal lead. Shrewsbury, 18th in League One, established an advantage their second-half display merited through Greg Docherty’s emphatic finish and Waterfall’s thumping header. Wolves have made a habit of late goals this season, however, and after the Diogo Jota winner that brought his manager on to the pitch against Leicester last weekend, Doherty salvaged a replay. Shrewsbury have won two replays away from home already in this season’s competition. That will offer comfort, although it was hard for Ricketts to find in the immediate aftermath of an agonising finale. “Six minutes of injury time – I am not sure where that came from,” said the former Wales international and Wolves player. “I was told by the fourth official it was because the ball boys disappeared. They didn’t disappear, they were still on the side of the pitch. Admittedly, they weren’t in the corner where all the police were between the fans and I wouldn’t leave an eight-year-old in the corner with 100 police and fans fighting amongst themselves. That disappoints me more than anything. Six minutes was an awful long time and unfortunately we couldn’t quite hang on in the end, but I can’t be disappointed with the performance.” Docherty served notice of the trouble to come for John Ruddy with a vicious, swerving drive from 25 yards that Wolves’ stand-in keeper parried back into the danger area. Conor Coady was on hand to clear before Fejiri Okenabirhie could pounce. Docherty drove another shot wide from distance on the stroke of half-time. He found his range and spot in sensational style with his third attempt moments after the restart. Wolves were caught cold by Okenabirhie, who muscled his way clear of the visiting defence before finding the Scot in space on the right. Docherty cut inside to unleash a ferocious shot from an acute angle that flew through Ruddy’s guard into the far top corner. New Meadow erupted. Wolves almost levelled quickly when Rúben Neves’s shot from 25 yards struck Ollie Norburn and deflected just wide with Arnold wrong-footed. Neves squandered a better opportunity from the edge of the penalty area seconds later and Raúl Jiménez, seconds after his introduction for Leander Dendoncker, side-footed wide when found unmarked in the area by Ryan Giles. Shrewsbury were in dreamland after Coady conceded a corner heading Docherty’s free-kick away from the lurking Omar Beckles. The resulting set piece was delivered to perfection by Norburn and the commanding Waterfall, a member of the Lincoln City side that reached the quarter-finals as a non-league outfit two seasons ago, powered a header past Ruddy from close range. That was the cue for an ugly stand-off between rival supporters. Wolves fans were involved in scuffles with stewards and police before events on the pitch recaptured their attention. Jiménez set up a nervous finale for the home crowd when he despatched a calm finish beyond Arnold from a cross by fellow substitute Ivan Cavaleiro. Shrewsbury looked comfortable but just when a victory to savour seemed within their grasp it was ripped away by Doherty. Wolves were encamped in the home penalty area when Adama Traoré delivered an inviting cross from the right. The defender soared above the crowd and broke Shrewsbury hearts with a fine header into the bottom corner.