Good morning briefers. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the stories you need to know about this morning. Jeremy Corbyn has opened the door for MPs to vote for a second referendum as the fight over the shape of Brexit gathered pace at Westminster. After Theresa May told MPs that Britain’s social fabric could be at risk if people are asked to vote on the matter again, Labour tabled an amendment to her Brexit deal motion calling on the government to hold a vote on two options. The first would be Labour’s own alternative Brexit plan and the second would be whether to legislate “to hold a public vote on a deal or a proposition” that is supported by a majority in the Commons. It is the first time the party has asked MPs to formally consider a second poll but did not satisfy a cross-party group of MPs who fear Corbyn’s Brexit plan has “little regard for what could actually be delivered”. May’s Brexit motion faces amendments from across the Commons and our correspondent Jessica Elgot has handily summarised them here. Meanwhile, the CBI stepped up its anti-Brexit campaign with a report today on the impact of a no-deal exit on Britain’s regions. It says the north-east of England would suffer the most because its large manufacturing sector depends more than any other region on exports to the EU. Prison squalor – An inmate at Bedford prison caught and killed rats in his cell during an inspection that found shocking conditions at the jail. Inspectors discovered a litany of other problems at the facility and a report published today says cells were “filthy and decrepit”, toilets did not flush properly, and an amputee was in a cell with no adaptations and a wheelchair that he could not propel himself. Pest control work had failed to eradicate the infestation, the report said, and described a notice on a door which read: “Please ensure doors remain shut to prevent rats entering the wing!!!”. The collapse in standards at the jail was “as sad as it is inexcusable”, the report said. ‘Baby editing’ claim – A Chinese researcher who claimed to have created the world’s first genetically edited babies faces a police investigation as authorities in China confirmed that a second woman fell pregnant during the experiment. He Jiankui caused a sensation when he announced last year that he had altered the genes of twin girls to prevent them contracting HIV. He also said a second woman was carrying a gene-edited baby and state media reports on Monday appear to confirm his claim. Such gene-editing work is illegal in China, as it is in most countries, and state media said He had kept his research hidden from authorities with the intention of “pursuing personal fame”. Greenland meltdown – Alarming new research suggests that Greenland is melting four times faster than it was 15 years ago. Glaciers on the island are depositing ever larger chunks of ice into the Atlantic ocean, where it melts. But scientists have found that the largest ice loss in the decade from 2003 occurred in the south-west region, which is largely glacier-free. They believe this means that surface ice is melting as global temperatures rise, causing gushing rivers of meltwater to flow into the ocean and push up sea levels. Michael Bevis, lead author of the paper and a professor of geodynamics at Ohio State University, said: “The only thing we can do is adapt and mitigate further global warming – it’s too late for there to be no effect.” ‘You’re a feminist?’ – Victoria Derbyshire has created a stir in New Zealand by asking the country’s progressive prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, if she is a feminist. In an interview on Monday, the BBC star asked Ardern on a visit to the UK whether she had any plans to propose marriage to her partner. She said she hadn’t, to which Derbyshire said: “You’re a feminist?” Ardern, who gave birth to her first child while in office last year, replied: “Oh absolutely, absolutely I am a feminist.” The exchange questioning her credentials prompted surprise in New Zealand, where a leading political commentator said people would find the line of questioning “inappropriate”. Infra dig – A man who drove a digger into a brand new Travelodge hotel in Liverpool is being sought by police after an attack thought to be over unpaid wages. Builders were putting the final touches to the Travelodge when the man repeatedly drove the digger into the building in a rampage lasting more than 20 minutes. “We’d put the last tile in, cleaned up and made sure everything was perfect,” said Samuel White, a ceiling fixer. “Then some idiot in a mini digger decided to drive through the middle of the building.” With Brexit talks stalled and some of its supporters pushing a betrayal narrative, our political correspondent Peter Walker charts how Ukip has begun rising in the polls again. But how did the party come to fully embrace the far right in Britain? And do its supporters know how extreme it has become? Plus: Helen Pidd on what young voters in Bolsover make of the Brexit deal paralysis Rio Ferdinand has tried his hand at quite a few things since retiring from football. The former England and Manchester United defender has become a pundit, campaigned against leaving the EU and knife crime, and visited schools and prisons. He has also endured the loss of his wife and mother to cancer, prompting him to back a DNA test kit business that purports to help you live a longer life. Our interviewer, Simon Hattenstone, met the budding entrepreneur to discuss his foray into nutrigenetics and, along the way, uncovers stories about the young Ferdinand’s Peckham childhood, his wild drinking sessions, and why his England teams weren’t coached properly. Warren Gatland, who ends his 12-year association with Wales at the end of the World Cup, has held discussions about his next full-time job and has not ruled out a return to the Premiership. Wasps’ Dan Robson, one of only two scrum-halves in the Six Nations squad, says he intends to stake his England claim with a long-overdue first cap against Ireland. The language used to describe Manchester United’s Paul Pogba, including “pace and power”, highlights the importance of the debate sparked by Raheem Sterling’s Instagram post and shows a need to rethink coverage of black and minority ethnic players, writes Sachin Nakrani. Moeen Ali has made peace with his role in this England Test team, insisting it is time to stop hiding behind the tag of second spinner and accept he is No 1. And the former England women’s coach Mark Sampson has apologised unreservedly to Eni Aluko and Drew Spence for remarks he made to the players while in charge of the national team. The world economic forum is under way in Davos against a backdrop of concern about the world economy. A survey of leading global chief executives shows that pessimism has risen sharply in the past 12 months amid rising protectionism and the deteriorating relationship between the US and China. Their sense of gloom was reflected overnight in markets in Asia Pacific, which were down after IMF warnings and China’s poor growth figures. The FTSE 100 is set to open down very slightly while the pound has dipped a fraction to $1.287 and €1.137. The papers are chock-full of Brexit news again today, with most considering the prospects of a second vote. The Guardian leads on “May rules out second vote as ‘threat to social cohesion’”, while the Express has a similar concerns: “Second vote will lead to civil unrest”. The Telegraph focuses on Labour with “Corbyn backs plan for second referendum”. The Times warns “Dozens of ministers ready to quit over Brexit” and the Financial Times heralds more bad news for the PM: “May’s hopes of revising Irish backstop rebuffed by Barnier”. The Independent’s digital edition sums up the general feeling with: “Groundhog Day”. Away from Brexit, the Mail gives voice to the parents of victims of a speedboat accident: “Ramp up hunt for our girls’ killer Mr Javid.” The Mirror has an exclusive on hundreds living in a tower block covered in cladding similar to Grenfell Tower. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com