Every MP, when they were elected in 2017, knew that they would vote in the Commons’s most important decision since the second world war – the terms of Britain’s withdrawal from the EU and our future relationship with it. In years to come, each of us will be asked – by constituents, families and friends – how we came to the view we took, and contributed to the decision parliament made. The responsibility that we bear is why I have always believed that the whole Commons would – and must – shape and determine the nature of the Brexit we implement. This is not a decision that any MP can delegate to others. Each of us has a responsibility to participate in the decision that is to be collectively made. For so many years our parliament has been a source of strength in our international reputation. It has been viewed as robust and adversarial but also as responsible, pragmatic and decisive and has seen us safely through times of danger and contention. This is just such a time for those qualities to be exercised. In order to benefit from this, the government recognises its duty to respond willingly to what parliament, in its deliberations, requests. To address concerns raised, to seek solutions to problems uncovered and to find ways to assure those with reservations. And to recognise that attempts to establish common ground need not be a sign of weakness but an expression of a desire for national unity. There have been positive signs in this respect during the last week. One example is in the area of workers’ rights after we have left the EU. The United Kingdom – and our parliament – have a proud tradition of establishing and improving the rights of working men and women from Shaftesbury’s Factories Acts, through William Hague’s Disability Discrimination Act to the Minimum Wage introduced by a Labour government, bolstered into the national living wage by a Conservative government. While the EU sets minimum requirements in many areas of workers’ rights, time and again Britain has pre-empted them and chosen to exceed them. Indeed, the EU agency for the improvement of working conditions ranks the UK as being second strongest, behind only Sweden, of all 28 member states for wellbeing in the workplace. The UK offers 39 weeks of statutory maternity pay, compared with the 14 weeks of paid maternity leave required by the EU. We have given fathers and partners a statutory right to paternity leave and pay, something that the EU is now only just starting to consider. Our “national living wage” is at the upper end of those of other EU countries and the Low Pay Commision that advises on it is widely respected. The report of Matthew Taylor – Good Work – now being implemented shows how we can establish the quality of work, as well as the availability of jobs, as a central goal of policy. There is no reason why we should not maintain this record of leadership outside the EU. Yet it is a fact that some people fear that defending the rights of workers would not be adequately addressed. Last week in the House of Commons a number of MPs including John Mann and Caroline Flint, proposed an amendment which would ensure that parliament would decide on whether to implement in the UK any advance in workers’ rights enacted in future by the European Union. The government agrees with the intention of the amendment and the constructive spirit in which it has been proposed. We will work with its authors on how to implement it. This exchange in the Commons is an example of progress that can be made. Much can be achieved with co-operation between willing participants, helping shape how our future will be. The time for this is now. Across the country and the world there is a mounting impatience for us to settle how we will enact the decision of the referendum. I work with companies and investors to make the case for them to make investments and to create jobs in Britain. They are more than willing to do so. The strengths that we offer as a creative, scientific and entrepreneurial nation are being systematically reinforced by our industrial strategy – such as by investing more than ever before in research and development. But the same businesses and investors need also to know what our relationship will be in less than three months’ time with our most important market. They need to know we will continue to be a dependable, stable and pragmatic partner. That we will not subject ourselves – and them – to the uncertainty, disruption and cost of an unintended and deeply damaging rupture in less than 80 days. I believe that most MPs want the same. Now is the time to act. Greg Clark is the business secretary