Is there a better genre of news story than “animal loose in an unexpected place”? It’s the journalistic equivalent of a classmate running in and shouting, “There’s a dog in the school!”. You immediately assume all other news will have to be cancelled for the day while the headmaster/prime minister runs around the playground/British Isles trying to catch it with a big net. It’s a genre with a low bar for entry – as a rule of thumb, any “animal in unexpected place” story is newsworthy as long as you can imagine a Brooklyn cab driver in a live-action Disney movie doing a double-take, rubbing their eyes and saying, “Woah, an [animal] in a [unexpected place]? I better quit drinking,” upon seeing it. But every so often there comes a variation that lifts the genre into new and exciting places. This is no “monkey in Ikea”, “cat on a football pitch” or even “whale in the Thames” (RIP). No, today there was a red panda loose in Belfast. Just let that sentence sit there for a moment. A panda. Loose. In Belfast. It’s impossible to hear it and not imagine the inevitable animated DreamWorks movie that will come out of this: a pampered red panda (voiced by Liam Neeson or Jamie Dornan, whoever’s available) dreams of seeing the “real” Northern Ireland. With the help of a tapir with moxie from the Republic of Ireland (played by Sharon Horgan or Saoirse Ronan), the two bust out of their enclosure, much to the anger of the evil British zookeeper (Tom Hiddleston/Mark Rylance), and lead the police on a merry march through Belfast’s most iconic sights (the Samson and Goliath cranes, the Titanic quarter, inexplicably the Giant’s Causeway even though it’s an hour’s drive away). Eventually Red Panda and Tapir end up in the middle of an Orange Order parade, defuse an escalating argument between Arlene Foster and Michelle O’Neill, restore the Stormont government and solve the 250-year-old crisis of sectarianism in Northern Ireland. Red Panda and Tapir realise that they actually love each other because there’s no such thing as a platonic heterosexual relationship in these films, and their panda-pir hybrid cub ends up being elected first minister of Northern Ireland. In reality, the red panda was found a while later in a residential garden near the zoo, where we can only assume it was trying to break into a garage to hotwire a car and drive up the Causeway coastal route. According to an exceptionally sarcastic police force, the panda spent most of its few hours of freedom taking in the sights of “beautiful Glengormley”. Now I’ve been to Glengormley a few times and, while I love bowling at the sportsbowl and getting a well-priced Chinese takeaway from Antrim Road as much as the next panda, I feel like it could have got a bus into the botanical gardens and made a day of it. There are still so many questions that need to be answered. How did the red panda escape? Did it visit Shankill Road? Did it go into a Catholic church? Does this panda adhere to the theory of transubstantiation? Did the panda interact in any way with a union jack while it was free? All I know for certain is, after months of ill-informed and arrogant British politicians wading into the debate on the Irish border, this is a news story involving Northern Ireland that I can get behind. After all, if we’re going to talk uninformed bollocks about the lives of nearly two million people in the newspapers, we might as well chuck a red panda in there to make it a bit more fun. Now if you’ll excuse me, I have to call up DreamWorks and pitch “Panda-monium in Norn Iron” (working title). • Jack Bernhardt is a writer and occasional performer. He has written for comedies including Horrible Histories