Across the road from Victoria Station is one of London’s longest-running musicals, Wicked. Walk further on, past the history-making hit Hamilton, and you’ll find a smaller theatre where a crack squad of performers are putting on their own musical. This one is guaranteed to both open and close on the same night, but it’s no flop. The idea behind the Olivier award-winning Showstopper! The Improvised Musical is that the cast creates a new, never-to-be-repeated production every evening, entirely improvised from audience suggestions. On Wednesday night, they will create their 1,000th show from scratch, more than 10 years after their debut. The Showstopper! phenomenon started with an outlandish challenge laid down by theatrical maverick Ken Campbell. Adam Meggido, who co-created the format with Dylan Emery and still performs with him in the show, recalls attending Campbell’s “workshops in eccentric performance” in a north London squat. “Ken had just come back from Canada where he’d seen a group called Die Nasty. For over 25 years now they’ve done a weekly improvised soap opera. Ken said it was better than stuff that’s scripted.” When Campbell was commissioned to create an entertainment for the Globe, to be performed on Shakespeare’s birthday, he floated the idea of a group of actors improvising Shakespeare – but he had a caveat. Meggido convincingly adopts Campbell’s nasal inflections as he remembers being told: “The thing is, it’s got to be better than the original.” The Shakespeare gig led to similar improv shows at the Royal Court and the group began to riff on the dramatic style of Pinter and Sondheim in their performances. Increasingly, Campbell would tell them: “Do it like it’s a musical. That’s a winner.” Meggido, whose parents were musical-theatre actors, already knew the art form inside out. He learned more about the craft of improvisation from Emery, who was combining an unlikely pair of careers: financial journalism and improv comedy. They built up a team called the Showstoppers; today’s company comprises 17 performers including Lucy Trodd and Pippa Evans. Several of them have been members since the early days. The show has been expanded and the formula fine-tuned since their first trip to the Edinburgh fringe. In 2008, they performed in an 89-seat Portakabin at the festival in an 11.30pm slot. It sold out from day one. “We had no idea why,” says Meggido. “There were other groups all over the world doing that kind of thing, but I don’t think anyone else was trying to make it a musical in the same way we were.” Meggido and Emery are hopelessly devoted to the art of the show tune: they genuinely want to create a great musical each night, not just pastiche the genre and have some knockabout fun. So they dress like they mean business. “A lot of improv happens in bars and improvisers generally dress very casually,” explains Emery. “But when you’re in a theatre you want the audience to know this isn’t mucking around.” Meggido adds: “I didn’t want it to look and feel like improv. I wanted it to look and feel like a musical.” For each show, a six-strong squad of Showstoppers wear colour-coded red and black outfits with matching bowling shoes. They are introduced by a sharp-suited character called The Writer (usually played by Emery). The Writer takes a call from a producer named Cameron (one of many winks to the audience) who desperately needs a new musical. The audience must help by supplying a setting, a title and assorted musical styles from which the actors will spin a story. On the night I see them at The Other Palace (for production number 998), we set the show in a funeral parlour (narrowly beating second choice Stonehenge), name it Stiff! and request songs in the key of rock musical Six, Alan Mencken’s The Little Mermaid and Sondheim (“easy to copy,” deadpans The Writer). Almost instantly, the six Showstoppers have created their characters, are singing choruses, keeping just-about-in-sync for salsa routines and finding satisfying rhymes for “formaldehyde”. Their synergy is staggering and a three-piece band onstage don’t miss a beat either. The Writer interrupts proceedings for us to add suggestions. Emery says it’s a highwire act for the cast and The Writer’s job is to wobble the wire if they ever look too comfortable: “You put them in a new situation and see what they can do.” As an audience member you can’t help but try to “solve” the show. Are those melodies pre-arranged? Are there stock characters or situations they use? How much has really been pre-prepared? Nothing, says Meggido. “Audiences want to come back to see the ‘trick’ or find secret signals. But there aren’t any. People think there are set things we fall back on but it’s harder to have something in the back of your mind to fall back on than it is to genuinely improvise the musical. It’s easier just to make it all up.” The Showstoppers, he says, are like a sports team: they train hard, communicate well and “use their skills in the moment”. In the interval, the audience is encouraged to tweet further suggestions for the second half. I wonder if this is when they map out the rest of the show between them backstage but Meggido says they concentrate on firming up the story from Act I, as it all moves so quickly. (Emery later records the title and synopsis of each show they do in an online archive.) The show uses minimal, multi-purpose props and those red-and-black outfits have been cleverly designed, by Gabriella Slade, to suit a range of musical styles and eras. Emery uses a frock coat as an example: “You put it on and you could be an American general in the civil war, a doorman at the Dorchester or an 18th-century gentleman.” The Showstoppers empire now includes a 45-minute version for kids. “We only take suggestions from the children,” explains Meggido. “It’s just a big game of ‘what happens next?’ We do whatever the kids say.” Emery says the older children are often very good at making sense of the plot and creating a structure, while the younger ones “are more likely to go somewhere fun and exciting. You need both elements to create a really satisfying story. The kids show is probably the most fun we have. We’re basically doing as little improvisation as possible. It’s so liberating and it’s good training because, in the main show, everyone is worried constantly about where the story is going. Is it making sense? Are people emotionally attached to it?” I wonder how stressed they get each night – for most of us in the audience, singing a song onstage would be bad enough, never mind making up your own lyrics and dance routines. Meggido explains the ethos: “I want us to be a bunch of naive clowns who don’t get how terrifying what they’re doing is.” The key, he says, is “to be completely present and free from tension as much as possible. Anything I’ve done in my life creatively that felt any good, it didn’t feel like I was doing it. It felt like I was a channel for something that was happening … The more relaxed I am, the more present, it becomes obvious what to do next. The more tense and less connected I am, the more I have to strain. But it’s not necessarily a better or worse result. You can create through relaxation or tension.” One day, they plan to perform a show with all 17 of the Showstoppers on stage for the full chorus-line effect. In the meantime, a handful of them will continue to turn up at the theatre in Victoria each night, arriving without a character’s name, a line of dialogue or a single lyric between them. And then these improv wizards will teach Elphaba a thing or two about defying gravity. Showstopper! The Improvised Musical is at The Other Palace, London, until 16 March 2019