The former British Cycling and Team Sky doctor Richard Freeman will face explosive claims that he obtained banned testosterone for an unnamed rider and lied to UK Anti-Doping when he appears before an independent medical tribunal next month. The tribunal will look at claims brought by the General Medical Council that Freeman ordered 30 sachets of Testogel, which is on the World Anti-Doping Agency’s prohibited list, in May 2011 to be sent to the Manchester velodrome – and then tried to cover his tracks. According to pre-hearing information from the Medical Practitioners Tribunal Service, which makes decisions about a doctor’s fitness to practise: “It is alleged that Dr Freeman’s conduct was dishonest. It is further alleged that his motive for placing the order was to obtain Testogel to administer to an athlete to improve their athletic performance.” Freeman, who worked for Team Sky and British Cycling between 2009 and 2015, has denied all doping charges in the past but this tribunal has the potential to throw a dark shadow over British cycling’s golden decade. According to the pre-hearing information, when Dr Freeman was first asked about the delivery by a fellow member of staff, he denied ordering the Testogel and said it must have been a mistake by the supplier, the Oldham-based Fit4Sport Limited. In October 2011 it is also alleged that he asked Fit4Sport for written confirmation it had been sent in error, returned and destroyed “knowing that this had not taken place”. It is claimed he showed this false email to others knowing it to be “untrue”. Freeman’s case, which will start in Manchester on 5 February and could run until 6 March, will also look into allegations that he lied about the Testogel delivery when questioned by the UK Anti-Doping Agency in 2017, when he claimed it was for a member of British Cycling’s staff and that it had been returned to the supplier. Freeman’s medical record-keeping, which was criticised by the UK Anti-Doping Agency when it looked into a separate case regarding a jiffy bag delivered to Bradley Wiggins at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011, will also be investigated. Wiggins has always denied any wrongdoing. Freeman, who resigned from British Cycling 17 months ago after telling the organisation he was too ill to face disciplinary action about his record-keeping, was unavailable for comment. However, a British Cycling spokesman said: “British Cycling suspended Dr Richard Freeman in March 2017 and subsequently initiated an investigation into his conduct as an employee of the federation. British Cycling requested that Dr Freeman be interviewed as part of the investigation: however, he declined to make himself available for interview, citing grounds of ill health. “In September 2017, he resigned from British Cycling. British Cycling has raised concerns relating to Dr Freeman’s fitness to practise with the General Medical Council and has continued to support the GMC’s investigation, in which the federation is a co-referrer.”