Anyone reading the outpouring of writing the global crisis has provoked must be prepared for anticlimax. There are hundreds of denunciations of Trump’s America, Brexit Britain and the Putinesque dictatorial “democracies” appearing everywhere from Hungary to Venezuela, Turkey to the Philippines. You turn to the final chapter expecting to hear how to fight back and… answer comes there none. The endnotes flash by, the index rolls and that’s that. You should not be surprised. The global order that developed in the 1980s has failed and to date the only replacement on offer has been authoritarian nationalism that will impoverish and diminish its supporters as much as its opponents. A politics worth having must cope instead with the failure of the old wisdom that all that societies needed to prosper was for central banks to hold inflation down. It would have to explain how 21st-century countries will live with a greying population – not just with the healthcare costs but with the electoral power of the old to impose their priorities and prejudices on the young. It would need to grapple with the impact of digital technology on the privacy of the individual and on the ability of well-funded interest groups and hostile foreign powers to use big data to subvert free elections and referendums. Hard though they are, these are mere appetisers. To say we have no answers to mass migration, which global warming is likely to accelerate, and the future of work as robotics develops is to understate the case. We don’t even know the right questions to ask. Danger lies in allowing the confusion to push you into fatalism. You see it among the British politicians and activists who say they cannot support a second referendum on Brexit. They can’t take the anger and the bitterness all over again. They do not believe that the experience of what Brexit is doing to Britain will change enough minds. How you think is as important as what you think. Slip into fatalism and you lose the essential benefit of thinking of yourself as a member of an opposition and a lucky opposition at that. In Venezuela, Turkey and Hungary, control of the media and judiciary is so extensive that effective opposition is impossible. Huge efforts have been made to delegitimise opposition in Britain. The attacks on judges and civil servants as enemies of the people and on MPs as mutineers, and the threats of violence against politicians, always female politicians, of course, are our form of Putinism. It is a compliment to this country that the assault has not worked and was never going to work. Going into opposition means a little more than combating the idea that Remainers are the “elite”, even though that notion staggers on like a blood-drenched zombie. A “people’s vote” will not be popular with everyone. Millions of real people, including people who voted Remain, will say: “We’ve already voted on this and even if we don’t like it, we must accept the result.” To which the best reply is the true reply that Brexit will have forced a second referendum on the British. Its supporters had it all in June 2016. They controlled the Conservative and Labour parties and had the popular mandate. Just as they are responsible for the near breakdown of government and the economic, diplomatic and constitutional crisis, so they will be responsible for a second referendum. If they had united, they might have had Brexit and nothing you or I said would have mattered a damn. Among the many failures of journalism in 2016, the greatest was the failure to explain that the enemies of the EU could never agree among themselves what version of Brexit Britain should follow. They never offered the public an exit plan and that dilettantish fool David Cameron failed to insist that the referendum spelt out what voting for Brexit meant. Today’s breakdown flows from yesterday’s infighting and indolence. With equal inevitability, the fight to protect Britain will generate new ways of thinking. Although we do not face state repression, the situation of the opposition in Britain is fraught in the extreme. American liberalism appears as fragmented as a smashed vase. At the end of last year, journalists counted almost 40 challengers competing to be the Democratic candidate to run against Trump in 2020. Yet, however divided they are, they are united in their opposition to Trump. Resistance to the right provides a stable point. Their counterparts in Britain must fight not only a right agitating for competing forms of Brexit that vary from the self-harming to the suicidal, but a Labour opposition that has abandoned its foundational duty to protect the working class and is willing to let it suffer the consequences of leaving the single market. The very intensity of a war on two fronts against an opposition that won’t oppose and a government that can’t govern will force through new ideas and new leaders. You can see it now, as politicians from the Greens and the Labour and Tory backbenches become more important than ministers and shadow ministers as they try to save what they can from the wreckage. It is for this reason, rather than because they have enough political baggage to fill a freight train, that Tony Blair and Peter Mandelson’s attempt to lead the People’s Vote campaign is doomed. They are not fighting in the arena against the Brexit right and far left simultaneously. They are not feeling the urgent need to develop new arguments and tactics that will eventually produce a new politics. Intellectuals like to believe that ideas emerge from a lecture hall and then converts struggle to implement them. More often, it’s the other way round and the struggle produces ideas. The fatalism of those who in their despair think the best course is to opt out and let events unfurl misses that it is in the act of fighting back that the future will be shaped. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist