The dark side of the moon may not actually be dark, but alas it’s not that hospitable. That much became clear this week when a seedling planted by the Chinese (which also gave us the headline of the week) on the far side of the moon failed to survive a lunar night. Hardly surprising really: night over there goes on for two weeks with temperatures as low as -170C. But back on planet Earth, thankfully there are green shoots aplenty if you know where to look. The UK has resettled more than 10,000 Syrian refugees since 2015, but 70% are unemployed or underemployed – a considerable waste given the advanced professional skills that many have. Enter a group of social entrepreneurs with the savvy and financial acumen to get people like doctors and dentists back into their chosen profession. The cliche of the post-doctoral physicist driving minicabs for a living might finally be put to bed. Help of a different kind has been offer in Sweden to those on the receiving end of an online troll offensive. #Jagärhär mobilises a small army of benevolent commenters to threads where hate merchants are spreading their poison. The pen is mightier than the sword – and the keyboard is mightier than both. Each week, we’d like to try and include a nugget of data that shows human progress in a good light. Do get in touch to let us know where to look (email theupside@theguardian.com). This week we were curious about global employment rates – the number of people with jobs. So we consulted the World Bank, and according to its latest data more people have jobs than ever before. Have a good weekend. This piece on The Inkline about a British social enterprise battling loneliness and suicide via a tour bus that stops in various destinations across the UK and invites people to play chess. Also this article in the Atlantic that reports on 10 new guidelines for making better men. Thank you for giving me something to look forward to at the end of a week. Instead of feeling overwhelmed and tuning out from the news. I particularly enjoy some of the obscure things you pop in. Brooke Penrose, by email The German hashtag #ichbinhier has been a breath of fresh air for me. Ppl feel free to insult and attack others because they are anonymous. I like the fact that others are calling them out for their hate speech and encouraging positive behaviour online. This hashtag was needed years ago imo. MistyKasumi, commenting bravely about trolls below the line No need for a reply, just wanted to say thanks for your work. It’s made a big difference to my week. Matt Savage by email In Geneva, where 500 people gathered to figure out how to get this kind of news more prominently into our newspapers, television screens and websites. The challenge was beautifully articulated by the former Le Monde journalist and founder of Heidi news, Serge Michel… Solutions journalism is like Johnny Hallyday. 90pc of people love him and 90pc of journalists hate him. Great line from @UNOG_DG up now at #ConstructiveConf "Constructive journalism isn't about positive upbeat news, it's about reporting solutions to start a debate about what can be done. Journalists are not activists but can *activate* citizens". pic.twitter.com/06x6GuVhKc Also at the University of Birmingham School, central England, which has launched a bold experiment to tackle segregation by taking in children from all parts of the city. If you have a thought, a comment, a criticism or a suggestion of story ideas or subject matter, do please get in touch with us by email at theupside@theguardian.com. If you like this type of journalism and and would like to help us to uncover more valour, enterprise, altruism and innovation, please support our work with a single or recurring contribution. Support the Guardian.