Donald Trump has announced plans for the biggest expansion in US missile defence since the Reagan-era Star Wars project, in a policy review that singles out North Korea as an “extraordinary threat” seven months after the president claimed that threat had been eliminated by his diplomacy. In the Pentagon’s missile defence review, which Trump unveiled on Thursday, his administration has called for a large-scale expansion of existing and sea-based systems, much of it designed to guard against a missile attack from North Korea. “While a possible new avenue to peace now exists with North Korea, it continues to pose an extraordinary threat and the US must remain vigilant,” the review said. In particular, Trump announced there would be 20 more ground-based interceptors in Alaska, a location aimed at countering North Korean missile. One of Kim Jong-un’s top aides, Kim Yong-chol, is expected to arrive in Washington on Friday for talks about a second summit with Trump. On Wednesday, Mike Pence admitted that the first summit – in Singapore last June – had failed to lead to any concrete steps by the Pyongyang regime to dismantle its nuclear arsenal. The new missile defence review also envisages the addition of a new layer of satellites that would be able to spot enemy missiles at launch. A study would be conducted into the feasibility of space-based interceptors and lasers. It is far from clear, however, that Congress, with Democrats now controlling the House of Representatives, will be prepared to foot the bill for a huge hike in spending on unproven technology. Tests of land- and sea-based missile interceptors have been inconclusive even in very controlled conditions. In a speech delivered in the Pentagon, Trump made claims for the planned missile defence system that went far beyond the capabilities of the systems, even according to his own administration’s review. “My upcoming budget will invest in a space-based missile defence layer,” he said. “We will terminate any missile launches from hostile powers … regardless of missile type or geographic origin,” Trump said. The Pentagon review acknowledges that the Russian and Chinese arsenals are far too large and sophisticated to be countered by missile defence, and that US strategy is reliant on its own huge arsenal to deter any attack from a major nuclear power. Before discussing the new missile defence review, Trump spent six minutes on a campaign-style speech in the Pentagon auditorium denouncing Democrats for blocking his demand for a wall on the southern border, likely to increase the reported unease of senior officers over the administration’s attempts to politicise the US military.