An explosion in central Mexico has killed at least 20 people and injured more than 70 after people carrying water jugs and fuel containers gathered at a pipeline gushing gasoline. Video footage showed people getting covered in petrol as they tried to fill their containers on Friday in the town of Tlahuelipan, Hidalgo state, to the north of Mexico City. Screams could be heard later as a fireball shot to the sky. “Hit the ground!” one person yelled at those fleeing. The origins of the explosion remain uncertain but it brought home the horrors of huachicol – stolen fuel, often siphoned from pipes belonging to the state-run oil company Pemex. "Mi garrafón, wey" circula en redes video de la fuga en #Tlahuelilpan, Hidalgo antes de la explosión https://t.co/LoGFExj8cH pic.twitter.com/wCOP5XQv4a Hidalgo state governor Omar Fayad appealed to people via Twitter to avoid taking fuel, saying they were putting their lives and those of their families at risk. “What happened today in Tlahuelilpan should not be repeated,” he said. Mexico has cracked down on fuel thefts, which have mushroomed in recent years and spawned criminal gangs, whose clashes over huachicol – originally slang for poor-quality alcohol – have sent the homicide rate soaring in several states. President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who took office on an agenda of combating corruption and calming the country, ordered the crackdown on fuel theft barely a month after taking office, on 1 December. He closed fuel pipelines running from refineries and deployed tanker trucks to supply petrol stations, arguing fuel thefts cost the country billions. He also sent the army to guard key Pemex installations, where he alleged insiders were working with fuel thieves. Sobrevolando el lugar de los hechos ocurridos en Tlahuelilpan. Estamos aplicando todas las medidas necesarias para atender a la población de la zona. pic.twitter.com/ptPGOGLbF5 Pemex pipes were tapped an average of 42 times a day in the first 10 months of 2018, according to the company. The crackdown inevitably caused shortages and long petrol lines in at least six states and the national capital – not unlike the US in the 1970s. “Don’t play these corrupt people’s game, even though they say, ‘you have gasoline, take advantage of it’,” López Obrador admonished the population earlier this week. Opponents panned the crackdown as improvised and ill-considered, while business groups have warned of a possible economic slowdown and shortages of staples in some western states. “They can’t guard the pipelines so they’re going to stop using the pipelines,” said George Baker, veteran Mexico oil industry observer. But the public is backing the president, whose predecessor Enrique Peña Nieto presided over a six-year term marred by accusations of graft and inaction on crimes such as fuel theft. A poll in the Reforma newspaper showed 73% of respondents saying they were willing to endure fuel shortages to combat huachicol. Still, a culture of stealing fuel has taken hold in some parts of the country – such as in the state of Puebla, where residents of poor corn-farming villages have blocked major highways to protest army actions against so-called huachicoleros. “Huachicol happens in poor towns and everyone there benefits,” said Esteban Illades, editor of the magazine Nexos. “As long as that keeps happening, no power can stop huachicol.” In December 2010, authorities blamed oil thieves for a pipeline explosion in a central Mexico near the capital that killed 28 people, including 13 children. That blast scorched homes, affecting 5,000 residents in an area six miles (10km) wide in San Martin Texmelucan.