The margin of victory was enormous – 381 runs – but this accurately reflects the gulf between the two sides. In terms of runs only the England defeat at Manchester in 1976 against Clive Lloyd’s side is bigger. Back then we could at least admire the ultimately futile bravery of the old, un-helmetted men, Brian Close and John Edrich, in the face of a barrage of short-pitched bowling. But here we witnessed a barren England performance on all fronts. Only Jimmy Anderson and Ben Stokes with the ball and Rory Burns with the bat have anything to feel proud about. Maybe England won one session of the match, the last one on Wednesday. Otherwise they were outplayed and outwitted by a side that is supposed to contain some “very ordinary, average cricketers”. Where does that assessment leave the England players? There was no atonement on the final day despite a modicum of resistance from Burns, who hit 84 – his highest Test score. Instead there was further humiliation. Somehow Roston Chase, the batting all-rounder from Barbados, contrived career-best figures of eight for 60. Now Chase is a fine cricketer, primarily because of his batting. His bowling is his second string and England’s finest found a variety of ways to succumb to him. But they were not undermined by any devious turning deliveries. There is no shame attached to this for Chase, but there is for the England batsmen, who were dismal in both innings. Chase did not take any of his eight wickets because he managed to make the ball turn, a quirk that is familiar to your correspondent. The left-handers were beaten on the inside edge; the right-handers via the outside edge or to catches somewhere on the leg side from the meat of the bat. This all serves to highlight the haplessness of England’s performance. They were all at sea from before the toss when they selected their final XI. Naivety rather than complacency led to their humiliation. Joe Root was at pains to acknowledge the threat of the West Indies and was quick to distance himself from the odd observations of fellow Yorkshiremen. Yet over the four days West Indies batted and bowled far better with the Bajan contingent, which numbers six, to the fore. The home side was pragmatic in selection rather than fancifully naive – like England, who opted for a high-risk policy that had all the efficacy of some of Baldrick’s cunning plans. Yes, all would be well if the ball swung late for Sam Curran early on or if Adil Rashid could spin his leg-spinners viciously late in the game with the comfort of runs in the bank. But these were big ifs. Neither of these bowlers can be trusted to bowl 20 overs a day in unfavourable conditions. Hence Root was left with two potential liabilities in a five-man attack, a situation that was exacerbated when the West Indian right-handers decided that they would launch an aerial attack on Moeen Ali’s off-breaks. Mind you, the tentative display of rusty batsmen on Thursday contributed mightily to England’s plight throughout the rest of the match and so did the magnificent discipline of the four-pronged West Indian attack, superbly overseen by the inspirational Jason Holder. In their second innings England were seeking to recover some form or confidence if nothing else. They did not manage that even though the opening batsmen got past the dreaded 77 without being parted. Then Jennings fell caught at second slip when driving at Alzarri Joseph. Jennings does not smell the ball when he is driving. That is not possible with such a stiff-legged technique. Unless he is in princely form, which does not seem to be the case at the moment, the cover drive becomes a dangerous shot for him. By contrast Burns’s stock has risen after his innings. Yet he will be utterly exasperated by his dismissal. He had almost batted through the morning session when he faced the first ball of the day from Chase. Somehow he allowed it to pass through a disturbingly wide gate and he was bowled. The batting became nervy after the break when Shannon Gabriel thundered in. Root, on one, fended at a short ball and was caught in the gully but the replays revealed an obvious no-ball. Meanwhile Jonny Bairstow hit half-a-dozen silky boundaries in between moments of indecision. He had reached 30 when he edged another short ball from Gabriel down the leg-side and this time the bowler’s front foot was in the right place. Root could not capitalise on his reprieve and soon became another victim for Chase. An attempted off-side glide to a good-length ball found the edge of his bat and Darren Bravo, until now an anonymous figure in his comeback game, calmly accepted the catch at slip. Now Stokes briefly took a more forthright approach. Twice he advanced down the pitch to loft drives for four or six but just before tea he was lbw to Chase, who had just switched ends. Then England subsided embarrassingly to the local off-spinner, who could not believe his luck. Moeen registered his first pair in Test cricket, Jos Buttler flicked to mid-wicket, Ben Foakes did the same to short leg, and Adil Rashid unerringly picked out the man on the leg-side boundary. Finally Shai Hope, deputising for the stiff-backed Shane Dowrich, stumped Sam Curran, the last victim of an ugly procession of forlorn England cricketers who had played spin bowling rather well in Sri Lanka a couple months ago. Perhaps Chase had cunningly duped the callowest of crews – by not turning the ball.