1) The legendary writer Hugh McIlvanney, “a giant among journalists”, died last week at the age of 84. His finest work may have been in print, but McIlvanney was also an accomplished broadcast journalist, as seen in his documentary series ‘Busby, Stein & Shankly: The Football Men – here are parts one, two, three and four. McIlvanney also wrote and narrated Goal TV – The World of Georgie Best, first shown in 1970. The Scot had a particular passion for boxing. Here he is in a 1987 interview with Mike Tyson’s manager, Jim Jacobs, and in conversation with Sugar Ray Leonard. 2) The Six Nations is back in style, with Ireland v England this Saturday. England may have labelled the defending champions “boring” this week, but both teams will go some to match this fixture in 1963, a mud-caked nightmare that ended 0-0. It was a livelier affair in 2007 at Croke Park, when Ireland thumped their old rivals 43-13 – but went on to lose the title to France on points difference thanks to Elvis Vermeulen’s last-gasp try against Scotland. Finally, something for England fans to cheer: a 42-6 thumping that sealed the grand slam in 2003. 3) Super Bowl Sunday is approaching, with the New England Patriots into their ninth Big Dance of the Bill Belichick era. The Pats’ first title came in 2002 against this weekend’s opponents, the Rams – then of St Louis. Not for the last time, second-year QB Tom Brady led his team down the field to set-up a game-winning field goal. That marked the end of the ‘Greatest Show on Turf’ – a dazzling Rams offense that won the title two years earlier – thanks to a defensive play forever known as ‘The Tackle’. 4) This week in sports stars making us feel old: 16-year-old Kelly Sildaru wins slopestyle ski gold at the X-Games in Aspen with a record score of 99, and 13-year-old figure skater Alysa Liu wins the US national championship. 5) Fun and games in Italy’s lower leagues, as Lucchese coach Giancarlo Favarin sticks one on his opposite number in a Serie C match: 6) Another skirmish that spilled off the field – or rather, the rink. Texas Tech and SMU’s college hockey match descended into the longest fight scene since They Live. If the highlight reel isn’t enough, here’s the whole thing. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) It’s blindfolded boxing! 2) We’re all in on underarm box cricket. 3) Riding the Pic d’Aret. Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, GrahamClayton Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.