The British army’s much-derided, Lord Kitchener-inspired recruitment campaign (reportedly costing £1.5m) could be more symptomatic of desperation than of insight into a young person’s mindset. (Since starting work with Capita in 2012, the army has never reached recruitment targets.) Perhaps there are those who self-identify as a “snowflake” (“The army needs YOU and your compassion”), “Me, me, me Millennial” (self-belief), “phone zombie” (focus), “binge gamer” (drive), “swinger” (team spirit). That last one was a spoof, but there’s the problem – they all come across as spoofs. At best, it’s all a bit trendy teacher – accentuating the positive taken to absurdity. Yet still, this isn’t an example of an army recruitment drive at its worst. The real story here is waning recruitment numbers – the army has 77,000 trained troops compared with a target of 82,500, with almost half of applicants dropping out of the lengthy process in 2017-18. There’s also the question of what the besieged, underfunded army can offer recruits. Don’t be a hippy and simply answer “nothing” because, hey man, war is bad. (I imagine that those who have experienced combat have a clearer-eyed view of war than politicians sitting on their derrieres in parliament.) Like the RAF and navy, the army can offer a great deal – from employment, education and training to teamwork, purpose and confidence. It’s also a job that could get someone killed or leave them with appalling physical and psychological disabilities. This is the problem of modern forces recruitment – how do you get young people to sign up for that? To be more precise, which young people and how young are they? And this is where recruitment drives truly go awry. In September 2018, around the army’s “This is belonging” campaign, a briefing document emerged showing the “target audience” was “16-24, primarily C2DE”, attracted to risk, easily influenced and money-driven, but not good at money management. That’s a fair number of wayward, adrenaline-fuelled kids in the lowest socioeconomic brackets with limited education and prospects. It also emerged that the campaign is targeted during exam periods, when the young are most anxious about their future. It’s also little known that the UK is the only European country to recruit soldiers at 16. The UN committee on child rights is among organisations to challenge the UK about this. Perhaps this is recruitment’s true dark side – not some bungled campaign aimed at personality types who wouldn’t consider joining up even if you offered them a spliff and free latte every time they drove a tank in the right direction. Rather, that it has been known to target very young hotheads, who may not fully comprehend what they’re signing up for. When it comes to deriding army recruitment techniques, let’s focus on that. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist