How did you start writing about food? My first review was in about 1998 for Marie Claire magazine. The restaurant is still there and I loved it. I wanted to write about food and have a column from that point but they’re not the kind of jobs you come across easily. You have to pretty much wait for someone to die or give up because they’ve got gout. People carry on as long as they can because it’s the greatest job in the world. Before I started reviewing for the London Evening Standard in 2012, I spent years wanting to be a critic so that I could purge all the things in my head about bad restaurants and good restaurants, but mainly bad ones. Do you eat out every night? No. I tend to hit restaurants in batches over two to three days, and eat and take notes. Last night, I was at a place in north London. Today, I’m going to write my column about a restaurant in Edinburgh, then go to one in Covent Garden and a brasserie in the West End. I have a space where I really eat and then I try to counteract it by living really cleanly for, say, 48 hours, 72 hours. It’s the only way that works for me. During the down period, I exercise a lot and I live, try to be as good as I can. In London alone, there are about 230 openings a year and I am invited to all of them. If I wanted to go and eat the food there for free, I could although that’s an ethical problem. I book anonymously everywhere I go, which is hard because they find out the names all the time, I pay for the meal myself then claim it back from the Guardian. I spend as much as an average person would at dinner - I don’t go mad. It’s a normal experience, so far as it can be. You have to be really strategic in eating as a critic because your body doesn’t really belong to you any more: it belongs to the newspaper. You’ve got to get the food into you at some time to write the column but if you were to eat everything that came your way, it would be the end of you. Is it impossible to eat without mentally reviewing the food? Yes. It’s impossible even when I’m really trying. My mind is always subconsciously trying to work out why this food isn’t up to standard. Is it stale? Has it been made without love and without the right seasoning? And why is a restaurant not staffed properly? It takes over your life so I enjoy eating at home because there’s a calmness about that. I took my mother for afternoon tea at a hotel in the Lake District the other day and I just wanted to treat her to a lovely experience but I was writing a furious column in my head from the moment we walked in. The greeting, the lack of greeting, the general atmosphere from the staff, that they’re bored to see me and so on. It’s difficult to go out eating with me socially because once I’ve noticed things, my antennae are on. My friends never cook for me. When they’re tipsy, they invite me to dinner then, in the cold light of day, they panic and always book a restaurant. I’m rarely ever invited to people’s houses to eat. It’s a lovely idea until they wake up then they wriggle out of it. What have been your best dinner? I always remember the bad experiences because I have hundreds of great dinners. I once went on a hot date with a hot actor to what was one of London’s hottest restaurants and once we’d ordered he announced that he was actually seeing someone else but of course then I couldn’t stand up and leave. I had to eat about seven courses of incredible world-class Indian food through absolute gritted teeth. And I remember thinking there are thousands of people across London who would kill for this bespoke naan and I am bloody going to eat it. You’re pretty much vegan. How does that affect your reviewing? When I was a little girl I always enjoyed the roast potatoes and the vegetables at Sunday dinner more than the meat. I was always incredibly aware what meat is. I’m a massive animal lover so the glorification of meat doesn’t sit right with me. I don’t get upset if people eat it around me. When I’m reviewing, I always have someone with me who eats meat. I don’t generally ever order meat; they always do. I will have a bit of theirs and I can tell straightaway if it’s good or rubbish. I don’t have to force myself – I’m not gagging when I eat it - because I don’t think meat tastes horrible. One of the cruellest tricks is how absolutely delicious lamb is. In my own time, I eat vegan or vegetarian. I really abhor factory farming and its byproducts so I live a vegan lifestyle as much as I can. If you come to my house you are getting oat milk, vegan cheeses and things like that. I am always walking into restaurants and making them paranoid that they are not catering to people of different appetites and I think that I am a force for good in that way. What would be your desert island dish? It would be something carb-laden and full of calories because I’m going to finally put on as much weight as I’d like to if I wasn’t on HDTV in people’s living rooms. It would be chef Romy Gill’s samosa chaat – fried, chopped-up samosas with chickpeas, sweet chutneys and yoghurt. It’s a big, crunchy, chunky bowl. It’s delicious. She would just keep bringing me that. What’s the most important thing you try to convey in reviews? Is the restaurant worth going to? That’s it for me. I’m not writing for a small number of London food-scene tastemakers. I write my Guardian column for people all over Britain who may go out two or three times a year because they have families and a limited budget, and I want that experience to be amazing for them and not a rip-off. I write for people who are looking for places to take their spouse for an anniversary or somewhere to propose or somewhere to save their relationship. I also want to convey what restaurants are like for people who may never get to go to them. I think those people want to know what it feels like to be in there. The food world is very funny – unintentionally often – and I want to make people laugh or cheer them up every Saturday morning. What’s the best thing about your job? When I review a rural pub, say, outside London for Feast, then I hear that they have been booked out for months ahead and they’ve had to take on more staff from the local area. You realise that you’ve really made an impact on that community and you can change people’s lives. It feels amazing but you’ve got a massive responsibility sometimes. Are you ever wrong? Looking back at reviews I sometimes know that I was in an incredibly bad mood and taking my horrible day with me, so the fact that the service and the food were terrible meant that I was probably harsher than I could have been. However, was I wrong? No, you’re never wrong. I don’t make up that things are bad. When I’ve given a stinking review, it’s because those things happened. I don’t look back at any place that I have annihilated and go, actually now I think about it, that was a wonderful meal. How do you think of the restaurants around Britain? Before Feast, when I wrote about restaurants at the London Evening Standard for five years, I definitely became convinced that the only good food in Britain was in the capital. When I came to the Guardian, I was determined to spend half my time going right through Britain, to prove myself wrong and to take up the advice of readers and of people that I met along the way. After my first year, I admit I was a complete idiot to think there wasn’t great food outside London. It does new and trend-setting but there are incredible places across the country. My greatest meals in 2018 have been in places like Moseley, Edinburgh and the Lake District. One of my favourite places to be at the moment is Bristol and I love Manchester - it’s really exciting. What do you think of food crazes? Food fads are the bane of the critic’s life because you’re served the same thing again and again. Food predictions are arbitrary things that people have decided will be cool next year, like some super seed is in and another one is out. They’re just ridiculous. But as a writer who likes to make people laugh, they’re an absolute gift. A food trend I’d like to see the back of is the never-ending tasting menu. I looked at the menu of a restaurant near Brighton recently and they do a 19-course tasting menu for £180 or something. I think there may be a 14-course one if you beg for clemency. It said that to enjoy the full experience please allow three to four hours for dinner, we seat everyone at 7 but meet us at 6 o’clock at the bar for a drink. I’ve had relationships that haven’t lasted as long as that. You’re literally moving in with all your fellow diners and the staff for an entire evening. No. 