Olivia Newton-John has denied recent reports in US media that she had just “weeks” to live. Appearing in a short video posted on social media, the Australian music and screen icon wished fans a happy new year, and said reports of her imminent death were off the mark. “I just want to say that the rumours of my death have been greatly exaggerated, to quote a very famous quote,” she said. “I’m doing great and I want to wish all of you the happiest, healthiest 2019 that’s possible and thank you all for your wonderful support for me and for my Olivia Newton-John cancer wellness centre in Melbourne, Australia.” Happy New Year! Here’s to a wonderful 2019! Love & light, Olivia pic.twitter.com/1Nd2jIcRb1 It came after US tabloid site Radar Online had claimed the 70-year-old was “clinging on to life” amid her battle with cancer. The site said Newtown-John had been hoping she’d live long enough to see daughter Chloe Lattanzi wed fiancé James Driskill in 2019. Quoting unnamed sources, the report said Newton-John’s “bodily functions appear to be shutting down”, and quoted a “longevity expert” who said she was “almost certainly is going to die!”. The reports in the US were picked up by a number of Australian media outlets, sparking an outpouring of grief among local fans. It forced members of Newton-John’s family and friends to insist the rumours weren’t true. Her niece Tottie Goldsmith, herself a singer and actor, denied the claims in a post on Instagram overnight. “Just giving you the heads up that Livvy is in good health, so let’s leave that distressing rumour where it belongs,” she wrote. Newton-John postponed tour dates in May 2017 after revealing a second diagnosis of breast cancer. In September she revealed she had received a third diagnosis for cancer, saying her stage-four breast cancer had metastasised to her spine. In an interview on Channel Seven’s Sunday Night, she said: “I’m one of millions in this fight. I shouldn’t say fight ... in this journey.” Newton-John was catapulted to global stardom in 1978 by her co-starring role with John Travolta in the musical film Grease. She has previously spoken about her experience of surviving breast cancer and become an advocate for the importance of early detection.