Paweł Adamowicz, the mayor of the Polish city of Gdańsk, has died after he was stabbed in the chest on stage at a charity concert on Sunday evening. The 53-year-old, who had held the post since 1998, underwent more than five hours of surgery overnight. “We couldn’t win,” said Poland’s health minister, Łukasz Szumowski, on Monday afternoon. Dr Tomasz Stefaniak, the director of the hospital in Gdańsk where Adamowicz was treated, said: “With the deepest regret we must inform that unfortunately we lost the struggle for the life of the president of the city. Honour to his memory. He died just now. The cause of his death will be investigated by prosecutors.” The alleged assailant, a 27-year-old from Gdańsk with a record of violent crime, was released from prison last month, it emerged on Monday. After the stabbing, the assailant told the crowd he blamed Adamowicz’s former political party Civic Platform for his jailing in 2014 for a series of violent attacks. Adamowicz, a popular, liberal mayor, had long been considered a hate figure in far-right circles for his vigorous defence of migrants and refugees and LGBT rights, but no evidence has emerged that the attack was politically motivated. Some in Poland are blaming the attack on a more general rise in social tensions and an increasing prevalence of hate speech. Even before his death, silent protests had been planned in a number of cities on Monday. The assassination of Adamowicz, a six-term mayor who often mingled freely with citizens of his city, sent Poland into shock. In Gdańsk, the city flag was lowered to half-mast and a mass was planned for later in the day. Politicians from across the political spectrum condemned the stabbing, including the prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, the interior minister, Joachim Brudziński, and other members of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice Party (PiS). Adamowicz was known as an opponent of PiS. “I’m expressing great pain for the tragic death due to the criminal attack on mayor Paweł Adamowicz. We express solidarity with his family,” Jarosław Kaczyński, the PiS leader, was quoted as saying in a tweet from a party spokeswoman. Donald Tusk, the president of the European council and a former Civic Platform leader, said: “Paweł Adamowicz, mayor of Gdańsk, a man of solidarity and freedom, a European, my good friend, has been murdered. May he rest in peace.” Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, will meet party leaders later on Monday to organise a march against violence and hatred. Adamowicz was part of the democratic opposition formed in Gdańsk under the leadership of Lech Wałęsa during the 1980s. After leaving Civic Platform, he was re-elected to a sixth term as an independent candidate last autumn. As mayor he was a progressive voice, supporting sex education in schools, LGBT rights and tolerance for minorities. He showed solidarity with the Jewish community when windows at Gdańsk synagogue were broken last year, strongly denouncing the vandalism. It is understood that Adamowicz’s wife, Magdalena, was in the UK at the time of the attack. The Polish government sent a plane to London to bring her back to Poland. Associated Press contributed to this report