Organisers of a crowdfunding campaign that aimed to raise $99,000 to pay off the fines of Aboriginal women jailed for fine default in Western Australia say they hope to release as many as 30 women from prison this week. The fundraising campaign expected to meet its target on Tuesday night after just two days of fundraising. By mid-afternoon it had already topped $84,000, with more than 1,900 people donating. Organisers have already identified seven women whose debts will be paid immediately, including a $3,100 debt from a mother-of-three who was unable to call police to respond to domestic violence concerns until her debt was cleared or face arrest herself, and a $2,456 debt against a 22-year-old mother pregnant with her second child. The Sisters Inside chief executive, Debbie Kilroy, who started the fundraiser, said she was overwhelmed by the response. “My heart is so warm and I am uplifted,” she said. “It’s a clear message to the WA government to lift their game and change the legislation as a matter of urgency, not in the middle of the year.” Under current WA law, the fines enforcement registrar can issue a warrant of commitment against a person who has unpaid court or criminal infringement fines, such as fines from a traffic infringement. The McGowan government promised to change the law before winning the 2017 election, after a coronial inquest into the 2014 death in custody of Yamatji woman Ms Dhu recommended the practice be abolished. Since Ms Dhu died, police procedures have changed so that people cannot serve out unpaid fines in police cells or watch houses but must be transferred to a prison. A spokesman for WA police said police did not have the option not to execute an active warrant. Gerry Georgatos, who is coordinating the fine repayments in Perth, said he had been overwhelmed with calls from people who are currently at risk of being jailed due to unpaid fines. Some of those fines were as high as $30,000. Georgatos said he was working with police to help set up a payment plan for those with the largest debts. A spokeswoman for the attorney general, John Quigley, said that legislation to change the law would be put before parliament by the middle of the year. She said the government took the issue “very seriously”. “The attorney general is committed to ensuring the quality and content of the statute book and he will introduce this comprehensive package of reforms as soon as possible,” she said. As the law currently stands, warrants may be issued if other avenues to encourage payment, such as disqualifying a person’s driver’s licence or organising a payment plan, have failed. They authorise police to immediately arrest a person and place them in custody until they have either paid off the fines or “cut them out” as time served, at a rate of $250 per day. If a person has multiple fines, the jail time is based on how long it would take to cut out the largest fine.