So, there you are, having worked your way through a crowd denser than a Brexit negotiation, standing in front of your prize. The Mona Lisa in the Louvre. What do you do? Look more closely at that enigmatic smile? Wonder at the subtle gradations of light and shadow in Leonardo’s rendering of the face? Admire the illusion of depth? No, of course not. You turn your back on the painting, whip out your phone and take a selfie. And then you move on to your next prize. You could be forgiven, amid the Brexit fracas, for not having noticed that Wednesday was Museum Selfie Day, a “fun day to encourage people to visit museums”, in the words of Mar Dixon, whose brainchild it was. A fun day? Not to the critics. “Art is serious. It is not light entertainment,” the Guardian’s Jonathan Jones wrote sternly in 2015, adding that selfies were a “spiritual menace” to museums and galleries. This might seem pompous and overwrought. For selfie enthusiasts, such critics are curmudgeonly snobs making the age-old “us and them” divide: between those who use museum collections “properly” (for education or cultural self-improvement) and those who use them “incorrectly” (for mere distraction or entertainment).’ But who’s really being snobbish here? Sure, there are some who may think that the unwashed masses should not sully the sacred spaces of a museum. What can be more snobbish, though, than the idea that “ordinary people” can only be enticed towards culture through gimmicks or by turning art into entertainment? There’s a kind of condescension that suggests that only we – the learned middle class – can truly appreciate art for what it is. Everyone else needs entertainment. Rather than allowing an extraordinary moment to infuse our spirit, we hustle to document our being there In any case, what’s the point in enticing people into museums and galleries only to ignore that which makes museums and galleries so special? A few years ago, there were reportedly six-hour queues outside the David Zwirner Gallery in New York, which was hosting an exhibition by the Japanese conceptual artist Yayoi Kusama. The crowds weren’t there as aficionados of Kusama’s work. According to that bible of art appreciation, Town & Country, one of the rooms in the show, called Infinity Mirrored Room: The Souls of Millions of Light Years Away, created the illusion of an infinitude of reflections. People were queuing because the self-reflection that never ends had became the ultimate selfie pose. “You can’t say you’ve been there and did it if you don’t have the picture,” explained one visitor. It was less a case of drawing the public into art than a fashionista version of trainspotting. At least trainspotters had a profound knowledge of, and love for, trains. Nor is it a generational issue. My daughter possesses all the accoutrements of digital teenagership – the iPhone seemingly surgically attached to her thumb; the constant flick from WhatsApp to Spotify to Instagram. A couple of years ago, we visited New York’s Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). She was particularly taken by the Picassos. After studying Les Demoiselles d’Avignon intently, she stood back and noticed the crowd milling around. “Why take photos of the painting rather than look at the painting itself?” she muttered in amazement. It’s not just in museums or galleries that the selfie is transforming experience. From the Sydney Opera House to the Grand Canyon, capturing the experience has become more important than the experience itself. Rather than allowing an extraordinary moment to infuse our spirit, we hustle to document our being there. The selfie, the photo, has become the experience. There is nothing new in seeking to be a cultural show-off or in trying to bag cultural scalps. The “cabinets of curiosities” that emerged in 16th-century Europe as forerunners of modern museums were as much about public display as cultural improvement. The 18th-century Grand Tour was a rite of passage for upper-class northern European men. Nineteenth-century museums were places for the wealthy to be seen rather than sit in contemplation. From the Guggenheim to the Louvre Abu Dhabi, the fabulously rich have long built grand cultural palaces as monuments to their bottomless wealth. Museum selfies are just the latest, democratised, version of this tradition of showing off. And there’s nothing wrong in that. There’s nothing wrong with having fun in a museum or a gallery. And, yes, we’re often too po-faced about culture. But we should not confuse public fun-making with immersing oneself in art. Nor should we be so snobbish as to imagine that “ordinary people” can only be enticed to art as entertainment. In Sweden, after four months of deadlock, a new minority government is formed. It’s not expected to last. In Greece, the prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, survives a vote of no confidence by the narrowest of margins with the help of defectors from his former coalition partners, the radical-right Independent Greeks. How long he can cling to office is an open question. In France, gilets jaunes protests paralyse politics, and Emmanuel Macron’s plan for a “grand national debate” gets off to a bad start after he derides sections of the poor as “screwing around”. The US has endured its longest-ever government shutdown. Instead, politicians take to schoolyard tactics – Democrats trying to prevent Donald Trump’s State of the Union address, Trump banning Democrat Nancy Pelosi from using military aircraft, forcing her to cancel a trip to Afghanistan. Riots and protests rip through South Africa, where local government is virtually at a standstill. The chaos, uncertainty and failure of leadership exposed in Westminster over the past week can, from the midst of the Brexit pandemonium, seem peculiar to contemporary Britain. Yet, raise our eyes to beyond Dover and the same traits are visible. The issues are more sharply posed in Britain because Brexit has raised fundamental questions about the nation and its future with particular urgency and force. It has helped unravel the political class more publicly and more ignominiously than elsewhere. But the paralysis of the political class, and the inability to find answers, is not exceptional to Britain. It’s a feature of our age, and of the global dissolution of the old politics. Westminster politicians certainly need to be held to account for their ineptitude. But to understand their failures, and to formulate ways out, we also need to place them in a much wider context. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist