Just before 2018 turned into 2019, Senator Elizabeth Warren announced she would be exploring a run for president in the 2020 US election. If the Massachusetts Democrat is chosen as the presidential candidate by her party, she will join a list of women who have run to be US president (though none so far have won). But how many women exactly are on that list? It’s a simple question that is surprisingly tricky to answer, but here’s an estimate: 31 women have been nominated to run as president by their respective parties. Since many of those women have run for president multiple times, the total number of times women have been nominated totals 41. Where possible, the race of the candidate has been illustrated in the chart here. The women include Charlene Mitchell, who ran for the Communist party in 1968; 54-year-old Margaret Wright, described as a grandma when she was nominated by the People’s party in 1976; and Lenora Fulani, who was the nominee of the New Alliance party in 1988 and again in 1992. The total shown here is higher than the list provided by Center for American Women and Politics, but that’s because it includes the likes of Gracie Allen, who ran for the Surprise party in 1940. Allen was a comedian who ran as a publicity stunt and says she chose the name of her party because her mother was a Democrat, her father a Republican, and she had been born a surprise (her running song included the lyric “Vote for Gracie to win the presidential racie”). She retired her candidacy before the vote took place, saying she wanted the serious campaigning to go ahead. But she still managed to gain thousands of write-in votes. However, Allen was not the first woman to run for the presidency. That accolade goes to Victoria Woodhull who, in 1872, ran for the Equal Rights party alongside Frederick Douglass. Not long before announcing her run, Woodhull gave a lecture calling for marriage laws to be completely rethought (the press covered it as a “theory of free love” and derided the idea). It took 144 years after Woodhull’s run for any woman to be considered a serious contender for the White House. When Hillary Clinton ran in 2016, she won the popular vote (gaining 2.9 million votes more than Donald Trump) but didn’t become president. She ran alongside five other women who ran for the Green party, Peace and Freedom party, Socialist Workers party, Workers World party and the Revolutionary party. Some of those parties have a long-held tradition of nominating female candidates to represent them in their presidential bids. The Workers World party has had six female candidates, while the Socialist Workers party has had three. Clinton was the first ever woman to be nominated to run as the candidate for a major political party. If chosen by the Democrats, Elizabeth Warren would be the second woman nominated by a major party to run for president – but she would be only the 32nd woman nominated by a party for a White House bid. This is a new column that illustrates numbers from the news each week. Have feedback or ideas for future columns? Write to me: mona.chalabi@theguardian.com