Having wobbled and tumbled over a challenging Christmas week, Arsenal got back on the bike on Tuesday. They did so a little gingerly but ended an afternoon freewheeling past Fulham feeling buoyed by the restorative power of points and goals. Last week’s slips at Brighton and, more punishingly, Liverpool came as a large dollop of reality for a club whose path to a new post-Wenger way was always likely to be a bumpy one. A reaction was needed – both from Unai Emery and from his players. The Premier League’s original Tinkerman, Claudio Ranieri, knows all about the benefits and perils of high-intensity squad juggling and it will not have gone unnoticed how Emery has attacked this project with a penchant for impatiently shuffling his pack before and during games. The search for his most balanced side is an ongoing one, not helped by the vulnerabilities in defence that are so hard to cure with relentless injuries in that department. But for all the angst about Arsenal’s goals conceded column, goal creation and execution also needed attention, having dipped of late. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette were granted a rare start side by side (something they experienced only once in 10 games before this fixture). It is one of Arsenal’s enduring curiosities that both Emery and his predecessor showed reluctance to play their two strongest attackers as a pair. Both had opportunities. Both got on the scoresheet. For all that it might feel risky for Arsenal to start two strikers, it does seem riskier not to. Emery pondered it afterwards and touched upon the big balance question. That was something Ranieri also had in his mind. Fulham brought a sense of adventure, even if marrying that to defensive stability was not easy. They carved out two fantastic chances for the speedy Ryan Sessegnon in the first half. Aleksandar Mitrovic’s hulking presence was another menace as defenders bounced off him and Bernd Leno had to be alert to keep out a couple of his headers. Just as Arsenal were feeling the pressure they pulled themselves together to score. Sead Kolasinac and Alex Iwobi combined all afternoon and when the ball was floated in Granit Xhaka was unmarked with enough time to chest the ball down and pass it into the net. Arsenal chances came regularly and they got a cushion early in the second half. Iwobi was involved, creating the space for a spate of quickfire passing involving Aubameyang and Kolasinac, and Lacazette was on hand to smash the ball in. Lacazette was disappointed not to be awarded a penalty when Jean Michaël Seri caught him with an outstretched leg as he burst forwards in the box. Nothing was given by the referee, Graham Scott. Seri was instrumental in Fulham cutting the deficit moments later. He bundled over Lucas Torreira and advanced to play a key role in the move that ended with Sessegnon crossing for the substitute Aboubakar Kamara to tap in. The Fulham bench was all smiles this time after the weekend penalty brouhaha. “I have no grudge,” Ranieri explained. “He apologised immediately to me, his teammates, the club and it is finished there. I need all my players. I kill but after I give oxygen to them.” The mood lurched. Briefly Fulham attacked at will and Arsenal’s anxiety gnawed. The air of discontent took a notable turn as the substitution of Lacazette for Aaron Ramsey was greeted by boos – the first time Arsenal supporters aired an audible challenge to Emery. “You need a cold mind to make a decision,” he said. “Every supporter can have a different opinion but I need to do my work.” It was not such a bad change after all, as the Welshman eased some nerves by scoring Arsenal’s third on the rebound after Aubameyang struck a post. It looked like one of those days for Arsenal’s top scorer, who went close a handful of times, but his goal came eventually, albeit aided by a deflection. He went over to the bench to celebrate with Lacazette. The Arsenal hierarchy, and where certain players fit into it, remains an intriguing conundrum in the Emery era. Again Mesut Özil was absent and the Ramsey situation – with his contract running down while he continues to contribute – adds to the complicated strands that need tidying up. Defensive imrprovement is Emery’s priority. “Today was the first time we could play with Sokratis [Papastathopoulos], [Shkodran] Mustafi and [Laurent] Koscielny,” he said. “Then came an injury from Mustafi in the first half so we changed to a back four. We are very happy with the attacking players. We need defence also to take more balance and improve. We need to work. We need to prepare for to do better for the second half of the season.” The prospect of any arrivals to bolster that department is difficult but open. “The club is working, watching different possibilities,” Emery said. “Maybe we can if the transfer market gives an opportunity to sign one or two players.” Ranieri is also on the hunt for reinforcements and refinement. “My defence improved a lot but, when you play against these type of players that are fast, skilled, that is where you have to improve more,” he said. “They have to be faster. If there will be an opportunity for us I am sure our chairman will help us to stay in the Premier League.”