As storm clouds gathered above the Cardiff City Stadium on what was a grey afternoon in south Wales in more ways than one, Robert Glaves stared at the floral tributes that had been placed in the wake of the news that Emiliano Sala, the club-record signing, was on board an aeroplane that disappeared near the Channel Islands on Monday evening. “He’s going to be remembered as the best player we never had,” said Glaves, who has been following Cardiff for more than 50 years. Sala joined Cardiff for £15m from Nantes on Saturday and had flown back to France at the weekend to say farewell to his former teammates. “La ultima ciao,” or “the last goodbye,” was the poignant message the Argentinian posted on his Instagram account prior to taking his seat on a small aircraft that departed Nantes on Monday evening. Little more than an hour after take-off, Guernsey Coastguard received an alert from Jersey air traffic control that the aircraft had gone off their radar, triggering an extensive search and rescue operation that was suspended at 5pm the following day. In truth, it had been impossible not to fear the worst long before that sobering update from the police. “Waking up this morning and hearing it on the radio alarm, you think: ‘No, this is a bad dream, this just isn’t true,” said Glaves. “And then, as the day unfolded, listening to it all … absolutely shocking, isn’t it?” Half a dozen teenagers stood only a few yards away from Glaves and the statue of Fred Keenor, Cardiff’s 1927 FA Cup-winning captain, telling their story about how Sala had happily posed for a picture with them at the end of last week, shortly after the striker had completed his medical but before his transfer had officially gone through. “On Friday night we were coming across from having food to go and play our own football game and we were wondering if he [Sala] would be in the stadium,” said Hywel Davies, a 16-year-old Cardiff fan. “We saw him in the window by the main entrance signing some [paperwork]. So we waited outside for a bit, thinking he might come out. He did in the end and he was nice enough to come and have a photo. He was asking us how we were, he just seemed like a nice guy.” It seems strange to think that Davies and his friends spent more time with Sala than some of the Cardiff players, and in many respects that explains why this tragedy is so difficult for everyone at the Premier League club to come to terms with and understand. People are mourning a footballer that they never got to see play. There are no Sala shirts for sale in the club shop because the 28-year-old had not even been allocated a number. “Obviously there weren’t any scarves made yet, but somebody has been busy with a felt pen – that’s wonderful,” adds Glaves, pointing to a scarf, bearing Sala’s name, lying at the feet of the statue of Keenor. While the emotional attachment with Sala will understandably run deeper in Nantes, where he scored 42 goals across three and a half seasons, there is no escaping the sense of loss in Cardiff and it is hard to imagine what is going through Neil Warnock’s mind. Cardiff’s manager made the same journey as Sala when he returned from Nantes last month, after watching the striker play against Marseille and was full of excitement about the prospect of signing him. Warnock and the Cardiff board took the decision to cancel training on Tuesday and nobody at the club is quite sure what to expect when the players report on Wednesday. For now all thoughts are with Sala and the pilot on board the Piper Malibu that left Nantes at 7.15pm on Monday.