A red flag dropped for David Garcia-Rosen just after it was suggested he create a cricket team for his Bronx high school. Garcia-Rosen, then a dean at International Community High, wanted to start a competitive sports team – any kind of team – for his students. With a neighborhood of soccer and baseball players, those sports seemed a natural fit. The Public School Athletic League (PSAL) – the New York City department of education office that governs scholastic sports across America’s largest city – had other ideas. There was no chance Garcia-Rosen’s school would get a soccer or baseball team into the leagues, it said. Maybe try cricket, it suggested. Cricket for a school in a city hardly known for an abundance of wickets, stumps, or bails across the five boroughs. “We gave it a shot,” Garcia-Rosen recalls. “I told the Dominican kids that cricket was a bit like baseball and some Bangladeshi kids kind of led the team. We bought cricket gear and got a cricket coach and then we had a cricket team. We filed our team request for cricket … and then we got the denial.” High school sports in the United States so frequently evokes Friday Night Lights, the book, movie and TV series that popularized the particular religious fervor of Texas football to a broader audience. But a different reality exists in urban centers like New York that forces students to protest, and in some cases take legal action, for access to school sports. Garcia-Rosen, now director of athletics at the Bronx Academy of Letters, has fought a battle with the New York City department of education for equity in school sports for almost a decade. It’s a match that saw him create the Small School Sports League, a rebel confederation of sorts that was taken over and then shut down by the DOE. It’s a campaign that has won Garcia-Rosen few fans within the city’s education system; at one time he was allegedly described by a DOE executive as “Mr Fire and Brimstone” and accused of wanting a “Marxist redistribution of teams”. Garcia-Rosen was bounced into New York City’s infamous “rubber room”, a disciplinary purgatory for teachers exiled by the DOE, but has also inspired student-led protests at City Hall and, significantly, a recent lawsuit filed by four Bronx high school students against the DOE, the PSAL and its executive director Donald Douglas. The suit claims student access to school sports is a human and civil rights issue and alleges the DOE’s policy, or lack thereof, adversely impacts the city’s black and Latino population. It’s also a lawsuit that just might vindicate Garcia-Rosen’s long held concerns. “Black and Latino students experience far-reaching deprivations of key resources and opportunities,” the suit claims, with accompanying research and data showing how black and Latino high school students in New York City public schools have significantly less access to sports teams than students of other races: 17,323 black and Latino high school students in New York public schools attend high schools with zero PSAL teams. “The research results and analysis proved what we had anecdotally known,” says Melissa Iachan of the nonprofit New York Lawyers for the Public Interest, a lead attorney on the case. “The policies and procedures employed by the PSAL discriminate against black and Latino students by depriving them of equal access to resources that should be made publicly available.” New York is not the only big city with sports equity issues. Los Angeles is in the middle of what Renata Simril, president and CEO of LA84, a legacy non-profit organization from the 1984 Olympic Games charged with funding access to sports across the city, describes as “a crisis hiding in plain sight.” While New York’s challenges can be traced to a policy of downsizing failing high schools, in Los Angeles the “no child left behind” program has caused many children to be left behind when it comes to school sports. “There’s an impetus on math and science curriculum and no increase in funding,” Simril says. “So schools had to do away with something. What they’ve done away with is enrichment programs including sport, art, and dance programs.” Schools in Los Angeles now rely on outside grants from third parties like LA84 and professional sports teams to fund school sports or after-school programs. The catch is that third-party generosity is inconsistent and never a guaranteed solution to funding shortfalls. Similar cites like Oakland, across the bay from tech-rich San Francisco, are a classic example of the problem facing West Coast public education. “Oakland announced it is eliminating 50% of its sports programs in schools in a $500,000 cost-saving measure,” Simril says. “That adversely affects kids from low socio-economic settings as well as girls and kids of color. The [NFL’s] Oakland Raiders and a few others stepped in with supplemental funding so they can keep sports programs running but the Raiders are going to be moving to Las Vegas in two years.” LA84 released a report in late December that found Los Angeles families from disadvantaged socio-economic households participate in sport and physical activities at a much lower rate than those from affluent households. With schools unable to fund sports programming the only option for many families is often expensive after-school programs. Underlining the issue, the LA84 research also found lower-income households considered youth sports in Los Angeles to be too expensive. “The parents that can’t afford quality sports programs are just being left out of the game,” says Simril, adding that the underlying problem is economic rather than strictly race-based. “While the areas we have funded in Los Angeles are for communities that identify as black and brown, if you go to Ohio then the economic issue looks like white kids.” Back in New York, city councilman Antonio Reynoso has launched a bill demanding the DOE “ensure that all students have equitable access to after-school athletic activities and associated funding”, a resolution that mirrors the student lawsuit. Reynoso’s bill is considered progress but lawyer Melissa Iachan doesn’t expect the legal battle to be settled any time soon. “It could take years,” she says. Iachan is sure of one thing, however. Without David Garcia-Rosen, school sport equity would still be stuck somewhere in the back of a school closet. “He is the fire behind this locomotive,” Iachan says. Garcia-Rosen says he’s driven by his students and an obviously inequitable system. He describes his decade-long fight as “exhausting” before refocusing: “The small things matter and when they don’t matter the small things become big things.” “You have a school in [New York’s] Staten Island that has 44 teams and over a quarter of a million dollars of funding from the PSAL. Then you have schools that ask for one team and get denied. It is totally unfair. The system is totally opaque.” “It is amazing that these kids are running these campaigns and getting civics lessons and civil rights lessons through all this but on the other hand - they should just be playing sports. When I was their age I wasn’t fighting a civil rights campaign. I was playing soccer. They should just be kids at this point. This shouldn’t be something they have to fight for.”