Tens of thousands of Venezuelans have taken to the streets of the country’s capital in what opponents of Nicolás Maduro hope will prove a turning point for the country’s slide into authoritarianism and economic ruin. Venezuela’s president, who started his second term on 11 January after disputed elections, is facing a reinvigorated opposition as well as increasing international hostility from the right-wing governments of the US, Brazil and Colombia. Wednesday’s march follow two nights of violent protests in working class neighbourhoods of Caracas – once bastions of support for the government – and the apparent foiling of an armed uprising by members of the national guard. Early on Wednesday, protesters in eastern Caracas braved an early morning downpour, shouting in unison, “Who are we? Venezuela! What do we want? Freedom!” In the centre of the capital, riot police flanked by water tanks and lightly armored vehicles had already been deployed to the central Plaza Venezuela square. Other protests were planned across the country and outside embassies around the world. Government supporters will hold their own rival march in downtown Caracas. Juan Guaido, the new leader of the opposition-held national assembly, repeated calls for members of the security forces to withdraw their support for Maduro. “The world’s eyes are on our homeland today,” he said in an early-morning tweet. Relatively unknown until this month, Guaido appears to have reinvigorated Venezeuela’s opposition which has long been wracked by in-fighting. Ahead of Madruo’s inauguration, Guaidó described Maduro as a “usurper” and declared himself ready to assume the presidency until open elections could be held. Wednesday also marks the anniversary of the 1958 uprising that overthrew military dictator Marcos Pérez Jiménez – a symbolism that was not lost on María de Jesus, a social worker from Caracas who was born on the day of the 1958 . “I was born in democracy,” she said on her way to the march in Caracas. “I want my freedom; this is a dictatorship.” Oil-rich Venezuela is mired in economic and political turmoil, with hyperinflation rendering the bolivar currency practically worthless. Shortages in food staples and basic medicines are rampant, while crime is widespread. More than three million Venezuelans have fled, causing consternation across the continent. In Ciudad Guayana, a north eastern city, a statue of Hugo Chávez – Maduro’s late predecessor and the figurehead of Venezuelan socialism – was burnt, cut in half, and the bust hung from a bridge on Tuesday night. Maduro has accused the opposition of fomenting violence. “I demand the full rigor of the law against the fascists,” he said on Tuesday night. His allies have also threatened the use of armed pro-government militias – known as colectivos – to quell disturbances. The United States, long fiercely opposed to Maduro, has thrown its support behind the opposition. “President Trump and the US stand resolutely with the Venezuelan people as they seek to regain their liberty from dictator Nicolás Maduro,” vice-president Mike Pence wrote in an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal on Tuesday. A previous spate of protests in 2017 left at least 120 dead and hundreds more injured, after Maduro dispatched the national guard. Human rights watchdogs and international observers are readying for a similar crackdown on Wednesday. Foro Penal, a local watchdog, reported on Wednesday morning that 30 protestors had been arrested overnight. Local journalists alleged that authorities in Caracas had attempted to confiscate their equipment.