Donald Trump’s nominee for attorney general has said the special counsel Robert Mueller’s report on Russian election interference may not be made public. On the first day of his US Senate confirmation hearing, William Barr indicated that his own summary of Mueller’s findings would be released. “Under the current regulations, the special counsel report is confidential, and the report that goes public would be a report by the attorney general,” Barr told the Senate judiciary committee. Pressed by the Democrat Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Barr said: “I don’t know, at the end of the day, what will be releasable. I don’t know what Bob Mueller is writing.” Barr, 68, is expected to win confirmation in the Republican-controlled Senate to serve as America’s top law enforcement officer, putting him in charge of Mueller’s investigation into alleged collusion between Moscow and Trump’s campaign. In his opening statement, Barr, who was attorney general under the Republican president George HW Bush in the 1990s, promised “as much transparency as I can” on the Mueller report, but added that the degree of transparency would be “consistent with the law”. Later he stopped short of guaranteeing that the Mueller report would be submitted to Congress. The White House could try to assert executive privilege to block parts of the Mueller report. Trump’s lawyer Rudy Giuliani told the Hill website last week: “As a matter of fairness, they should show it to you – so we can correct it if they’re wrong. They’re not God, after all. They could be wrong.” At at other points in Tuesday’s hearing, Barr went out of the way to signal his independence. He told senators that he would protect the Mueller investigation from political pressure and would break ranks with the administration when necessary. “I will not be bullied into doing anything that I think is wrong – by anybody, whether it be editorial boards or Congress or the president,” he said. “I’m going to do what I think is right.” He continued: “President Trump has sought no assurances, promises or commitments from me of any kind, either express or implied, and I have not given him any, other than that I would run the department with professionalism and integrity.” He said he described Mueller, a longtime friend, as a “straight shooter” when Trump asked about him. He added: “On my watch, Bob will be allowed to complete his work.” And if the president asked him to fire Mueller without good cause, Barr told the Democratic senator Chris Coons: “I would not carry out that instruction.” Directly contradicting a claim Trump has made many times, Barr said: “I don’t believe Mr Mueller would be involved in a witch-hunt.” He also endorsed the view of intelligence agencies, often questioned by Trump, by testifying: “I believe the Russians interfered or attempted to interfere with the election, and I think we have to get to the bottom of it.” Barr even took issue with one of the lines chanted at Trump’s rallies, saying that he does not “subscribe to this ‘lock her up’ stuff” as he distanced himself from politically motivated prosecutions. Nevertheless, Barr was not able to allay all the concerns of Democrats and other critics. He was questioned about an unsolicited memo he wrote last year that called Mueller’s case “fatally misconceived” for examining whether Trump obstructed justice by firing the FBI director James Comey. Dianne Feinstein of California, the top Democrat on the committee, told Barr the memo showed “a determined effort, I thought, to undermine Bob Mueller”. Barr replied his memo did not question the legitimacy of the investigation as a whole but merely expressed concerns that the special counsel might be improperly interpreting one aspect of the law. He repeatedly refused to commit to recusing himself from an investigation, even if recommended by ethics officials. “At the end of the day I would make a decision,” he said. “I am not going to surrender the responsibilities of the attorney general.” This contrasted with the former attorney general Jeff Sessions, who said he would defer to the recommendation of ethics officials after it emerged he had met with Russian officials while working on Trump’s election campaign. But Barr said Sessions “did the right thing” because he faced a conflict due to his political activities. Barr also spoke in favour of many of the hardline immigration policies ushered in by the Trump administration. He said he believed in the use of border walls and condemned “sanctuary cities” that shield unauthorised immigrants from deportation. “We need money right now for border security, including walls and barriers,” he said. And he raised eyebrows on the issue of freedom of the press. Senator Amy Klobuchar, a potential candidate in the 2020 election, asked: “If you’re confirmed, will the justice department jail reporters for doing their jobs?” Barr answered: “I know there are guidelines in place, and I can conceive of situations where as a last resort and where a news organization has run through a red flag or something like that, knows that they’re putting out stuff that will hurt the country, there might be a – there could be a situation where someone would be held in contempt.”