It is no secret Rafael Benítez is infinitely more concerned with avoiding relegation from the Premier League than winning the FA Cup but his decision to field a weakened team backfired. A draw leaves Newcastle’s manager contemplating a draining replay at Ewood Park, where Tony Mowbray’s Blackburn will be anxious to finish off a tie they very nearly won here. It took a late Matt Ritchie penalty to rescue Newcastle, who have not progressed beyond the fourth round since 2006, after the excellent Bradley Dack had given the Championship side a deserved lead. “The dressing room’s very quiet and disappointed,” said Mowbray, painfully aware his side had contributed the more intelligent football. “We couldn’t see them scoring.” Benítez appeared to have mixed feelings about Ritchie’s leveller. “I’m not happy with another game,” he said after making eight changes from the side that lost to Manchester United last Wednesday. “I’m disappointed we face a replay. It’s more minutes, more risk. We were trying but Blackburn were pushing hard for every single ball - and we didn’t play at the level I was expecting.” Indeed with Dack’s sharp movement between Newcastle’s midfield and defence frequently discomfiting Sean Longstaff and Isaac Hayden, and Craig Conway fazing Javier Manquillo down the visitors’ left, Mowbray’s players regularly forced Newcastle to retreat deep into their own half. Although they struggled to conjure final balls inventive enough to test the reflexes of young Freddie Woodman – making a rare, and not entirely convincing, appearance in the home goal – Blackburn did win a series of dangerous set pieces. To Benítez’s evident disappointment, his team looked distinctly leggy, often lingering too long in possession. Where Newcastle did occasionally menace was in exploiting the space created by Blackburn’s high pressing and breaking fast on the counterattack. The best of those forays saw Fabian Schär direct a long ball forward for Ritchie to control before stretching David Raya with a low shot. Joselu’s close-range follow-up was deflected to safety by Elliott Bennett. From the subsequent corner Florian Lejeune – making a very decent central defensive comeback following a speedy recovery from a ruptured cruciate ligament – headed wide. Yet it was Mowbray’s players who might easily have been celebrating when, on the stroke of half-time, Charlie Mulgrew’s inswinging corner deceived Benítez’s defence. When Dack could not quite make the necessary contact to squeeze it past Woodman it represented a reprieve for the Tynesiders, who needed to be mindful of Mulgrew’s impressive dead-ball deliveries. It was his short free-kick to Bennett that prefaced Dack’s 13th goal of the season. Given that Dack was the most creative player on view it seemed thoroughly appropriate that the former Gillingham attacking midfielder headed Blackburn into the lead after dodging Jamie Sterry on his way to meeting Bennett’s superb cross. With several potentially influential individuals struggling, most notably the Chelsea loanee Kenedy and the £12m winger Jacob Murphy, Newcastle were up against it and needed Manquillo to somehow clear Mulgrew’s acrobatic shot off the line. Meanwhile Woodman did well to palm a capriciously swerving Mulgrew free-kick round a post. It was easy to see how a Newcastle team increasingly devoid of self-belief have won only twice at home all season and Shelvey – one player not lacking confidence – was required to step off the bench belatedly to raise the tone. “They brought quality on,” said Mowbray. “Shelvey’s passing made a difference.” Sure enough Mulgrew, increasingly involved at both ends, was soon to be found scooping a shot off the line at the conclusion of a desperate goalmouth scramble but Newcastle still looked set for their seventh third-round exit in the 11 years since Mike Ashley bought the club. That fate was avoided – or at least postponed – when Corry Evans brought Ayoze Pérez down in the box and Ritchie converted the penalty.