On Martin Luther King Day, late-night hosts examined the first amendment, Donald Trump’s shutdown offer and unfair comparisons to the civil rights leader. As the news cycles through backlash to the backlash of the viral video of Kentucky high schoolers seemingly intimidating a Native American veteran on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, the Daily Show host Trevor Noah attempted to take a step back and see the situation clearly. “The toughest thing to combat is our bias,” he said in a more sober, graphic-free segment. Admittedly, the Covington Catholic high school student in the widely circulated images “looks like an asshole”, he said. But the story is a “weird” one, with additional information making it harder to trust each video clip. “Depending on who was holding the camera, their story made them look like the victim,” Noah said. Which isn’t to say there’s been some bullshit victim cards thrown – Noah broadly refuted statements from the students that they were afraid. “I’m watching the video – you guys are dancing, your shirt is off,” he said. “I’m never taking my shirt off when I’m afraid.” “You don’t have to lie,” Noah said of one student’s response, issued through a lawyer’s statement. “You weren’t trying to defuse shit, man. You know? You were having a good time.” “The Maga hats is also a thing that you have to acknowledge,” Noah added, an outfit choice that he said the boys had to know “is a very explicit political symbol. You know how it makes people feel.” Overall, though, to get into the full understanding of what happened and the background that produced it, “I think it’s too convoluted and complicated to get into in one sitting in a few hundred characters on Twitter,” Noah said. “But I think everyone played the victim card a little too hard.” On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert avoided talk of the Lincoln Memorial confrontation and wished the country a happy Martin Luther King Day, “in which we honor Dr King’s dream: 50% off at Nordstrom’s”. Monday also marked the 31st day of the government shutdown, a fact the president attempted to address Saturday with an offer to restore Daca and “Temporary Protected Status” (TPS) protections for immigrants brought to the US as children – protections he previously took away – for three years in exchange for border wall funding. Somehow, Colbert said, Democrats didn’t go for this deal. In other words: “So you want to rub the steak sauce on my head and I put my own head in the alligator’s mouth? No thank you.” The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, rejected the deal before Trump announced it on Saturday. “She said no before Trump even asked, a move known in Washington as ‘The Melania’,” Colbert joked. To help drum up public support for his offer, Trump dispatched vice-president and “man wishing the dogs in the dog park would put on some damn pants” Mike Pence, who favorably compared Trump’s actions to Martin Luther King’s on Face the Nation. “Mike, are you sure you want us to judge Trump on the content of his character?” Colbert asked. “He puts a lot of effort into the color of his skin.” And on Late Night, Seth Meyers took a closer look at Trump’s proposed offer from Saturday, a deal universally rejected by Democrats, but also by the conservative pundit Ann Coulter. “Now, we are living in a very surreal time where people like Ann Coulter have tremendous sway over the president,” Meyers explained. “In December, Trump was going to give up on the wall before Coulter called him a gutless and a vulgar publicity hound. He then went to try to win her back; Trump shut down the government.” Coulter criticized Trump’s latest proposal as “amnesty”, a claim Trump rejected on Twitter. This raises a bigger question, Meyers said. “Man, why is he so subservient to her? Does she have a different pee tape?” As for Congress, Meyers said that lawmakers should remember who they’re negotiating with: “President Werewolf, except he’s a werewolf 29 days a month, and then there’s a full moon and he turns into a human and you can talk to him. And then all you dummies celebrate because you think it’s permanent. Then the full moon goes away, and he goes back to chasing you through the woods.”