Born from a skate brand background, Aries has enjoyed a cult following for years. Subversive graphics embody anti-fashion youth movements and trash culture. Price-wise it occupies the sweet spot between top-end high street and designer. The hand-printed tie-dye T-shirts and the Cerne Abbas giant motif fleece designed with artist Jeremy Deller are among our favourites. T-shirt, £95, ariesarise.com Men’s jewellery can be tricky terrain to navigate, but this London-based brand makes it easy with dialled-down bling. Pendants of found objects like paperclips and bottle tops are cast in brass and plated in ruthenium. Chains are offered in two lengths and while the rings are simple, the gold and ruby cuff features three 1.8mm square rubies discreetly fitted flush into one end. Necklace, £99, alexorso.com Stats say Swedes spend more time at home than anyone else in the world. Factor in the Scandi love of simple design and an ability to look chic at all times and you get Nufferton, purveyors of Instagram-friendly PJs. Think old school cotton stripe styles in shades of navy and claret and candy pastels that wouldn’t look out of place in a Wes Anderson movie. Pyjamas, £123.35, nufferton.com Athlete-entrepreneur brothers Tom and Phil Beahon founded Castore to provide high-performing sportswear using patented technology and advanced engineering for discerning sportsmen. The limited-edition Garcia hoodie is made from a fabric that is 100% waterproof yet lighter than most training tees. Top, £215, castore.com Having redesigned the humble boxer short to a well-fitting piece of kit, Hamilton and Hare set their sights on lounge wear. Their sleep shirts can take you straight from bed, on an emergency supermarket milk run and back to bed again without giving you away. Take advantage of the complimentary monogramming on cotton-cashmere items. Sleep shirt, £295, hamiltonandhare.com Founders Christian Larson and Andreas Palm set up CDLP to provide a solution to unsightly and uncomfortable ill-fitting underwear. Their pants, stylish and sustainable, are available in five colours and four styles from briefs to boxers. And they’re made from Lyocell, an organic fibre derived from wood pulp that is biodegradable. Life is better with good pants. Fact. Pants, from £27, cdlp.com Drawing on Spanish heritage, Goya sandals are a luxury version of the classic “menorquina” sandal, upgraded with a deep rubber boot sole for city-wear durability. Madrid-based British designer Kimberley Tecles-Byrom worked with Alicante artisans to create this summer must for anyone who shies away from sandals because they dislike their toes. Sandals, £258, thegoyabrand.com Aimé Leon Dore, a lifestyle, sport and ready-to-wear brand based in Queens, New York, celebrates its fifth anniversary this year. Think elevated authentic sportswear with its own basketball-inspired line, Sonny NYC (and even its own tournament). A few AW18 pieces from well appointed collaborations with Timberland and Woolrich can still be snapped up. Inject colour into January with their colour block rugby jersey. Top, £215, endclothing.com Uniqlo opens its first Manchester store this spring. Seek out fashion’s best kept-secret, the U Uniqlo line designed by Christophe Lemaire. It’s the backbone of many style insiders’ wardrobes, with great quality and design at wallet-friendly prices. This season we love the bold knitwear and bleached denim. Be quick though, it sells like hotcakes. Jacket, £34.90, uniqlo.com Pete Sunderland and Ross Baynham founded Instrmnt, a multidisciplinary design studio, in Glasgow in 2014. Their minimal watches are easy on the eye, the clever packaging as elegant as the watch itself. They come in a box, unassembled, with tools provided for the customer to build their own watch. All styles have a two-year guarantee. Watch, £180 instrmnt.co.uk This Paris menswear brand is without gimmicks or trends. Designer Pierre Mahéo describes it as “clothes for the everyday life… made in Europe in the most ethical way”. Pick up an unstructured summer suit or a really great pair of trousers. For SS19 the collection features plenty of (local) French silk and Japanese seersucker. Blazer, from £390, officinegenerale.com Putting slow fashion at the heart of her label, designer Stacey Wood focuses on fabrics that last. Should you no longer need it, you can return your worn product and receive a 15% discount code. Returned items are resold in the “hand me down” section of the website to minimise consumption. A summer capsule collection designed by model Richard Biedul is another highlight. Polo, £170, kingand tuckfield.com Opticals are given the bespoke treatment at Tom Davies. All frames are meticulously made by hand. After an in-depth consultation in-store to fit your new specs, video updates of your new glasses progressing through the TD workshop land in your inbox. In a final James Bond flourish, frames are finished with the name of the customer engraved discreetly on the inside of the temple arm. Glasses, from £395, tdtomdavies.com A go-to name on the Stockholm menswear scene since 2005, Hope is something of a newcomer to the UK. Collections are packed with interesting not-your-ordinary basics. Placing style first and gender second, Hope introduced dual sizing on labels in 2017, making it easier to shop across men’s and women’s collections without size confusion. Shirt, £180, hope-sthlm.com Hailing from Bolton in Manchester, brothers George and Michael Heaton are the brains behind this British-made, street-inspired brand. Denim, made in Italy, where the brand show at Milan fashion week, is the exception. A points scheme rewards regular customers. The windcheaters for spring are standout. Windcheater, £300, representclo.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.