Cinematography is one of the most mysterious aspects of film-making. The American Society of Cinematographers turned 100 this month and, though last year’s Oscar for the category drew attention after the first nomination for a female cinematographer, and Twitter users reguarly share examples of “One Perfect Shot”, the art of “painting with light” is little understood. Cinematographers are responsible for photographing films, but in practice their job is more complex. The skill of the cinematographer, or director of photography, is to combine visual artistry with technical knowledge and a certain amount of people management. “Maybe as many as 80 people on a movie come under your direct command,” says Bill Butler, the Oscar-nominated cinematographer who worked on classics including Jaws and One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest. “Next to the director, it’s the cinematographer who is really in charge of everything, from the costume you wear to the makeup. You do a lot more than just take meter readings.” The ASC was established to formalise the role of and distinguish cinematographers from camera operators, but it had more to do with practicalities and problem solving. In the silent film era, movie cameras were generally heavy hand-cranked machines, and the centre of gravity of the US film industry was shifting from the east coast to the west. The technology and the medium were new, so camera operators everywhere faced common difficulties, such as annoying white streaks on footage, caused by static electricity. The east-coast based Cinema Camera Club, formed by a team of Edison’s camera operators, and the Static Club of America, based in Los Angeles and led by Universal’s Harry H Harris, collaborated on solutions to these issues, pooling their wisdom. Soon enough, Edison cinematographer Phil Rosen suggested a national organisation to his Hollywood colleague Charles Rosher. “It’s not just about making pretty pictures,” says Mandy Walker, whose CV includes Hidden Figures, Australia and the forthcoming Mulan. “The most important part of my job is helping the director tell a story with the images of the film and camera and lighting and lenses. The decisions we make are the most important.” Butler agrees: “One of the things that is important is your ability to understand the truth in the film you’re making. Where should you put the camera? How should your camera look at this story? If you do it wrong, then you interrupt the truth you’re trying to get to.” In many ways, the job has changed beyond recognition in the last century. By the time the ASC was founded in 1919, to keep up with the demand for movies, films were increasingly being shot under artificial lights in studios rather than outside in the sunlight. Camera operators had to become cinematographers, or directors of photography, manipulating various different lights and lenses to create specific effects. As the job became more technical and with more opportunities for creative expression, still photographers such as Charles Rosher entered the movies. “There was a stage when you had two directors on set, a director of actors and the director of photography,” says McDonough. “Eventually the actors became pre-eminent, so the director of actors became pre-eminent.” Through the 1920s, much cinematographic flair, especially in Hollywood, was focused on making the stars look more beautiful. This was the birth of the three-point lighting system with a key, a fill and a backlight to add a glamorous effect to stars’ faces, often accompanied by a generous amount of soft focus. Cinematographers were also widely expected to compose each shot, and the growing use of camera movement gave them more seniority: they would need to employ a camera operator and focus puller, too. More challenges and innovations were to come. By the 1940s and 50s, cinematographers were more regularly asked to light for Technicolor (although using crisp enough light that films would still look good on TV, in black-and-white) and create widescreen compositions. In the 60s, the use of handheld cameras and “soft light” (that is, bouncing light off reflective surfaces around a space rather than using direct sources), changed the game again. In the 1970s, Garrett Brown invented the Steadicam, removing the need for expensive dolly tracks, and allowing for a new range of faster, more fluid camera movements. That’s around the time that Butler started to work in cinema, after years spent on live TV. He brought some techniques from television and from European cinema to Hollywood, including bounce lighting and the extensive use of handheld photography in Jaws. “I was original in my style mainly because of my background in television. It very much affected what I did in film and, when things were changing from the old, old style of cinematography, all the rules started to get broken.” In the 21st century, the cinematographer’s remit is only expanding. For Walker, there are more departments to consult with than ever and the job extends before and after the shoot, especially with films that involve a lot of special effects. “Collaboration very early in pre-production is important so that the director knows that the cinematography and the VFX are working together.” Walker is also involved in post-production. A sense of cinematographic history can still come in useful. David Mullen, cinematographer for film and TV projects including The Marvelous Mrs Maisel and Jennifer’s Body has used historical techniques with modern lights and cameras to create a vintage Technicolor look. “I loved working on The Love Witch because I was able to recreate a lot of the lighting from the 50s and 60s,” he says. “The key to making it feel authentic was to put myself in the mindset of someone working back then and not try to apply any modern sensibility to the lighting.” There will be more and more advances in the technology and the way people view films, and I love it With the industry transitioning rapidly from film to digital and VR movies possibly spelling the end of the “one perfect shot”, what do cinematographers expect from the next 100 years? Mullen expresses some concern about “the end of cinema”, with declining ticket sales. “I don’t know whether fewer and fewer people want to see a movie in a theatre. And then we won’t have movie theatres any more. I hate to see that go, because viewing a movie on the big screen is a unique experience. It’s not the same as watching at home, even with a big television set.” Walker is more excited: “There will be more and more advances in the technology and the way people view films. I was reading that because of Netflix, people are going to cinema more because it has reinvigorated their film watching.” Although she shot Hidden Figures on film, Walker is enthusiastic about digital technology and recently shot a VR movie: “It’s broadening the art of cinema.” “There will be amazing tools that we’ll be using to gather images,” adds McDonough. “But I hope there’s still the human behind that making the final emotional decision about what it means and what to do with it.” “Digital does not really change what the cinematographer does. That doesn’t change, and won’t change in the future,” says Butler. “The future will still depend upon sense of composition and truth as the cinematographer sees it. That will not change. You still need somebody in there that understands the composition and the truth in what he’s doing.”