Pete Wild described it as a fairytale and that was no hyperbole from an Oldham fan who bought a ticket to watch this match with friends but ended up managing the League Two team to victory over Premier League hosts. “My mates have said they’ll stand for the ticket now but we’ll see,” said the 33-year-old with the broadest of smiles. A wonderful story unfolded with a perfect sense of drama, as the underdogs fought back from a goal down thanks to strikes by Sam Surridge and Callum Lang either side of a penalty save by Daniel Iversen. Ten days ago this seemed an outlandish scenario. Wild had made arrangements to travel by train to Craven Cottage with five fellow fans but then, following Frankie Bunn’s dismissal as manager after a 6-0 defeat at Carlisle United on Boxing Day, he was asked to become the club’s manager on a caretaker basis. He stepped up from the role of academy manager, to which he had been assigned in June, also on an interim basis. It would have been a difficult time for anyone to get the job, let alone someone who was running Oldham under-16s last season and, by his own admission, had “only been an academy manager for two minutes”. The club has endured the most traumatic year in its recent history featuring discord, financial problems and relegation to League Two, a level to which they had not sunk since 1971. In his first two matches in charge Wild led Oldham to wins over Port Vale and Notts County but that could hardly be cited as evidence that victory over Premier League opponents was imminent. To Wild’s immense credit, and Fulham’s ignominy, there was no chasm on the pitch between the team who spent over £100m on players after last summer’s promotion to the Premier League and the one that has fended off winding-up orders and, in October, faced threats of a strike by players over unpaid wages. From the start here it was clear that Wild has instilled method and confidence. The 4,000 visiting fans had good cause to sing throughout the match. Fulham’s frustrations were encapsulated by the moment in the 37th minute when Neeskens Kebano was booked for diving in the box. Oldham’s defence, marshalled by the 37-year-old Peter Clarke, had kept their hosts at bay with such poise that the only hints of a goal up until then were a couple of headers by Floyd Ayité. Neither required Iversen to make a save. “The first half was boring from us,” said Claudio Ranieri later. It was music to Oldham’s ears. Fulham might have thought they had restored order when Denis Odoi drove the ball into the net in the 52nd minute after an inadvertent back-header from Ayité. But Oldham have grown accustomed to adversity and were not about to give up. Ranieri had made six changes to the lineup that started Fulham’s last Premier League match but, in recognition of Oldham’s defiance, he introduced more of his top players as the game advanced. The substitutions backfired. Ryan Sessegnon’s first involvement after his arrival in the 73rd minute resulted in him conceding a penalty after the prodigy tangled with the veteran Clarke. One of Wild’s substitutes, Surridge, converted from the spot. After the game he returned to Bournemouth, from whom he had been on loan since the start of the season. Ranieri cast on another high-calibre substitute, Aleksandar Mitrovic, just in time to take a penalty awarded to Fulham following a dubious tumble from Tom Cairney. Any debate about that was made redundant by Iversen’s save but Oldham exacted retribution anyway and in glorious style. In the 89th minute Gevaro Nepomuceno sent a cross to the back post and Callum Lang scored with a superb header. For Lang, too, this was a surreal turn of events given that on Friday he thought he would miss this match and return to Wigan, from whom he is on loan. “I can’t quite believe it,” he said. “Last week it was touch and go whether I would be going back to Wigan and now I’m enjoying one of the best feelings of my career, if not one of the greatest moments of my life.” Ranieri was left to fret about what this performance means for his team’s chances of Premier League survival. He said he was let down by players who have been asking for game time since his arrival in November. “You have an opportunity to prove me wrong and you miss it,” said the Italian. “If you lose and the players give you 100% passion and desire I can accept it but we didn’t play with passion and I don’t understand that.” As for Wild, he says he has no idea what this win means for his career. But as an Oldham fan he knows who he wants his team to get in the fourth round. “Manchester United away, because they ruined my childhood,” he said, referring to United’s last-gasp win in the 1994 FA Cup semi-final – Oldham’s last major mark in the competition – until now.