Belgian techno, Milanese eccentricity, Finnish ambience and silken Berlin sounds make up January’s best releases – as well as a utopian playlist platform Alongside artists such as Angel Ho and Chino Amobi, Belgian-Congolese producer Nkisi is part of NON, a politically-minded collective and record label dedicated to multimedia art and music by artists of the African diaspora. Nkisi’s releases on NON are caustic meditations, blending the breakneck euphoria of the trance and gabber she loved as a teenager in Belgium with her own hard techno beats, in turn inspired by Congolese polyrhythms. Her debut album 7 Directions, out now on Lee Gamble’s UIQ label, further explores her ideas of pan-African rhythms and cosmology. In this recording, Nkisi’s phantasmagoric sound gets pushed gradually harder and faster, melding her own productions with PlayStation sounds, 90s hardcore and tribal techno. Paquita Gordon is a Milanese DJ who has long been based in the UK, but has a close relationship with Italian festival Terraforma. Hosted in rural gardens surrounding Villa Arconati, a baroque palace and museum near Milan dedicated to the arts, Terraforma has invited Gordon to play every year since it began in 2014. She has cited DJ residencies such as Villalobos at Fabric and Theo Parrish at Plastic People as formative experiences, and perhaps they helped nurture the subtle eccentricity of her sets. In her latest for Terraforma, programmed for a Sunday-afternoon slot, she leads the crowd down a winding path. Aleksi Perälä’s late-90s releases for British rave label Rephlex were a snug fit, releasing braindance under the monikers Ovuca and Astrobotnia. But it was during his studies in his native Helsinki – he is a classically trained pianist – that he broke away from the western 12-tone scale and folded microtonality into his ambient techno beats. Since 2014, Perälä has released a staggering 30 albums. Tracklists read as numerical codes, as if each release is a workbook for fine-tuning minute sonic details. In this recent live set, drum breaks and melodic techno riffs murmurate through the ambience. There is a school of thought in design that if you can make something simpler and still get the message across, do it. In December, Avalon Emerson and friends made buymusic.club, a website that allows artists to curate Bandcamp tracks into playlists; so far, selectors including Ben UFO and Four Tet have contributed. Buy Music Club is a simple and effective tool for people to buy tracks that are ID’d in DJ sets, too – on a recent upload of her performance at Mutek Mexico, Emerson neatly hyperlinks all tracks available on Bandcamp in her track list. Blending breaks that draw from ambient techno and jungle – from the superb Overmono Whities 019 EP and Skee Mask’s Compro album – with acid breakbeats and an inspired inclusion of Serpentwithfeet’s confessional vocals, Emerson is in fine, playful form here. For European techno fans, there are two sections to the musical timeline: Before Berghain and After Berghain. When the club opened in 2004, Andreas Baumecker controlled Berghain and Panorama Bar’s mammoth weekend lineups for the better part of a decade. His tastes as a booker and resident DJ shaped the direction of the club and, by osmosis, much of the dark and heavy loop-based techno sound that’s become synonymous with Berlin. For the seventh instalment of Panorama Bar’s mix series for in-house label Ostgut Ton, Baumecker builds two silken hours of time-evaporating techno with psychedelic tinges, including original tracks from his collaborative project Barker & Baumecker. It is nearly 10 years since Jim Coles became Om Unit. A chimeric project that has produced music across the hardcore spectrum, its sound has grown from Coles’ roots in hip-hop scratching: there are splintered drum and bass and junglist breaks, thrashings of IDM and dubstep-adjacent beats in his back catalogue. Recent years have shown a love for footwork, teasing out its tightly wrought 160bpm percussive patterns into a more skeletal form, juggling tempos as a nod to that early turntablism work. Based in Bristol, he also runs his own label, Cosmic Bridge. In this mix for Australian crew the Operatives, he blends forthcoming tracks from Cosmic Bridge artists as well as his own new material.