The enterprise bargaining agreement at my workplace permits three days of leave for the loss of a loved one. I’m not sure how three days of leave are supposed to work for the bereaved. On day one you are numb. Day two you cry. And on day three, you step towards life. Ready to be back at your desk by day four? Able to have friendly Monday morning chats? Contribute to the next strategic planning meeting? Grief cannot be neatly packaged into three days. Grief wears many faces, it keeps odd hours. My mother died a hard death from aggressive breast cancer in February 2017. After three days the funeral wasn’t even organised. At one month I was numb, trying to carry on each day as I had done before she died – back at my desk, as the enterprise bargaining agreement told me I should be. Three months later I was a shell of myself, unreachable. People began avoiding me at work, unsure of what to say or do. By six months I was a pool of tears. A colleague raised their voice at me and I spent the next week hiding in my house, crying. At nine months I was panic and fear. Every hour I ran around the block of my office or my house – trying to outrun the terror. At twelve months I was simply relieved to have survived twelve months. Now, at two years, I’m nothing if not changeable. Some days I’m joy on wheels, walking my dogs in the bush or sharing a drink with friends. Some days I burst into tears because my mother would have liked the way I pruned her favourite pot plant just so. Happy or sad, there isn’t a moment in my life that I don’t experience through the prism of her death. Grief is not one thing. Grief does not fit into three days of leave, or neatly around a nine-to-five work schedule. And yet we continue to pretend that it should. According to research, there are around 160,000 deaths in Australia each year. Each death leaves one to five close ties behind. What this research suggests is that, at any point in time, large numbers of our community – workplaces or otherwise – are grieving. We may be uncomfortable in the face of this grief, and unsure of what to do. But when we leave those who are grieving alone, we intensify their loneliness which can lead to depression, and other mental health issues, ultimately weakening their immune system. Grief raises the risk of heart disease, cancer and high blood pressure. With grief’s link to depression, one current theory is that it may in fact stop the process of neurogenesis – the ability of our brains to create new neurons. In other words, while we are grieving our brains may be unable to learn and adapt to new information, experiences or situations. Working through grief is like walking through molasses. Hardly the flexible, agile and adaptive employees our workplace strategic plans demand. In modern life we no longer make space for grief. We are uncomfortable bearing witness. As Cheryl Strayed wrote in her book Brave Enough, we do not help the bereaved when their suffering goes on beyond what we are comfortable with or feel is appropriate. We don’t help them, we tell them they need to get help, “we pathologize their pain; we call suffering a disease”. And in doing so, we make it harder for people to understand their own grief, let alone the grief of others. After the loss of her sister, Kate Beaton said “grief opens the doors to other parts of your life and mind, making lateral moves into unrelated spaces and opening fire there”. Grief upends your life, reshapes who you are, where you thought you were going and leaves all the plans you had for getting there on the scrap heap. As the two-year anniversary of my mother’s death looms, I think about her often. I try very literally to move in the direction of life, talking with my partner about our new puppy, about starting a family. I never imagined my mother wouldn’t be part of these conversations, where we grapple with how to fit another life event around our work schedules. Who will help us in the first few months of sleeplessness when our baby arrives? Tell us what do we do when the baby cries? Every step I take towards new life, I feel her absence at my side. Gemma Carey is a researcher at the University of New South Wales. She has written for Croakey, The Mandarin and have appeared on ABC National Radio.