Jess Varnish, the former Great Britain track cyclist, has lost her landmark employment case against British Cycling and UK Sport which had threatened to overhaul funding for Olympic athletes. She began legal proceedings after claiming she was dropped from the British Cycling squad for the 2016 Rio Olympics in retaliation for criticising her coaches. She argued that she was in effect an employee of both British Cycling and UK Sport and therefore should be subject to certain protections under law – including sick pay, a pension and the right to sue for unfair dismissal. However, at a tribunal in Manchester last month British Cycling and UK Sport claimed national lottery funding for athletes is more akin to a university grant and therefore should not be subject to the same employment rights. After several weeks of deliberation their position was supported by Judge Ross, who on Wednesday ruled that Varnish was neither an employee nor a worker of either organisation. It means the cyclist will not be able to pursue a claim for unfair dismissal, sex discrimination and detriment suffered for being a whistleblower against British Cycling or UK Sport. Varnish, a former European team sprint champion and world silver medallist, is due to have a baby on Thursday and has not commented on the decision. Her agent said that she and her legal team would “digest the 43-page judgment” and look to offer a statement on Thursday. A British Cycling spokesman welcomed the verdict but made it clear the organisation regretted that Varnish’s case had ever gone to a tribunal. “The decision to contest this case was founded on what we believe is the best interests of riders who represent Great Britain, and our conviction that our relationship with them is not one of employer-employee but that of a service provider supporting talented and dedicated athletes to achieve their best,” he said. “We very much regret that Jess was advised to pursue the route of an employment tribunal when we had made significant efforts to reach a resolution which all parties regarded as equitable.” The spokesman also insisted that the macho culture in British Cycling that Varnish had spoken out about had improved. “Thanks to a lot of hard work by staff and riders the culture of the Great Britain cycling team is changed for the better since Jess first raised her concerns and we hope to welcome her to the national cycling centre as we would any other rider who has represented Great Britain,” he added. Varnish had claimed in April 2016 that the then British Cycling technical director, Shane Sutton, had told her “to go and have a baby” when she was dropped from funding before the Rio Games. A subsequent UK Sport independent investigation into bullying claims at British Cycling cleared Sutton, who had previously resigned, of that remark but found him to have used sexist language against Varnish. Meanwhile the ruling was greeted with relief by UK Sport, which faced having to overturn the way it funds British athletes if it had lost. Currently around 1,100 elite athletes are funded by UK Sport up to a maximum of £28,000 a year, tax-free. If Varnish had been successful the athletes would have benefited from employment rights and pension. However, UK Sport insisted that as a consequence it would have been unable to fund as many potential Olympians to achieve their dreams. It did acknowledge, however, that it had taken on board some of the issues that Varnish’s case had raised, particularly the need to provide a greater duty of care for athletes. “Whilst this verdict did not find Jessica Varnish to be an employee or worker of UK Sport or British Cycling, we have already taken action to strengthen the duty of care and welfare provided to athletes and are ensuring that avenues for raising any concerns are effective and appropriate,” it added. “It also gives us confidence that the structure of the relationship between other national governing bodies, their athletes and UK Sport can continue in a similar way but we will reflect on the concerns that were raised through this case when finalising our future strategy for post Tokyo. “We regret for Jessica Varnish, her partner and her family that pursuing this case was considered the best course of action she had to address the concerns she felt she experienced as an athlete on the British Cycling world class programme. We hope Jess feels proud of the success she achieved through cycling and we wish her all the very best for the future.” Joe Morrow, the lawyer who advised UK Sport, said: “This case marks a crucial moment for athletes and the entire sports industry safeguarding funding for athletes for the future. If the tribunal had ruled in favour of the claimant, funding for more than 1,000 could have been called into question.”