Chelsea have rejected Callum Hudson-Odoi’s transfer request, turned down Bayern Munich’s £35m offer for him and told the 18-year-old winger he is staying at Stamford Bridge for the remainder of the season. The London club took the hardline stance on Monday, just as Bayern were preparing what they hoped would be a decisive push to take Hudson-Odoi before the deadline on Thursday. Hudson-Odoi has had his head turned by the interest of the Bundesliga champions this month, so much so that he formally told Chelsea of his wish to be granted a transfer. Although he made his 11th appearance of the season in all competitions in the 3-0 FA Cup win against Sheffield Wednesday on Sunday – and scored his second goal – he has come to be convinced that his opportunities would be greater at Bayern; something which has been questioned at Chelsea. The situation looked bleak after the game against Wednesday, when Hudson-Odoi said that he did not know whether he had just made his final appearance for the club. But Chelsea, who have been annoyed at Bayern’s public courting of the player, have taken a calculated gamble by telling him he is going nowhere. That will give them another four months to convince Hudson-Odoi that his long-term future ought to lie at Stamford Bridge. They remain hopeful that he will come around to the idea, particularly if he is given further game-time. Hudson-Odoi will have 12 months to run on his contract in the summer but Chelsea do not believe that his value will drop between now and then if – in the worst-case scenario – they do have to sell him. Willian is the latest Chelsea player to insist that Hudson‑Odoi can fulfil his potential at the club. “He’s a special talent,” Willian said. “Of course, he’s only 18 and he can improve a lot. And in the future, he can become one of the best players in the world.” Tues 29 Jan Newcastle Utd v Man City 8pm (BT Sport 1)Wed 30 JanLiverpool v Leicester City 8pm (BT Sport 1)Sat 2 Feb Tottenham v Newcastle Utd 12.30pm (Sky Sports Main Event)Cardiff City v Bournemouth 5.30pm (BT Sport 1)Sun 3 Feb Leicester City v Man Utd 2.05pm (Sky Sports Main Event)Man City v Arsenal 4.30pm (Sky Sports Main Event)  