I have spent the week watching a show in which a victim of childhood abuse tries to cope with her PTSD, while her gay flatmate wrestles over whether to sacrifice his career in order to out a high-profile sexual abuser. That sounds grim; you’re probably imagining some greyscale Channel 4 drama with Sarah Lancashire set in an apprehensive quarry. Actually, it’s the final six episodes of Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt (available from Fri, Netflix), the silliest, most colourful, best-written show on TV. Since the show’s first episode, when the titular Kimmy was rescued from a bunker where she has been held captive for 15 years, creators Tina Fey and Robert Carlock have tried to take TV comedy to places it has never gone before. And by comedy, I don’t mean a show that gets called a comedy because it happens to be 22 minutes long, but when you start watching it’s just Hannah Gadsby delivering incurable illness diagnoses at a children’s hospital – there’s barely a line spoken in Schmidt that doesn’t have at least three jokes in it. I watch with subtitles on so I don’t miss a throwaway moment, such as when the vain Jacqueline responds to the discovery that “these millennials like us old broads” by adding “and us young narrows”. In these final episodes of the season, it feels as though they are daring themselves to see how far they can push it. Struggling actor Titus gets dragged into the Time’s Up movement when Ronan Farrow (played by the actual Ronan Farrow) asks him to go on the record about his Sesame Street audition, where he had a casting-couch experience with a pervert Muppet called Mr Frumpus. It gives you a sense of how the show finds humour in serious moments that his decision is based around whether he’ll lose his job as “the first ever black, male Dairy Queen” or get to join other victims who are all wearing shorts to the Tonys in solidarity (there are “divas in denim cutoffs, Bernadette in Bermudas and so many victims!”) Elsewhere, Kimmy uses her own covered-up workplace harassment case as blackmail to help launch a children’s book series that teaches little boys not to be perverts. Also, Rob Huebel guest stars as a home makeover host looking for a fake gay showbiz relationship so no one finds out he has a wife, and there’s an hour-long Sliding Doors parody in which the Sliding Doors moment is whether or not Kimmy went to the cinema to watch Sliding Doors. It’s not that the show makes light of serious issues – if anything it’s better than more po-faced attempts at joining up the dots between daily harassment, embedded misogyny and grave abuse – it just manages to do so while being constantly hilarious. Some will tell you that critically acclaimed writer-creators tend to overthink the follow-ups to their hit shows (hello Treme, The Romanoffs and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip). But Kimmy Schmidt managed to avoid that curse by taking the gags and structure of 30 Rock and just infinitely upping the stakes, replacing dumb celebrities with troubled real people. By making a success of Schmidt, Fey and Carlock have shown how TV comedy can still be funny in serious times.