Let me count the ways in which I love my new phone: the clicky silver keys; the 10 minutes it now takes to write a text; the tinny jingle it plays when you switch it on. That’s right, I’ve dumped my iPhone and bought myself an old-style, internet‑free dumb phone (or “feature phone”, as the new branding would have it). Admittedly some of my enthusiasm is pure nostalgia. I harbour a similar affection for toast and Marmite, and bleepy 1990s trance – these things take me back to a time when life was simpler, and humanity seemed to have a cat in hell’s chance of getting its act together. But ditching the smartphone is not purely a backward-looking decision. On the contrary: I would place a bet on 2019 being a year in which growing numbers of people join what is becoming known as the “attention resistance”. Hell, maybe I’ll even make it to that Labour party meeting I’ve been thinking about attending for at least three years As a book reviewer I’ve seen a steady flow of literature on the impact of ubiquitous smartphone use: in 2017, Adam Alter’s Irresistible set out the ways in which social media companies have employed sophisticated psychological manipulation in order to keep us checking and clicking. Matthew Walker’s Why We Sleep pointed to the overuse of technology as one cause of sleep deprivation, and Tanya Goodin’s Stop Staring at Screens looked at its impact on family life. It’s amazing, though, how possible it is to understand some of these arguments on a rational level and yet not feel willing or able to change your own behaviour. But that is what addiction means: we can be aware that something is causing us harm, and yet feel compelled to do it anyway. The book that has finally tipped me over the edge is Cal Newport’s Digital Minimalism (which is out next month). Newport is an American professor of computer science and he not only sets out the evidence about how harmful constant connectivity is both socially and psychologically but gives readers practical advice about how to reclaim their time from the technology companies, and make more conscious decisions about what to give their attention. He argues that breaking free of tech addiction requires taking “aggressive action” to control our tech use. The most serious consequences of this addiction are likely to be suffered by young people. While there is still debate about why depression, anxiety and suicide have skyrocketed among people born in the past couple of decades, ubiquitous smartphone use – according to one US study, young people use their phones on average nine hours a day – surely plays a part. The human brain is simply not designed to cope with this level of stimulation. If we are to support our children in resisting tech addiction, we need to tackle our own. There are things about my iPhone I will definitely miss: the maps app; pictures from far-flung friends; instant access to my bank accounts. But on any rational analysis these inconveniences are minor. At the moment we live in a world in which it is still possible to choose to disconnect. In future we may not have that luxury. Yuval Noah Harari, in his terrifying 21 Lessons for the 21st Century, envisions a future in which “humans will not be able to survive at all if they are disconnected … insurance agencies might refuse to insure you, employers might refuse to employ you, and healthcare services might refuse to take care of you.” Harari is an eminent historian, by the way, not a screenwriter for Black Mirror. A couple of weeks in, I can report that smartphone‑free life is good. I have sat peacefully on the train, daydreaming as the countryside scrolls by; I have stopped a stranger in the street to ask for directions. I have plans to take up knitting, write poetry – hell, maybe I’ll even make it to that Labour party meeting I’ve been thinking about attending for at least three years. Already I feel more centred, less distracted, less edgy. I realise that I haven’t actually bought myself a brain transplant. But for a mere £31.99, it really feels like the next best thing. • Alice O’Keeffe is a freelance literary critic and journalist