The first time Alex de Minaur played Rafael Nadal, at Wimbledon last summer, he was walloped in straight sets. “It was a surreal experience, words can’t really describe it,” the 19-year-old said. “You often get told what to expect and what to do in these situations but you’ve got to live it for yourself to actually realise the magnitude of the occasion. It was incredible. I had to experience that for myself, I believe next time round I’ll be used to it and hopefully it will be different.” De Minaur speaks with the maturity of someone who has been around the main tour a lot longer than just over a year. At a time when some of Australia’s top players seem to be more concerned with in-fighting, his down to earth attitude is a throwback to years gone by in Australian tennis. When he meets Nadal on home soil at Melbourne Park on Friday, he will do with confidence, having won his first ATP Tour title last weekend in Sydney. This time 12 months ago, he was ranked outside the top 100; this year, he is ranked 29 and seeded at a grand slam for the first time. Playing Nadal for the second time ought to be less daunting than the first. “I feel like I learnt a lot from that experience,” he said after his second-round win over Henri Laaksonen, the Swiss who pushed him to five sets. “I’m really looking forward to just having fun, going out there and just competing. I’ve already stepped out on court and played him, so that whole experience of playing Rafa, that’s not new to me anymore. So hopefully this time around I can go a bit more relaxed, just focus on myself, try to play some good tennis.” Born in Sydney to a Uruguyan father and Spanish mother, De Minaur moved to Alicante in Spain when he was five years old. Since then, he’s divided his time between Australia and Spain. When he is in Alicante, it’s hard to escape the exploits of Nadal, who is chasing his 18th grand slam title here. “Rafa is pretty much like the king in Spain,” he said. “He’s done so much amazing things for the sport. He’s had that many achievements. It’s pretty incredible. It’s going to be fun for me to get out on court and be able to test where I am.” With a game-style reminiscent of Lleyton Hewitt, the former world No 1 and now captain of Australia’s Davis Cup team, who is almost always to be found in his corner courtside, De Minaur possesses incredible speed, his retrieving skills as good, perhaps even better than Hewitt himself. “He’s probably the quickest guy on the circuit now, that’s for sure,” Australian Peter McNamara said. McNamara, a three-time grand slam doubles winner, said De Minaur asks difficult questions of his opponents. “He’s probably the fittest, too. He gets to balls that no other guy gets to, makes you play another shot. In men’s tennis, that can help a lot.” After reaching the third round here, Nadal pronounced himself happy with his form and paid De Minaur a compliment, saying: “He’s a little bit Spanish, no?”. It is 10 years since Nadal won the title in Melbourne, but after undergoing foot surgery in the off-season, he has looked strong at the Australian Open and won his first two matches in straight sets. He knows, though, that he may need to step things up again when he plays De Minaur. “Since a couple of years ago we know that we have a good player coming,” he said. “I think he improved a lot during the last three years. Today he is one of the best players of the world. That’s the real thing. He’s young, very young. He is winning a lot of matches. He’s having a great improvement year by year. So let’s see. Going to be a tough one.”