There is no stopping Leinster, that defeat at Toulouse proving a blip, and they will surely be too powerful for Wasps when the champions travel to Coventry next Sunday. Johnny Sexton watched his replacement Ross Byrne give a dominant display in the 29-13 win over Toulouse, once the bluebloods of Europe who are rediscovering some of their old princely form. If ever there was an illustration of English clubs’ fall from grace in Europe it was at the Recreation Ground where Bath and Wasps, with three Heineken Cup wins between them, fought out a meaningless game with Bath squeaking home 18-16 thanks to a late kick from Rhys Priestland. For Wasps there is some consolation in the return of Joe Launchbury who followed his return against Northampton with another captain’s performance. • Match report: Bath 18-16 Wasps Exeter Chiefs can still make progress after their convincing win over a demoralised Castres but Munster have only lost four times at Thomond Park in their European history and are dominating Pool Two. Saturday evening’s trip to Limerick will be mightily difficult for Rob Baxter’s men. It seems a long time ago now that Gloucester were celebrating that shock win at Exeter in the autumn. Danny Cipriani’s comeback was overshadowed by a brilliant performance by his opposite number Joey Carbery at Kingsholm on Friday evening. Carbery scored 26 points in a 41-15 win for Munster and controlled the game brilliantly. Johnny Sexton’s injured calf made may yet give Carbery the chance to shine against England. The game will not have made comfortable viewing for Exeter. • Match report: Exeter 34-12 Castres Saracens are the only side with a 100 % record in the competition and their shoulders must be tiring of carrying the English standard. Sunday’s bonus-point win in Lyon was a drab affair but with Maro Itoje restored to the side and Nick Tompkins, their young centre filling in superbly for the injured Brad Barritt, there was no way Lyon, with their aged pack, were going to put them off their stride. Itoje ended up in the sin-bin but Saracens lead the pool and can go through as the leading qualifier if they defeat Glasgow on Saturday. Glasgow, who started the weekend four points behind Saracens, made the most of Stuart Hogg’s return and their pack gave Cardiff Blues a tough afternoon. Rob Harley was impressive on his 200th appearance in the Warriors back row but it is difficult to see Glasgow putting a spoke in Saracens’ wheel next weekend. • Match report: Lyon 10-28 Saracens Team of the weekend15 Jack Nowell Exeter14 Darcy Graham Edinburgh13 Garry Ringrose Leinster12 James Johnstone Edinburgh11 Jacob Stockdale Ulster 10 Joey Carbery Munster9 Conor Murray Munster 1 Cian Healy Leinster2 Jamie George Saracens3 Jannie du Plessis Montpellier4 Leone Nakarawa Racing 92 5 Tadgh Beirne Munster 6 Rhys Ruddock Leinster7 Schalk Burger Saracens8 Ken Owens Scarlets Quote of the weekend"I think the Premiership is so tribal. We smash the hell out of each other and then we are almost too tired to get out there and have a crack when it comes to the Champions Cup. You can see where the teams are in the table that teams are under a lot of pressure" – Todd Blackadder, Bath’s director of rugby, tries to explain English clubs’ struggles in Europe Owens shines from front to backWarren Gatland watched Scarlets beat Leicester on Saturday evening and he would have been impressed by the versatility of the Scarlets hooker Ken Owens who played at No 8 again because of his side’s back-row crisis and ended up with the man-of-the-match award. Wayne Pivac, his coach, said: “He’s a great guy who always puts the team first.” Ulster’s 1999 Heineken Cup winners were presented to the crowd before Saturday’s pulsating 26-22 victory over Racing 92, the tournament’s highest scorers in this season’s competition. Can Ulster repeat their feat of 20 years ago? They are three points adrift of Racing at the top but look much too strong for Leicester, who crumbled at Parc y Scarlets on Saturday evening, when they meet the Tigers next weekend. Ulster, though, may struggle to make it to the last eight as Racing will be too strong for the Scarlets in Paris. The Parisians are odds-on to secure a bonus-point win and the likes of Finn Russell and Simon Zebo can profit from the work of Racing’s powerful pack. Leicester, meanwhile, paid the price of fielding a weakened side in west Wales and their only goal is to not finish bottom of this pool. How the mighty have fallen. Edinburgh are on course for their first quarter-final place for six years. If there were any doubts about their resurgence under coach Richard Cockerill they were dispelled at Stade Félix Mayol with a historic 28-17 win over Toulon, the first Scottish side to triumph there. A repeat display in Friday night’s meeting with Montpellier in the Scottish capital can give Edinburgh the bonus of a home draw in the last eight. Newcastle’s Champions Cup has been a mixed bag. They were also winners in Toulon, a result that really raise eyebrows, and they overcame Montpellier with a dramatic win with the last move of the game at Kingston Park but the battle against relegation and a raft of injuries did for them in Montpellier, hammered 45-8 to wipe out any mathematical hopes of making it to the last eight. • Match report: Toulon 28-17 Edinburgh