The hero of The Mule is Earl Stone, a horticulturist who earns extra cash ferrying drugs across the US. He is a popular fellow, and there are no fewer than three scenes in the film in which he is applauded by large and admiring crowds. Though aged 90, he has two separate threesomes in the course of the film, both with women in their 20s who are eager to get their hands on him. (“It’s my turn!” says one impatiently). Earl may crack a joke about Viagra in the film’s opening minutes, but he requires no chemical boost. And it is not enough that he should get it on with two women at once; he is also spied on from across the street by a younger man, mystified and perhaps a touch envious about the old timer’s allure. It is encouraging to find a stereotype-busting role like this on the screen, and good to see that Clint Eastwood has the vim to play it. But that joy can only be compromised by the knowledge that Eastwood also cast the part, and called the shots behind the camera. All those closeups of himself looking incorrigible, or lapping up the adoration of others, or getting down to business with women young enough to be his great-granddaughters – these were staged and approved by him. Perhaps he even asked for extra takes. Better safe than sorry. Eastwood is no slouch when it comes to self-worship, though in his case it usually has a moral rather than a sexual dimension; in films such as Unforgiven, Million Dollar Baby and Gran Torino, he performs self-sacrificial acts for the betterment of mankind, or to atone for his own sins. At least when he made his directorial debut in 1971 with Play Misty for Me, he was to some extent interrogating male narcissism as much as he was wallowing in it. In that thriller about a gadabout DJ who is stalked by a female fan, there is the sense that Eastwood’s character is the architect of his own undoing, paying the price for his cavalier treatment of women. Fast forward nearly half a century and analysis has been replaced by analgesia. Whenever an actor directs his own performance (and it is almost invariably a “he”), there is the risk that a film will morph into a vanity project. There can have been little reason for the Scrubs star Zach Braff to have directed himself in Garden State and Wish I Was Here other than to promote Brand Braff: quirky, sensitive, indie-loving. Overstretching is another risk, as Kenneth Branagh proved when he directed himself in six films over the course of just seven years, some of them so bad that their titles (Dead Again, Peter’s Friends) are never mentioned on film sets for fear they will summon a Macbeth-style curse. But vanity need not make an endeavour worthless. When Bradley Cooper, who plays an FBI agent in The Mule, directed himself last year as a fading country-rock singer in A Star Is Born, he gave us vain without the pain. As one of the co-writers of this remake, Cooper had the opportunity to shift the balance of the story away from its usual focus on male self-destruction and to give the female lead a bigger slice of the pie. It was one he chose to resist. With Cooper in charge behind the camera, as well as hogging the meaty scenes in front of it, this was vanity cinema at its baldest. Fortunately it’s no hardship watching him: file Cooper in the vain-but-worth-it category alongside Warren Beatty directing his own performances in Heaven Can Wait and Reds. At least Cooper wasn’t deluded. When Kevin Spacey first proposed making Beyond the Sea, a film about the singer Bobby Darin, he was 32 – five years younger than Darin was when he died, and comfortably within range of playing the part. By the time Spacey found financing for the project, he was 45. A wise man would have known that the years had overtaken him, and that he should probably find someone else to tackle the crooner’s late teens and 20s, but Spacey was not that man. Beyond the Sea tries to pre-empt such criticisms by having the older Darin debate the story’s veracity with his childhood self, but this technique comes across as precisely what it is: the equivalent of slapping a sticking-plaster on a compound fracture. Plenty of actor-directors make the mistake of assuming themselves to be positively adorable. Sylvester Stallone directed parts two, three, four and six of his own Rocky series, amplifying his sentimental fondness for the title character each time. Even the one film that he directed that didn’t have a role for him – his pitiful Saturday Night Fever sequel Staying Alive – still included a tell-tale flash of egotism. Stallone gives himself a Hitchcock-style walk-on part in the movie, which might have been harmless enough had he not directed its star, John Travolta, to perform a disbelieving double-take as he strolled past. There are numerous ways in which an actor-director can share with the world his high opinion of himself but you have to admire the directness of Vincent Gallo. It was ironic that the actor-writer-director was mocked for his film The Brown Bunny, and for the moment in which he is fellated on-screen by Chloë Sevigny, when anyone who has watched the whole movie will know that this scene has a nasty sting in the tail: the encounter transpires to be pure fantasy, the product of Gallo’s character’s warped guilt over failing to save Sevigny from an ugly death. Far more deserving of ridicule is the scene in his directorial debut Buffalo 66, in which he is shown peeing at a urinal while the man next to him marvels at Gallo’s equipment. “It’s so big!” the man says, as though it would have been impolite to keep this view to himself. Difficult to look at this scene, written and directed by its star, without thinking: What a dick. There is no shortage of contenders for the title of most self-regarding actor-director in cinema: George Clooney in Leatherheads, Jean-Claude Van Damme in The Quest, Steven Seagal in On Deadly Ground, Prince in Under the Cherry Moon. But it takes a special kind of vanity to combine narcissism and prestige and it is for that reason that no one can hold a candle to Kevin Costner, even 29 years after his performance in his own Dances With Wolves as a Union soldier who discovers a kinship with the Sioux. There may ostensibly be an on-screen love story between the hero and a Sioux woman (Mary McDonnell), but the most convincing romance is the one between director and star, Costner and Costner. There is nothing quite like it. Except, perhaps, Costner’s followup, The Postman, which repeated all the same tricks as Dances With Wolves to zero acclaim. In this futuristic drama, set at a time when democracy has collapsed in America and the land is ruled by thugs, Costner chances upon an old mail van and reinstates the country’s postal service. The actor does his humble messiah routine from Dances With Wolves, while several hundred extras send looks of awestruck wonder in his direction. The effect suggests a man contemplating himself in a mirror for three hours. If one element is conspicuous by its absence from this survey, it is women. It is not unheard of for a female director to show excessive self-regard or false humility, and it would be hard to think of a better example than The Mirror Has Two Faces, a take on the Ugly Duckling story directed by its star, Barbra Streisand. The picture contains endless scenes of Streisand fishing for the audience’s compliments, playing gawky when we can see all along that she’s glam; it is the stuff of Marie Antoinette at the milking stool. Yet to put it in the same class as Costner’s work would be to praise it with faint damning. Streisand can be self-indulgent, but she is no Costner. Only once a female film-maker directs herself in something as self-admiringly bad as The Postman will we have achieved true equality between the genders.