Welcome back, Mr Hazard. We’ve been expecting you. On a chilly, boisterous night under the low white lights at Stamford Bridge Chelsea reached the final of the Carabaou Cup. They did so thanks to a first half during which they scored twice and played with an unmannered freedom, not so much Sarri-ball as a team settling back into a comfortable old pair of shoes. Crucially Eden Hazard was restored from the start to a place on the left flank he never should have left. And for 45 minutes Hazard was sublime, a player reaching out into those old familiar spaces and reminding his manager that in this stitched-together Chelsea team there are some things you can only break by trying to fix. One step beyond, the PA blared at the end of this tie. For Spurs that step will have to wait. Chelsea had strolled their way through the penalty shootout, Jorginho, Willian and finally David Luiz producing wondrously impudent spot-kicks. By contrast Eric Dier will, no doubt regret opting to take his while apparently wearing a pair of mud-clogged fishing waders, all the better to punt the ball high into the Matthew Harding end. Penalties aside, this was a tie Hazard did most to win, leading Maurizio Sarri to a first domestic cup final and perhaps also, to a moment of clarity. For the last few weeks Sarri has watched in apparent bewilderment as Hazard struggled as a No 9, spluttering and stalling like a Maserati trying to bump its way through a field of turnips. In the buildup Chelsea’s manager had questioned the leadership capacities of his best player, although there has been a degree of cultural misunderstanding over this. Sarri did not blast or slam or roast Hazard. It is simply the way he communicates, a manager who feels an he can and must speak from the heart and the spleen. Whatever Sarri’s motivation it worked in the first half as Chelsea tried repeatedly to find the space behind Tottenham’s full-backs. It was here that Hazard lurked, ambling that familiar coiled way. The opening goal arrived just before the half hour via a deflected shot from N’Golo Kanté. Hazard had taken the corner that led to it. He made and finished the second, taking the ball in Hazard Country, that deep inside-left channel, rolling it to Pedro, who funnelled it on to Cesar Azpilicueta. The cross was skimmed perfectly in to Hazard’s path. His finish was lovely, letting the ball travel across his body and pinging it away into the far corner, a finish so relaxed it might have been executed from a prone position, paperback in one hand, left foot lolling over the edge of his favourite inflatable swan. After which Hazard ran the game for a while in his urgent, scurrying way. He dropped deep and passed crossfield with a flourish. He dropped even deeper and floated another long pass, Pirlo-style, into Kanté’s run. This was, for a while, Total Hazard, a left-sided forward free to make the game up in front of him, and looking in those moments like the only grown up on the pitch, a footballer playing under a slightly different gravity to everyone else. Spurs pressed back hard and Fernando Llorente scored with a wonderful header to make it 2-2 on aggregate. Hazard kept on running hard. Chelsea might have won it in normal time. They never looked like losing it on penalties. At the end of which Hazard’s performance here felt like a regal rebuke. José Mourinho used to fret that Hazard was not nasty enough, that he was too mild and too sane to ever really become an attacking machine in the galáctico mould. You do not have to be an obsessively driven narcissist to score 30 goals season after season in pursuit of undying sporting fame. But it helps. There is a strong suspicion Hazard really will make that move to Real Madrid at the end of the season. Here he showed enough edge to suggest some unfinished business before he does.