Manny Pacquiao finds himself in a bit of an unusual spot entering Saturday’s welterweight showdown with the profane underachiever Adrien Broner on the Las Vegas strip. The Filipino senator, who celebrated his 40th birthday in December, may well be a silhouette of the hyperkinetic force of nature that captured world titles in a record eight weight classes (from 112 to 154lbs) over the last two decades, catapulting from fringe curiosity to global brand. Yet even the reduced present-day iteration set to climb through the ropes at the MGM Grand Garden Arena for his 70th professional bout continues to fight at a high level and is no worse than a top-five welterweight in the world. Problem is, the weight class where Pacquiao campaigns is a top-heavy division occupied by some of the most gifted fighters in the sport, including pound-for-pound stars like Terence Crawford, Errol Spence Jr and, soon enough, Mikey Garcia, who is moving up to fight Spence in a March blockbuster at AT&T Stadium in Arlington. So while Pacquiao’s impending defense of the secondary welterweight title he captured from the shopworn Lucas Matthysse in the summer is not as lacking in credibility as the skeptics might allege, the endgame for a surefire Hall of Famer with absolutely nothing left to prove is less certain. The working theory is Pacquiao is angling not for supremacy at 147lbs but a rematch that nobody asked for with the retired Floyd Mayweather, an all-quadragenarian affair that might not do the record-shattering business of their poorly received 2015 blockbuster, but would no doubt be a money-spinning affair and another nine-figure payday for both men. That Pacquiao signed a two-fight deal with longtime Mayweather adviser Al Haymon’s Premier Boxing Champions stable in November, and the sequel would be infinitely easier to make than the original, has only fueled the speculation. For now, Pacquiao, who came in one pound below the welterweight limit at Friday’s weigh-in (146lbs), is focused on the embattled Broner (146½lbs), knowing one misstep could wipe out his golden parachute. “This is a challenge because it is my first fight as a 40-year-old,” said Pacquiao during Wednesday’s final press conference. “I have something to prove to everyone about what that means. Age is just a number. What matters is how you prepare and that you’re working hard.” He added: “I don’t need to dislike my opponent to want a knockout. I’m just doing my job in the ring. If the knockout comes, it comes. We’re hoping to have that opportunity Saturday. I have to pressure him to make him open up. Wherever he goes, I’ll be there.” It’s all left the 29-year-old Broner, who’s somehow collected alphabet titles in four weight classes (from 130 to 147lbs) despite never being the top dog in any of them, in a perpetual huff throughout the promotion, bristling at the unfamiliar role of speed bump. Once touted as the heir apparent to Mayweather as the sport’s biggest star, the Cincinnati native has managed wins in only six of his last 10 outings, absorbing setbacks every time he’s taken a step up in competition during a tortuous regression to gatekeeper. “I just feel like y’all trying to play me, for real, I don’t like that shit,” Broner said. “Y’all keep saying he’s going to fight Floyd again. To my recognition, Floyd is fucking retired, man. ... There’s some shit going on and I just feel y’all are trying to throw me to the wolves.” Broner, who enters as nearly a 3-1 underdog, leaned into his familiar role of heel during the week, firing off a series of racist remarks to Pacquiao supporters and verbally lambasting the veteran commentator Al Bernstein, quite possibly the most pleasant personality in the sport, as he attempted to moderate a Q&A before the gathered press. Salesmanship, perhaps. But not even Broner can downplay the stakes at hand for his career. “I’m not in awe of any fighter, especially Manny Pacquiao,” he said. “I hope he’s in awe of me. I’m a one-of-a-kind fighter, too. I’ve made history in this sport. I just have to go out and win this fight, then everything is going to start going my way. Saturday night, I will be victorious. This is a defining moment in my career, and it’s going to be one of the biggest nights of my life.”