Jimmy Anderson believes he has cracked bowling in all but one of Test cricket’s overseas outposts after a four‑wicket masterclass in Bridgetown made him the first England player to take 200 victims away from home. Now 36 but seemingly evergreen, Anderson admitted to feeling like “a spare part” on England’s tour to Sri Lanka. He took one wicket from two Tests as the spinners dominated in a historic 3-0 series victory by Joe Root’s side. Against West Indies on Wednesday he struck to end Shai Hope’s ominous-looking 57 with a ball that was 65 overs old, before his late burst with the second fresh Duke gutted the lower middle order to finish the first day with four for 33 from 24 overs. Anderson, whose 200th away wicket was a brute to get Shane Dowrich caught at slip, said: “I’ve always enjoyed the challenge away from home but it’s often been difficult to get to grips with conditions. “I guess it’s getting to know my game and getting my skills and confidence up. Now I feel I can bowl on most pitches – though you could probably take Sri Lanka out of that. Tours like that make you appreciate when there’s a bit of something for you. There was a bit of swing here even though the wicket was pretty flat.” Anderson is without his regular strike-partner, Stuart Broad, and the pair have gone four Tests since their last dual outing. They share 1,002 Test wickets between them – 851 when in the same side – and the senior man is sympathetic to Root’s tricky task in selecting the team. “Of course it causes conversation, it’s a massive decision,” Anderson said. “He’s a guy who has played 124 Tests but you have a really talented all‑rounder [Sam Curran], in that respect it shows how strong our squad is. It’s tough for Joe but that’s why he gets paid the big bucks.” A late collapse left West Indies on 264 for eight at stumps but they still have the dangerous Shimron Hetmyer unbeaten on 56 after an electric innings. Roston Chase, who made 54 from No 5, thinks Hetmyer could yet bring about a handy first-innings total on a pitch that offered plenty late on. Chase said: “Shimron recently got a heavy contract in the Indian Premier League [£450,000 at Royal Challengers Bangalore] and he’s showing why. Hopefully he can take on the mantle tomorrow and see if we can push on to get a good enough score.”