Arsenal will face Manchester United in the FA Cup fourth round while Newport have been rewarded for their exploits against Leicester City with a trip to Middlesbrough. Fellow giantkillers Oldham and Barnet were drawn to face Doncaster and Brentford respectively, while AFC Wimbledon, who have reached the fourth round for the first time in the new club’s history, will take on West Ham. Newport, beaten at this stage of the competition at Wembley last season by Tottenham after a replay, will nonetheless fancy their chances of reaching the fifth round despite a tough away draw against Tony Pulis’ side while Barnet, who share their “Bees” nickname with Brentford, will entertain their Championship opponents at The Hive. Elsewhere Accrington Stanley will face Derby or Southampton while Millwall entertain Everton, Manchester City take on Burnley and Crystal Palace entertain Tottenham in another all-Premier League tie. The holders, Chelsea, will face Sheffield Wednesday or Luton while Wolves’ reward for their surprise 2-1 victory over Liverpool last night, courtesy of Rúben Neves’s goal, is a trip to Shrewsbury or Stoke. United and Arsenal beat lower-league opposition to reach round four, with Unai Emery’s side winning 3-0 at Blackpool and Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side seeing off Reading 2-0 at home. Arsenal - who have won the FA Cup a record 13 times - won the last time they faced United in this competition, with Danny Welbeck scoring the winning goal at Old Trafford in the sixth round as Arsène Wenger’s side went on to win the trophy. Brighton won comfortably at Bournemouth in round three and will welcome West Brom to the Amex Stadium, with the winners of a replay between Derby or Southampton travelling to face Accrington. Meanwhile, Swansea play host to Gillingham, Bristol City take on Bolton and QPR travel to League One leaders Portsmouth. FA Cup fourth-round draw: Swansea v Gillingham; AFC Wimbledon v West Ham; Shrewsbury or Stoke v Wolves; Millwall v Everton; Brighton v West Brom; Bristol City v Bolton; Accrington v Derby or Southampton; Doncaster v Oldham Chelsea v Sheffield Wednesday or Luton; Newcastle or Blackburn v Watford; Middlesbrough v Newport; Manchester City v Burnley; Barnet v Brentford; Portsmouth v QPR; Arsenal v Manchester United; Crystal Palace v Tottenham. Ties to be played 25-28 January.