Theresa May has told Jeremy Corbyn his demand that she rule out a no-deal scenario as a prerequisite for Brexit talks is “an impossible condition” and called on him to join cross-party discussions immediately. In a letter to Corbyn on Thursday afternoon, written after the Labour leader dismissed her request for talks as a “stunt”, May said that she would be “happy to discuss” the Labour leader’s ideas. She urged him to “talk and see if we can begin to find a way forward for our country on Brexit”. Referring to Corbyn’s instruction to Labour MPs not to meet with her, May asked: “Is it right to ask your MPs not to seek a solution with the government?” The proposed talks have been stymied by Corbyn’s insistence that a no-deal must be ruled out as a precondition and May’s insistence that doing so would not be workable. In her letter she wrote: “It is not within the government’s power to rule out no deal.” May has been meeting other party leaders in the aftermath of the resounding defeat for her Brexit plan in the House of Commons earlier this week. A number of Labour MPs have defied their leader’s instruction not to engage in discussions designed to find a plan that might command a majority. Earlier, Downing Street insisted the prime minister was determined to stick to her “principles” on Brexit, including rejecting a customs union and a second referendum. With the clock running down to Brexit day on 29 March, May kicked off Thursday’s talks with the Green party MP, Caroline Lucas. May’s official spokesman insisted these conversations would be approached “in a constructive spirit, and wanting to hear what the various groups have to say”. But when asked whether May was willing to flex any of her negotiating red lines, he said they remained in place. “Where people have pre-existing positions, of course they will want to make their argument for them, and the PM is going to listen, but you understand the principles which the PM holds, which she believes honour the result of the referendum,” he said. “The PM has set out over the course of many months now what she believes the British people voted for, and what she believes is necessary to honour the referendum. She stands by those principles.” On the specific issue of a customs union, which is a key demand of both Labour and backers of a Norway-style softer Brexit, he said: “The PM is absolutely clear on the importance of having an independent trade policy in order to honour the result of the referendum.” Members of the customs union cannot strike their own trade deals. May’s spokesman said: “The ability for the UK to reach out throughout the world and strike its own trade deals is an important element of taking back control.” On whether a second referendum could be considered, the spokesman said: “You know the prime minister’s position on a second referendum.” Asked why the government had not discussed with Brussels the possibility of extending article 50 and delaying the UK’s departure, as the SNP’s Westminster leader, Ian Blackford, has demanded as a condition of further talks, he said: “Because we do not wish to do it.” No 10 said the Cabinet Office minister, David Lidington, and the environment secretary, Michael Gove, would chair separate talks, including with the Labour backbenchers Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper, in their capacity as select committee chairs. They will be provided with civil service support, and the government has promised to lay a statement before parliament next Monday setting out its next steps. That motion will be amendable, allowing Labour and rival groups of backbenchers to test support for their own Brexit proposals. Asked to identify areas where compromise might be possible, May’s spokesman pointed to workers’ rights and environmental protections. May met Labour backbenchers and spoke to trade union leaders in the run-up to Tuesday’s vote to discuss beefing up workers’ rights in the hope of winning over support for her deal.