Clemson quarterback Trevor Lawrence completed the most remarkable freshman season in recent history on Monday night. His stunning performance against Alabama in college football’s national championship game already has NFL teams plotting how they can get their hands on him – and he still has two years until he can make the leap to the pros. It’s important to note how rare his rise is. College football is a shifting landscape. High school players, particularly quarterbacks, are better prepared than ever to make the leap to college. A year-round, hyper-intensive recruiting circuit, featuring non-stop training camps and one-on-one sessions with some of the game’s top quarterback coaches (private tutoring of top high school prospects pays more than being an NFL position coach), allows colleges to fully understand a player before he rocks up on campus. Still: what Lawrence did this year is close to unprecedented. Eight months prior to his systematic beat down of Alabama and one of college football’s greatest ever coaches, Nick Saban, Lawrence was attending his high school prom. He took the starting gig early this season, usurping Kelly Bryant, a talented, more experienced quarterback in the midst of an unbeaten run.Young players either grasp the physical side of the game – they’re bigger, quicker, stronger, or have a better arm than their peers – or they are a step ahead on the mental side of the game (typically these types of players are sons of coaches). Lawrence, though, is superior physically and mentally. There’s more than a whiff of Peyton Manning about his game; the way he surgically carves open a defense, winning with brain and brawn. He makes NFL throws with regularity, something it can take college quarterbacks years in the pros to perfect. This throw and catch is ridiculous.Trevor Lawrence to Tee Higgins #AllIn pic.twitter.com/Bjq7l7dZNL “My man is a true freshman,” ex-Clemson quarterback and current NFL star Deshaun Watson said after Monday night’s game. “He’s got at least two more years [in college] to do work. He’s gonna be a legend. He already is. People know that now.” College football’s archaic rules force Lawrence to stay in school for an extra two years. College sports’ governing body, the NCAA, in partnership with the NFL, forces so-called student-athletes to remain in school for three years of eligibility before they can head to the pros. That’s not exactly how the rule is written. Technically, a player could leave school, sit at home watching TV for three years, or go to a different pro football league. But that’s not the way it works in the real world. Players want to be in the NFL. The best job interview for the league is to play against the best competition, and that’s in college football. We’re not long removed from a debate about whether sitting out a team’s bowl game – an end of year game that’s tantamount to an exhibition – would dump a prospect’s draft stock because it would be considered too selfish. The NCAA and NFL do this under the guise of player safety. Nineteen-year olds aren’t ready to play with grown men, they say. How could we put a teenager in the manliest of worlds? The reality, of course, is that the NFL wants as much time as possible to see who’s good and who isn’t and, just as importantly, who’s broken. Meanwhile, the NCAA and its member schools want to protect their bottom line. Keeping star players around helps business – Clemson head coach Dabo Sweeney made just south of $1m for Monday’s win alone. Lawrence and his teammates made nothing.As for player safety, is there anything to prevent the NFL from inserting a rule that all players are draft eligible but are unable to play until they hit 21? Why could a team not take the organizational decision to play things long-term, draft Lawrence now, pay him, then sit him for two years until he hits some mythical age threshold, as though anybody is truly ready for the brutality of the league (and the rate of brain trauma in the NFL shows age is no protection against injury). It’s not like the education many players get at college is worth something anyway. As always, it’s about the money. It serves none of the powers to have to pay a superstar athlete to sit on a practice squad for two seasons. Lawrence will have to wait, and teams are ready. Already, smart ex-executives like the NFL Network’s Gil Brandt are talking about amassing draft capital for 2021, when Lawrence will be able to enter the league. Trevor Lawrence is the best true freshman QB I've ever seen. If I was running an NFL team, I'd be making trades for as many 2021 picks I could get my hands on. It’s a brilliant plan. A team cannot plan to be terrible in two years’ time and tank for the top pick. Our most recent example of a similar prospect is Andrew Luck, and it took a bizarre set of circumstances for the Colts to be happy throwing a season away in order to Suck for Luck. Tanking for Trevor won’t be quite as easy. What’s the incentive for a coaching staff? If you wind up 1-15 you will be fired even as a first-year coach, as Arizona’s Steve Wilks can attest.That makes plotting for the top pick tough. But you can tip the scales in your favor by collecting as many 2021 picks as possible. Perhaps the team selecting No 1 overall in two years’ time already has their quarterback of the future. Or maybe they don’t fall in love with Lawrence as much as other teams. Or maybe they think accepting a boatload of draft picks is a better use of resources than selecting a lone passer, as Cleveland did when they let Philadelphia jump up to select Carson Wentz. The league has two more years to nit-pick Lawrence. Every throw, every decision, on and off-the-field will be hyper-analyzed, all through the prism of his draft stock. Then again, with his physical tools alone he would be a top-10 lock this year. And he still has another two years to add muscle to his giant 6ft 5in frame (and get a decent haircut) before heading to the big show. Yet good quarterback play at the NFL level isn’t always spectacular. It resides in the absence of spectacle: setting and resetting protections, making sure the team checks from a bad play to a good one, getting the ball out hot, and the bravery to take a shot in order to complete a throw. Lawrence has already mastered the game within a game. He is more of a chess player – a manipulator – than any top draft choice since Luck. And he seems immune to pressure, regardless of the moment and regardless of the blitz. NFL teams are already circling. For perennial losers or teams lacking a long-term solution at quarterback, every decision, every action between now and the 2021 draft will be made with a view to grabbing Lawrence.