Evidence of the first beer believed to have been brewed in the UK, dating back more than 2,000 years, has been uncovered by road workers. Signs of the iron age brew from about 400BC were identified in fragments of charred residues from the beer-making process found during the £1.5bn upgrade of the A14 in Cambridgeshire. In parallel with the roadworks, a team of up to 250 archaeologists led by experts, from Mola Headland Infrastructure, a joint venture including Museum of London Archaeology, has been working on the project, investigating 33 sites across 360 hectares, making it one of the UK’s largest archeological projects. Lara González, an archaeobotanist with Mola, likened her work to looking for a needle in a haystack but said it offered rewards when finds of such significance were detected. “I knew when I looked at these tiny fragments under the microscope that I had something special,” she said. “The microstructure of these remains had clearly changed through the fermentation process and air bubbles typical of those formed in the boiling and mashing process of brewing.” She said the fragments initially appeared similar to bread before microscopic study proved otherwise. “It’s possible to see that this residue is from the beer-making process as it shows evidence of fermentation and contains larger pieces of cracked grains and bran but no fine flour,” said González. The road project had already yielded a treasure trove of archeological finds, including whole medieval and Anglo-Saxon villages, 342 burials, dozens of Roman brooches, a bone flute and the remains of a woolly mammoth that could be more than 130,000 years old. A Roman supply depot, rare Roman coins from the third century, an ornate 8th-century comb made of deer antler and 40 pottery kilns have also been uncovered. Steve Sherlock, the Highways England archaeology lead for the A14, said the work was continuing to unearth “incredible discoveries that are helping to shape our understanding of how life in Cambridgeshire, and beyond, has developed through history. “It’s a well-known fact that ancient populations used the beer-making process to purify water and create a safe source of hydration, but this is potentially the earliest physical evidence of that process taking place in the UK.” Roger Protz, lecturer, author of more than 20 books on beer, and former editor of the Campaign for Real Ale’s Good Beer Guide, said: “East Anglia has always been of great importance to brewing as a result of the quality of the barley that grows there. It’s known as maritime barley and is prized throughout the world. When the Romans invaded Britain they found the local tribes brewing a type of beer called curmi.” He said the beer was believed to have been made from grain, as hops did not come into use in Britain until the 15th century, with herbs and spice to balance the sweetness of the malt. The A14 work has been nominated for the rescue project of the year in the 2019 Current Archaeology awards.