Parliament is facing a day of further Brexit deadlock after Theresa May swung the government’s weight behind an amendment that would send her back to Brussels to demand an alternative to the Irish border backstop, splintering Conservative support. The chances of the amendment, championed by senior backbencher Sir Graham Brady, are on a knife-edge after Tory Brexiters split over whether they should back the change, while pro-remain MPs suggested they would vote against. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the chair of the hard-Brexit European Research Group (ERG), emerged from an earlier meeting with MPs saying the group would not back the move. An hour later, other pro-Brexit Tories left a meeting with the prime minister sounding less certain of their opposition. May addressed Tory MPs in parliament on Monday night, spelling out her support for Brady and urging them to support the amendment. According to sources, May told the meeting that if the government was going to have “a reasonable chance” of convincing Brussels of the seriousness of the opposition in parliament, then it was a vote that mattered, rather than words. Boris Johnson, who has been at the forefront of demands to reopen the text of the withdrawal agreement to remove the backstop entirely, was publicly rebuked by the prime minister after he asked how the amendment would amount to meaningful change. “We won’t know until you support us, Boris,” the prime minister retorted, prompting some cheers in the room. The Conservative party chair, Brandon Lewis, confirmed that the Tories would be whipped to support Brady’s amendment to a government motion on Tuesday night if it is selected by the Speaker. Brady’s amendment would approve May’s withdrawal agreement, but says the government must replace the backstop with “alternative arrangements” – a change that senior EU figures have repeatedly suggested would not be acceptable. Rees-Mogg said many of the ERG were fundamentally opposed to an amendment that would not necessitate the reopening of the withdrawal agreement text. “The amendment gives conditional approval, which is an issue. It does not say what the backstop would be replaced with, and Graham has said he could live with a protocol rather than changes to the text. From our point of view, it has to be changes to the text,” he said. Among those who said they were now undecided about how to vote was Ben Bradley, who resigned as a Tory vice-chair to vote against May’s withdrawal solution. “I really want to support her and back the Brady amendment, but I need firm clarification of her intentions and what kind of change to the backstop she is seeking, and that’s what I’m trying to get tonight and tomorrow before I decide,” he said. The success of another amendment tabled by Yvette Cooper, which would pave the way for legislation to delay the article 50 process, also looked uncertain on Monday night as senior Labour figures including Jon Trickett voiced doubt about the message it would send to voters. The shadow Cabinet Office minister said voters in his constituency would regard support for the measure on Tuesday as a failure to respect the result of the 2016 referendum. “I feel that it may look to people as if we’re trying to somehow remove the earlier decision, which was to Brexit,” he said. Without the explicit support of the Labour leadership, the amendment may struggle to win a majority. The fading support for both amendments could potentially see parliament vote down all possible routes posed by MPs to break the Brexit impasse. MPs will vote on a number of amendments, yet to be selected by the Speaker, John Bercow, to a government motion that May was obliged to table after the heavy defeat of her Brexit deal. Government sources said they remained highly uncertain whether Bercow would select Brady’s amendment for a vote. Before the vote, the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, said the prime minister “has offered up no plan B or any credible solution to break the impasse” and demanded that the government spell out the next steps. “We now need to see action from the government, not further delay or warm words,” he said. “The prime minister needs to spell out precisely what she plans to negotiate with the EU, a timeline for delivery, and when parliament will next have a say on the terms of any deal the government has negotiated.” May is likely to make a new statement to parliament by 13 February on the next steps for the Brexit process. At their cabinet meeting before the vote, cabinet ministers will urge the prime minister to set out at the dispatch box when MPs will have the chance to vote again on her withdrawal agreement. “She needs to make a strong and clear statement,” one cabinet source said. The ERG will meet at 6pm on Tuesday night, an hour before the vote, to consider any last-minute amendments, including anything tabled by the government. Two other MPs, John Baron and Andrew Murrison, who had tabled amendments mandating changes to the backstop, said they would withdraw their amendments to give Brady’s the best shot at being selected by the Speaker. Senior Brexiter sources said the root of many MPs’ objections to the Brady amendment had hinged on what some claimed to have been promised by the chief whip, Julian Smith – that May was planning to demand that the EU reopen the text of the withdrawal agreement as a consequence of the Brady amendment. Yet many were spooked by Brady’s comments on Sunday night that the change would not require rewriting the agreement, but that a “codicil” with the new arrangements would suffice. Their concern was compounded after the prime minister declined to repeat the chief whips’ assurances in the meeting, one Brexiter source said. “That is the main reason why the bulk of the ERG are minded not to support this,” the source said. “If they vote for this, then they give up leverage for that demand to reopen the text.” May will also face a core group of rebels from the pro-remain group in her party, who may sink the amendment themselves even if the Brexiters eventually back it. Heidi Allen, one of the Tory MPs backing a second referendum, said: “There were no assurances on any of the other issues concerning many of us, such as the weak and non-binding political declaration; it was all about the backstop. I cannot believe our prime minister is prepared to renege on an internationally agreed treaty, via a backbench-sponsored amendment. I won’t be voting for it and many of my colleagues won’t either.” Those behind Brady’s amendment had also hoped to attract the support of the DUP. However, on Monday the party’s Brexit spokesman, Sammy Wilson, urged a hardline approach. “The real chaos when it come to the backstop is in Brussels and Dublin,” he said. “Now is the time for the prime minister to exploit the cracks which are emerging in the illogical position of the EU and the Irish.” Other moderate Tories also expressed deep scepticism about the effectiveness of the amendment, even if the party was eventually whipped to back it. “If Brexiteers buy this they’re a total pushover,” one Tory MP said. “The amendment may as well say: ‘I’d like world peace.’ What it does is underline that we don’t have an alternative.”