The Asian Football Confederation claims its president, Sheikh Salman bin Ibrahim al-Khalifa, is not responsible for matters regarding the Thai detention of Hakeem al-Araibi because he was recused from overseeing the region 18 months ago out of conflict-of-interest concerns. The new claim came in response to a call from the World Players Association for Salman to be disqualified from office if the refugee footballer was returned to Bahrain. Salman, a Bahraini royal who is also vice president of Fifa, has been widely criticised for his lack of action in the two months since the arrest and detention of Bahraini refugee Al-Araibi. The AFC did not address the disqualification calls but on Saturday said its senior vice president, Praful Patel, “was asked 18 months ago by the AFC executive committee to handle matters involving the AFC’s West Zone to ensure there were no accusations of a conflict of interest involving [Salman]”. It said the AFC administration was in contact with Fifa and the football federations of Bahrain, Thailand and Australia, but did not call for Al-Araibi’s release. Saturday’s statement is the first the AFC has said of Salman’s recusal. The AFC is increasingly alone in its failure to call for the release of the refugee footballer and Australian resident. Al-Araibi was arrested in Bangkok in November on a red notice issued to Bahrain by Interpol in contravention of its own refugee protection policies. Bahrain is seeking the return of Al-Araibi over a widely discredited vandalism conviction, delivered in absentia and carrying a 10-year prison sentence. The country’s justice system has a well-documented history of prisoner abuse and targeting of dissidents. Through its director of communications, Colin Gibson, the AFC has previously only said that it is working with Fifa, repeatedly declining to answer questions about the role of Salman or its specific efforts to help Al-Araibi. AFC officials also shut down questions on the topic of Al-Araibi at an Asian Cup pre-match press conference with the Australian Socceroos last week. Salman is expected to run for the presidency of Fifa in April. During his last tilt at the top role in 2016, Salman was the subject of public criticism by Al-Araibi, which Al-Araibi believes is largely behind Bahrain’s attempt to refoule him. World football organisations were widely criticised in the two months following Al-Araibi’s arrest over their initial silence and then muted responses, but in the wake of international lobbying, many have since called for the athlete’s return to Australia. Fifa recently lobbied the Thai government directly, but has still been criticised for not doing enough, and has been accused of abrogating its human rights responsibilities which require it to use all available means and leverage. On the same day as the AFC’s statement, the International Olympic Committee announced its support of Al-Araibi and Fifa’s position on his case – that he should be returned to Australia. It said the IOC member for Thailand, Khunying Patama Leeswadtrakul, had contacted the Thai government to try to find a solution based on “basic human and humanitarian values”. “The IOC president has personally discussed this worrying situation with the United Nations high commissioner for refugees,” the IOC added. “The high commissioner also expressed that UNHCR is very concerned about this case since Al-Araibi is a recognised refugee and should be allowed to return to Australia.” A leading Thai football team, Chiang Rai United, has also voiced support of Al-Araibi. “To take a footballer and lock him up is to ruin his life, particularly when there is no reason in law to hold him,” said club president Mitti Tiyapairat. On Sunday the president of the Jordanian Football Association, Ali Bin al-Hussein, called for Al-Araibi’s release. “Your silence as officials is a shame and a total embarrassment,” he said in a tweet which tagged Fifa and the AFC, as well as the football associations of Thailand and Bahrain, and Australia’s national team. “Protect your players.” Release Hakeem ! Your silence as officials is a shame and a total embarrassment. Protect your players @fathailand @bfainfo @FIFAcom @theafcdotcom @fatma_samoura @maryvharvey @maggiemrphy @afdpglobal @socceroos @thepfa #ReleaseHakeem On Monday morning an Australian cave diver who helped rescue the young Thai footballers in July, told the ABC “it does seem the gentleman concerned is the victim of a pretty grave injustice”. Retired vet Craig Challen – who alongside anaesthetist Richard Harris was jointly named  Australian of the Year – said there were questions around the actions of Interpol and perhaps Australia’s home affairs department. “I’m very hopeful justice will prevail in this case.” Bahrain has until 8 February to lodge its extradition documentation or request an extension, otherwise Al-Araibi can be freed. Thailand, which is not a signatory to the UN refugees convention, has so far resisted international pressure to release Al-Araibi back to Australia.