Buddhist monks in Japan have posted videos on social media to prove their traditional attire is no obstacle to safe driving after one of their brethren was fined. Police said an officer had stopped the unnamed monk, who is in his 40s, on a road in Fukui prefecture in western Japan earlier this year and told him he could not drive in his “constricting” sōi robes. The officer issued him with a ticket that described him as “driving in a kimono that could affect safety” and fined him 6,000 yen ($55). Recent news reports of the incident sparked a show of solidarity from fellow monks in a stunning display of asceticism-meets-athleticism. 僧衣を着ててもこんくらい出来るので、車の運転で僧衣が邪魔になることはないのです。#僧衣 #法衣 #僧侶 #お坊さん #リップスティック #安心安全の僧衣 #パジャマより気楽に着れちゃう pic.twitter.com/bFnjmVgxYV Several posted videos of themselves performing a series of activities – from juggling and skateboarding to skipping and playing the guitar – accompanied by the Japanese hashtag “Sōi de dekiru mon” (I can do it in robes). Another clip shows a barefooted, shaven-headed man in robes wielding a Star Wars lightsaber. The clips prompted a wave of online praise for their agility, while some commenters wondered if the police were similarly unforgiving of drivers wearing long dresses. これだけできるんだから、運転ぐらい困ることはないよね。#僧衣でできるもん pic.twitter.com/TneoRtCNMD Others praised the monks for their show of resistance. “If there’s one thing that the [I can do it in robes hashtag] taught me, it’s don’t f**k with Japanese monks,” wrote one Twitter user. Another encouraged his followers to “copy paste this hashtag to see the baddest monks on the planet sending a message to the Japanese police”. The monk was on his way to a memorial service and was wearing robes that stretched below his knees, according to the Yomiuri Shimbun. The newspaper quoted him as saying that safety had been uppermost in his mind throughout his 20 years as a driver. 運転に支障があるとの事ですが、お坊さんの衣は足もちゃんと動きますよ。 #僧衣でできるもん pic.twitter.com/PVb1jepZQP His Kyoto-based order, meanwhile, has complained that strict enforcement of the traffic regulation on “unsafe” clothing could inhibit monks’ ability to perform their religious duties. The monk’s ordeal is not over, however. He has so far refused to pay the fine and has not responded to follow-up demands, the Yomiuri said, meaning he could be formally charged for violating road traffic laws and have his case sent to court. If that happens, the monk told the newspaper he would “clearly state at a trial that I can drive safely in my robes”.