Late-night hosts on Tuesday dissected the damage control of Rudy Giuliani and the 2020 Democratic candidates for president. On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert unpacked another round of Rudy Giuliani’s continuously contradicting statements, often in the same breath. After a Sunday in which he appeared to confirm that, despite Trump’s denials, the president was engaged in construction project negotiations in Moscow during the 2016 campaign, Giuliani spoke with the New Yorker in his typical circular fashion. Giuliani said: “I have a sense of ethics that is as high as anybody you can imagine.” But he then admitted he was “not an ethicist”. “I am everything. I am nothing,” Colbert translated. “I am old. I am young. I am ever-ending, just begun. Behold, I am Rudy, destroyer of clients.” Giuliani admitted that he worried about his legacy as Trump’s lawyer but figured “I can explain it to St Peter,” since he doesn’t think, as a lawyer, that he’s said anything untruthful. Good news for the president, Colbert said, because “you know things are going great when your lawyer is already prepping his argument to stay out of hell”. On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah provided an update on “world war D” – the race for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination – as several candidates tried to Marie Kondo-away their problematic pasts. Former vice-president Joe Biden, for instance, admitted that he had been wrong on harsh sentencing laws for crack cocaine versus powder cocaine. “It was a big mistake when it was made,” Biden said in a speech to the National Action Network on Monday. “We were told by the experts that ‘crack – you never go back’.” Noah had to pause Biden there. “I think he’s conflating two different phrases,” he said. “First, there’s ‘once you go black, you don’t go back,’ which isn’t true – just ask Obama. And then there’s ‘black don’t crack’, which also isn’t true – again, just ask Obama.” Next up, Bernie Sanders discussed allegations of sexual harassment and discrimination in his 2016 campaign in a meeting with begrudged staffers earlier this month, but refused to detail the conversation because it was “private”. Noah called bullshit on that last claim. “Bernie can’t say that any conversation he’s ever had has been private,” he said. “If you’re in a 10-mile radius of the man, you can hear the conversation.” Finally, Kirsten Gillibrand has been on an apology tour for her past policy ideas. Specifically, as a congresswoman from upstate New York, Gillibrand supported expediting “the removal of illegal aliens”, according to 2008 mailer sent from her congressional office and gathered by CNN. “If Trump’s immigration policies are racist,” CNN host Jake Tapper asked Gillibrand on Sunday, “were they racist when you held them as well?” Gillibrand avoided answering yes or no, but admitted her past policies were “not empathetic” and “not kind”. It was a tough sell for Noah. “It’s hard for her to say Trump’s policies are racist, but her identical policies were just ‘unkind’,” he said. “It’s like someone saying ‘No, honey, what YOU did was cheating. When I slept with Carol, I was just being unkind to our marriage.’”