Ariana Grande’s song 7 Rings was released less than two weeks ago. In that time, it has already reached No 1 in 18 countries and broken Spotify’s record for most streams in a 24-hour period. So, obviously, Grande celebrated this achievement in the traditional manner; getting the Japanese for “small charcoal grill” tattooed on her hand. The slip-up has already become infamous. Grande apparently wanted “7 Rings” tattooed on her in kanji. However, the tattoo she got actually reads “shichirin”; a lightweight portable charcoal stove that is used in Japan to grill fish or meat. It is embarrassing, but at least it allows Grande to enter the prestigious and sacred Celebrity Botched Tattoo Translation Hall of Fame. Here are her peers. In 2000, David Beckham wanted to get a tattoo in honour of his wife. However, he also wanted it in Hindi, a language he doesn’t speak. Which is why, when translated, his tattoo reads “Vihctoria”. Sadly, however, a “Vihctoria” isn’t a small charcoal grill, so Grande’s tattoo is still funnier. Jessie J once wrote a song called Who You Are, which contained the lyric “Don’t lose who you are in the blur of the stars”. To mark this, she had the words “Don’t loose who you are in the blur of the stars” tattooed on her pelvis. This is also why Jessie J favours high-waisted trousers these days. Grande needs to go some to beat Spears, for she has two misspelled tattoos. On her hip is a Chinese symbol that was intended to read “rebellious” but says “strange”. And on the back of her neck, there used to be three Hebrew characters. They were meant to spell “God”, in an act of devotion to Kabbalah, but they were inked out of order so were just gibberish. The phrase “rebel flower” is important to Rihanna. It is how she describes herself, it is the name of a perfume she launched in 2010 and it is the title of an unauthorised biography that someone once wrote about her. It is also why she has the words “Rebelle Fleur” tattooed on her neck, even though French adjectives typically follow the nouns they modify, so it is ultimately meaningless. Finally, the ruler of the Celebrity Botched Tattoo Translation Hall of Fame. Actor Panettiere has “Live Without Regrets” tattooed on her side in Italian. Except it is spelled incorrectly. This is a level that Grande can only aspire to reach. Maybe next time.