Good morning, this is Alison Rourke welcoming you to the final morning briefing of this hectic Brexit week. A string of junior shadow ministers have told the Guardian they strongly oppose a “people’s vote” and might resign if the party backs a second referendum, believing it could expose Labour to a vicious backlash in its pro-leave constituencies. “I would feel deeply uncomfortable about going into a people’s vote at this stage,” said one, adding the idea of not carrying out Brexit would “break a link with millions of our traditional voters who expect us to keep our word.” Labour strategists have not ruled out a free vote on a second referendum, believing that whipping MPs either to support or oppose a referendum would open a deep rift. Meanwhile, Theresa May continues to insist her door is open to Corbyn but also that it is “impossible” to rule out a no-deal exit. On Thursday a group of senior Tory Brexiters – including former cabinet ministers David Davis, Iain Duncan Smith, Owen Paterson and Theresa Villiers – told the PM parliament would back a deal if she could find a way of dealing with the Northern Ireland backstop issue. The DUP’s Nigel Dodds said May “has a way through this” if she could ease concerns about the backstop. As the political brinkmanship continues, manufacturers are stockpiling cash in the face of “terrifying uncertainty”, according to the the manufacturing lobby group EEF. Its chief executive, Stephen Phipson, said companies were “ramping up their contingency operations” in preparation for a hard Brexit. ‘Very shocked’ – The Duke of Edinburgh is reported to be shaken after the Land Rover he was driving was involved in a collision in Norfolk. Prince Philip, 97, escaped without injury from the accident that involved another car near the Queen’s Sandringham Estate. Both drivers were breath tested and returned negative readings. Trump targets Pelosi– Donald Trump has dramatically escalated his feud with Democrat House speaker Nancy Pelosi over the US government shutdown by cancelling her previously undisclosed trip abroad and denying her the use of a military aircraft to visit American troops in Afghanistan. It follows Pelosi suggesting he should postpone his State of the Union address, or submit it in writing. “In light of the 800,000 great American workers not receiving pay, I am sure you would agree that postponing this public relations event is totally appropriate,” he wrote to Pelosi. Trump added that she should be in Washington negotiating with him over the shutdown. NHS overspend – Some hospitals are overspending by as much as £141m a year due to NHS underfunding, staff shortages and demand for care, according to Whitehall’s spending watchdog, the National Audit Office. The NAO concluded in its annual review of health service finances that the NHS in England was grappling with budgetary problems that are unsustainable. The watchdog warned that continuing to cut spending on public health, capital projects and medical education and training, in order to give the NHS more money for frontline care, “could affect the NHS’s ability to deliver the priorities of the long-term plan”. ‘Going back would be the end for us’ – The Home Office has come under fire for trying to separate an Iranian couple from their four British children and 11 grandchildren by forcing them to return to Iran. The couple, aged 83 and 73, bought their flat in Edinburgh in 1978, live near their close-knit family and depend heavily on their daily support. But they also act as co-parents to one of their grandchildren, a teenager with severe autism who requires constant supervision. Although the couple raised their children in the UK, they never sought British citizenship. Heatwave hell – Spare a thought for the residents of the Australian outback community of Noona, population 14, who attempted to sleep through a night of 35.9C on Thursday. The town, 670km west of Sydney, has the dubious honour of setting a new, country-wide record for overnight minimum temperatures. Large parts of Australia are continuing feeling the heat with 45C forecast in parts of western Sydney today, and the country’s capital, Canberra, is on track for its fourth consecutive day over 40C. ‘Cute rat’ – Tokyo authorities are taking a closer look at graffiti that could be the work of the elusive street artist Banksy. The city’s governor, Yuriko Koike, asked on Twitter if the image of a rat holding an umbrella – one of Banksy’s best-known works – that appeared on a door at a monorail station, could be a gift to the city from the artist. The Democrats are already fighting for the opportunity to take on Donald Trump – but can any of them hope to unseat him? Plus: Nobel peace prize winner Malala Yousafzai on what she would like to tell the US president about building walls. Countries around the world are making it easier to choose the time and manner of your death. But doctors in the Netherlands, the world’s euthanasia capital, are starting to worry about the consequences, writes Christopher de Bellaigue. As the world’s pioneer, almost every Dutch person seems to have known someone who has been euthanised, he says. But questions remain to be answered about where the limits of the practice should be drawn. Eddie Jones has made the remarkable claim he may break from convention and select nine forwards in his England side for the Six Nations. Bernard Tomic has denied he has ever threatened Lleyton Hewitt’s family as Australia’s ugly tennis feud continues to escalate, with Tomic hitting back at the Davis Cup captain’s sensational claims of blackmail and physical threats calling Hewitt a “liar”. Jess Varnish insists she has emerged as a winner despite losing her landmark employment case against British Cycling and UK Sport because both bodies have made significant changes since she exposed what she described as the “culture of fear and lack of athlete welfare in the British world class performance system”. The World Anti-Doping Agency says its expert team has finally managed to retrieve all the doping data from the Moscow laboratory – but admits it cannot yet be sure whether it is genuine. And Jonny Bairstow fell two runs short of a second century in his new No 3 position for England but the Yorkshireman’s desire to reclaim England’s wicketkeeping gloves remains undimmed. Asian stocks advanced on Friday as a report of progress in US-China trade talks stirred hopes of a deal in their tariff dispute and supported risk sentiment. The Wall Street Journal reported on Thursday that US Treasury Secretary, Steven Mnuchin, discussed lifting some or all tariffs imposed on Chinese imports and suggested offering a tariff rollback during trade discussions scheduled for 30 January. The pound is buying €1.14 and $1.30. Brexit and Prince Philip’s car crash dominate today’s papers. “Corbyn faces threat of revolt if he seeks new referendum” is the Guardian’s headline. “May faces revolt against no deal” says the Telegraph. The Times has “Bitte! Stop Brexit and stay with us, Germany asks Britain”. Photos of Prince Philip’s overturned Land Rover feature on most of the front pages. “How did he walk away”, asks the Mail. “Philip, 97, cheats death in crash” is the Mirror’s headline. “My Legs! My Legs! Philip’s agony as he’s pulled from car crash” is the Sun’s splash. The Daily Express plays it straight with: “Prince Philip crash horror”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com