‘I didn’t think 2019 would start with me in my house in a onesie, hungover and watching Sister Act, angry,” says London Hughes, a 29-year old comedian and TV presenter from Brighton. But this anger did inspire a tweet that went viral: “Sister Act is on, and I’m still a tiny bit pissed off that in 2018 a whole Whoopi Goldberg agreed to do a travel show with me but no TV channels wanted it,” she posted on New Year’s Day. Sister act is on, and I’m still a tiny bit pissed off that in 2018 a whole Whoopi Goldberg agreed to do a travel show with me but no TV channels wanted it. In 2019 let’s have more female comedians travelling and making TV and not just male comedians and their mum’s please. Thnx The comedian-travel show format is now well trodden, commonly involving a comic taking a trip with either their family (Jack Whitehall’s Travels With My Father, Romesh Ranganathan’s Asian Provocateur, Russell Howard & Mum) or friends (Joel & Nish vs the World, Dara Ó Briain’s Three Men in a Boat). Notice anything about these comics? All of them are men. In fact Sue Perkins seems to be the only woman in British comedy with a passport. Last year, Hughes was in discussion with a television production company to make a travel show – a far cry from a decade earlier when she wrote her first comedy set after being fired from TGI Fridays. Since then she has won the prestigious Funny Women comedy award, created a YouTube series, appeared on ITV2’s Don’t Hate the Playaz and Channel 4’s Celebs Go Dating, and has worked as a presenter on channels such as CBBC. Hughes idly mentioned to the production company that working with her comic hero, Whoopi Goldberg, would be great. “She’s my Beyoncé. She’s the only black female household name in comedy.” A month later Goldberg agreed to take part. “We could have done anything,” says Hughes. “We could have gone to Ibiza or sat in a caravan making sausages. It’s me and Whoopi Goldberg, who wouldn’t want to watch that?” So, what happened? “We took this idea to every channel,” says Hughes. “The feedback from some was that Whoopi Goldberg isn’t relevant enough. Not relevant? She’s a legend!” In response to Hughes’s tweet, comedians including Jenny Eclair, Gina Yashere and Katy Brand shared their frustration at having tried and failed to get similar shows commissioned. As the standup Tiff Stevenson put it, who was trying to put a show together with Meera Syal: “Travel is very different for women, let alone the fact we’ve all come up with different/cool ways of packaging it.” Although television is its own industry, it’s worth noting the role of women in the travel sector: 80% of consumer travel decisions are made by women, and women make up most of the sector’s workforce. “I can’t believe no one wants to make a funny travel show for women,” says Hughes. Jody Smith was formerly a commissioning editor at Channel 4 and is now creative director of Studio71, a TV production and talent management company. “The issue is there are fewer high-profile female comedians that broadcasters think will draw an audience to a show,” he says. “The only way to solve this is for channels to back more female comedians early on.” But Hughes believes that commissioners are too heavily influenced by the lack of diversity in the industry to understand why a female travel show might appeal. “The people making the comedy went to university with the people starring in the comedy,” she says. “If you didn’t have any black friends you’d think all we did was kill each other or make grime records,” she adds, laughing. “And I don’t tick that urban box. I’m from a lower- to middle-class family. I just happen to be a British black girl. “I don’t want to sound ungrateful,” she says. “I’ve had a great career and I’m actually making loads of other shows with the very channels that rejected the show with me and Whoopi. It’s not an attack, but a comment on the state of comedy right now.”