Should prosecco join the list of environmentally sinful food and drink, such as North Atlantic cod (overfished), beef (huge climate impact) and coffee (excessive water consumption)? That’s the question raised by a study that modelled the amount of soil erosion caused by production of the sparkling wine in north-east Italy. As demand for the Italian white wine has surged in recent years, production has intensified on steep slopes where the soil is often bare. Heavy rain then causes serious erosion. Researchers at the University of Padua found that three-quarters of soil loss from hillsides of the winemaking region in Veneto, home to a number of Controlled and Guaranteed Designation of Origin (DOCG) wines, is a result of prosecco production. That’s the equivalent of 400,000 tonnes of soil each year, or 4.4kg of soil for each of the 90m bottles of prosecco the region produces each year. Such a rate of loss is unsustainable, says the soil expert Prof Chris Collins. It’s not just bad news for the health of the vineyards, but for the wider environment, too, he adds. “The more soil you can leave in situ, the better in terms of nutrients. When soil goes downstream, it causes sedimentation. It also makes water treatment expensive because they have to take the soil out, and it can take pesticides downstream,” says Collins, who coordinates the UK’s soil security programme. The world consumes about 370m bottles of prosecco a year, according to the IWSR drinks market analysis, with Italy top, followed by the UK and the US. The Wine and Spirit Trade Association says most of the £1.5bn Britons spent on sparkling wine last year was on prosecco. Should we stop drinking the stuff? “No, we should manage our vineyards better,” says Collins. Grassing the soil in the affected area would dramatically cut erosion, he adds. The authors of the paper, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, think the amount of soil lost could be made three times smaller using grass and hedgerows. The researchers did not consider the impact of Boris Johnson, however, who memorably told Italy it would sell less prosecco if it failed to accept the UK’s Brexit demands.