As the season of goodwill gives way to January purposefulness, we need something other than food to bring us together as a nation. We need people and things to hate. Casual misbehaviour isn’t enough: a person or entity has to offend or solidify some core British value, some sensibility we don’t think other nations share. What makes a great public enemy? You think you can create one by sticking someone on a front page with a target on their face, and the headline “Public Enemy”? It’s not that simple. You can’t just find a public figure with a few atrocious cock-ups on their CV and make their name rhyme with something (see: Failing Grayling). Politicians make terrible hate figures anyway because everyone expects to hate them. Ex-politicians, different matter; we expect to feel neutral towards them, maybe on a slow day get their name a bit wrong. Remember our delight when we realised that we properly, deep-seatedly hated David Cameron? If the loathing of a person or thing is too partisan, someone will defend them – which creates more bitter division. And a hate figure can’t be anyone too obvious. Triggering the nation’s bile ducts is complex biology. When the target is acquired, though, the effort is all worth it. I’ve identified the first five hatees of 2019. However many more come along, these, I guarantee, will last us all year. Whether or not they really deserve it. Meghan Markle. There were rumours that the new duchess was making no friends in the palace, but it was hard to pick a side. She wanted to marry in a particular tiara, but, according to reports, the Queen wouldn’t let her because it was a Russian emerald, and Markle had a tantrum. So what are the moral parameters of this tiff? If you’ve got a load of emeralds so shady you can’t wear them, why not sell them and give the money to refugees? It emerged yesterday, however, that Markle has banned Prince Harry from drinking alcohol, coffee and tea for January. Ancient principles are at stake. This is a stone-cold classic, Guys and Dolls switcheroo (Marry the man today / give him the girlish laughter / give him your hand today / and save the fist for after). (Core values: marriage, tea.) Bacon. It gives you cancer, but so do loads of things. Nobody hates cigarettes (it’s smokers we can’t abide). It’s not the meat per se, it’s the nitrates, and you can’t hate a nitrate. This cured product acts so innocently delicious, so timelessly wholesome, when all along it’s been asbestos with tasty rind. The problem with bacon, see, is that it’s not on the level. (Core value: English breakfast.) Bros. The success of the documentary Bros: After the Screaming Stops will lead some production company to give the Goss brothers a reality show. The philosophising will pall after seven minutes, but the vehicle will be kept on the road for months. We’ll feel generalised embarrassment, and this, being uncomfortable, will morph straight into hatred. Mark my words. (Core value: the humility of the has-been.) The Ferry Company With No Ferries. It’s hard not to blame Seaborne Freight, contracted to provide emergency capacity on the short straits in the event of a no-deal Brexit. But at least Ferry McNonExistentFerryFace will give us all a laugh, as we sink, giggling, into the sea. (Core value: caustic resignation.) The Woman Who Looked As If She Punched a Police Horse. A woman in Adelaide was reported to have ambled up to a horse on New Year’s Eve and punched it. It turns out that she may have actually punched someone on the other side of the horse. But still, who would throw punches in the vicinity of a horse? (Core value: be kind to horses.)