Theresa May’s Brexit preparations could be thrown into fresh turmoil on Tuesday with Labour poised to support a backbench amendment tabled by Yvette Cooper that could restrict the government’s taxation powers unless a no-deal Brexit is taken off the table. The Labour frontbench is likely to whip its MPs to back the cross-party amendment to the finance bill, significantly increasing its chances of success in the Commons if it is selected by the Speaker, John Bercow. Around a dozen Tory MPs have also signalled their intention to back the amendment. Downing Street and the Treasury are still assessing the extent of the damage that the amendment could do to its ability to prepare for a no-deal Brexit. “It’s important we can take any steps necessary for leaving the EU, including in a no-deal scenario,” Theresa May’s spokesman said. Writing for the Guardian, Cooper said there was a growing danger that “brinkmanship, political paralysis, siren voices” could see the UK fall over a Brexit cliff-edge. “Just because most people don’t want something to happen, doesn’t mean it won’t,” she said. “So it is with a no-deal Brexit. I believe the majority of MPs, ministers and most people across the UK are opposed to the self-inflicted damage to our economy and security that would result from crashing out of the EU.” The extent of the effect that the amendment would have to stop a no-deal Brexit is still unclear, but its organisers also see it as vehicle to demonstrate the strength of parliamentary opposition to no deal. MPs are also beginning preparations to target other bills for similar blocking amendments include immigration, fisheries and trade. The amendment has the backing of a number of Labour and Conservative select committee chairs, including Tories Nicky Morgan and Sarah Wollaston, Labour’s Hilary Benn and Frank Field, the pro-Brexit chair of the work and pensions select committee. Former minister Nick Boles and Tory grandees Sir Oliver Letwin and Nicholas Soames have also given their support. Bercow must rule on whether to accept the amendment ahead of the finance bill debate on Tuesday but it is understood to have a high chance of selection if the debate goes ahead. Cooper said the amendment had support from MPs on both sides of the Brexit debate, including from those committed to backing May’s deal and those opposing it. “It doesn’t avoid the difficult debates and disagreements ahead over the best way forward, but it at least gives us the chance to rule out the worst outcome,” she said. The amendment to the finance bill, tabled over the weekend, is one of the first of a slew of parliamentary tactics expected to be adopted by MPs to try to prevent a no-deal Brexit. Its effect would be to restrict the government’s freedom to make Brexit-related tax changes without parliamentary safeguards. It would be attached to one clause in the finance bill, designed to give the government the power to keep tax law working in the event of a no-deal Brexit. If it is passed, it would mean that clause would only be allowed to come into force if there were either a Brexit deal, a decision to extend article 50, or a vote in the Commons specifically approving a no-deal Brexit. Morgan said that it was time for parliament to create a mechanism to stop no deal by default. “Many of us have been clear that parliament will not allow a no-deal situation to unfold, and with less than 12 weeks to go until 29 March it is time for parliament to show our opposition to a no-deal exit,” she said. Experts are divided about the effectiveness of the amendment in stopping a no-deal Brexit altogether. Nikki da Costa, the former Downing Street head of legislative affairs who has extensive experience navigating the difficult parliamentary arithmetic since 2017, said the Treasury would have to weigh up if the powers could be reinstated via another route. If the government finds a new way to grant itself the same powers, it could allow the amendment to pass. “The easiest route is to see if those powers really are essential and how quickly they may be needed,” Da Costa said, saying she believed the actual effect to be “relatively minor”. “If those amendments, for example to EU references in tax law, aren’t really problematic, and you can afford not to amend for some time after exit day, then you might just accept the amendment and find another legislative vehicle at a later date.” Other efforts are also under way to demonstrate the extent of parliamentary opposition to a no-deal Brexit. Tory ex-minister Dame Caroline Spelman, who organised the letter with Labour’s Jack Dromey, are set to meet the prime minister on Tuesdayafter co-ordinating a letter signed by 200 MPs calling for May to rule out a no-deal Brexit. MPs returning to Westminster on Monday have also launched a new drive for parliament to coalesce around the so-called Norway-plus option championed by Boles and Labour’s Stephen Kinnock. On Monday, Labour former shadow minister Lucy Powell and Tory Robert Halfon, who chairs the education select committee, launched a detailed plan for a Norway-style compromise arrangement that would result in the UK remaining mostly within the European single market. Their plan is laid out in a new pamphlet, entitled “Common market 2.0”, which says the UK should remain in the single market and ensure continuity in current customs arrangements. In a joint statement to launch the report, Powell and Halfon said the route was “the only sensible, common-sense Brexit deal that can work” and called for more MPs to support the plans. “Common market 2.0 offers Theresa May a last chance at a Brexit deal that can command a cross-party majority,” they said. “It is also the only deal that meets Labour’s six tests by delivering on Jeremy Corbyn’s call for a customs union and a strong single market deal.” Kinnock said the plan “respects the 52/48 mandate [of the referendum result], commands a parliamentary majority, deals with concerns about free movement, removes the need for the backstop and reunites our deeply divided country.”