It seems perverse yet unavoidably sensible to suggest that, of the six British players entered in the 2019 Australian Open, Andy Murray is by no means the most likely to reach the second week of a tournament he has been a finalist five times. He will do his best to get there, but recent history suggests the former world No 1 has less chance of making a memorable impact than Britain’s best woman, Johanna Konta, or even the world No 14 Kyle Edmund, cut down by a knee injury in Brisbane and forced to withdraw from the Sydney Open. Edmund’s declaration that he would “do everything I can to be fit for the first grand slam of the year” did not inspire confidence that he will be able to replicate his run to the semi-finals a year ago, although his team insist his injury is not serious. Murray’s fitness remains an ongoing puzzle. He confessed after a good win and a bad loss in his comeback in Brisbane this week that he had no idea how long he would stay in the game, but the angst in his voice suggested he will not go meekly. His hip still hinders his lateral movement, although his all-court speed is more convincing than during any of his 12 matches last year, when he beat two top-20 players in five wins. Certainly, he looked the part in beating James Duckworth in the opening round, but was disturbingly off the pace in two quick sets the following day when Daniil Medvedev put him out of a tournament he has won twice and in which he had been unbeaten. Katie Boulter and Heather Watson, who are warming up in Hobart, and Cam Norrie, who plays Benoît Paire in Auckland – where he grew up – complete the British sextet for the first grand slam of the season, which starts on 14 January . Still, for all their best ambitions, any of them would be pleased get past the first round. Which leaves Konta, 37 in the world and determined to put a nightmare 2018 behind her, as the standard bearer. Much has changed for Konta since she went out in straight sets to Agnieszka Radwanska in the first round here a year ago: her coach, her management and, more importantly, her strategy. She was candid over lunch in London a few weeks ago when she spoke about the reason for her dramatic slide in the rankings after a season when she had announced her arrival at the summit of her sport with three breakthrough titles and a run to the Wimbledon semi-finals. “I basically just ran out of steam,” she said. To fix that, she will play more selectively, she said, organising quality time to breath life back into her game and her enthusiasm for a sport she began in this city more than two decades ago. “I’m going to have cycles of tournaments, rest, train, tournaments, rest train,” she said. The plan began brilliantly in Brisbane, when she played the former US Open champion Sloane Stephens off the court, then dipped alarmingly by losing in straight sets to world No 46, Ajla Tomljanovic. It was a worrying echo of her struggles last summer but Konta’s self-belief has rarely been anything less than 100 %, despite serial losses to players a long way below her in the rankings. Konta’s mood will have improved after beating the Czech Miriam Kolodziejova 6-3, 6-2 in 71 minutes in Sydney yesterday. She acknowledged change was needed. So out went her American coach, Michael Joyce, after less than a full season, and in came the Frenchman Dimitri Zavialoff. She and Joyce had a frank discussion in Wuhan that both acknowledged, “We’d kind of come to the end of our road,” as Konta put it – and it was all done a week later in Beijing. Konta says of Zavialoff, her fifth coach in 10 years: “It is much more of a partnership than I have had in previous coaching relationships. He encourages me to have a lot more input. There has to be a certain amount of compatibility. The personalities start to evolve and then, when you spend more time together in stressful situations, it becomes more apparent how well the two work together. But that takes time.” Elsewhere, there is calm for one man seemingly immune to stress. Roger Federer’s 22nd successive win in Australia – since losing in the Hopman Cup two years ago – saw off Alexander Zverev and put Switzerland on the board against Germany in Perth on Saturday. Federer looked sharp, relaxed and happy. “It puts me in a good position [for Melbourne] which is wonderful,” he said to an adoring audience of more than 14,000. Wonderful for Federer . Not so great for opponents waiting for him to grow old more disgracefully. Novak Djokovic’s surprise loss to Roberto Bautista Agut in Doha the previous evening will have put a spring in the 37-year-old’s step and it is not beyond him to win his 21st slam in Melbourne, scene of his remarkable comeback after seven months out with a knee injury in 2017.