The psychology of the con artist is such, say those who study them, that the very best fraudsters are able to sail through lie-detector tests because they don’t believe themselves to be lying. This fact came to light in Fyre Fraud, one of two documentaries released this week about the 2017 Fyre music festival, a fiasco that traumatised hundreds of social media influencers and for which organiser Billy McFarland is serving a six-year prison sentence. What’s fascinating about the story, as told in both the Netflix and Hulu shows, is how deeply McFarland tapped into the self-deception of his targets, and how the companies that enabled him continue to thrive. The art of the con feels like the great expression of our age and McFarland – a grifter who, as well as having the brainwave to put on a music festival in the Bahamas, ran a credit card company and sold fraudulent tickets to exclusive events – is the sort of vapid buffoon whose naked untrustworthiness is so undisguised as to make him seem almost transparent. His downfall, and the defrauding of millennials with more money than sense, was considered deeply satisfying at the time and continues to be so in the retelling – particularly the part played by Kendall Jenner and her imitators, all of whom heavily promoted a festival that, when partygoers turned up in the Bahamas, was discovered to be a tent city with no catering and no music lineup. It is the role played by Instagram that continues to interest. All advertising is premised on the selling of an ideal but the efficiency with which social influencers inculcate inadequacy in their followers, then sell them products and experiences to fix their sad little lives, is creepier than anything that predates it and feels like the greater deception behind McFarland’s hustle. On social media, people whose income derives from promoting a fantasy version of their lives were persuaded by McFarland to endorse the festival. It’s a strange thing about the current celebrity landscape that while consumers have become more sophisticated – no one who watches Keeping Up With the Kardashians is under any illusion that it is spontaneous, nor that the Kardashians are a happy family – the same voodoo still works on them time and again. It’s a dynamic that makes sense, in a way. While traditional advertising is at a remove from everyday life, a personal photostream in which every shot is carefully curated has an “integrity” that broader branding can’t reach. In this scenario, the enjoyment of an experience is secondary to that of selling of it down the chain to one’s own followers, with the subsequent admiration and envy it’s hoped to cause. It doesn’t matter if the experience is fake, nor if the artifice is fully on show. All that matters, as someone as unlikely as Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez observed on Twitter recently, is that “the brand is so strong”. McFarland’s festival failed, but the delusion underpinning it rages on unabated. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist