In 1982, when she was 60 years old, Sara Berman left her husband of 38 years and her home in Tel Aviv, taking one suitcase with her. It contained a potato grater, an old travel clock, a silver funnel, a cookie press for making sesame cookies, and clothing. Berman moved to a small studio apartment in Manhattan’s West Village. Her two daughters lived in Manhattan and so did her grandson. One day, she decided to wear only white. She arranged her ironed, starched, folded white garments in totemic piles on white shelves in her white wardrobe, along with the three watches she liked to wear all at once, and one or two other objects. Hers was an “edited” life, says Berman’s daughter, Maira Kalman, and a quest “for beauty and clarity”. After Berman died, in 2004, Maira, an author and illustrator, and her sister were sorting out her mother’s effects. “It was when we were looking at this beautiful landscape of a closet and a life that the idea for an exhibition came,” recalls Maira. “‘We should save it,’ I said to my sister. ‘One day it will be an exhibit.’ I just knew it had to be part of our culture.” Berman’s grandson, Alex Kalman, a writer, designer and curator, agreed. But it wasn’t until 2014 that he acquired his first gallery space: a 4ft x 5ft disused freight elevator shaft in a Tribeca alleyway. He called it Mmuseumm. Sara Berman’s Closet was Mmuseumm’s second exhibit. Then, in 2017, the exhibit transferred to the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. It was quite a step up for its unknown owner and her humble collection of shirts, underwear and brogues. Rather than an endless accumulation of matter, what Berman had was intentionally acquired and placed there Visitors to the Met were captivated, says Alex. “We overheard visitors of all nationalities saying: ‘Who is this Sara Berman?’ They expected her to be someone of great historical importance.” Exhibiting the closet was, he says, “a way of expanding the narrative of whose stories are being told, and how and why”. “Everything is usually based on wealth at the Met,” adds Alex’s mother. “But we were taking something that was from the vernacular, that was intimate and from the everyday. It spoke to people.” “She became an unexpected hero,” says Alex. The closet certainly has a devotional intensity – and provokes outsider anxiety, even envy in those whose failure to impose order over the chaos of their material lives is writ large in their floor-drobes and paper mountains. But Berman was no ascetic, says Maira, and was “very funny”. The closet, like her lifestyle, was merely a kind of “offering” by a woman who “had found what was important” and measured her new stab at life in cherished routines: eating pizza with her grandson every Wednesday in the Museum of Modern Art’s cafeteria, watching Jeopardy! every night on TV, writing a weekly letter to her sister back in Tel Aviv. The public response to the exhibition inspired Maira and Alex to create the hybrid memoir, Sara Berman’s Closet. “This is a book about Sara,” we learn from handwritten text on a cover that features a portrait of Berman, painted by Maira. Her striking white suit and overcoat are offset against a fuchsia sidewalk and matching tree behind her. “And her journey to America. and eating Lemon ices. and the meaning of Time.” The imperfect punctuation and capitalisation are in keeping with Alex’s lyrical prose and Maira’s naive paintings. Along with family photographs and documents, they chronicle Berman’s early life in Belarus, her years in Israel and new beginnings in America. Berman’s existence “was about intentionality,” says Alex. “Rather than an endless accumulation of matter, what she had was intentionally acquired and placed there.” Her actions were equally mindful. The text opposite an illustration of a lemon and a letter states: “Every action was done with care. Every day was filled with precise and Brilliant Actions.” There is a feeling of energy and wit in the memoir; a sense of a life in motion held steady by order, routine and stillness. Berman was playful and had a keen sense of the absurd that ran counter to what was, hints her daughter, a difficult marriage. Her pared-down existence “was borne of necessity and sorrow,” says Maira. “She left my father. They had a reasonably well-to-do life with lots of possessions. She left that life. She got a studio apartment with not much room. You can’t accumulate too much. “But starting fresh, what do you need? A bed, a table you write letters on to your sister and iron on – a fantastic limitation. It was the greatest freedom she had ever encountered in her own life,” she says, calling to mind Virginia Woolf’s exaltation of private space in A Room of One’s Own. Berman loved ironing, and so does her daughter, who finds meaning in an act that symbolises the paramaters of her mother’s known world when she was growing up in Belarus. “She came from a small village. Women never walked outside the house. For them, the expression of work was to take care of the home and family with utmost devotion.” The elevation of the domestic to art recalls Tracey Emin’s 1998 Turner Prize-winning artwork, My Bed. If that was an unsettling expression of chaos, Berman’s closet is a paean to the soothing power of order and also, says Maira, to “what it reveals about us as humans: that we need to persevere in this thing called life and to find a way to do so with meaning.” Her curated life and uniform of white were “not for show”, says Maira. “She was beautifully dressed all her life. But she was not vain. It was all done with a great sense of humour and certainly not in a self-conscious manner. It came from a sense of pleasure and wellbeing.” The potato grater, like its owner, travels through space and time. “The most quotidian things in the world can have the most meaning,” says Maira. “What we are saying is, the most humble, the most simple, the smallest moments in life are really the sweetest and can live on through decades and through centuries. We never want to forget that. We like to think of Sara making her potato pancakes with the grater, and to think of her as a source of wisdom.” Remembering is, of course, a way of conquering time. It is fitting, then, that next year Sara Berman’s Closet will mark the Fourth of July celebrations. It will be exhibited beside the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia – “a monument to freedom and independence.” Alex says. “It raises the question of what is monument-worthy. Sara Berman’s Closet is a monument to a life lived with great humility and tenderness.” And an awful lot of starch. Sara Berman’s Closet by Maira and Alex Kalman is published by HarperDesign at £20