While most things seem to have been going down the pan, there’s been one phenomenon making a clean sweep: Mrs Hinch. The cleaning craze that swept social media in 2018 shows no sign of abating this year – and it could well help you through the January blues. For those not in the know, Hinch is an Essex hairdresser catapulted to fame through her highly watchable Instagram stories showing her … cleaning. Her followers have skyrocketed over a few months to 1.4 million people. This “Hinch army” faithfully watch her clean her immaculate house as she shares her domestic tips, which include giving names to all her products and working through a list of chores (mostly accompanied by a snatch of high-octane music) and always – always – ending the day with putting the sink to bed at night. It doesn’t sound like much, but trust me, it’s addictive. Her meteoric rise is no flash in a pan (or Flash in a toilet pan). We’re suddenly surrounded by a surge of love for keeping everything spick and span. From Facebook groups for people addicted to the disinfectant Zoflora (you’d think it was the elixir of life, the way people are stockpiling it) to the festive TV adverts advocating giving a spray that prevents the smell of poo as Secret Santa presents, cleaning has been promoted to the status of a hobby. And there’s a flourishing movement to get our homes as dirt-free, as sparkly and as fragrant as humanly possible. While the country is falling apart around us, with Brexit bananas, austerity anguish and climate meltdown misery, we need to turn to bleaching our toilets. This is no coincidence. Cleaning helps us find our way through a dirty world. It can heal us, soothe us, fix us. There’s an almost instant gratification to cleaning. No job is too large, too daunting, too much of a brain drain. From dusting to vacuuming to mopping, there’s a simple, ritualistic process we can follow, and which can make us feel as if we have achieved something. We have been able to make a positive impact on the negative turmoil of the world. Work is precarious and money is tight, but my sink is spotless and still smells of Festive Fireside. There’s also a mindfulness to cleaning. Concentrating on a task – be that just wiping down your kitchen cupboards with your Minkeh – physically and mentally allows us to escape whatever’s going on around us. It lets troubled minds find a place of peacefulness. Following a process from start to finish gets us to focus on just that one job in hand, dispelling all other anxieties and worries. Cleaning soothes. I know this. At the end of last year, my brother died – suddenly, unexpectedly and, unfathomably, aged 64, from a heart attack. In the immediate aftermath of the news, I was at a loss as to what to do. So I got out my neglected collection of cleaning products, and for a few hours, I scrubbed my bathroom, from top to bottom, sobbing intermittently, going through memories as I tackled mould, coming to terms with death as I removed layers of dust. At the end of my weeping housework, my bathroom looked clean for the first time in a long while. But more than that: I felt satisfied, soothed, and ready to return to the world stronger. Maybe in years gone by, when something so awful happened, we would have gone out and found resolve in a pint or three, or found happiness through a bout of retail therapy. But austerity’s purse strings have made a mindless bender in the pub or the shop more hassle than helpful. Sophie Hinchcliffe herself admits cleaning helped her with worry and anxiety attacks; many of her followers feel similarly. So don’t scoff at Dave and Vera, but rather try a spot of Hinching yourself. You may find that, like the Hinch army, you’re not just sweeping away the day’s dirt, you’re sweeping away the daily grind. • Kathryn Hearn is a Guardian assistant production editor