Sometimes, journalists have been heard to wonder if the moniker under which the so-called Angry Chef has blogged since 2015 is ironic. Before they meet Anthony Warner, they expect the character they encounter online: a choleric type whose white apron, metaphorically speaking, is liberally splattered with the blood of the charlatans and pseudo-scientists he spends his time so furiously pulling apart. But then in he walks, a quietly spoken, dorky-looking bloke with a neatly trimmed beard and distinctly non-architectural glasses, and disappointment rises inside them like a pan coming to the boil. Is he about to yell the F-word in their faces? No, he is not. He is just going to go on – and on – about such things as genes and hormones and the difference between a simple problem and a complex one. Is his temperament really so placid? I’m not at all sure it is. Warner, a former chef who went on to work as a development cook at Premier Foods, owner of brands such as Oxo and Mr Kipling, certainly has a careful, almost pedantic way of talking; his determination to avoid generalisations when it comes to talking about diet means he can be both somewhat verbose and a little humourless. He doesn’t swear anything like as a much as his alter-ego. Nevertheless, it’s pretty easy to wind him up. All sorts of things seem to make him irritated, including me. On the quiet – actually, not even on the quiet – he’s a massive inverted snob, always on the look-out for perceived slights against processed food and takeaways. When, for instance, I tell a funny (ish) story about how Marco Pierre White became furious when I revealed to him in an interview that I often make my own stock – White, the original angry chef, was then the face of Knorr cubes – Warner seems to grow just a little taller in his seat. “Well, I get equally upset when people demean others for using products,” he says. Hang on! I didn’t demean anyone. “No, but to have a society where people are made to feel guilty for making a pasta bake from a jar…” He picks up his knife and fork, and silently sets about attacking the food on his plate. Warner, who lives in Nottinghamshire, meets me for lunch at a restaurant in London where he has schnitzel with pommes aligot – a dish that is surely anathema to many, if not most, of the exasperatingly wrong-headed dietary “experts” who first induced him to begin writing his blog, given that it combines mashed potato with cheese to such powerfully alluring effect. But alas, once his order arrives, he all but ignores it for 20 minutes or so. The trouble is that his new book, which we are here to discuss, is on such tricky, nuanced territory, talking about it demands his full attention. “It’s mind-bogglingly complex,” he says. “When I started my research, even I wasn’t sure where I was going. The only thing I knew for certain was people were over-simplifying, and this is a subject that completely defies simple explanation.” Genetics accounts for around 70% of the reasons why someone might become fat Warner’s first book, The Angry Chef: Bad Science and the Truth about Healthy Eating, took apart every diet and food fad it’s possible to imagine; on the receiving end of his rage were, among other things, detoxing and the kind of nutritional nonsense purveyed by the likes of the Hemsley sisters, “Deliciously Ella” Mills and others who worship at the shrine of coconut oil. But these were, as he readily admits, pretty easy targets. His new book, The Truth About Fat, is altogether less focused in the sense that it is impossible to say, precisely, why levels of obesity may be rising, or what, if anything, can and should be done about this. Having waded through a lot of scientific papers and spoken to some of the world’s leading experts in this field, all Warner knows for sure is that body weight should not be defined, as it is now, as a behaviour – like smoking. “It’s the outcome of an enormously complicated set of circumstances,” he says. “This idea that willpower plays a part, that the overweight have some kind of personality deficit… Look at the evidence: that’s a ridiculous position to take. It’s just not true, and yet we’re conditioned to believe it is.” If his book has a message, then, it is that fat shaming, in all its various guises, must end. Calorie-reduction diets for weight loss do not, he writes in his book, work for the majority of people. Carbohydrates are not the enemy, and nor is sugar. Yet still we continue to regard those who are overweight as lazy and greedy (visibly overweight people are, among other things, less likely to be promoted at work, and more likely to be convicted of a crime by a jury) – cue even more misery for them as they embark on yet another regime that will inevitably fail. Why, he asks, are we not kinder? If we knew the facts, we surely would be. “The most shocking statistic I learned while I was writing the book was about binge-eating disorder in bariatric surgery populations,” he says. “Fifty per cent of those who have this surgery [a procedure that tackles obesity by reducing the size of the stomach] suffer from it, a condition that is very strongly associated with childhood trauma. It’s an expression of complex mental health problems.” Bariatric surgery, he believes, does help a great many people. But it still amazes him that the case against it isn’t made more often:.“If this was a drug, one that killed one in 200 people who took it, it wouldn’t get anywhere near being prescribed.” Warner has trouble with current definitions of obesity. He thinks body mass index, a number calculated by dividing a person’s weight in kilograms by the square of their height in metres, is too blunt a tool to be helpful (you tip from being overweight to being obese if your BMI is between 30 and 35). When, in 1997, the World Health Organisation moved the BMI of a person of normal weight from 27 to 25, millions of people woke up to find they had a health problem; he believes this change was based on questionable data. More significantly, he questions the notion of an “obesity epidemic”. Such language is unhelpful, not least because it suggests the race is on for a single “cure” when no such thing exists. Moreover, while populations may well be putting on weight, there is evidence to suggest that obesity, far from being an epidemic, has mostly affected only a small number of vulnerable individuals. The factors involved in weight gain are so multifarious, and interconnected in such complex and still elusive ways, it’s all but impossible to summarise them (for all Warner’s efforts to be as clear as possible for the lay reader, the 330 pages of his book are probably best described as chewy). Over lunch, I have a go at getting him to talk about some of these in a single sentence or so. Sometimes, he’s able to do it. Sometimes, he simply can’t. On the subject of genes, for instance, the evidence is (relatively) straightforward: “Body weight is one of the most inherited characteristics ever studied,” he says. “Genetics accounts for around 70% of the reasons why someone might become fat.” But when we move to hormones things get radically more complicated. “Historically, the biggest threat to human beings has been starvation. We have a system in place, and when our body thinks it’s not getting enough food, that hormonal system kicks in. It is almost impossible to override. It’s as powerful as the desire to breathe.” If he talked me through this system now, we’d probably still be here at dinnertime. On exercise, he notes that even if people are more sedentary than in the past – he’s not sure that we are – it is nevertheless quite difficult to expend more calories than you consume. “We’d have to run for an hour and a half to burn off the meal we’re eating now,” he says, eyeing my steak and chips. If we exercised more, it would, he thinks, make a huge difference to our health – to our mental health, and to the composition of our bodies in terms of muscle – but not necessarily to our weight. Nor is he into the idea of, say, banning takeaways from operating in the vicinity of schools. “It would be better if we could work with businesses to improve their food. Lots of fried chicken joints are still using hydrogenated vegetable oil. It would be easy to ban that, without any impact on the quality of their food.” His hunch is that those who are keen on takeaway bans simply find it “distasteful that young people like to hang out in them… It’s a culturally driven thing.” Warner, the son of a Hertfordshire accountant who fell into working as a chef having enjoyed the kitchen jobs he did as a biochemistry student in Manchester, famously believes that processed food can have the same value as any other kind of food; that we’re wrong to think something made from scratch is “better” or healthier. So does he cook from scratch at home? (He and his partner have a young daughter.) “Sometimes. But I worry about talking about how I cook. What works in my life might not fit into someone else’s.” When, after 20 years as a chef, he began working at Premier Foods (now he’s a writer, he still consults), it was fascinating to learn what “challenges” people faced when cooking at home. “I spent a lot of time doing focus groups and going to people’s houses, and most people know more than we give them credit for. They do know how to roast a chicken – and even if they don’t, the reasons for that won’t change unless their socio-economic conditions change. The number of times I’ve heard celebrity chefs tell people to buy a cheap cut of meat and slow cook it! Those recipes are written by someone who has no idea what it’s like to have to watch your electricity.” I have the impression he believes a special place in hell is reserved for those people – I’m not sure who they are, but he certainly seems to think they do exist – who believe the problem of obesity would be solved virtually overnight if only everyone knew how “to make their own hummus”. Still, all this surely leaves us with a problem. If the message does eventually get through that diets and exercise don’t work, and that a lot of our trouble lies with our genes, then why would anyone bother to do anything at all to change their lifestyle? Warner doesn’t exactly have an answer to this, beyond telling me he hopes only to help people accept complexity in the matter of weight gain, that we need better information and fewer false prophets, and to insist that, no, he really doesn’t wish to downplay the notion we do have a problem with obesity. “I know this will be framed as: ‘You don’t care about the health of the nation, you only care about your pay masters at big food.’ But I do think there are serious problems, even if they’re not necessarily the ones people think.” He’s not sure the message will ever get through. Just look at me: I’ve read his book, yet still I’m asking my naughty Protestant questions about self-control (not to mention telling him how I like to get off the bus a stop earlier, the better to try and shrink my bum). And he’s just as bad, in a way. As he’s perfectly willing to admit, if he ever began to get fat, he would almost certainly embark on a diet himself. (Warner has, incidentally, always been slim – something that, thanks to his genes, has never involved any effort on his part.) It is, he says, part of the human condition that we cling to ideas we know in our hearts to be worthless; to narratives that are little more than the result of a certain kind of brainwashing. In this sense, he’s every bit as human as some of those he is apt to attack. “We want short cuts,” he says. “We look at a diet, and we think: that looks OK. I only have to cut out this or that. And so we try it.” He eats the last morsel of schnitzel. Unsurprisingly, given the turn of our conversation, it seems to give him no pleasure at all. The Truth About Fat (Oneworld, £14.99) is published on 10 January. Order it for £13.19 from guardianbookshop.com