We still don’t have an oven in our new flat. Things that require one need carrying down a flight of stairs, across the internal courtyard and up two flights to my friend’s studio. She’s often away, so I let myself in, put whatever it is in the oven, set the timer on my phone and go home. When my pocket rings, I run back over. Our courtyard is not unused to cooking smells – in fact, it’s a vortex of them, the ovens and vents of a ground-floor bakery, trattoria, bar and canteen-like tavola calda competing for air. There are also the 64 kitchens in 64 flats over five floors that open on to the courtyard, including my friend’s studio. By the time I get to the courtyard, I have an absolute noseful. But today it was meat and potato pie. The smell of beef, onions and potato, a thick, purposeful and savoury scent of meat steaming and braising underneath a pie crust, and the smell of pastry itself, made me stop and catch my breath. In that hot scent were Yorkshire and Lancashire market stalls; my gentle grandparents and the oval meat and tatty pies that warmed our hands but gave us heartburn; their house, which always seemed to smell of worry, meat and potatoes; and, of course, Granny’s pub, and the endless meat and tatty pies eaten there. Then, as I ascended the stairs, the smell was also of Sicily, the wedges of olive-oil pastry torta we eat there in bars with strip lighting and curtains of lotto tickets. The odd combination of Sicilian and Lancashire aromas came about because I was trying a classic meat-and-potato filling in an Italian olive-oil crust, which some might say is sacrilege, but seemed a good pastry-filling match, especially for an Englishwoman with Lancastrian roots who lives with a Sicilian. This pastry is a good match for a meat and potato filling, because it stretches and can be twisted closed, making for a sturdy and functional pie. Alternatively, there is classic lard dough, which is tender and softly flaky. Of all the pies, meat and tatty is the best and most complete, I think: substance, softness and a starchy, enveloping gravy. The pleasure of pie is the same as the pleasure of a good short story – an enticing beginning (top), a fully flavoured middle and a satisfying end (base). I always wish for mashed potato with pies, except for meat and potato pie, when I wish for peas. I didn’t have any, so in their absence I had bread, butter and pickles – crisp, sweet and sharp – which provided a good alternative to accompany a pie I have carried through my life, across a courtyard and up a flight of stairs. Choose between the lard and the olive oil pastries. For the lard pastry150g lard, diced and frozen for 10 minutes250g plain flourSalt3–4 tbsp iced water For the olive-oil pastry450g plain flourSalt2 tbsp olive oilAbout 200ml water, at room temperature For the filling400g stewing steak, diced to 2.5cm cubes100g kidneys (optional)200g onion, diced250g potato, diced1 heaped tbsp plain flourSalt and black pepper75ml cold waterMilk, for brushing To make the lard pastry, rub the lard into the flour and salt until it resembles coarse breadcrumbs, then add just enough iced water to bring everything together into a dough ball. Knead briefly, wrap in clingfilm and chill for an hour. Alternatively, to make the olive-oil pastry, put the flour and salt in a large bowl, add the oil and enough warm water to make a soft, putty-like dough, knead for one minute, then wrap in clingfilm and chill for 30 minutes. Put the meat, potatoes, onion and flour in a bowl, season generously with salt and pepper and toss well with your hands. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 and pop in a baking tray. Roll two-thirds of the dough into a disc large enough to line – and overhang – a 20cm wide x 4cm deep, ideally loose-bottomed, pie tin. Pile the filling into the pie, carefully pour over the water, brush the edges with milk. Roll out the final third of the pastry into a disc wide enough to cover the top, roll it over the filling, and pinch or twist the edges together carefully. Make two slits in the top of the pie. Put on the preheated baking tray and bake for 25 minutes, then reduce the heat to 160C (140C fan)/325F/gas 3, and bake for another hour for the lard pastry (cover it with foil if it looks to be browning too quickly), and a little more than an hour for the olive-oil pastry. Let the pie sit for 15 minutes, then serve with peas or pickles.