Say what you like about the Rugby Football Union but it leads the world when it comes to totting up rugby injuries. Since 2002 there has been a painstaking audit of every twanged hamstring and strained ankle, with the aim of identifying trends rather than jumping to instant conclusions. It is unglamorous work but thank goodness someone has been doing it. Because each year we discover a little more about how the game is changing, for better or worse. The year 2017-18 figures are as thought-provoking as ever, not least the massive spike in injuries at England training sessions and the ever-lengthening periods that top players, on average, are out with injury. Concussions, by contrast, are fractionally down, although the experts are not yet sure if that is merely a blip. As with all statistics, perceptions tend to be shaped by those quoted in headlines rather than buried in the small print. Next year, when data from every major competition in both hemispheres will also be available for comparison, promises to be even more instructive. Unless, of course, rugby’s future ultimately boils down to an entirely separate question: what constitutes acceptable risk? What is “too dangerous” and who gets to define that? Rugby, as a contact sport, will always involve discomfort but at what point do personal choice and health and safety irrevocably part company? This particular debate also now has to be viewed in the context of the concussion-based litigation already transforming the landscape in American football. For all that, the views of Dr Simon Kemp, the RFU medical services director, on the subject of “responsible risk management” in rugby are worth contemplating, too. “It’s not for medics to determine if something is acceptable or not,” Kemp said. “You have to put it in context with other risks we’re exposed to in life. What about the risk of driving a car to and from training and matches, for example?” The health benefits of exercise and the joys of collaborative team sport also help to balance the equation. A life without rugby might be physically less painful but seriously deficient in other ways. Furthermore, as Kemp went on to emphasise, “one person’s evaluation of risk may be quite different from someone else’s, even with the same data available”. Those who would ban rugby on the basis of little Johnny breaking a finger aged 10 are never going to see the world through the same eyes as those looking to make it their profession. Such is human nature; born mountaineers and instinctive sofa dwellers are rarely going to chime either. Rugby, even so, urgently needs to clarify one crucial aspect if the sport is serious about prospering globally. For all the philosophical rights and wrongs, those in charge must now reach a definitive, far-sighted consensus on what is or isn’t an acceptable tackle, whether the participants weigh 70kg (11st) or 140kg. Damian Hopley, the Rugby Players’ Association chief executive, admits even a roomful of pro players could not agree in November whether Owen Farrell’s late match-turning no-arms tackle against South Africa should have been penalised or not. Will Spencer’s red card for Leicester against Wasps also sharply divided opinion. Which, as Hopley rightly says, invites a fundamental question: where does rugby go next? Does it really draw a line on the shirt above which a card is guaranteed? Fine in theory, unworkable if the ball carrier is stooping and it is also unlikely to impress shirt sponsors. Should the number of players on the field be reduced to, say, 12 on the basis that fewer bodies equals more space and, potentially, fewer collisions? Does the sport dare go back to old-school legal rucking – the answer will be no – and make itself less upright? Or does it do what it so frequently does and just tinker around the edges until the next crisis erupts? Encouragingly, it would appear everyone from World Rugby downwards recognises the time for procrastination is long gone. While Kemp reckons a significant reduction in training injuries through better player management is entirely achievable – “Training injuries are not down to luck” – no one is yet claiming to have found the silver bullet to make rugby safe for all. This week’s figures undoubtedly help inform the debate and may have bought rugby’s well-meaning authorities some extra time but, with recent tragic deaths in France focusing everyone’s minds, they should not obscure the continuing reality. If the game’s injury statistics soar any higher, history will not judge its modern guardians kindly.