While not as overtly egregious as the awards handed out in the film categories – Seriously? Bohemian Rhapsody? Seriously? – the television half of this year’s Golden Globes still managed to smear itself across a spectrum ranging from “well-deserved” to “sit down, dad, you’re drunk”.We’ll start with the latter, because that’s more fun. If you take the opinion of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association as gospel, which you probably shouldn’t (Bohemian Rhapsody? Really?), the biggest lesson to learn from last night’s awards is that comedy is in the worst trouble of its life. Of the three categories reserved for comedy – best actor, best actress, best series – two went to Netflix’s The Kominsky Method and one went to Amazon’s The Marvelous Mrs Maisel. This would be fine if either of these shows were remotely funny or good, but they’re not, so it isn’t. The Kominsky Method is a middling autumnal wist-com shored up by a big-ticket cast, and any given episode of The Marvelous Mrs Maisel is roughly the television equivalent of being beaten to death by a Puppini Sisters CD you found at a car boot fair. What a waste of three perfectly good trophies. Look at the list of nominees and you’ll find shows that are smarter, braver and – importantly – actually capable of making you laugh. Barry was in there. Atlanta was in there. The Good Place was in there. GLOW was in there. All of them are more deserving than the actual winners, which are both the sort of show you’d expect to blare out unwatched at full volume in the corner of a residential home common room. Good comedy does actually exist, HFPA. Do better next year. Luckily, the drama category winners were less alarmingly wayward. The Americans probably won best TV series because it’s finished now, and awards shows such as these have a habit of posthumously course-correcting, but it was deserved nevertheless. Maybe now the series is as critically acclaimed as it always deserved to be, people will actually start watching it. Probably not. Patricia Clarkson’s win for Sharp Objects was also undeniable. Her character was one of last year’s biggest TV monsters, and she played it so chillingly that she’s single-handedly preventing me from ever rewatching the series. And it was great that Golden Globes co-host Sandra Oh won for her funny and complicated role on Killing Eve, even if she did spaff away a perfectly good acceptance speech at the end of the her opening monologue. Ben Whishaw winning for A Very English Scandal was thoroughly deserved, since a lesser actor would have steered his character into a one-note comic territory. Richard Madden winning for Bodyguard, though, was a little weird. Compared to, say, Matthew Rhys in The Americans, he tended to come across as a little flat. If he’s named as the next James Bond, it’ll be because of this. And so to The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story. Hopes weren’t exactly high for this gem of a series before the ceremony; not only was it written off as a dud compared to The People v OJ Simpson, but it faced some titanic competition in the form of Sharp Objects, A Very English Scandal and – in the acting category – Benedict Cumberbatch. The fact that it won twice, for best limited series and best actor, feels a little like vindication for those of us who fell for it from the start. It wasn’t a perfect show – the fact that Edgar Ramirez and Penelope Cruz were both nominated for their respective fling-it-at-a-wall-and-see-what-sticks accents remains bewildering – but it was gripping and livid and Darren Criss’ central performance was nothing short of mesmerising. The Golden Globes notoriously gets weak at the knees around big stars (which is presumably why it overlooked the fact that The Kominsky Method is stupid and bad) so for a relative newcomer like Criss to beat the likes of Hugh Grant, Benedict Cumberbatch, Antonio Banderas and Daniel Bruhl is a true achievement.