What had been looking like the toughest selection of Eddie Jones’s three-year England tenure has once again been hijacked by events. The unavailability of Ben Te’o for the opening Six Nations Test has not merely blown a sizeable hole in the coach’s midfield strategy but dispelled any notion that, at last, England have uncovered the secret of keeping their best players fit. With Brad Shields and Joe Cokanasiga also unavailable to feature, the first England team announcement of the calendar year on Thursday is no longer quite as hard to predict as it might have been. That said, Jones still has some major calls to make, not just in the context of the championship but the World Cup as well. While Manu Tuilagi may finally be back, does anyone know for certain what Jones’s best combination look like? The time for fudging certain problems has long gone and, assuming England wish to go big in Japan, the Ireland game in Dublin on Saturday offers Jones one of his last serious opportunities to resolve them. Ireland have become formidable opponents at home and escaping Joe Schmidt’s tactical vice on the opening Six Nations weekend would be the biggest achievement of Jones’s rollercoaster tenure to date. So which way to proceed? In certain positions Jones’s best men virtually pick themselves. Both Vunipolas and a refreshed Maro Itoje, for example, are fit and ready to add legitimate punch. With Sam Underhill injured, Tom Curry has to start on the openside. Ditto Jamie George at hooker with Dylan Hartley still nursing his grumbly knee. More tricky, in light of Te’o’s misfortune, is where to deploy Owen Farrell, who may have to wear his captain’s armband on the sleeve of the No 12 jersey. George Ford is a more than capable fly-half but, with so much riding on the Dublin match, this was a game seemingly made for Farrell at 10. The spine of a team is always crucial, as Ireland have been demonstrating repeatedly. From Rory Best through James Ryan, Conor Murray, Johnny Sexton and Rob Kearney there were absolutely no weak links in 2018. George, Itoje and Billy Vunipola offer a similar sense of security and Jones would love this Six Nations to remove any lingering uncertainty about his best options in the equally pivotal positions of 9, 10 and 15. At scrum-half, for instance, Ben Youngs has not always looked himself at Leicester this season, for whatever reason. Danny Care and Richard Wigglesworth are not involved at all. Quite why Wasps’ Dan Robson is still waiting to make his Test debut is a mystery but asking him to start this particular fixture, opposite the classy Murray, would be a seriously tall order. It makes more sense to ask Youngs to restate an unanswerable claim with Robson, for now, on the bench. Further down the backline, things start to become devilishly complicated. Much of it hinges on Jones’s decision at full‑back. A recall for Mike Brown to help defuse Ireland’s aerial threat appears increasingly on the cards but if Elliot Daly shifts to the wing that means omitting either the in-form Chris Ashton or Jack Nowell from the 23. Ultimately it boils down to precisely what Jones has in mind for Japan. Come the World Cup, Cokanasiga and Watson will also be in the back-three mix, with Jonathan Joseph also around to compete for the outside‑centre berth. If Jones still regards Daly as his World Cup full-back it hardly makes sense to reinstate Brown now. And is playing Daly on the wing ahead of Ashton and Nowell really the best use of the Wasps man’s considerable talent? Given his side’s distinctly moderate record in Dublin and with the try-scoring threat of Jacob Stockdale further complicating the equation, a starting back three of Nowell, Brown and May would be the most defensively solid option, with Ashton, Daly and Jonny May a more freewheeling alternative. A possible compromise would be Daly (whose long-range goalkicking would also be useful), Brown and May with Tuilagi and Slade forming a midfield duo that, but for injury, would have been trialled long ago. Could that combination unsettle Ireland? Given enough ball and some forward momentum, it just might. It may be seen by some as a bit of a risk but Jones already knows what the Ford‑Farrell axis can offer and retaining Slade as an extra tactical kicking option against Ireland also makes sense. Midfield power is perfectly fine but you also need players who can pass, kick shrewdly, create space for others and make consistently sound defensive decisions. If for any reason the Tuilagi-Slade combo does not instantly gel, Ford could be deployed for the last 25 minutes with Nowell also available to cover a number of eventualities from the bench. Elsewhere, given Ireland’s lineout threat, there is also a strong case for George Kruis in the second row, leaving Courtney Lawes or Joe Launchbury – or both – to make an impact later. Questions, questions. Injuries continue to bombard the Jones project but World Cup-winning coaches make their own luck. Robert Kitson’s England team to face Ireland: M Brown (Harlequins); E Daly (Wasps), H Slade (Exeter), M Tuilagi (Leicester), J May (Leicester); O Farrell (Saracens), B Youngs (Leicester); M Vunipola (Saracens), J George (Saracens), K Sinckler (Harlequins), M Itoje (Saracens), G Kruis (Saracens), M Wilson (Newcastle), T Curry (Sale), B Vunipola (Saracens). Replacements L Cowan-Dickie (Exeter), E Genge (Leicester), H Williams (Exeter), J Launchbury (Wasps), C Lawes (Northampton), D Robson (Wasps), G Ford (Leicester), J Nowell (Exeter). Rugby’s assorted powerbrokers have been meeting in Los Angeles to try to resolve the long-running debate about how the sport’s international future should be structured. Striking the right balance between satisfying core audiences and attracting new fans remains fundamental, as is the case with the club game. One word of warning: one of the most frequent reasons southern hemisphere players give for relocating north, aside from the money, is the chance to spend less time sitting on aeroplanes en route to away games. World leagues and continental play‑offs sound fine in theory but if it means players spending half their lives at 35,000 feet then their enjoyment will swiftly dwindle. Both the men’s and women’s Six Nations will be under close scrutiny this year when it comes to high tackles. The sport cannot afford any more high-profile instances to go unpunished and referees will be told as much in a conference call this week. The number of tries in the men’s tournament last season – 78 – was a Six Nations record and, weather permitting, there must be a good chance of a similarly high tally this season as well.