Israeli prosecutors have charged a 16-year-old Israeli settler with manslaughter after he was accused of throwing a rock at a speeding car and killing a Palestinian woman. According to the indictment, the suspect deliberately targeted the family car on 12 October in the occupied West Bank in an anti-Arab attack “as part of an act of terror”. The teenager, who has not been named, was also charged with intentional sabotage of a vehicle “under terrorist circumstances” after his DNA was found on the 2kg rock. Lawyers for the suspect have claimed he was not connected to the incident. Aisha Rabi, 48, and mother of eight, was travelling home along a highway late at night when the jagged rock plummeted down from a hill. Her eight-year-old daughter was in the back seat and her husband, who was driving, told the Guardian he believed it was a hate crime. Settler violence against Palestinians living in the West Bank has been rising since the beginning of 2017, according to the UN. A tally by the local Haaretz newspaper said “nationalist crimes”, such as beatings, stonings and painting anti-Arab or anti-Muslim slogans, tripled in 2018. Incidents often followed violence by Palestinians against Israelis living in West Bank settlements. During the past month, the Shin Bet internal security agency arrested five youths “for grave terrorism offences”, all of them students in an Israeli settlement yeshiva, a Jewish education centre, near where the attack occurred. The agency had initially called for a media blackout on the highly sensitive case, even as supporters of the teenage settlers launched a public battle to discredit Israeli security services. Four of the boys were released to house arrest, but only after their supporters had accused the Shin Bet and the police of illegal interrogations and mistreatment of minors in detention. A lawyer for one of the suspects said his 15-year-old client was shackled to a chair. Israeli far-right and pro-settlement groups have protested outside the residence of the prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, to call on him to intervene. The outcry comes in the lead-up to an April election in which several politicians are seeking votes from the far right. A member of Netanyahu’s ruling Likud party compared the Shin Bet to the Soviet KGB and accused it of “torturing Jewish boys”. In response to the criticism, the Shin Bet took the unusual step of defending itself, saying there was an ongoing effort to “slander” and “delegitimise” the agency. “Such action should be condemned, we must be allowed to continue with our activities to prevent terrorism, whether Jewish or Palestinian,” it said. The agency has questioned other students at the yeshiva and said settler activists drove to the school on the morning after the attack to brief students on how to prepare for Shin Bet interrogations.