Kenya’s president has vowed to “relentlessly pursue” anyone involved in the Nairobi hotel complex attack, confirming earlier reports that 14 civilians had died. Uhuru Kenyatta said security forces killed all four militants who stormed the dusitD2 hotel in the centre of the Kenyan capital, and that operations there had ended. “We will seek out every person who was involved in the funding, planning and execution of this heinous act,” Kenyatta said. “We will pursue them relentlessly wherever they will be until they are held accountable.” A Briton and an American have been confirmed among the dead in the attack, which began shortly after 3pm on Tuesday with an explosion in the parking lot and then a suicide bomb blast in the hotel’s foyer. The assault on the compound in the centre of the Kenyan capital, containing restaurants, a spa and several office buildings housing international companies as well as the luxury hotel, was the most high-profile by terrorists in Kenya for many years. It was claimed by al-Shabaab, the militant Islamist organisation based in neighbouring Somalia, on its in-house radio network and online. Al-Shabaab was responsible for an attack on Nairobi’s Westgate Mall in 2013 that left at least 67 people dead. Images from security cameras showed four young men in black combat fatigues and armed with AK47s entering the compound. The gunmen initially targeted a bank and diners at a Thai restaurant, prompting panic. Survivors reported hearing a shattering blast and saw people mown down by gunmen as they sat at a cafe. Victims were left lying on tables, bleeding. “We were changing our shifts, and that is when I heard a loud blast and people were screaming,” said Enoch Kibet, who works as a cleaner at the cafe and managed to crawl out of a basement gate. “I couldn’t believe I was alive. The blast was so loud and shook the whole complex.” In the hours after the attack, the gunmen and security forces engaged in a series of sporadic but fierce firefights. Plumes of smoke rose into the air from several burning cars. “There was a bomb, there is a lot of gunfire,” said one man working at the complex, who asked not to be named. Others described office workers hiding under desks or sheltering behind makeshift barricades. Casualties were still being brought out of the complex at about 7am on Wednesday morning, when gunfire and blasts were heard. A heavily armed member of the British SAS who was reportedly on a training mission with Kenyan special forces was pictured helping to evacuate people during the attack. A woman rescued from the hair salon she manages in the dusitD2 complex on Tuesday also survived the Westgate attack, local media reported. “I was working there when the attackers stormed in, it was not easy just like today. All I can say is that I thank God,” Tracy Wanjiru told Nairobi News. Wanjiru said she heard a loud explosion on Tuesday and went out to see what was happening. “I jumped back to the salon, told my colleagues to be keen because we were under attack. They dismissed me at first but when they heard wails and screams, everyone went into hiding,” she said. Western and international security officials have told the Guardian they warned Kenyan counterparts about potential high-profile attacks by al-Shabaab, an affiliate of al-Qaida, over Christmas and the new year. The attack came exactly three years after an al-Shabaab attack on a Kenyan military base in El Adde in Somalia, in which about 140 Kenyan soldiers were killed. Experts say the organisation has other motivations for attacking Nairobi, a city it sees as a “western bastion”. Kenyatta said operations to “deter, disrupt and defeat” terrorists were under way throughout Kenya. “I assure every Kenyan and foreign visitors that you are safe in Kenya,” he said.