Encouraging news for the embattled Wada president, Sir Craig Reedie, as the founder Wada president, Dick Pound, rides eye-catchingly to his defence. By way of recap, Russia last week missed the deadline to allow the World Anti‑Doping Agency access to the Moscow laboratory that was at the heart of its massive state-sponsored doping programme. This deadline was itself a bizarre act of faith on Wada’s part, given that Russia has failed to comply with two crucial recommendations of the McLaren report which uncovered the vast scale of their cheating. Anyway, the predictably missed deadline has gone down like the proverbial sandwich with many national anti-doping authorities, as well as many clean athletes who increasingly despair of the notion that Wada is run in their interests, and not those of states to which Wada’s main funder, the IOC, may wish to cosy up. But they’re all wrong, apparently. Dick has penned an article in which he explains that the reaction “has all the elements of a lynch mob”. Does it? I hesitate to resort to a Family Fortunes analogy, given the subject matter. But if you asked a hundred people what “all the elements of a lynch mob” were, and we pictured Vernon Kay waiting for the percentages to pop up on the big screen, I imagine our survey would have said something quite different. “Forty-nine people said ‘racists’,” Vernon might reveal. “Forty-one said ‘noose’ …. Seven said Deep South … I’m sorry, we’ve got nothing for ‘despairing anti-doping executives’ or ‘some newspaper articles’. Athletes, you have a chance to steal.” Leaving aside the question of whether it is remotely appropriate to cast an equivalence between robust criticism and actual lynching, Dick’s suggestion that the criticism is driven by ignorance of due process simply doesn’t stand up. Not only did Wada row back on its own terms for Russian readmission, but Reedie’s own predecessor in the president’s chair, David Howman, accused the agency of bowing to pressure. “This looks like they have taken the decision to deviate from a carefully put-together roadmap for entirely pragmatic reasons,” he judged. “Wada has gone from being an organisation that cared about clean athletes to one that cares about international federations that have not been able to stage events in Russia: it’s money over principle.” Reading Pound’s defence of Reedie’s stewardship, it is hard not to see Wada as just another club of the same sort of men who stick together. Of more immediate concern is its apparent faith that the Russian authorities are also chaps cut from similar cloth. In Michael Cockerell’s documentary about the great offices of state, a former foreign office official outlined something called “the Wykehamist fallacy”. “Intelligence failures very often come not because you can’t see what’s happening,” he smiled wryly, “but because you misinterpret the intentions. You read their intentions as if they’d been educated at Winchester, you know, and they haven’t been – they’re a bunch of thugs. And actually their intentions aren’t our sort of intentions, and they may not be bluffing – they may be out to do something catastrophically dangerous.” I can’t help feeling there is rather a lot of this naivety to Reedie (and now to his defender, Pound). Back last year when he was justifying the decision to chuck the Russians a bone, Reedie described the notion that Russia might miss the deadline as “inconceivable”. He must now conceive of such a thing, but the damage caused to his organisation – and, by more important extension, to the believability of sport – has been serious. If Wada continues to misidentify its enemies, it may become critical. And so to news that Wayne Rooney was arrested and fined last month at a Washington airport, after being accused of intoxication in a public place and swearing at police. According to his spokesman, Rooney was “disorientated” after taking “a prescribed amount of sleeping tablets mixed with some alcohol consumption”. He was on a private flight back from a one-day promotional trip to Saudi Arabia. The feelings of DC airport cops notwithstanding, some will find the Saudi Arabia element of the tale the most distasteful, for all the good it might have done Rooney’s business. Saudi Arabia is a country where women have historically not even been allowed into football stadiums. That all changed this time last year, you may recall, as part of a much-praised drive by Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to “reform” his country, which was all going so well until his operatives murdered and dismembered a prominent journalist inside an embassy. Still, you will note that MBS has shaken off the haters in a very “you do you” way, and is continuing to bomb and starve Yemenis into the world’s deepest humanitarian catastrophe with the various weapons we continue to sell his family. Sorry, where were we? Ah yes. Football. Of course. With regards to Rooney, there is something very “football now” about getting wasted on top of your Ambien as you are private jetted from 18 hours’ sportswashing duty in arguably the ghastliest country in the world, back to Washington DC where you are seeing out your playing days far from home, and without even the sunshine lifestyle benefits so often touted as the perks of an LA Galaxy contract. I’m not saying Rooney has suffered enough for this latest misdemeanour, or even that he was aware of why a trip to Saudi should be right down his to-do list. But none of this is really the football you dream of when you’re a kid, is it, and all the money in the world can’t self-medicate that.