You might think it obvious that nobody wants to pay more for their wine, but that’s not entirely true. “People often say to me: ‘Oh, I only drink expensive wines,’” says Sam Caporn, the wine expert and self-styled Mistress of Wine. “They say it’s because they don’t get headaches from them, but it’s the alcohol that gives you the headache, not the price!” When it comes to buying wine there’s a lot of misinformation out there, and one of the most common misconceptions is that spending a lot of money on a bottle means you will like it. But it might not be your style, it might be overpriced or you could be drinking it for completely the wrong occasion. So, with Brexit approaching – and with it rising prices for wine – how can we sniff out the best value when it comes to buying a bottle? Yes, I’m aware that I’m starting an article about buying cheap wine by telling you to spend more money on wine. You wouldn’t get a fitness guide that began with the suggestion that you should eat twice as many doughnuts. But very rarely will you find good wine at the very cheapest price points. And you want good wine, right, rather than sugary chemicals in a bottle? Caporn points out that the £7-a-bottle price point is where you start seeing real value. Anything below that and you’re paying for the bottle, the labelling, the shipping, the duty, the VAT … if you’re lucky, there’s a few pennies left for the actual liquid. “Don’t feel bad about spending a bit more,” says Michael Sager, from east London wine bar Sager and Wilde, who recommends a £10 starting point. “We’re not in France. We don’t produce wine en masse, affordably in a sustainable way, so this is just what it costs.” Do you know what wine you like? It sounds like a silly question but, according to Caporn, a lot of people don’t. Getting value for your money when it comes to wine involves at least a bit of legwork on your part – noting down which grapes, regions and styles you prefer, and progressing from there towards specific producers and vintages. Sager recommends using an app such as Vivino to keep track of the wines you have liked. Vivino can build a profile and help to guide you towards bottles you will enjoy in future. “In the long run, you won’t buy shit wine,” he says. With all its quirks and specialist insights, building up a comprehensive knowledge of wine can take years. “Even though I’m supposed to be an expert in the field, I’d much rather talk to someone and ask what they recommend,” says Sager. If you can find a wine merchant you trust, your job will become a lot easier, as they will come up with suggestions based on your preferences and price range. For instance, I always know I will try something interesting at the east London wine bar Weino BIB, because I trust Kirsty Tinkler’s choices – the wines she stocks are likely to be full of fruit and funky, farmyard notes. As for where to shop online, my panel of wine experts suggest shopping at Drop, Red Squirrel, Humble Grape, Tanners (if you’re looking for wines from Rhône or Burgundy) and even Majestic (especially if you’re after malbec). A supermarket’s own range often punches well above its weight, especially compared with the big brands on the shelves. Partly this is because it can save money on shipping by bottling the wine here in the UK. And partly it’s because the wines can become a labour of love for the buyers, who often take a hands-on approach when it comes to blending. Caporn used to be a buyer and now works for Aldi, which has some hidden gems in its Exhibition Range. She suggests Googling the producer’s name on the bottle. James Button from Decanter.com says that while Marks & Spencer and Waitrose are generally seen as the go-to places for supermarket wine, two of the most popular pages on his magazine’s website are for the ranges at Aldi and Lidl. “They’re often working with smaller producers from less well-known areas, which means better value for money,” he says. “For example, Lidl have a lot of good eastern European producers – they recently had a dry Hungarian tokaji for under £8; it’s a voluptuous white that’s waxy and fruity and works really well at this time of year.” Special offers might make your wine cheap, but will they provide more value? Not always. Button says two-for-one or half-price offers are the biggest cons. “It devalues the wine, because if a bottle of New Zealand sauvignon was £10 and now is suddenly £5, then was it ever really worth £10?” Instead, look for offers across the whole range – buy six bottles and save 25% is a common one. If you drink more than a few bottles a year (and if you don’t, why are you reading this?) then bulk buying will save you a few quid. Because of how they are made, natural wines tend to be more expensive. Yet Tinkler found that by cutting down on packaging, she could sell them at more affordable prices (while helping the environment, too). She sells wine in boxes and straight from the tap for customers who bring in their own bottles – providing uniquely farmy wines that start at under a tenner. “Reducing the glass and packaging can lower the price of wine by up to 30%,” she says, adding that these savings are passed on to the customer. Tinkler says there are similar shops dotted around the country, but for those without such a place nearby there are good options online. Try When in Rome (currently selling a 2¼-litre box of Piedmont barbera for £15.99) and Le Grappin, which specialises in “bagnums” (two bottles-worth in a bag). There is often value to be found in regions with a dodgy reputation. Beaujolais used to be known chiefly for its youthful plonk, but in recent years it has been making wines that rival those from nearby Burgundy, with the added benefit that you don’t need to remortgage your house to enjoy them. “Beaujolais cru is one of France’s most underappreciated wines,” says Dan Keeling, co-founder of Noble Rot restaurant and magazine. “Morgon, Fleurie and Moulin-à-Vent all produce profound, food-versatile wines with moderate tannins and alcohol.” Keeling suggests Germany as another region with an undeservedly low reputation. “Precise, complex whites from Heymann-Löwenstein, Koehler-Ruprecht and Joh Jos Prüm are among the planet’s finest, affordable wines. At 7.5% ABV for Prüm kabinett, you may as well be drinking a virtuous health tonic.” Some of your best wine purchases could well be 0% ABV. Sager believes a new book, The Sommelier’s Atlas of Taste, will give you a better understanding of wine than any expensive trade qualification course. Likewise, one of the best purchases I made was a membership to the Wine Society (£40, but you get £20 off your first order). Not only is the quality of wines available consistently good, but most will be cheaper than on the high street. The situation you’re drinking in can matter as much as the wine – an austere bordeaux that might work at a Michelin-starred restaurant wouldn’t necessarily be a hit if you’ve got your mates around to watch the Love Island final. Expectations also matter. Caporn shares a story of someone who was fed up with people turning their noses up at her cheaper bargain finds, so she started decanting them into smart bottles – suddenly everyone loved them. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.