Barnet, the last non-league side in the FA Cup, refuse to leave the competition without a fight and may yet advance to the fifth round for the first time in their history. Brentford will certainly not expect an easy ride in next week’s replay at Griffin Park after this see-sawing draw at the Hive. Apparently several Barnet players groaned and clasped their heads in disappointment when they heard that they would face Brentford, as they had hoped to be paired with more prestigious opponents after pulling off a shock win at Sheffield United in the third round. So the fifth-round draw, made just before kick-off here, was probably not greeted with euphoria in the home dressing room, a potential trip to Swansea City being no closer to the stuff of dreams. But making history surely is, and Barnet’s players would be fuelled by the knowledge that they could boldly go where their club had never been. What is more, there was a record crowd at the Hive to bear witness to their attempt to reach the fifth round. Besides, Brentford would be an impressive scalp to claim. They may not be giants in the grand scheme of things but they boast mighty pedigree compared to Barnet. These London clubs share a city but are supposed to be worlds apart in terms of ability, with 70 teams standing between them in the football pyramid. Brentford are comfortable in 18th place in the Championship while Barnet sit 17th in the National League, below Halifax Town on goal difference. What is more, Brentford were evidently intent on quashing their lowly hosts and advancing with the manager, Thomas Frank, fielding a strong lineup, whereas Sheffield United had deployed a shadow side in the previous round. Barnet’s manager, Darren Currie, was forced to make a significant alteration to his team owing to the suspension of his first-choice goalkeeper, Mark Cousins. With the club’s only other goalkeeper, Rihards Matrevics, never having started a senior match, The club quickly arranged a month-long loan deal from Leeds United for Will Huffer, a 20-year-old with one senior start before this tie. Huffer did not have to make a save until the 20th minute here, thanks to the valour of his defence. When it came, the first save, from a tame shot from 20 yards by Sergi Canos, amounted to a useful warmup for the goalkeeper on a night when the temperature plunged below zero. Huffer had to do some plunging himself two minutes later but still could not get a finger to Moses Odubajo’s powerful long-range drive from wide on the right. Mercifully for Barnet, the shot rebounded out off the inside of the far post. That narrow escape triggered a feisty response from the hosts, who came close to opening the scoring when Dan Sweeney met a corner by Medy Elito. Luke Daniels dived to his right to push the defender’s header round the post. The goalkeeper had to intervene again moments later to thwart Ephron Mason-Clark after Barnet harassed the visitors into coughing up possession in a dangerous area. After enduring a tricky spell, Brentford regained the upper hand and Barnet resumed their tenacious defending. But a flash of class from Ollie Watkins undid the hosts five minutes before the break, the midfielder ramming a low shot beyond Huffer from nearly 30 yards. The non-league side showed their spirit and no little quality as they unsettled the visiting defence again before the break, Elito missing by a yard as he attempted to emulate Watkins’s breakthrough strike. Home supporters in the Bees Terrace spent half-time dancing to keep themselves warm and their spirits up. Five minutes into the second period they jumped for joy as Barnet drew level. Mason-Clark created the goal with a run down the right before crossing for Shaq Coulthirst, who poked into the net from 10 yards. The home team were not satisfied: three minutes later they seized the lead, provoking mayhem in the visitors’ defence before Coulthirst, once a teammate of Harry Kane in Tottenham’s U-23s, fired into the net. Now Brentford summoned a quick response, Neal Maupay sending Huffer the wrong way from the penalty spot after Watkins duped David Tutonda into a foul. Both teams chased victory in a thrilling last half-hour. Brentford might have thought they had restored order when they struck through a high-class counter-attack in the 72nd minute, Canos finishing after a pass from the right from Henrik Dalsgaard, freshly sprung from the bench. But still Brentford could not shake off the pesky non-leaguers. Three minutes later Dan Sparkes, another substitute, made it 3-3 by curling a brilliant free-kick into the top corner from 20 yards. Odubajo again struck a post as Brentford did their damnedest to shake off Barnet once and for allbut the non-league side did not yield.