The gilets jaunes (yellow vests) have named 10 candidates for the European parliament elections in May and called for more of their fellow demonstrators to put their names forward. The French protest movement that, until now, has had no official leaders or formal organisation, announced on Wednesday that it would take part in the vote on 26 May after 10 weeks of occasionally violent demonstrations across the country. The list is headed by Ingrid Levavasseur, 31, a health worker who has become one of the most high-profile members of the movement. Nine other candidates, five women and four men whose ages range from 29 to 53 and who come from various backgrounds, have come forward. A communique from the group said names for France’s other 69 seats in the parliament are open to suggestions before 10 February. Candidates will be chosen in a vote by gilets jaunes activists. Levavasseur accused the French president, Emmanuel Macron, of ignoring the gilets jaunes. “We just want to be heard,” she said. The movement emerged in November in protest at a new eco tax on diesel and petrol. Since then, Macron’s centrist government has dropped the tax, but the movement has morphed into wider opposition to the president and his reformist administration. Macron is currently travelling around France overseeing a “great national debate” aimed at responding to public anger expressed by the gilets jaunes, but protesters have continued their demonstrations. Gilets jaunes continue to call for demonstrations across France every weekend. In major cities including Paris, Bordeaux and Marseille, these have led to violent clashes between police and protesters. The new group is calling itself the Ralliement d’Initiative Citoyenne (Citizen Initiative Rally) and has the same initials – RIC – as one of the gilets jaunes’ key demands for citizens’ referendums to decide national policy. “We want this list to be carried by people who have been involved in the mobilisation on the roundabouts from the beginning. No technocrats,” their statement read. ”We must transform the anger into a human political project that is able to bring solutions to the French.” Previous attempts by gilets jaunes to organise have led to those putting themselves forward being subjected to abuse and threats from rival groups. Levavasseur, from Normandy, was signed up by the French television station BFMTV as a commentator, but turned down the job earlier this month after she was abused by other gilets jaunes. Le Figaro newspaper said the group had to raise €700,000 (£610,000) to field the election list of candidates and had about 10% of that figure so far. RIC has not said how it will raise the remainder, but is considering appealing for donations through a crowdfunding campaign. Its programme is likely to be anti-European. The group’s statement added: “We no longer wish to suffer the decisions of European authorities and the diktats of the castes of financiers and technocrats who have forgotten the most important things: the human being, solidarity and the planet.” Le Figaro reported that another gilets jaunes group may present its own list for the European election. An Elabe opinion poll published on Wednesday suggested gilets jaunes candidates could attract 13% of the vote behind Macron’s La République en Marche and the far-right Rassemblement National (formerly the Front National).