Ruby Wax was born in Evanston, Illinois, and for more than 25 years has been a comedian, TV writer and performer. She holds a master’s degree in mindfulness-based cognitive therapy from Oxford University and was awarded an OBE for her services to mental health. She is the author of the bestsellers Sane New World and A Mindfulness Guide for the Frazzled and has toured with the accompanying one-woman shows. Her latest book, How to Be Human, is out now in paperback. How to Be Human: The Manual sets out to answer life’s big questions… So in a nutshell – how can we be human?Part of it is to understand the mechanics of what we are, because if we don’t look in to how the brain works, how we got to be like this, we just assume, oh well, I am the way I am and we never change. Understanding neuroplasticity and epigenetics we realise that we can change. And if you can understand that it’s not our fault, our condition is the human condition, then we can be nicer to ourselves because part of the problem is that everybody has these critical voices. I don’t want to start being corny but when we start working as a bonding tribe, which we have the capacity to do, that’s us at our best, but we don’t know how to switch that part of our brain on, to get out of our self-obsession. “Inclusion is the condition where humans flourish best,” you write. Have you ever felt excluded?I always do. I’ve always felt like a freak of nature. First, living in America when my dog and I would look out of the window and watch people in their clusters in the park and I had a feeling of alienation; later, I realised I carry that feeling with me. Are we becoming more human or less in an age of technology?I think a bit of both. This has always been a question – from when we first started being able to read, to when the Industrial Revolution happened. There’s no point complaining about something we could use to our advantage. We can shout all we want, but history never stops. But if we’re going to survive the future, we need to upgrade our minds as much as we do technology. This is your third book exploring mental health and mindfulness. How did you first discover mindfulness?I had serious depression about 12 years ago, and I was desperate; I Googled, looked up, read everything I could about mindfulness. They were teaching it at Oxford and they weren’t teaching witchcraft so I thought, maybe there’s something to it; I studied it there. For me, it works – maybe for other people it doesn’t. It’s discipline, like going to the gym, you have to do it regularly: you’re exercising and training your brain. You state: “With my background I could only have ended up as a criminal or a comedian.” When did you discover your gift for humour?I was a real problem child in high school – and then one day I turned into Joan Rivers. It was like getting breasts – one day this thing hit and I made the really beautiful boys laugh; they ended up mostly gay. Humour was as good as beauty. So I used it. You also say that memory has kept your sense of self cohesive. How did you learn to turn your memories into powerful material?Most of my memories are horrific, so I learned to be funny as a defence. I turned my memories into comedy and delivered it to my mentor, Alan Rickman – he would listen and say, this is so great, keep going, write how you think. So it was out of the darkness that light came in. I think I would have ended up… maybe I wouldn’t have ended up. Maybe I would have killed myself. But I learned to take something that’s painful and flip it – then people listen and acknowledge it, so at least you get it out of your system; part of the problem with trauma is that it’s in your head and you can’t get it out. You did a famous BBC series Ruby Wax Meets… in which you interviewed celebrities. How does it feel being interviewed yourself?I like the sense of freefall it brings. I think I pay attention to the other person and respect them. You have to respect the person doing the interview whereas a lot of people don’t – especially when I interviewed Donald Trump. He thought I was an idiot so I became an idiot. He frightened me and it’s my default that when I’m treated like an idiot, I don’t make sense any more – but if I had stayed steady and mindful, I could have gotten a lot more out of him. So I learned from being an interviewer how to be interviewed. What books are on your bedside table?My favourite book now is The Complete Patrick Melrose Novels by Edward St Aubyn. That’s my dream book. You’re rooting for a guy who’s beyond the gutter but also a genius. I love characters that are dark and funny – my favourite combination. I love The Corrections and Revolutionary Road and Philip Roth. What book would you recommend to people? The Sellout by Paul Beatty – he can write black American street slang; he makes genius and hilarious observations, and tells the story of the American dream gone wrong the way Tom Wolfe does. He’s taken a show that I saw in my childhood called Our Gang – there was a black kid in it and they would cover him in tar and torture him – it’s horrifying. Paul Beatty is writing about the American justice system gone completely wrong. It’s taking bigotry and turning it inside out. How do you organise your books?In order of their height. What do you read for sheer pleasure?I really like science books, and read a lot of them while researching How to Be Human. What kind of reader were you as a child?I couldn’t read as a child because my house was so noisy and distracting. I could only look at Dr Seuss because it was as crazy as my house. I watched a lot of TV – Jack Benny, Dick van Dyke, Jerry Lewis, Joan Rivers. I only got smart in my late 50s. I wish I did read more as a child but I couldn’t focus. I would hear my mother screaming, as she had hysteria. You write in your new book that you first became fascinated by mental illness aged around 13.I still have a library book out from Evanston high school that should have been returned in the 60s called This is Mental Illness. Maybe I had an inkling that my mother wasn’t like other mothers. When you’re a kid you tend to think that’s how everybody lives, but I must have sensed that something wasn’t right especially when I saw other kids’ mothers and they were so loving. My mum handed me her rage. But after researching my genealogy during Who Do You Think You Are? I can’t blame my parents any more – I feel sorry for them. What are you working on next? I’m working on another book, which will either be called How to Save the World or To the Future With Love. What is the process of writing a book like for you? I’m both illiterate and dyslexic and I have to stare at the words for ages. At first it’s just a splattering of pain, and then some time after my 15th edit it starts to sculpt into something really funny. The process is horrific – it’s like drawing from an open wound. Only toward the end when I make myself laugh, I think, oh this is good. When it meets the audience it’s a total pleasure. • How to Be Human: The Manual is published by Penguin (£8.99). To order a copy for £7.91 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99