At the end of last week, the actor and comedian who stepped down from hosting this year’s Oscars in the wake of a controversy over homophobia, said he was “evaluating” his position in terms of a return to the role. On Wednesday, Hart appeared to have come to a decision: that he would not be open to being rehired by the Academy – at least, not this year. Appearing on breakfast TV show Good Morning America, Hart said: “I am done with it. It gets no more energy. For the last time, I am done addressing this. There is no more conversation about it. I’m done with it, I am over it.” Questioned about how he had changed in the past eight years, since some of his more objectionable utterances, Hart said he was “over” discussing old tweets. “I have explained how I evolved. I’m not saying how I’ve changed anymore. I’m not saying what I’ve done and what the new me is. I’m giving no more explanation.” Hart had been thought to have been reinstalled as MC for next month’s ceremony following a remarkable interview on Ellen, which surfaced on Friday. In this, both Hart and interviewer Ellen DeGeneres concurred that the best way for Hart to “take a stand against the trolls” who had brought his homophobic tweets to light was to return to host the ceremony. But the interview met with a mixed reception on social media, with many declaring that they felt betrayed by DeGeneres for dismissing their concerns over Hart as simple mischief making. In the interview, Hart declined to apologise again but reiterated his feeling that the episode was a direct attempt to bring down his career. It was “a malicious attack on my character … an attack to end me”, he said. “This was to destroy me, to end all partnerships, all brand relationships, all investment opportunities, studio relationships, my production company and the people that work underneath me.” Any failure to accept his contrition, said Hart on Good Morning America, was not his fault. “I’m a good person,” he said. “If you don’t see that, it’s a problem with you. I shouldn’t have to prove who I am … what more do you want from me? You want blood? You want my arms?” Hart’s main reason for not resuming his post, he said, was because of the lack of time now available to prepare. Although the ceremony is still some six weeks away, Hart said promotional commitments for new film The Upside meant he would only have a fortnight to devote to the Academy Awards. “I can’t do it this year, it’s not going to happen, in the future if it does it does but it’s not the conversation of today.” The Upside is a remake of French hit drama Untouchable, about a paraplegic billionaire (in this case played by Bryan Cranston) and his unlikely new carer (played by Hart). In his review, Guardian critic Peter Bradshaw calls it “horrific”.