The prominent Chinese rights lawyer Wang Quanzhang has been sentenced to four and a half years in prison for subversion. A court in Tianjin heard on Monday that Wang had been found “guilty of subversion of state power”. Wang, a lawyer who defended political activists, victims of land seizures, and members of the banned religious group Falun Gong, was tried in a closed hearing at the second intermediate people’s court on 26 December. Chinese courts often try sensitive political cases during the holiday season when western diplomats and media are away. He was one of approximately 250 lawyers and activists detained in 2015, as part of what is now known as the 709 crackdown, and was the last of the group still awaiting trial. Wang’s case is notable for the length of time he has been kept incommunicado, prompting a UN rights group on arbitrary detentions in August to call on Beijing to release Wang. After disappearing in August of 2015, Wang’s family was not sure he was alive until July 2018 when a lawyer and friend of the family was able to see him. “In the three years leading up to his sham of a trial, the authorities disappeared Wang Quanzhang into a black hole, where he was likely tortured. Wang’s family, who continue to be harassed by the authorities, didn’t even know if he was alive until recently,” said Doriane Lau, China researcher at Amnesty International. “His continued imprisonment only prolongs their suffering.” Wang’s sentencing was lighter than expected for a charge that carries a maximum punishment of life in prison. Wang’s pre-trial detention should contribute to his sentence, which means he could be released as early as 2020. In addition to his prison term, the court said he would be deprived of his political rights for five years – a parole-like period of heightened scrutiny. He will also be stripped of his legal license and unable to practice. “Until Wang Quanzhang is completely free, and he and his family are compensated for this nightmare, the injustice will continue,” said Michael Caster a human rights advocate who has worked with Wang. A directive ordering Chinese media not to report on Wang’s sentencing was leaked at the weekend. “Without unified prior arrangement, do not gather news or report, do not comment or reprint,” it said, according to China Digital Times. A copy of Wang’s indictment says the lawyer “seriously harmed the country’s security and social stability” by accepting funds from foreign organisations, training lawyers, representing “cults,” and providing investigative reports overseas.