Alex Salmond, the former first minister of Scotland, has been charged with multiple counts of sexual assault and two of attempted rape. Salmond, who appeared at Edinburgh Sheriff court before a closed session on Thursday afternoon, was charged with 14 offences: one of breach of the peace, two of indecent assault, nine of sexual assault, as well as the two of attempted rape. The 64-year-old made no plea during the hearing and was released on bail. Appearing outside court afterwards, he gave a brief statement saying that he was innocent. “Let me say from the outset, I am innocent of any criminality whatsoever,” the former SNP leader said. “Now that these proceedings, criminal proceedings are live, it is even more important to respect the court. He added: “The only thing that I can say is I refute absolutely these allegations of criminality and I will defend myself to the utmost in court. I’ve got great faith in the court system in Scotland.” “You know me well enough to know that I’d love to say a great deal more but I have got to observe the rules of the court and in court is where I will state my case.” Salmond was charged on Wednesday night after voluntarily attending a police station with his solicitor. Earlier a Police Scotland spokesman said: “We can confirm a 64-year-old man has been arrested and charged and a report has been sent to the procurator fiscal.” Salmond has been under investigation by Police Scotland over allegations of sexual harassment. He has consistently denied that he was guilty of any criminal behaviour. After the news of his arrest broke, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said that it would be “a shock to many people”. But she added: “These are now live criminal proceedings and that means now more than ever it would be completely inappropriate for me or anyone else for that matter to make any comment on the situation.” There have been media reports that the Police Scotland investigation had been broadened to include allegations about incidents at Edinburgh airport more than a decade ago. In early January, Salmond won a significant legal victory against the Scottish government after the civil service admitted its investigation into the two harassment claims had been mishandled. It emerged that the senior personnel expert who led the formal investigation, Judith MacKinnon, had been involved in counselling and supporting the two complainants before they filed their official complaints. The Scottish government acknowledged this was in breach of its rules, was unlawful and had the appearance of bias.