Yorgos Lanthimos’s raucous period romp about a high-stakes love triangle in the court of Queen Anne continues its ascension to this season’s awards favourite with 12 nominations at this year’s British Academy film awards. The film, which swept the board at the British independent film awards in December, with a record 10 wins, is a contender in all the major categories other than best actor. The Favourite converted just one of its five nominations into a win (for Olivia Colman) at last Sunday’s Golden Globe awards, with controversial road trip drama Green Book the biggest victor, taking best supporting actor, best screenplay and best comedy or musical. Freddie Mercury biopic Bohemian Rhapsody, meanwhile, won best drama and best actor in a drama for Rami Malek. That film also performed strongly with British voters (though it was significantly omitted from the best film shortlist), taking it to level pegging – on seven nominations – with arch musical rival A Star is Born. Also on seven are First Man, the Neil Armstrong biopic starring Ryan Gosling, which has so far met with little awards love, and with Alfonso Cuarón’s much-lauded Roma. Meanwhile Vice, the Dick Cheney biopic which bagged Christian Bale the best actor in a comedy or musical prize on Sunday, came away with six nominations. Spike Lee’s BlacKkKlansman has five, and Green Book and Pawel Pawlikowski’s Cold War have four each. This year's Baftas take place on 10 February 2019. The ceremony at the Royal Albert Hall will be hosted by Joanna Lumley and broadcast – about 90 minutes after it actually happens – on BBC ONE. The Baftas are voted for by around 6,500 members of the British Film and Television Academy. These are industry workers who have to apply for membership – and pay an annual subscription of £450. Each category in the shortlists is decided by a chapter of around 100 specialists in that area. Once the shortlists are announced, all voters can have their say. If they haven't seen a particular film, they are supposed to abstain from voting in that category – but this is unenforced. The Baftas matter on their own terms, third only to the Golden Globes and the Oscars as prestige gongs. A Bafta win adds critical kudos – and, hopefully, box office – to a film, as well as credibility to an individual's career. They also matter because of their proximity to the Oscars. Until 2001, the Baftas took place in April or May, but since the move to about a fortnight before the Academy Awards, their importance increased. This is because voting for the Oscars closes a few days after the Baftas, meaning it's the final chance for candidates to impress with their speeches - or for Oscar voters to seek to redress apparent miscarriages of justice. The Bafta and Oscar voting bases overlap considerably, too: around 500 people are thought to vote for both. Not necessarily. A recent survey found the Baftas were only the fourth best Oscars bellwether – after the DGA, PGA and SAG awards. Since 2001, they've predicted the best picture winner eight times out of a possible 17, diverging the past four years running, opting for Three Billboards over The Shape of Water, La La Land over Moonlight, The Revenant over Spotlight and Boyhood over Birdman. Their form is stronger when it comes to the acting categories, though they do consistently favour homegrown talent. A big bronze mask on a marble base, which Bafta reserves the right to buy back for £1 should the recipient give it to anyone other than their children. Plus a certificate, with which the winner can do what they like. Can You Ever Forgive Me?, Mary Poppins Returns, Mary, Queen of Scots and Stan & Ollie have three nominations each. Steve Coogan was nominated over co-star John C Reilly in the latter, perhaps betraying voters’ British bias, although Emily Blunt was passed over for her part as the magical nanny, with Mary Poppins Returns up only for technical awards. Significant snubs included Steve McQueen, whose followup to 12 Years a Slave, Widows, scored just one nomination, for leading actress Viola Davis. If Beale Street Could Talk’s Regina King was also omitted, despite being favourite for the best supporting actress Oscar. Mike Leigh’s Peterloo also failed to pick up a single nomination, while Black Panther took just one (for visual effects). Peterloo marks a rare failure for Film4, which picked up 20 nominations on Wednesday across a slate which includes The Favourite, Cold War and Widows. Meanwhile BBC Films came away with four for its titles, Stan & Ollie and Apostasy. The Bafta shortlists were read out by actors Will Poulter and Hayley Squires. This is the first year the BFI’s diversity standards have become mandatory in the best debut and best British film categories. These require films to fulfil a number of different production-stage quotas that demonstrate that they have “worked to increase the representation of under-represented groups” in areas including “onscreen representation” and “industry access and opportunities”. They come as part of Bafta’s drive to up the diversity of its membership, as well as the breadth of films they choose to celebrate. This year’s best British film nominees are Bohemian Rhapsody, The Favourite, Stan & Ollie, fashion documentary McQueen, Lynne Ramsay’s You Were Never Really Here, starring a vengeful Joaquin Phoenix, and serial killer thriller Beast. The latter is also up for best British debut for its writer/director Michael Pearce. Pitted alongside him are Daniel Kokotajlo for Apostasy, set amongst suburban Jehovah’s Witnesses; Chris Kelly for activist documentary A Cambodian Spring, and the teams behind Pili, about HIV sufferers in Tanzania, and neo kitchen sink drama Ray & Liz. The nominees for the Rising Star award – which is voted for by the public – were revealed last week, with Black Panther’s Letitia Wright fancied as early frontrunner. The Baftas will be announced in a ceremony on 10 February hosted for the second time by Joanna Lumley. The Oscars take place two weeks later; their host is still uncertain.