Chelsea have confirmed the signing of Argentinian forward Gonzalo Higuaín. The 31-year-old has moved to Stamford Bridge on loan until the end of the season and will wear the No 9 shirt. Higuaín will reunite with Maurizio Sarri after ending his loan at Milan in order to seal his move from parent club Juventus. Sarri was head coach at Napoli when Higuaín equalled the all-time Serie A scoring record for a single season, scoring 36 goals in 2015-16. The 31-year-old Argentina international spent the first half of the campaign at Milan, scoring eight times in 22 appearances. Higuaín, who will not be available for Thursday’s Carabao Cup semi-final second leg against Tottenham, said he was keen to repay Chelsea’s faith in him. “When the opportunity to join Chelsea presented itself I had to take it,” he said. “It’s a team I’ve always liked that has a lot of history, a wonderful stadium and they play in the Premier League, a league I’ve always wanted to play in. I now hope I can give back that trust Chelsea have shown me out on the pitch. I can’t wait to start and I hope to adapt as soon as possible.” ✍ It's official!@G_Higuain is a Blue! #HiguaIN Higuaín, who has been capped 75 times by his country, scored just once in his final 12 appearances for Milan. But his record under Sarri has persuaded Chelsea to compromise on their usual policy of not signing players aged over 30 for vast sums. Higuaín’s arrival means Álvaro Morata is now expected to leave west London. And Sarri believes the former Real Madrid man Higuaín can contribute more than just goals as the Blues battle for a top-four Premier League finish and Champions League qualification. “It’s very difficult in January to find one of the most important strikers in the world. So I think the club is working very well because it’s not easy to get a new striker,” said Sarri. “We hope he’ll bring goals, that he starts scoring for us. He’s also very good at other aspects, other than just goals, but that’s what we are hoping for. He has had some difficulties recently, but we’re hoping we can raise him back to his best form.” Juventus revealed the existence of two long-term financial options attached to the deal, with Chelsea able to sign Higuaín outright during the loan spell for around £31.3m. A statement on Juventus.com read: “The agreement also grants to Chelsea the options to extend the duration of the loan until 30 June 2020, for a consideration of 18m euros (£15.7m) to be paid in 2019-20 financial year, or to acquire the registration rights of the player on a permanent basis for 36m euros (31.3m) to be paid in two financial years.” Chelsea director, Marina Granovskaia, added: “Gonzalo was our number one target in this transfer window and arrives with a proven record at the highest level. He has previously worked with Maurizio to great effect and is familiar with how the coach likes to play. “This was not an easy deal for us to do because of the numerous parties involved, but we are delighted we were able to make it happen and we look forward to seeing the impact Gonzalo will make for us in the second half of the season.” Milan will replace Higuaín with Polish striker Krzysztof Piatek, who is set to join from Genoa after the clubs agreed a €35m (£30.9m) fee over the weekend. Piatek has scored 13 league goals this season after arriving from Cracovia in the summer.