Well, that was nice, wasn’t it? 370m mince pies, 40m rolls of sticky tape, 108m rolls of wrapping paper, and hangovers – so many hangovers. But Christmas is over now, and we’re thrust into January, dazed and sluggish and expected to purge our homes of cheer. Admittedly, the sight of a drooping tree will do nothing to keep spirits up during the dark months of midwinter, so it is probably best to take that down. But before you consign the decorations to the loft, consider that these first two months of the year – with the short days and bleak weather (and looming Brexit) – are the time we’re most in need of bright, joyous colours and warm, cosy lighting. With that in mind, here are some ideas for repurposing decorations to keep homes cheerful for the worst of winter. Thread three or four baubles (or more, depending on how long you want your chandelier to be) on to lengths of transparent wire, fixing them at different heights. Pin these around your light fixture, in place of a shade. Alternatively, hang your baubles off an existing chandelier to add colour to a post-Christmas (ie drab) room. Wrap bead-chain decorations around old jars, stopping about halfway up; fill with candles or flowers and you will have some colourful table centrepieces. You might need a hot-glue gun to affix your bead chain, but it will be worth the effort. 3D wooden letters are available in most craft shops and make good bookends and decorations. But they often come unpainted or white. Wrap them tightly in tinsel (double-sided tape works well) to add some some sparkle to your living room. The no-effort way to jazz up your houseplants: cover the soil in your plant pots with baubles and pine cones. It takes all of 30 seconds and will add a pop of colour to any sad-looking plant. With drawing pins, string your fairy lights across one wall and attach photos to the sections of wire between each bulb with mini clothes pegs. The lights will keep your house looking cheerful, while – according to a study published in the journal Nature Human Behaviour – reminiscing about good times has been shown to help lower stress levels and guard against the damaging effects of the stress hormone cortisol. Also, even with the craft element, this is probably easier than meditating.