Jill Abramson became the executive editor of the New York Times in 2011, the first woman to hold its top editorial job. In 2014, however, she was fired by the paper’s then publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jnr, who once gave her a performance review she has summarised since as: “People think you’re a bitch.” Her book, Merchants of Truth: Inside the News Revolution, attempts to tell the story of the seismic changes that have taken place in the news industry in the last decade. Over the course of more than 500 pages, she reports from inside four major organisations, two of them digital upstarts, the others venerable representatives of old media: BuzzFeed, Vice, the New York Times and the Washington Post. Are you nervous? Even as we speak, fellow journalists will be going over your book with a fine-tooth comb.Yes, I am. My stomach is in a fair amount of knots. How personal did writing it feel?It felt very personal. I’d lived through these times – and a lot of it wasn’t easy to live through. Do journalists make for good sources?For the most part, yes. They tend to have very detailed recall. When your book begins, the long-term future of even a newspaper as redoubtable as the New York Times looks, thanks to the internet, to be in doubt. By the time it ends, it is enjoying a renaissance in terms both of subscriptions and its journalism, thanks largely to the election of Donald Trump. Is he the saviour of news?The trouble is that not every news organisation has witnessed a Trump bump. He has been a bonanza for cable and the best national newspapers. But the bleak part of the picture is the death of local papers. The fact that there are state capitals with very few or no watchdogs directed at them is a terrible development for citizens. It weakens our democracy. What about the reporting of Trump? Is there a danger that readers will ultimately become exhausted?I think reporters at the Times and the Post are rising to the challenge. For the most part, I admire the fact they are resisting the temptation to report every single thing he says or tweets. He is a circus master – he knows how to dominate – and that can be hard for editors to resist. But they’re writing about his policies, about what he is actually doing rather than saying. In your book, you say the New York Times is anti-Trump, a fact that had the president gloating when it was leaked by a Fox news columnist. Do you regard such partisanship as a sea change and a bad one at that?The idea that objectivity gives equal weight to both sides… [with Trump] that’s been torn away. I think the willingness to call him out – the Times has used the word “lie” – is a healthy thing. The duty of journalism is to supply readers with the truth. What about Jeff Bezos, who bought the Post in 2013? Your book makes a strong case in his favour.Yes. He doesn’t interfere. I think the Graham family [its previous owners] did a fantastic job of making sure that anyone interested in buying it – and remember that Bezos owns it personally, not through Amazon – would never use it as a weapon for a political or business purpose. My respect for him increased after the arrest of Tehran bureau chief Jason Rezaian, which he took very seriously [the Post’s Tehran bureau chief was put on trial and imprisoned by Iran in 2014 and released in 2016]; you see it, too, with the murder of Jamal Khashoggi [the Saudi dissident and Post columnist]. He stands up for principled journalism and by ploughing more resources into it he has brought the Post back to its glory. That is a gift to democracy. What was it like delving into the world of BuzzFeed and Vice, particularly when they were just starting out? [The book describes cockroach-infested computers at BuzzFeed’s early offices and Vice’s reputation for rampant sexism.]The style of Gavin McInnes and Shane Smith [two of the founders of Vice] was to shock, to be deliberately provocative, and the first experiments of Jonah Peretti [the founder of BuzzFeed] were also somewhat salacious. , especially Black People Love Us [a spoof of racial cluelessness that went viral in 2002]. But I found it all fascinating: their process of of learning, of working out how to profit from information going viral. In the US, there are more women journalists than ever, but fewer top female editors than there were 10 years ago The future used to belong to BuzzFeed and Vice, with their vast traffic, young readers and piles of cash. But they’re struggling for revenue now; both have cut staff. Can they survive?I think their long-term future is uncertain. But I’m rooting for their survival. They do make an important contribution; they do good investigative work, like BuzzFeed’s scoop about Michael Cohen [BuzzFeed reported that the president had ordered his former lawyer to lie to Congress about his involvement with a Trump Tower project in Moscow; Robert Mueller, the special counsel leading the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 US election, has since called it inaccurate]. They are definitely overvalued at the moment, but they could eventually be merged, or bought by bigger players, because we live in a time when giant companies like Netflix and Amazon are so hungry for documentary content. When you were fired, you became a poster girl for every woman who has ever been characterised as shrill or pushy at work. Have things since improved for women at the Times and elsewhere in the US media?At the Times, there’s real happiness at how it has led the way on stories about sexual harassment. But there is frustration that there doesn’t seem to be a woman who is being talked about in terms of who might be in the next leadership position. In the US, there are more women journalists than ever, but fewer top female editors than there were 10 years ago. What’s holding them back?It is a basic truth that people who occupy seats of power – and they, for the most part, are men – like to keep hold of it. What’s the future for digital-first news?It won’t be driven by the next device, but it will be strongly related to it. What about old media? Is the worst over or is there more to come?No, the worst isn’t over. Print advertising is in freefall, and it’s such an important source of revenue. But I’m still optimistic. People’s thirst for reliable sources of news has grown and that has led to a revival for some trusted brands. Reader revenue is now emerging as a viable business model. You wrote a bestselling book about your dog and how she helped you get over the depression you suffered after you were knocked down by a truck in 2007, which could not be more different to Merchants of Truth. What moved you to write it?I started writing Puppy Diaries as a blog at the Times after one of the editors encouraged me to do it because I was regaling her with stories about our new puppy, Scout. It was incredibly popular. I found I just loved writing about the joys and travails of raising a new puppy. • Merchants of Truth is published by Vintage (£25). To order a copy for £22 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99