Late-night hosts discuss the government shutdown, unpaid employees and a likely handwritten (and misspelled) State of the Union. On the 26th day of America’s government shutdown, Seth Meyers addressed the continuing fallout and the president’s lack of accountability with his usual straightforward candor. The shutdown is “not both sides,” Meyers said in reference to comments made by William Barr, Trump’s nominee for attorney general, that it “takes two to tango”. “We all remember the meeting in the Oval Office where Trump literally said he was proud of shutting down the government,” Meyers continued. Meyers also addressed reports that Trump believes he’s winning the war on public opinion over his proposed wall. “Well of course he believes that, he watches more Fox News than all the residents of a Texas Senior center combined,” Meyers said. “Trump always thinks he can win any fight. He’d be in the Octagon with Conor McGregor, taking a kick to the face, and he’d say: ‘Did you see? I just headbutted his foot with my face.’” And in his ongoing public relations effort, Meyers continued, Trump has adopted a new underlying logic for the wall: walls work because cars have wheels. So far, the strategy appears to be saying “walls” and “wheels” in various orders, with the word “medieval” tossed in. Or, as Meyers put it, “he’s hitting a wall, and his brain is going around like a wheel.” In typical fashion, Meyers called the situation plainly. “What we’re witnessing right now are the desperate gasps of the Trump agenda. The wall was the signature promise of his campaign and presidency … And now, it’s slipping away with Democrats in control the House.” Now nearly a month into the government shutdown, Late Show host Stephen Colbert admitted that he was running low on material. “I’ve run out of shutdown jokes,” he said. “We might have to dip into the National Reserves at this point.” This wasn’t entirely true; Colbert managed to slip in some jokes about the ongoing meltdown, such as speculation that a shortage of TSA agents, snarling airport lines, would anger Americans enough to force an end to the shutdown. This sounds about right, Colbert said. “The American people are reasonable, but if we have to spend the night on a bench in the Newark airport we will grab a flag and join the revolution like an extra in Les Mis.” In other shutdown news, the president called 50,000 federal employees back to work on Wednesday for no pay. “So, the president is going to make people work without pay, and he announced it in his Unmancipation Proclamation,” Colbert quipped. “And these are not people you want working while pissed,” he added, noting that their jobs include disbursing tax refunds, overseeing flight safety and inspecting the nation’s food supply. Of course, Colbert said. “Everyone knows food is always so much tastier when you don’t pay the cook.” Over at the Daily Show, Trevor Noah also addressed the shutdown. “The Coast Guard isn’t getting paid, imports aren’t getting through customs, and things have gotten so desperate that the Pentagon has been downgraded to a square,” he said. Aw look! The U.S. and U.K. are government meltdown twinning! pic.twitter.com/SZzBTWLv9G Trump delivering a State of the Union address by candlelight amid a shutdown government wouldn’t be particularly assuring, but Noah said he’d prefer an in-person speech over a written one submitted to Congress, as requested by House speaker Nancy Pelosi. “Trump delivering the State of the Union in writing would be a disaster,” Noah said. This is the same guy who tweeted the word ‘hamberders’ yesterday. If Trump writes his speech down he’s going to end up declaring that the state of the union is ‘schlong.’” And though things aren’t looking great for the American government right now – Noah noted reports that the shutdown could eliminate a whole quarter of national GDP growth – at least it has a twin in meltdown mode: Britain. Prime Minister Theresa May’s plan to exit the EU went before Parliament yesterday, and like “week-old blood pudding, it did not go down well”, Noah said. In summary, it was not a good Wednesday for some places. “America’s government is shut down and there’s trash on the street. The UK’s government is in turmoil and soon they may not have food,” Noah said. “And Africa is watching all of this like, ‘Ha ha, who is laughing now?’”