The return of Grace and Frankie this week is heartening for fans, not least those who might expect them to be dead. After all, the Netflix series (now number five) follows the travails of two elderly chalk-and-cheese women, who have been lumped together after they discover their husbands were locked in a decades-long gay affair. But this cruel assumption would be to misunderstand one of the key aspects of modern old age – namely, that it seems to go on for ever – as well as the power of the show, its stars, Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin, and indeed its distributor. Age has not withered them, and they are sustained by Netflix’s infinite variety. At the start of 2019, we can tentatively say that the streaming service’s appeal to older viewers is bearing fruit. It must be pointed out that Netflix’s general aim seems to be to appeal to absolutely everyone, but those golden oldies are a premium target. They have a lot of time and money. It’s almost surprising there isn’t a deluge of Poirot reruns on the home screen, but it seems to have decided to approach the situation with care. It is picking well: The Kominsky Method, another sitcom it has produced starring another elderly duo – this time Michael Douglas and Alan Arkin – just won the Golden Globe for best TV comedy or musical (Douglas won best actor in the category too). Then we are due a third instalment of The Crown, the stately Windsor saga that seems to have mostly been conceived to hook in a juicy older Poldark market. In short, only a fool would bet against more of this content creeping in, among the cutesy teen comedies, woke dramas and shock documentaries. Netflix and dyspepsia pill? Both Grace and Frankie and The Kominsky Method are great gateway drugs into the strange world of “elder entertainment”. The former thrives on an old formula – the odd couple formed by the uptight Grace (Fonda) and the hippy-dippy and tangential Frankie (Tomlin). One loves nothing more than a spreadsheet, while the other is, as she puts it, “an artist who’s been well written up in a series of local prison newsletters”. It has flaws: each series, like many Netflix shows, is meandering, and the script is characterised by what Grace calls Frankie’s “trips down non-sequitur lane”. It has a bulging list of returning characters it seems unsure what to do with (although it’s often their lost millennial children, so it may just be an accurate representation of their predicament). However, the charm tends to suppress your qualms. It’s a surprising type of escapism – as though Thelma and Louise had finally decided to just park the car, and sit in the car park eating sandwiches. And it doesn’t shy away from the big topics, sex and death. In fact, it really likes sex. The main thrust, as it were, of several seasons has been the ladies’ development of a vibrator for the older lady. Products like their “Ménage à Moi” aren’t just to be sniggered at: they emphasise the valuable message that there is plenty of fun to be had in the final age bracket. Glossy and slightly 1-percenter as it is, the show puts elderly women, an often-neglected segment of any market, front and centre. Fonda made this clear when it first appeared in 2015: “Nobody is addressing them, that’s what’s unusual about the series.” The Kominsky Method, meanwhile, tackles the inevitable hubris of being a slightly past-it white man. Its focus is the friendship between Douglas’s Sandy Kominsky, a washed up actor, and his startlingly dry agent Norman (Arkin – who, by the by, was the one really due an award). Each has their own woes: Kominsky spends an awful lot of time dwelling on his prostate, while Norman, more touchingly, still talks to his recently deceased wife. Like Grace and Frankie, it mostly chooses to laugh at old age’s indignities, which may be the best way to sell it to an audience. Perhaps you can’t truly understand how the wheel of showbiz turns until you’ve seen Danny DeVito, playing Kominsky’s doctor, with his hand up Michael Douglas’s bum, telling him to prepare for “retrograde orgasms”. The fact that Netflix is providing a home for older stars neglected by Hollywood is important too. There’s a strange pathos to seeing Fonda, once the queen of exercise videos, hobbling around on a cane as each knee gives way. When The Crown next appears, Netflix should be well on the way to hooking in that older market. Yet there are reasons for prudence. For one thing, and this is a horrible thing to say, it might seem less appetising to try and hook a market that might not be here all that long – although of course, the way time works, someone will always replace them. Far more vital, either way, to hook a younger audience for life. It’s also at a disadvantage because fewer older viewers would watch a show on their mobile or a tablet. Statistics are hard to come by (Netflix reveals next to none) but there are clues. Last May, a survey by Ampere Analysis looked at the viewing habits of viewers aged 55-64: it found that in the US, these viewers are 51% less likely to take up a streaming service like Netflix or Amazon than the average internet user; in the UK it is 57%. Over a month, only 20% of that age group had watched Netflix in America; in the UK, again, it was even less, at 10%. Compare the latter statistic to their use of BBC iPlayer, which stands at a relatively healthy 53%. Persuading a generation of viewers away from the comforts of a regular schedule and “free” state broadcasting could yet be a tall order. But that’s the 55-64-year-olds: imagine what the stats are for the next group up. That is the group which, to be clear, Fonda and Tomlin and Douglas and Arkin inhabit. Not that it’s a brave new world, really: shows about the twilight years have always existed. British viewers may fondly remember BBC sitcoms such as As Time Goes By, starring Judi Dench, or Waiting for God starring Stephanie Cole. The latter got a cult following for her turn as a cantankerous old journalist wreaking havoc in a retirement home. Perhaps as our concept of old age changes, and Hollywood’s too, that part might be offered to someone slightly older. When the sitcom first aired, Cole was 49. Grace and Frankie returns to Netflix on 18 January; The Kominsky Method is available now.