Noemie Lopian, a 52-year-old Holocaust educator, grew up in Munich and Manchester hardly speaking about the Holocaust, even though both of her parents were in it. Her French mother, Renee, was questioned at gunpoint by the Gestapo at the age of 10 and imprisoned in the Prison du Pax in Annemasse, on the border between France and Switzerland. She was saved by the town’s lord mayor, Jean Deffaugt, who persuaded the Gestapo to release the youngest children into his care, and the resistance fighter Marianne Cohn, who rescued at least 200 Jewish children during the war by smuggling them out of France’s occupied zone. Lopian’s Polish father, Dr Ernst Israel Bornstein, was arrested at 18 and moved between seven concentration camps during the war, enduring a number of long death marches. He was liberated near Munich by American soldiers on 30 April 1945. Derek Niemann, 57, lives in Bedfordshire and is a writer, teacher and contributor to the Guardian’s country diary. Niemann knew nothing about his connection to the Holocaust until he was 49, when he found out, to his shock, that his paternal grandfather, Karl Niemann, was a Nazi war criminal. Last weekend, on Holocaust Memorial Day, it emerged that one in 20 Britons believe the Holocaust never happened, and one 12 think its scale has been exaggerated. Niemann and Bornstein now travel the country together and give talks about their different experiences, in the hope it will stem the tide of Holocaust denialism, and to educate people about antisemitism. Derek, what did you grow up knowing about your grandfather?Derek: He died the year before I was born, but my father had always said his father was a lowly official in a bank; a pen pusher. Then, my dad’s sister died and it was like something opened up in him. I learned that my father had spent the entire war in Berlin, and the family had escaped into the Alps at the end of the war. The next breakthrough came when I was going to Berlin, and I found out the address of where my father had grown up. From that, I learned that my grandfather was in the SS and was convicted of crimes against humanity and the use of slave labour. I immediately started burrowing in Holocaust and SS archives. I learned that he’d joined the Nazi party pretty early on, and, when he lost his job, he was recruited to the SS. At first, he was an auditor, and he worked his way up to become a business owner using the slave labour of concentration camps. He was going round to the camps and making sure they had supplies to keep working. I think he was a mediocrity who suddenly had a uniform and a chauffeur, and he thought he had to be loyal to the people who raised him up. The nonentities got to the top then. Was he punished after the war?Derek: Oh yes. He was captured by the US army on the day war ended in Europe, 8 May 1945, and imprisoned in the former prisoner of war camps at Moosburg, Bavaria, and Sandbostel near Bremen. He was released three years later. And how did the two of you meet?Noemie: I’d heard about Derek after he wrote a book about his grandfather, and was very keen to meet him. We finally met when he was giving a talk in a synagogue. I’d heard another grandson of a Nazi speak and I didn’t take to him at all. It wasn’t an intellectual reaction, it was an emotional one, which I hadn’t expected. But when I heard Derek speak, I knew I would feel comfortable with him. Why were you so keen to meet a grandchild of a Nazi?Noemie: I felt, with my past, I could either ignore it or embrace it, and if I was going to embrace it I should be proactive in whatever little way I can. I wanted to learn. Also, it’s hard to get people to listen to just me – I’m not a celebrity, I’m just a Jewish woman, and in the current political climate you feel as if you’re going to be dismissed as just another stroppy Jew. But I felt with the two of us, more people would listen.Derek: We gave a talk last week, and at the beginning everyone made eye contact with Noemie, but some could barely look at me. At the end, though, they were coming up and hugging me and shaking me by the hand. I realised that they can’t accept my family, but they recognise my desire to bridge the differences between us.Noemie: I feel that at our talks people are much more fascinated with Derek. They’ve heard my kind of stories before. It’s true … I’ve spoken with a lot of children of Holocaust survivors, but never someone who describes himself as a grandchild of a Nazi.Derek: Yes, there aren’t many of us around! I don’t want to self-aggrandise, but at times I feel like Andy Murray talking about feminism – it’s easy for some people to dismiss women calling out sexism, but it’s harder when it comes from a man.Noemie: And that’s why I think Derek’s story is so powerful. People are used now to hearing Jews talk about antisemitism and the Holocaust, but when it comes from someone with Derek’s background they’re like, wow! And, of course, he has a much tougher job than me because he has to acknowledge the love he has for his father, and even his grandfather, while also talking about what they did. It’s a far greater dichotomy than what I have. Did it affect how you see yourself, Derek, knowing that such a close relative did these terrible things?Derek: I think there was a lot of guilt in the beginning, and that may have been why I wrote about it and reached out so much to the Jewish community. But I know that my grandfather is not me, and I am empowered to … not make up for what he did, but at least use his story for, hopefully, a good purpose. Do you ever think about how your parents and grandparents would feel about you two becoming friends?Derek: All the time.Noemie: At first I tried to push those thoughts away. But then I realised that my father was a very humane man. He was a doctor after the war, and he had Germans among his patients. He went beyond hatred because he always said hatred eats up the person who hates. You have to move on and see the person for who they are. The Nazis tried to kill kindness and we fight against that.Derek: My father’s sister was openly antisemitic for the rest of her life. What happened during the war didn’t change her at all. She moved to Glasgow when she got married, and she would see a shop with “Goldberg” on it, and she would say: “That’s a Jew.” My dad also had this deeply ingrained antisemitism. I remember my mum once wanted to buy a menorah, and he said: “I’m not having that Jewish thing in the house.” So he could say, on the one hand, that the Nazis did terrible things to the Jews, but at the same time, he would say other things like that. That education he got from his family and friends, he could never shake it off. Do you think you would have been so aware of the recent rise of antisemitism in the west without your family’s connection?Derek: I don’t think so because, having done all this research, I have become sensitised to oppression in a way I wasn’t before. I’ve realised how comfortably bigoted I and my contemporaries were when we were kids. We would make Irish jokes, Jewish jokes … you could stand at the Arsenal and see a black player being abused and think: “Oh well,” because it was normalised. I’m ashamed I was like that, but we – in the comfortable minority – were like that.Noemie: This is why I urge the leaders of the countries to stand up and speak out because otherwise that behaviour is normalised. When the leader of the opposition in this country dismisses Jewish people’s complaints [about his actions], he is giving permission to that behaviour. We always said “never again”, but we have to work at it. But many of Corbyn’s supporters would say that he has spoken out about antisemitism. And perhaps, more importantly, that the things many Jewish people have criticised him for – such as initially defending an antisemitic mural on Facebook – don’t prove he’s antisemitic.Noemie: Yes, I get that a lot, people saying he’s not anti-Jewish, he’s anti-Israel. I accept that the actions of Israel, like any other country, can be criticised. But if the leader of the opposition befriends Hamas and Hezbollah, whose mission statement is to erase the existence of Israel – ie erasing me and my people again – then I don’t feel safe. When things happen, such as Donald Trump describing neo-Nazis as “very fine people”, and Jews get upset, a lot of people say they’re overreacting and of course the Holocaust won’t happen again. How do you respond to that?Derek: Any behaviour that fosters suspicion or hatred is wrong, and the Holocaust is a long, long way down that path, but you have to get off that path right at the beginning. Researching my grandfather’s story has given me a heightened awareness of the capability of humans to slide into evil deeds and find ways to exonerate themselves from culpability. It only needs the right conditions to expose our weaknesses and maybe I can see and understand that better than most. Noemie, have you experienced more antisemitism recently?Noemie: I remember as a kid people shouting: “Dirty Jew!”, and I almost wouldn’t think about it. You don’t get that now, but I’ve found that when I talk about antisemitism, the Israel question always comes up, especially among the left. I don’t support harm or killing to anyone, so what I always say is that I strongly believe that with more positive dialogue on both sides there can be less killing. Do you two talk to your children about their family histories?Noemie: I have three daughters and I consciously turned to my past after the birth of my youngest. I don’t particularly talk to them about their grandparents, but I’m very open about my activities.Derek: I have a stepson, who is not bothered by a connection that is not a blood link. But I have shared the whole story with him, and he is enormously supportive of what I do. What do you want people to take away from your talks?Derek: To learn to look beyond difference and to act against prejudice before it’s too late.Noemie: And also to remember that this happened. It’s already fading from memory, which is why we talk to so many young people, at universities and schools.Derek: It feels like this is my life mission now. I met someone who was in the French resistance whose best friend was killed in Buchenwald, and he shook me by the hand. At our talks, survivors have invited me to sit with them afterwards and taken me by the hand. It’s incredible.Noemie: I don’t think I can change the world, but maybe by showing people how we have stepped beyond difference, that will make a difference. Derek Niemann’s A Nazi in the Family is published by Short Books. Ernst Israel Bornstein’s The Long Night: A True Story is published by the Toby Press.