The new EFL chairman Rick Parry is “watching intently” to see whether proposals to overhaul European club competition would threaten the League Cup. The format of continental football could be set for major changes from 2024, with reports emerging on Friday that a new 32-team division for the Champions League had been devised, with leading Premier League clubs thought to be in favour. It was reported that each club would play ten matches against ten different opponents across two divisions, with the top eight sides qualifying for the round of 16. This would create a more congested fixture list, and place even greater pressure on the League Cup’s scheduling. Early reports have indicated that League Cup semi-finals would be reduced to one-off matches, with FA Cup replays also scrapped. Parry accepts that the future of the competition would be under scrutiny in the event of more European games.“It clearly is a concern and is something that we are mindful of,” Parry said. “I think we are unique in having a League Cup now, the French have done away with theirs.” The Coupe de la Ligue, which began in 1994, will end after this season’s edition. “Obviously now with Uefa’s third-tier competition and the potential [Champions League] changes on the horizon – who knows what they will be – we are obviously watching intently and with great care to see what they may be, and what impact they might have,” the former Liverpool chief executive added. Jürgen Klopp has described the proposed Champions League revamp as “absolute bollocks”, citing the difficulties his Liverpool side are having to fulfil fixtures with the current schedule. Klopp has travelled with the senior squad to Qatar for the Club World Cup while a youth side will take on Aston Villa in the Carabao Cup quarter-finals on Tuesday – and Parry felt the “sensible” decision had been taken. “I think we have actually come up with a very pragmatic solution that first and foremost worked for Liverpool,” he said. “It was sensible to say ‘you have a major problem here, what’s going to be the right solution for you?’” “The one thing I learned from being at Liverpool is you play your fixtures as soon as possible, you never push them back,” Parry added. “Having been at Anfield to watch the game against Arsenal with the Liverpool kids, which was one of the greatest nights of football entertainment I have had for many years, then I don’t think they are weakening the integrity of the competition unduly. I think it was a sensible solution and making the best of bad circumstances.” Parry also poured cold water on the idea of taking Carabao Cup games overseas in the future. “It’s not something we have discussed, personally it’s something I’m dead against,” he said. “I was never in favour of the 39th Premier League game [idea]. It’s an English competition to be played in England, in my opinion.”