Concern was writ large on faces all across Uefa HQ on Tuesday morning. First, chef forgot to put the honey glazing on the truffle macaroons. Then, a waitress slipped on a tranche of smoked barracuda and fell hard on the marble floor. Emergency services were called immediately, but the wine decanter she had been carrying could not be saved. It was enough to put officials off their seven-course breakfasts for a moment. By the time brunch was served 3.5 minutes later (the waitress was slower than usual for reasons unclear to anyone present), concern had turned to confusion. A rumour was going around that Liverpool, Big Cup holders Liverpool, were in danger of being eliminated from the competition in their last group game. What?! Could this possibly be true? One official scoffed, noting with a reassuring belch that for top clubs the group stages contain about as much jeopardy as a hearty breakfast. Ah. Oh. Everyone agreed this was a strange and irksome day. Meanwhile, RB Salzburg, famously named after the salt mountain in the condiment wing of Uefa’s pantry, continued plotting Liverpool’s downfall. They know their challenge is huge: nothing less than an emphatic victory will do for them against Jürgen Klopp’s team. But they are young, super-confident and led by a 19-year-old phenomenon, Erling Braut Haaland, who has predicted a 3-1 win for the Austrian side, with himself netting a hat-trick. No wonder the striker’s teammate Jérôme Onguéné said: “If I had to use one word to describe [Haaland], it would ‘Ibrahimovic’.” Of course the real Ibra retired several years ago when he went to the USA! USA!! USA!!! Which reminds us that a victory for Salzburg would be a blow not only to Big Cup power-mongers but also to everyone determined to keep patronising Jesse Marsch, the American head coach of the Salzburg Redbulls. Join Paul Doyle from 5.55pm GMT for hot Big Cup MBM coverage of RB Salzburg 1-3 Liverpool and then Simon Burnton will be on hand for Chelsea 2-0 Lille at 8pm. “I had a few times good offers from China, but you also need to listen to your heart. I think money is not everything; happiness is something you cannot buy. Inside I feel rich” – Ajax’s Dusan Tadic gets his chat on with Arthur Renard. Football and the election: it’s the latest David Squires cartoon. We lost it at Gordon the Gopher. And you can buy a copy right here. “Can anyone write a more anti-Liverpool hit piece than this utter drivel (yesterday’s Fiver)? Is this what passes for journalism these days is it? Get over yourself” – Marc Hageman. “Former Australia manager Ange Postecoglou guided his team to J-League glory last weekend, their first title for 15 years. Now just waiting for the club to announce they’re honouring the achievement by changing their name to Yokohama Flamin’ Marinos” – James Taylor. “Yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs mentioned some crowd trouble and stadium vandalism at a Cruzeiro game, but didn’t quote its usual source. My heart goes out to the staff of the Fun and Games in South America Dept – I don’t know how the bigwigs who shoved them through the door marked Has Uno and Faça Um so close to Christmas can live with themselves” – Ed Taylor. “The patron saint of Weird Uncle Fiver (yesterday’s Fiver letters) is surely Saint Cajetan, who has special responsibility for the unemployed, gamblers, odd lot dealers, and job seekers. However, I do worry that I’m flogging a dead horse with this patron saint business … in which case I’d need to call on St Felix of Nola. There really is a patron saint for everything” – Richard Morris. “Given the standard of football analysis and level of humour served up, surely the saint most appropriate for The Fiver is Saint Andgreavsie?” – Keiron Fulop. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day is … Keiron Fulop, who bags a copy of The Next Big Thing. We’ve still got more prizes to give away, so get scribbling. Burnley have confirmed that a 13-year-old fan was ejected for an alleged racist gesture towards Son Heung-min at Tottenham on Saturday. The FA has banned Saif Rubie from Mr 15% duties for improper comments on social media disgraces about Adam Johnson and then the England women’s team. Bolton striker Daryl Murphy has admitted being secretly banned for six weeks last season at Nottingham Forest, having tested positive for jazz salts he took at a trendy nightspot. “I would like to stress that the taking of recreational drugs is something that I don’t condone whatsoever,” he said. Taxpayers FC are keeping faith with Manuel Pellegrini despite their 3-1 gubbing by an underwhelming Arsenal side on Monday. Well, at least until they lose at Southampton. Or beat Saints and effectively sack Ralph Hasenhüttl. Or draw and both find themselves heading for the same door marked Do One. New Hearts boss Daniel Stendel has hit back at Barnsley over claims they sacked him because he was in discussions with a marriage-wrecking rival Championship club. “I was always honest and documented strongly that I wanted to continue to work with the team in order to achieve the goals of the club,” he sniffed, sounding very much like he believes the Tykes have turned the weans against him. Frank Lampard’s Chelsea manager Frank Lampard has urged his team to embrace the directorial work of Stanley Tucci. “I used to love big nights as a player,” he tooted. “I like the pressure of this game being a knockout. If we’re going to do anything good here, then we are going to need lots of these nights.” And Bernard Cribbins is proving the critics wrong at Newcastle, so says Andy Carroll. “It was obviously topsy-turvy at the beginning,” he trilled. “He wasn’t really everyone’s cup of tea, but … seven points in a week is great.” Come and get your Football Weekly. Jürgen Klopp has his game face on for Liverpool’s latest Big Cup final group game decider, writes Andy Hunter, while Salzburg’s Jesse Marsch gets his chat on with Tom Kludt about his half-time rant at Anfield and ambitions for the Austrian club. Booing your own team: is it useful? Paul MacInnes sifts through the evidence. Fans must act to resist racist poison dripping into the game from the political arena, warns Barney Ronay, while Jonathan Liew muses upon the silence of most sports people when it comes to politics. Nick Ames on how Nicolas Pépé has finally given Arsenal and Freddie Ljungberg a glimmer of hope. Quiz! Quiz! Quiz! See how much your brain knows about caretaker managers. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!