When it was announced in April that Britain’s longest-running soap, Coronation Street, would be introducing its first black family, the response was one of shock and incredulousness. Lenny Henry simply tweeted “wow” at the news, while theatre director Matthew Xia asked: “How have the producers managed to get away with this for almost 60 years?” Though Corrie introduced its first black character – Shirley Armitage, played by Lisa Lewis – in 1983, the arrival of the Baileys was a major step forward for the 59-year-old soap, coming almost 30 years after the Taverniers arrived in EastEnders’ Albert Square in 1990. The Bailey family would include the usual mix of high drama and plausibility – patriarch Edison with his gambling addiction, eldest son and wheeler-dealer Michael, youngest son James, a gay footballer, and kindly matriarch Aggie. “Coronation Street is a national treasure,” says Trevor Michael Georges, who plays Edison, “so when they announced they were looking for their first black family, that marked a real shift in mentality.” Georges has a history in opera and theatre, so Corrie marked a major shift for him, too. “The problem is not being the first of something but paving the way for the second or third,” he says. “That way you build a legacy and when you get to the third iteration, the novelty has worn off so you’re appreciated on your own merits.” Still, with no precedent to fall back on, it has been tricky. “There is an immense pressure,” he says. “There is no one I can go to for advice. It has been nerve-racking, but we just have to set up the pathway for others to follow.” With a storyline concerning racism and homophobia in football, Nathan Graham’s character, James, feels especially current. “It’s really important to shine a light on issues happening in the world,” he says. “We need to show all facets of James’s character and not stereotype him. Representation is increasing – but we still need to stay authentic.” Corrie might be the nation’s favourite soap, but, with viewing figures dropping across the board, there’s hope this injection of diversity will prove an incentive for new viewers to tune in. “This family has been so welcomed,” says Lorna Laidlaw, who plays Aggie. So many of her friends and family have come back to Corrie because of the Baileys – and she has been contacted by younger BAME actors asking for advice on breaking into the industry. “Acting is really tough and there isn’t enough representation, so this is a role of a lifetime,” she says. “I don’t see why we shouldn’t have more open casting now. Why we can’t have a black lawyer or black businessman on TV, too?”