Born in Yorkshire, Laurence Fox, 41, studied at Rada. He appeared in Gosford Park, and on television played DS Hathaway in Lewis from 2006 to 2015. His recent work includes ITV’s Victoria and the upcoming Netflix series White Lines. A singer-songwriter, he has just released his second album, A Grief Observed. He lives in London and has two sons with his former wife, Billie Piper. Which living person do you most admire, and why? My mum, because she raised five children. I am raising two and it’s hard work. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? Dogmatism. What is the trait you most deplore in others? Hypocrisy. What was your most embarrassing moment? When I was young, I went to an adventure camp and I needed the loo, but I didn’t want to run – and the inevitable happened. What would your superpower be? Smelling bullshit. What makes you unhappy? Inactivity. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose? Sensible, rational people. What is your most unappealing habit? Smoking. What is your favourite word? Douchebag. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you? A lady at drama school said, “You have no access to your imagination – you should give up acting.” If you could go back in time, where would you go? To the 1920s, for the fashion. What does love feel like? Different nowadays. It feels nourishing. What was the best kiss of your life? The last one. Have you ever said ‘I love you’ and not meant it? Yes. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party? Jordan Peterson and Cathy Newman: I could just sit back and watch. What has been your biggest disappointment? Not being Bond. What is the closest you’ve come to death? A motorbike crash. I broke my shoulder and ribs and was so scared I didn’t ride for two years. What single thing would improve the quality of your life? My children doing what they’re told. What has been your closest brush with the law? I have had several. The last time was in 2007, when I had a small disagreement with a photographer outside a theatre when I was in Treats with Billie. I got cautioned. What keeps you awake at night? Worry about being self-employed. Nowadays, I don’t lose sleep over my divorce – I did for about a year. Tell us a secret I sometimes lie to the children and say it’s later than it is so I can put them to bed earlier. How would you like to be remembered? Not that much of a twat.