With the starting gun fired on the Brexit legislation’s journey through parliament, Brexit day is virtually guaranteed on 31 January. While Boris Johnson agreed a deal with the EU last October, it does not have legal effect in UK courts until his withdrawal agreement bill (Wab) is passed. MPs voted for the bill in the House of Commons on Friday, paving the way for the completion of later stages in committee and the House of Lords. If all goes to plan at Westminster, the European parliament will ratify the withdrawal agreement on 29 January 2020, and Brexit will happen two days later. What happens on 31 January? Brexit day: after 11pm on 31 January, revoking article 50, the formal process of exiting the EU, is no longer possible. The UK will have passed the point of no return and will no longer be a member of the EU. What will be different? Life will generally carry on the same, as the UK will enter an 11-month transition period, to allow both the government and EU to work out what the future relationship should be. The UK will remain in the customs union and the single market, meaning trade will carry on as normal. But the UK will be outside the political institutions – it will no longer be represented in the EU council of ministers or the European parliament. During this period, the UK must continue to obey EU rules, but will have no say in making them. EU citizens will continue to be able to travel to and work in the UK and British citizens can do the same in another member state. The European court of justice will still have powers during the transition period so British courts can refer cases there. What role the ECJ will have following the transition period is still to be determined as part of the longer-term negotiations. But its role is likely to be limited. Are negotiations expected to start on 1 February? No. First, both the EU and the UK have to publish their negotiating objectives. However, after the sabre-rattling of the last few days in the UK, both sides have a fairly good idea of what the others sides’ positions are. The withdrawal agreement bill gives Boris Johnson 30 days in which to publish his negotiating objectives. EU member states are expected to agree their negotiating mandate on 25 February, which will then be handed to the EU chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, and officials at the European commission. Talks on setting up a border in the Irish Sea can begin from 1 February. Special committees of British and EU representatives can meet to agree technical details on implementing the protocol on Northern Ireland, an agreement that leaves the region following EU rules, with a separate status to Great Britain. What if there is no agreement by the end of 2020? The government has the option before 1 July to ask for an extension of the transition period for one or two years . Johnson is making that illegal under domestic law, but it would be easy to repeal if necessary. However, if the government changes its mind and seeks a transition extension after 1 July, the door will be locked. At a private meeting with EU27 diplomats this week, EU lawyers said there could be no extension after 1 July 2020. What else happens after exit from the EU? The government must pass new legislation in four key areas to implement its vision of Brexit – with new immigration laws to replace freedom of movement and new legislation for agriculture, environment and trade, all of which are substantially supported or regulated by the EU at the moment. In the Queen’s speech, it also promised bills on fisheries, financial services and private international law. Does this mean Brexit will be done? If all goes to Johnson’s plan, a trading arrangement for goods and some services will be reached by the end of 2020 that the Conservatives will label as Brexit. Business leaders, negotiations experts and the EU are sceptical there is enough time to conclude a comprehensive deal that goes beyond narrow matters of trade in goods, and covers the entire gamut of arrangements including science, education, data exchange and security, which involves approximately 40 EU measures on policing and judicial cooperation in criminal matters. Barnier has said not everything can be done in 11 months. His officials will prioritise some topics ahead of others: these are likely to be trade in goods, security and fishing rights. Although fishing is a very small part of the European economy, it could be the first question to settle: the two sides have promised to aim for an agreement on fishing quotas by 1 July 2020. Once the UK has left the transition on 31 December 2020, there are likely to be numerous questions to resolve. It means Brexit may not be achieved for years.