‘I feel like everything has led up to this moment.” These are the solemn words of UK rapper Krept (real name: Casyo Johnson) in a short film titled The Road to the O2, which documents him and musical partner Konan (Karl Wilson) on their journey from being independent artists to headlining the 20,000-strong venue. But does that sense of occasion translate to the show itself? Within two minutes of it beginning – with a 3D re-creation of the old-fashioned sweetshop on their album cover, a sprinkling of pyrotechnics, a choreographed fleet of hooded figures pretending to be Krept and Konan, and the appearance of four giant inflatable goats – the answer is a resounding yes. This is not to say that Krept and Konan rely on gimmicks. After the flashy showmanship of their intro, all they need to unite the room is the bolshy, instantly recognisable force of their six-year-old hit Don’t Waste My Time. Leaders in UK rap for a decade (their aforementioned documentary includes footage of their first-ever gig, opening for Skepta in 2011), the two have an easy chemistry that’s magnetic to watch: they slide effortlessly from hip-hop singles to grime freestyles to dancehall-inflected album cuts. Though they’ve been around for a decade, 2019’s Revenge Is Sweet is only the pair’s second album (following countless mixtapes, remixes and freestyles). The revenge of the title is aimed at the establishment media and music industry that have rarely taken them seriously. But while it flirts with sinister imagery, the record is a celebratory reminder that the best revenge is living well. That sense of celebration makes the pair’s appearance at the O2 so unforgettable. This is a joyful victory lap that’s shared with the crowd, whether Krept and Konan are floating across the stadium on a moving platform, leading an Afrobeats versus bashment dance battle, or encouraging the crowd to yell “wanker” at a video of a Boris Johnson lookalike before performing their song Liar Liar. What makes Revenge Is Sweet feel especially significant is that, having featured many high-profile American artists (Jeremih, Rick Ross) on their 2015 debut, Krept and Konan worked with a fleet of their British peers on the follow-up, instilling the record with a vehement sense of pride and community. That spirit powers the best portions of the live show, as a big red button and some Street Fighter-inspired visuals are used to ceremoniously announce each of their special guests, which include Stefflon Don, king of hooks MoStack and grime stalwart Stormzy. They also pay their moment forwards, making room for new faces, as afro-bashment group NSG come out to perform their viral summer hit OT Bop. But the show’s most poignant moments come at its close, with an uplifting tribute to rapper Cadet, who was killed by a dangerous driver in 2018, and a performance of Broski. The most heartbreaking song on Revenge, it was dedicated to their friend and business partner Nash Chagonda, who killed himself last year. Krept’s voice crumbles as he raps: “Now my heart’s broken that we have to go without him.” It’s one of many moments balances Krept and Konan’s hilarious and show-stealing production with genuine heart and soul.