I’m not a canapes person. They are fiddly, just one bite and there is only ever one vegetarian tray, which is always on the other side of the room … I could go on. If I am at a party, I want food that does a few things: fills me up, is bright and enlivening, can be eaten with my hands and helps soak up some of the wine I plan to drink. A banh mi is my dream party food: crunch from some fresh veg, punch from the sriracha, crisp-edged tofu and that all important sustenance from the baguette, which holds it all in. With this in one hand and a lemongrass margarita in the other, I’ll be the last one on the dancefloor. You don’t want a fancy sourdough baguette here: crusty baguettes are not a banh mi’s friend. You want the lightest, softest, airiest baguette you can get your hands on. There are bakeries that make Vietnamese-style baguettes specifically for banh mi, so if you can get your hands on them, hats off to you. You can make the veg, mayo and tofu (keep the tofu warm in a low oven) ahead of time, and put the baguettes together as needed. Prep 25 minCook 10 minServes 4 For the veg100g radishes, sliced into thin matchsticks½ green apple, sliced into thin matchsticks¼ cucumber, sliced into thin matchsticks1 medium carrot, sliced into thin matchsticks1 tbsp rice-wine vinegar1 tsp caster sugar15g pickled ginger, plus 2 tbsp of the pickling juice For the sriracha and lime mayonnaise150g good mayonnaise1 tbsp sriracha Juice and zest of ½ lime For the tofuSesame oil250g firm tofu, sliced into 2cm strips1 tsp runny honey or agave3 tsp sesame seedsJuice and zest of 1 limeFlaky sea salt and black pepper1 small bunch coriander, roughly chopped To serve1 large, soft and fluffy baguette1 small bunch coriander, leaves picked1 small bunch mint, leaves picked Mix all the veg ingredients in a bowl and set aside. In a small bowl, mix together the mayonnaise ingredients, then set aside ready to assemble later. Put two tablespoons of sesame oil in a large, nonstick frying pan, then fry the tofu for about five minutes, until crisp and golden on all sides. Turn off the heat, then add the honey, followed by the sesame seeds, and toss to coat the tofu. Now add the lime juice and zest, with a good pinch of flaky sea salt and the coriander. Warm the baguette in the oven, then cut in half lengthways, making sure that you don’t slice all the way to the bottom. Spread the top and bottom with a layer of the sriracha mayo, followed by a layer of the pickled veg, then the tofu. Finish with a handful of coriander and mint leaves, then cut into quarters and serve while the tofu is still warm. You can multiply this recipe up – keep the mix in a jug, then pour into glasses over ice as you need. Prep 10 minCook 5 minMakes 4 200ml apple juice1 tbsp agave syrup1 thumb-size piece ginger, peeled and roughly chopped2 sticks lemongrass, halved lengthways and bashed at the root100ml freshly squeezed lime juice (about 6 limes), plus lime slices to serve200ml tequila Put the apple juice, agave, ginger and lemongrass into a small pan, and simmer on a low heat for five minutes. Leave to cool completely in the pan, then pour through a sieve into a jug. Add the lime juice and tequila, then pour into salt-rimmed glasses with ice and a slice of lime.