LadBaby’s I Love Sausage Rolls, a spoof of Joan Jett’s 1982 hit I Love Rock’n’Roll, has beaten Stormzy’s Own It to the festive top spot. It is the second Christmas No 1 for YouTube stars Mark and Roxanne Hoyle in two years, putting them in gilded company: the only other acts to rack up consecutive Christmas No 1 singles are the Beatles (1963 to 1965) and the Spice Girls (1996 to 1998). With 85,000 digital purchases, is also the fastest-selling download since the Artists for Grenfell cover of Bridge Over Troubled Water in June 2017. The young parents became famous through sharing irreverent videos about raising their two infant sons and now command an audience of 3.4m Facebook fans and 766,000 YouTube subscribers. In 2018, they pipped Ariana Grande and Ava Max to the Christmas No 1 with We Built This City on Sausage Rolls, a riff on Starship’s 1985 single. This year’s LadBaby campaign drew support from Stormzy, who described their mission as a “beautiful thing”, and Scottish musician Lewis Capaldi, who posted a characteristically unfiltered video of himself dancing topless to the song. Alan Merrill, who wrote and released the original song with his group the Arrows in 1975, said: “When I wrote it back then I could never have imagined this!” The proceeds from both singles benefit the Trussell Trust, a charity that supports more than 1,200 food banks in the UK. The money from last year’s single provided 70,000 three-day emergency food parcels. More than 823,000 parcels were distributed through food banks between March and September 2019, the busiest period on record. Emma Revie, chief executive at the Trussell Trust, said the charity was “so grateful” for the support: “The money raised will help us support our network of food banks to provide the best possible emergency help to people referred, while we work towards a future without the need for food banks.” Mark Hoyle told the Guardian that he and his wife had been encouraged that fans weren’t just buying the single, but sharing photos of themselves going shopping to buy provisions for food banks: “That’s what we wanted to do this year – it wasn’t just about raising money, it was about awareness as well, and making sure people were going to help out [in person] as well as financially.” The Hoyles recently visited a food bank and were surprised by the constant stream of people coming through the centre’s door. “It wasn’t always people that were destitute – it was everyday people, and that was quite shocking,” said Hoyle. “A window cleaner said that he had fallen off a ladder and broken his leg, which had led him to be there. We read so much about the problem but it’s different when you actually see it. It’s so much more heartbreaking. “There was a woman who came in with a little baby, probably about as old as ours, and when she left, the guy said, ‘It’s her 21st birthday tomorrow.’ How are we in this position where there’s a girl who’s 21 is going to a food bank because she can’t get food for her baby?” LadBaby released I Love Sausage Rolls the day after the UK election. Said Hoyle: “We were really worried about whether it would get lost in what was going on but I think the country needed something to have a bit of a laugh about. However people felt about the government, this song hopefully gave them a reason to laugh and a reason to donate to the people who needed it most.” Of the new Conservative administration, Hoyle said: “I’m sure they’re gonna do a great job.” Pressed on whether a government that introduced austerity would do anything to mitigate the issue of food poverty, he said that the nation had to have faith that “the right people” had been voted in. He declined to state who he had voted for, but clarified that he had voted, and that it was important to do so. LadBaby’s aim with the single, said Hoyle, was to offer a break from politics. “So much of the last few years has been dominated by Brexit and what’s happening with the government that so many issues – whether it be food banks or so many others – are taking a back seat. We didn’t want to involve politics at all, we wanted to focus on the people who can’t eat.” Hoyle was equally non-partisan on the matter of who makes the best sausage rolls, and said his sole requirement was that they were served hot. Although perhaps not vegan: I Love Sausage Rolls makes one explicit, if unexpected political point on the matter of the meat-free pastry snacks that have proven a sales winner for Greggs this year. The Hoyles sing: “We don’t want to start a riot / We’re not on a vegan diet / We know Quorn will never be a client.” Hoyle said: “When we spent some time with the Trussell Trust, we learned that the only thing people really get a choice in is allergies. They don’t have the luxury of saying whether they’re a vegan or a vegetarian – they just get what people have donated during that week. It’s a luxury to be in that position where you can choose.” Hoyle said the family was looking for more ways to help the Trussell Trust throughout the year. “We don’t want Christmas to be the one time when we help out. Summer is a really important time for them – that’s when their food banks are really depleted because there’s no school. Children don’t have free school meals and a lot of parents have to rely on food banks.” The Trussell Trust’s Emma Revie argued that a more robust benefits system was needed to reduce food bank reliance. “Poverty acts like a current, with big structural things – like the rising cost of living or insecure work – sweeping people away and leaving them without enough money for the basics. But this isn’t inevitable. We know what things will anchor people against those tides and reduce the need for food banks: a benefits system that provides sufficient money and support to anyone who needs its help, work that is secure and pays fairly and emergency support from local authorities that fills the gaps when someone is hit by something unexpected.” In October, LadBaby signed with William Morris Entertainment and Margravine Management to represent them across all areas of their business and expand their platform across licensing, merchandising, literary and live events, Variety reported. Hoyle said they had no specific plans as of yet. “I like to be places we’re not expected. I don’t know what else is next. I’ll pick up the phone to anything, so as long as it’s funny and we can make people laugh and spread a positive vibe, we’ll keep doing it.”