Brussels sprouts see a 500% spike in sales over the upcoming holiday season. Come Boxing Day, sales slow, but these diminutive greens have more to them than just being part of the festive roast, and stay affordable and plentiful long into spring. Cooked properly, sprouts can be the hero dish of the Christmas table, and beyond. Fry leftover ones with lardons of tempeh or bacon, then cover with cheese and bake. Even overcooked sprouts can be transformed into a delicious brunch, mashed with potatoes to make colcannon or bubble and squeak. To reduce waste when preparing your sprouts, leave the stem attached, unless it’s on the turn, because its removal will cause perfectly edible leaves to drop off. To cook them, drop the sprouts into plenty of ferociously boiling water just minutes before you want to eat. That way, they’ll still be vibrantly green when they hit the table – and ready for reinventing into leftover recipes throughout the week. And if you have a glut of uncooked sprouts, they’re delicious raw, too, in a slaw or the like. This is a go-to Boxing Day recipe round my house. Raw sprouts are super-delicious in a slaw, and look colourful when mixed with satsumas and dried fruits. Use up other raw vegetables, too, and any nuts and dried fruit leftover from the holidays, to give the dish a wonderful texture. Serves 2 100g brussels sprouts, finely shredded2 sticks celery, finely sliced¼ red onion, finely diced2 satsumas, peeled and pulled into segments3 sprigs mixed soft herbs, such as oregano, mint and parsley, picked, stalks reserved 25g walnuts15g crushed hemp seeds or other seeds15g dried fruit, choppedExtra-virgin olive oil and a squeeze of cider vinegar, to dress Put the shredded sprouts in a large bowl, then add the celery, onion and the satsuma segments. Finely chop the herb stalks and roughly chop the leaves, and add to the mix. Add the walnuts, crushed hemp seeds (or other seeds) and dried fruit, season and finish with a drizzle each of extra-virgin olive oil and cider vinegar. Toss to combine, and serve.