In approaching a newspaper’s editorial, readers can reasonably expect that it is more than the personal view of its author. Many readers think that the unsigned opinion, supported by the masthead, is the result of a systematic and deliberative process, and that the editorial is the considered view, if not of the owner, then of the editor. An editorial in any paper can be perceived as a corporate or institutional view. It is not necessarily a collective or representative one. Consciously or not, editorials, also known as leaders, are a way newspapers assert identity, attempt overt influence, and differentiate themselves in the marketplace, especially at election times. So, if the editorial process goes wrong – as it did for the Guardian recently over a leader occasioned by a former UK prime minister David Cameron’s memoir – and the editor-in-chief apologises and promises measures to prevent a recurrence, readers can legitimately enquire further. I asked the editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, what changes she had instituted. For example, how many people, and of what seniority, would determine the Guardian view for any given leader, and see the draft before publication? Would she sign them all off personally, and, if not, how senior would be those delegated to sign them off on her behalf? She responded: “I realise that many people think that the editor writes all the leaders/editorials. At some smaller news organisations that might still be the case, but at the Guardian it has not been true for many years.” Viner pointed out that the Guardian has an international news website with 163m browsers monthly, print and other digital products, and hundreds of staff around the globe. “Our editorials are written by a team of colleagues, who agree themes and lines with me in advance; the articles then pass through a thorough editing and production process. This system has worked well on weekdays, but on that particular Sunday the subject matter was highly inappropriate and through a series of errors it was not shown to senior enough colleagues,” Viner emailed. “To correct this, we have tightened up editorial processes on a Sunday and all leaders are now seen before publication online by either the deputy editor or me.” Process-wise, I don’t think she could do more. Such an incident with an editorial is rare, though not unique, in Guardian history. In 1896, an editorial mentioned a rumour that the recently defeated prime minister, Lord Rosebery, had traded peerages for party donations. Viner’s greatest predecessor, CP Scott, wrote to him to say “how much I regret the passage in Friday’s leader … It ought of course to have been struck out. But the leader was extremely late and the revision unfortunately imperfect … Please don’t think of acknowledging this note, which I am afraid I am writing selfishly for the relief of my feelings.” But Rosebery did acknowledge, with what seems, at this distance, a sort of grim glee: “My Dear Mr Scott, the allusion in the Guardian requires no explanation. I rejoiced in it, for it gave me the opportunity that I had long desired of pulverising this lie, to which [a political rival] … had given circulation. It is amusing to see how the squirters of this filth are now declaring that they never said or intended or thought anything of the sort.” • Paul Chadwick is the Guardian’s readers’ editor