This is your reminder that Guardian setters Arachne, Enigmatist, Nutmeg, Pasquale, Puck, Qaos, Tramp, Vlad and others all support excellent charitable causes in the 2020 edition of the mind-boggling annual 3D calendar. Yes, a certain man keeps popping in to our puzzles, just as you would expect. For starters, we have this from Tracy kicking off a Times Quick Cryptic: 1ac Choose isolated area for a dip (10)[wordplay: synonyms for “choose” + “isolated area”][PICK + POCKET][wordplay: what “dip” is slang for] … where the answer, PICKPOCKET, has nothing to do with swimming, but does make us think of the Artful Dodger. In the Financial Times, Peto sets off the downs with a clue … 1d Maybe Mr M’Choakumchild shocked her with chocolates (13)[wordplay: anagram (“shocked”) of HER and CHOCOLATES][definition: what Mr M’Choakumchild is an example of] … where, even if you haven’t previously struggled through the on-the-nose character names of such novels as Hard Times, the wordplay will deliver you SCHOOLTEACHER. And we have an outright namecheck from Knut … 3d Disheartening Dickens work, perhaps A Christmas Carol (4)[wordplay: example of what Dickens wrote, without middle letter (“disheartening”)][NOVEL without middle letter][definition: a Christmas carol] … in a clue for NOEL. What’s that? The other man? The one whose calls for unity have a tang of “if you’re not getting behind me, your voice should not be heard”? We’ll talk about him next year. But if you insist, the Knut puzzle mentioned just above has some topical malarkey. Getting back to the theme of the previous clue, here’s Imogen: 21d Holy Italian who is sacked just before Christmas (5)[double definition: “holy” in Italian & a figure “sacked just before Christmas”] Initially, the solver brings to mind the Conferenza Episcopale Italiana bringing in zero-hours contracts, but the reality is much lovelier: SANTA. The Oxford English Dictionary entry for Santa could, for my money, benefit from a piece of deft re-writing so that it reads plausibly to adults and to children; I’m talking about losing both the “supposed”s so that it reads less as if it’s been written by Scrooge and more like the entry for Father Christmas: a personification of Christmas, now conventionally pictured as a benevolent old man with a long white beard and red clothes trimmed with white fur, who brings presents for children on the night before Christmas Day Both entries are keen to avoid suggesting that the two men are the same person: Now virtually synonymous with Father Christmas. Perhaps this is to pay respect to Father Christmas’s previous incarnations as King Frost and various pagan entities and distinguish him from the German-American tradition which has various names and spellings: Ah, “the terror of the young”. Echoing that combination of “Christ” and “child” is the subject of our next challenge. The name given to a kind of pomander-jelly-tot hybrid, it feels as if it has medieval roots, but – as the ever-assiduous Clare Spencer explains – goes back in the UK only as far as a 1968 charity fundraiser. Reader, how would you clue CHRISTINGLE? Many thanks for your clues for QUENCH. What a bumper crop! I enjoyed the snappiness of Phitonelly’s “Check cheque, half of new check” and Alberyalbery’s “Give satisfaction having put out”. QUENCH proves fecund in terms of prompting surfaces, from TonyCollman’s “Cool American Indian adopting name that’s not posh? Excellent!” to, courtesy of AlanB (“who doesn’t wish to come here himself”), “Macron’s word for what Nato’s commanders hoped at first to put out”; from PeterMooreFuller’s “What Spanish Navy and Swiss Brigade may do in a firefight” to Porcia’s “Extremely unputdownable new silk screens hard to put down”. The audacity award goes to BasaliskLion, who says: “I’m kind of new to crossword clues”, then invents a new-to-me device in: “Put out waltz through queues even, decipher.” The runners-up are Lizard’s “Stop heartless head of state being given honour in UK” and Dunnart’s “In Basque, “ñ” characters are satisfying on the tongue”; the winner is DeetotheGee’s grisly “Snuff out Bond’s supplier, strip gun and decapitate his acting boss!” Kludos to Dee; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. The annotated solution is now available for Picaroon’s recent prize puzzle, which reveals the multiple misleading elements of this clue … 3d Vote to Leave behaving carelessly? They’re no experts (5)[wordplay: symbol for a vote removed from (“to Leave”) synonym for “behaving carelessly”][X removed from LAXITY][definition: they’re no experts] … for LAITY. As an American president once put it, Merry Christmas to setters and solvers “of many faiths and no faith”, and see you in the New Year. The Guardian Crossword Blog will return on 6 January. Enjoy the festive puzzles, themed crosswords and jumbos!