Tottenham 4-2-3-1 Paulo Gazzaniga No chance with Willian’s first goal but his foul for Chelsea’s penalty summed up his ragged team. Booked. 2 Serge Aurier Dismal. Conceded the corner for the opener and failed to close down Willian’s shot. 2 Toby Alderweireld  Hard to fault him for an awful collective display, though he was often outmuscled by Abraham. Booked. 5 Davinson Sánchez Vulnerable when Chelsea sprayed long diagonals over him. It has become a weakness. 4 Jan Vertonghen Offered little in an attacking sense. Would Danny Rose have given Spurs more thrust? 5 Eric Dier Chelsea’s midfielders played around him and his passing was poor. Hauled off at half‑time. 3 Moussa Sissoko Tried to drag Spurs into the game with his powerful running but he lacked quality. Booked. 4 Lucas Moura Too slow to stop Kovacic combining with Willian for the opener; and was frustrating in possession. 4 Dele Alli Showed his frustration when he squared up to Kovacic. Squandered possession with poor touches. Booked. 4 Son Heung-min Let his teammates down when he lost his head and kicked Rüdiger. Poor before his dismissal. 2 Harry Kane Skied a good chance before creating an opening for Son. Carried a threat despite feeding off scraps. 5 Subs Christian Eriksen (on for Dier, ht) 5; Danny Rose (on for Vertonghen, 74) 5; Tanguy Ndombele (on for Moura, 75) 5. Kepa Arrizabalaga The Spaniard did not have to make a noteworthy save. Protected brilliantly by his back three. 7 Antonio Rüdiger The German has struggled with injuries this season but this was an imperious display. Good distribution. Booked. 8 Kurt Zouma Booked for blocking a quick free-kick but the Frenchman had a fine game in the centre of the back three. 8 Fikayo Tomori Nervous on the ball initially and Spurs targeted him. But the youngster soon settled down. 7 César Azipilicueta  The captain marshalled the right flank effectively and led calmly. Did not put a foot wrong. 7 N’Golo Kanté He was everywhere. His dynamism left Spurs wheezing and his passing was excellent. 8 Mateo Kovacic Combined with Willian for the opener and pulled the strings in midfield. Booked for tangle with Alli. 9 Marcos Alonso Shone on his first start since 5 November. Doubled up on Aurier with Willian and won the penalty. 7 Mason Mount Worked tirelessly, showed composure on the ball and moved intelligently. So selfless. 8 Willian Ran Aurier ragged and scored a wonderful opener before clinically dispatching his penalty. Outstanding throughout.9 Tammy Abraham Chelsea’s lone forward was up for it. Held the ball up well and dominated the centre-backs. 8 Subs Jorginho (for Kovacic, 68) 6; James (for Azpilicueta, 80) 6; Batshuayi (for Abraham, 80) 6.