Blame Den and Angie. Until the devastating 1986 EastEnders episode in which the Queen Vic’s landlord Den Watts chose Christmas Day to drop divorce papers on his wife, most TV Christmas specials were innocuous. Chas & Dave around the old Joanna. Ronnie Corbett in a Christmas sweater. Now, Christmas wouldn’t be Christmas without an aeroplane crashing into a pub and maiming half a dozen beloved soap stalwarts. From last year’s devastatingly bleak Call the Midwife to the routinely wanton carnage of Emmerdale, if it bleeds, it leads. In truth, Christmas has always been darker than might be imagined. Originally, it dovetailed with the festival of Saturnalia, a wild bacchanalia in which criminals ran amok and gift-giving was simply a means of avoiding violent robbery. Meanwhile, mistletoe was prized by the Druids as an infertility cure – which gives a slightly queasy aspect to its modern status as the office flirt’s favourite vascular shrub. Over the years, we’ve filtered out most of this stuff; replaced it with chocolate and tinsel. But maybe some atavistic traces remain in our desire to see misery materialising on our TVs over the festive period. The role of television has changed, too. Back in the 1970s, there were three channels, one of which – in the paternalistic interests of Public Service Broadcasting – would often be treating us to four hours of opera, even on Christmas Day. If they wanted to avoid having to talk to their relatives, viewers couldn’t afford to be picky. Now, choice proliferates, and Christmas TV has become an arms race, with ratings wars reported as news stories. “Audiences used to be passive vessels,” says media studies academic Tina Dixon. “That moved to them being more active. A sense arose not of what media does to audiences but what audiences do to media.” Hence, the Christmas special as distraction, escape and as catharsis. To illustrate, Dixon cites Uses and Gratification Theory, a means of analysing why and how people use specific media to satisfy specific needs. Soaps are a perfect example. We displace difficult emotions that surface in the overheated atmosphere of Christmas. Through TV, we express them vicariously. If we don’t, it can spell trouble. “Christmas can be difficult for a lot of people,” she says, “and that sense of having an outlet to cry over a tragic storyline is important. It chimes with people who are not having a picture-perfect Christmas. I can’t imagine that’s lost on media producers.” So, a feedback loop was born. If audiences have helped escalate this, then the makers of television have responded in kind. Think of the demise of Matthew Crawley in Downton Abbey’s 2012 special – a moment seemingly calibrated with the sole intention of making your mum cry. The utterly berserk Casualty@Holby City crossover of 2004 was essentially a maximalist game of Christmas TV bingo, managing to incorporate a fuel-tanker crash, a hostage crisis, an explosion, a fire, a sick child and of course, a drunk, grubby Santa wandering around the hospital. If it seems strange that shows as habitually subtle and nuanced as Casualty and Holby City would resort to such shock tactics, once again, there is a simple explanation. “Soaps have traditionally been targeted at women,” says Dixon. “At Christmas, there’s a sense of wanting to be more inclusive in terms of the rest of the audience. So these storylines might be an attempt to attract men and young people. There’s an expectation that dark storylines might tap into those viewers.” Of course, received wisdom has it that we just don’t sit down and watch TV together any more. This too might help explain the dark melodrama of Christmas telly. These specials are billed as “events”, hopefully replete with shocking, gossip-worthy resolutions. With that comes the sense that if you don’t watch at the same time as your nearest and dearest, there’s no point watching at all. In that sense, festive TV misery might be read as an appeal to our still discernible desire to experience things collectively. But is this TV trope under threat? While 2019’s offerings promise the traditional bloodbaths – both Coronation Street and EastEnders are teasing significant body counts – perhaps the hits of the season will be found elsewhere. And chances are, they will be dark. The fragmentation allowed by multiple channels and streaming services has facilitated the next evolutionary step in Christmas TV misery. It was over Christmas 2015 that Netflix’s bleakly addictive Making a Murderer really took flight. Perhaps there is a message there for makers of Christmas TV: you can only push dark melodrama so far before viewers start sneaking off in search of the real thing. Silent Night (1990)This Steven Berkoff adaptation tracks a lonely misanthrope’s descent into madness and depression. Harry (Berkoff) counts his Christmas cards (he’s got six, if you count one from an insurance company), agonises over contacting friends and ponders suicide. It doesn’t get repeated very often. The West Wing: Noël (2000)Festive PTSD anyone? Proving that US dramas can ladle on the gloom too, this episode explores White House spad Josh Lyman’s trauma after involvement in the case of a suicidal Air Force pilot. Just in case that’s too much of a downer, there’s a subplot about Nazi collaborators in second world war France. Casualty@Holby (2004)A metatextual exercise in which two dramas collide with the searing velocity of a lorry careering into an orphanage. As the carnage unfolds, an offscreen voice asks: “Can this get any worse?”. It’s unclear whether this is a question about the situation or a request to ramp the gloom up further. It works either way. Black Mirror: White Christmas (2014)So grim it’s almost comical. Cookies, in this instance, aren’t biscuits that can be used to decorate Christmas trees but simulations in which criminals are doomed to spend eternity trapped in the most agonising moment of their lives. Still, at least they’ve still got Slade … Call the Midwife (2018)At Nonnatus House, they’ve never been shy of getting some blood on the cobbles. But this effort from last year features a very festive vaginal haematoma as its centrepiece and feels like a particularly bold gambit.