With a handful of minutes left to play, Southampton were sheepish, unsure whether to eke their way through stoppage time or find a third goal to kill the game. They retreated until they could no more, surviving to see off Norwich City’s late retort. Such trepidation was to be expected given March was the last time they recorded back-to-back league wins. Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side held on to savour victory, with first-half goals by Danny Ings and Ryan Bertrand paving the way to a win that hoists them out of the bottom three. After a rocky start Southampton have garnered seven points from the last available nine to relieve pressure on Hasenhüttl and allow the Austrian to enjoy his one-year anniversary in charge. “It has not been an easy last month or two months but a very important one for me as a manager,” Hasenhüttl said. “I never had a situation like this – such a long time without winning [an eight-game winless run] – but I think in the end this experience is very important for me. I’m happy that I went through such a period and I’m thankful the club is going a different way, not immediately thinking about sacking the manager but supporting and I must say thank you to everybody in the club.” Hasenhüttl is adamant Southampton are a better side these days and, as much as a return of six points in five days was a welcome pick-me-up, the manager was most pleased with the front-foot manner of his side’s performance. Ings’s headed opener and Bertrand’s volley stemmed from James Ward-Prowse set pieces during a charismatic first-half display. “More important for me is that we have found a way we want to play and that we have got our identity back,” he said. “That’s more important than every win.” Teemu Pukki’s eighth goal of the season sent a familiar ripple of anxiety through the home crowd, particularly given how easily Southampton’s defence was carved open, with the Norwich striker lashing into the roof of Alex McCarthy’s net after galloping on to Alex Tettey’s threaded ball. If Southampton were in unfamiliar territory at half-time, they were almost in dreamland when Ings chested Nathan Redmond’s hooked pass and sent a shot rasping past Tim Krul’s left post. Shane Long was again lively and departed to a standing ovation five minutes from time. For Norwich it was a bitterly disappointing evening after an encouraging showing and result against Arsenal on Sunday. Norwich, as Daniel Farke acknowledged, were punished for a painfully sluggish start, having not truly troubled Southampton until Pukki struck with over an hour played. The substitute Marco Stiepermann, who was introduced at half-time alongside Tettey, had sent a shot over after collecting Pukki’s pass, which was artfully dummied by Cantwell, while Sam Byram squandered a chance to snatch an equaliser but Norwich got what they deserved. “We are not Liverpool or Man City – [those] sides can sometimes allow themselves to have a slow start or a slow half and they can still react because they have unbelievable qualities,” Farke said. “We are a newly promoted side, who hardly spent any money in the summer and we have to be at the top of our game in each and every second in order to be competitive.”