We are standing at a pivotal moment in the UK’s relationship with the rest of the world. As parliament reassembles post-election, nations around the world, both within the EU and beyond, are waiting to see what direction the UK will take. The past three years have been dominated by Brexit. By deals forged and then lost. By a string of votes in parliament. By demonstrations and debates and disunity. Whatever side of the fence you fall on, it’s hard to disagree that our country has lost its united national purpose. Looking from the outside, many nations – even while accepting the referendum result – have been truly puzzled and dismayed by our handling of it. We cannot afford another three years of navel-gazing. While digesting the impact of the election on pressing national issues, it’s time that Britain confounded that puzzlement abroad and reaffirmed its place as an outward-facing, global leader. And there’s no better place to do that than within international development. The UK has a long and proud legacy of supporting and investing in the world’s most vulnerable communities. From Bolivia to Bangladesh, our investment has saved the lives of millions, and is helping them reshape and rebuild shattered communities. But while we’ve made huge progress in reducing extreme poverty worldwide, there is still a long way to go. Climate change is taking hold, natural disasters are becoming more deadly and frequent than ever before, new wars are erupting and mass displacement is growing. The world is becoming a more dangerous place, especially for children. They can’t wait for Britain to get its act together. I served as minister of state for the Department for International Development (DfID) until earlier this year; I’ve seen first-hand what a difference aid makes. With the full backing of a parliament that is often bitterly divided on other matters, we helped deliver £30 million to rebuild hospitals, schools and other vital buildings destroyed by Islamic State in Iraq. As a result, families torn apart by the terror group’s brutality have been able to start moving back home. Aid is more than just platitudes by governments. It transforms lives. It’s because of this proven success that we can’t back away from our international commitments. In southern Africa, the worst drought in more than three decades has put a record 45 million people across 16 countries at risk of food shortages. Aid agency World Vision has estimated that put together, this is enough people to stretch around the world one and a half times. Across the globe, the impact of quakes, tsunamis, typhoons, floods and droughts is slowing economic growth, undermining development and trapping millions of people in poverty. Just this year, Mozambique suffered its two most severe cyclones on record within weeks, while devastating floods tore through Asia. These crises need urgent intervention if we are to avoid thousands of needless deaths. I hope the government will not make a hasty decision on merging DfID and the Foreign Office. A standalone DfID has been excellent for the UK’s reputation abroad, and those who work for it truly represent global Britain. As we enter this new season, my message to our new political leaders is this: use that unity between parliament and people as an anchor for rebuilding our national purpose, and demonstrate that we will not forget the world’s poor. They’re counting on us. Alistair Burt is a former minister of state for international development and former Conservative MP. 