The victorious England World Cup cricket team and the exceptional contribution of a number of women in sport were recognised in the honours. A number of the squad who beat New Zealand in the final were awarded honours, with Ben Stokes’ triumphant summer recognised with an OBE. Stokes, who was stripped of his vice-captaincy in 2017 after following a late-night brawl in Bristol, was honoured after a triumphant summer. Head coach Trevor Bayliss, the Australian who transformed the one-day team over his four years in the job, also received an OBE. Captain Eoin Morgan and the ECB chairman, Colin Graves, were given CBEs. Wicket keeper Jos Buttler, who sealed the historic victory and Joe Root, England’s top run-scorer at the World Cup and Test cricket captain, received MBEs. Veteran cricket great Clive Lloyd, 75, a former West Indies team captain, was awarded a knighthood for services to the game. The success of the England women’s football team – who came fourth in the FIFA World Cup – was recognised with an MBE for midfielder Jill Scott. Scott said it was fantastic to see the rise in women’s football since the time when she fell in love with the sport as a young girl from Sunderland. Baroness Sue Campbell, director of women’s football at the FA, who was responsible for hiring Phil Neville as manager, was made a dame. Campbell said the honour was an immense privilege. “I feel very grateful and it’s a reflection of all the hard work an awful lot of people have put in to women’s football and my life in sport generally,” she said. Broadcaster and former gymnast Gabby Logan received an MBE for services to sport, along with Olympic heptathlon bronze medallist Kelly Sotherton and former world squash champion Laura Massaro. England Netball team captain Serena Guthrie and goal shooter Jo Harten received MBEs, in the year the squad won the bronze in the Netball World Cup in Liverpool. British Gymnastics chief executive Jane Allen, who has overseen the emergence of a new generation of women’s talent including world medal-winning sisters Ellie and Becky Downie, was also given an MBE. “I accept this award on behalf of everybody at British Gymnastics who has been involved in the growth and development of gymnastics at the recreational level, as well as the fantastic achievements of our athletes on the world stage,” she said. Double Olympic taekwondo champion Jade Jones and former golf major winner and golfer Catriona Matthew, who captained Europe in their Solheim Cup victory over the US, were given OBEs. Having retained her Olympic title in Rio in 2016, Jones claimed her first world title in Manchester in May and will target a third straight Olympic gold in Tokyo next year.