Alice Roberts is of course right that the Christian church baptised the birthday of Sol Invictus, the unconquerable sun, with all the associated revelry of midwinter, as it Christianised the whole yearly cycle (Why I celebrate a pre-Christian Christmas, Journal, 21 December). What is remarkable is that what she calls “a fairly obscure Jewish apocalyptic cult” had by about AD300 captured the imagination, and won the allegiance, of a significant body of people in the Roman world without the use of arms and despite spasmodic but fierce persecution. The majority of these people were marginal, including many slaves and women. So it is today. The majority of Christians in the world are likewise to be found among the poor, at the mercy of an economic order dominated by an international financial elite. Alice Roberts calls their faith a “good myth”. For them the myth, and it is a bad one, is that which prevails in the elites, whether in the secular west or in China, that human fulfilment can be found by ignoring the ground of our being and blocking out the goal of our longing.Prof Richard HarriesFormer bishop of Oxford • As one who has been regularly driven to distraction by senior churchmen bemoaning the “commercialisation” of Christmas, I found Alice Roberts’ article truly refreshing, and a reminder that the pagans (so-called) had the idea of a winter jollification first. I have for many years preached on the two festivals that happen at this time of year – Xmas and Christmas – and I have encouraged my congregations to celebrate them both with equal enthusiasm. I hope all Guardian staff and readers will do likewise.Rev Stephen TerryHassocks, West Sussex • There is a cogent case for full retail closure on Boxing Day. Germany is more accurate in calling 26 December “Second Christmas Day”. Boxing Day is indeed a most integral part of Christmas, a time for unashamed chilling out, friends, families and pastimes since time immemorial. Much earlier closure is also necessary on Christmas Eve, to enable retail and distribution workers to get home and prepare for Christmas – and to partake in community functions such as Christingle services. Retail would be the big winner, as more goods would be bought before the two-and-a-half-day closure and upon reopening. In the meantime, Usdaw wishes a merry Christmas to the Guardian and its readers. John BarstowMember, Usdaw executive council • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition