Nothing catches the eye quite like retro styling, as done superbly at Toffs.com. Iconic strips across the decades ensure a standout look eschewing garish modernity, perfectly captured by their Spurs 1967 tracksuit top . Also looking back fondly are the beautiful F1-inspired shirts from Retrogp.com. Their Hesketh T-shirt , as worn by James Hunt, who promoted it in 1974 under the slogan “Go bear-breasted”, is a classic. Also capturing iconic images is the range at velolove.cc. Their Eddie Merckx shirt featuring the distinctive cap and Molteni logo of his Italian racing team is a beautifully realised, pre-distressed white casquette on blue design. Sporting outfitters Philosophy Football are 25 years old and their shirt range remains unique and striking. Recent standouts include Jürgen Klopp’s Liverpool quote: “This is Anfield. These are our streets …” and the England cricket world champions shirt. Team GB, meanwhile, are gearing up for a big year at the Tokyo Olympics and do so in some style with their Ariake T-shirt at Teamgb.com. Named after one of the Games’ major venues it’s a bold, stylish mixture of English and Japanese characters. Ensure the winter weather is kept at bay while spectating with the innovative 8kFlexwarm.com heated jacket. Battery powered, these sleek, stylish, quilted jackets and gilets have an in-built, printed heating element that warms up to 50C. It does the job superbly, with a 13-hour charge, and can be remote controlled by an app. Flexwarm do a similarly innovative heated scarf. If the chill takes a particularly bitter turn, look no further than the Jöttnar.com base layers. Designed by former Royal Marine commandos, and used by mountain rescue teams, the military and athletes this is exceptional gear. Beautifully made from merino wool, their Heimdall top and Hygge bottoms are gloriously warm and deliciously comfortable. Inspired by developments in high-performance sportswear, Dagsmejan.com believe they have the answer to every athlete’s need for a proper kip. Temperature‑regulating, moisture‑wicking and flat‑seamed, these merino wool and eucalyptus‑fibred Nattwarm tops and bottoms are a pleasure to wear. These jimjams mean marginal gains in the land of nod have never come easier. Make travelling to any event that bit less stressful with Lefrik.com’s Maverick foldable trolley. Made from recycled plastic bottles this suitcase-cum-bag is a marvellous piece of design. It has wheels but also straps that allow it to be used as a backpack, extends out to 50L, or to hand baggage dimensions and also rolls up into the size of a small holdall. Any journey should also be easy with the Danner Trail 2650 Mid GTX, a robust but stylish boot that combines rugged strength for hiking with the lightweight comfort of a trainer. Available from urbanindustry.co.uk, they are perfect for an afternoon on the sidelines or a fierce climb and the US brand, which was established in 1932, boasts a build quality that reflects their longevity. Make sure live commentary is never missed with the FreshnRebel.com, Rockbox Bold speaker. Bluetooth, waterproof, dirtproof, the Rockbox also delivers excellent sound quality and an impressive 15hr battery life. Practical and for a worthwhile cause, the RNLI.org offers the Fisherman’s Friend multitool. Wood-finished and titanium coated it has all sort of gadgets for bank-side and a bottle opener for the rest of us. Profits go to the RNLI. Budding goalkeepers should look at the new range from TheOneGlove.com. The brand is already popular with pros including Rob Elliot and Rebecca Spencer. Their SLYR Blaze are well constructed, with removable finger spines and designed to present a fine combination of comfort and padding. Outfield, football analysis comes from the Catapult PlayerTek football GPS tracker at Amazon.co.uk/launchpad . This GPS‑worn device links with an app to transmit all the vital stats. Speed, distance, sprints, sprint distance and positioning, combine with heat maps and comparative-half data. It’s easy to set up and neatly includes league tables to compare stats with friends and professionals using it. Entertainment for younger kids that is accessible even for non footy-mad parents comes in the form of Flip Facts Shoot from Amazon. A simple higher or lower football trivia game that is easy to pick up and fun to play. For even younger children, smythstoys.com has the Baby Clementoni World Cup Winner activity centre. It has all the bells and whistles for the 18-month-old that the Premier League does not. A goal featuring lights, colours, songs and tunes, it counts goals and teaches numbers and letters all the while. Technically savvy older children may prefer Sphero Mini Soccer, a miniature robotic football controlled by an app from Amazon. It takes the flick to kick principal and transfers it to a screen in a neat twist that is fun to play. Parents may enjoy the included option for kids to learn basic coding as part of the app. Budding racers looking for a thrill ride will find it in the Upriser Ducati Panigale V4 S radio controlled bike at Argos. It will get up to 12mph and is engineered with a self-balancing system to stay vertical. It can pull wheelies and is as visually arresting as it is fun to play with. Proving that some classic ideas remain relevant in the digital age, Danish table top game Klask from Amazon combines air hockey and table football to super effect. A wooden board has players attempt to score a goal using a striker manipulated by a magnet held under the play field. Simple, fast-paced fun for all the family, completed by shouting a celebratory “Klask!” on scoring. Make up the miles this year with front foot forward in the Hoka Clifton 6 from Hokaoneone.eu. The company, known for exceptional cushioning, here combine comfort with a very lightweight, versatile trainer, weighing in at only 9.1 ounces. Perfect, especially for beginners looking to ease into longer runs or anyone who needs encouragement to hit the streets. New to the market from brooksrunning.com and suited for those who already put in some decent mileage is the Levitate 3. A stylish shoe, with a smooth fit, the spring in the step sets it apart. The Levitate’s cushioning system, where the foam expands on stride vertically, returns energy as part of the rhythm. It is genuinely impressive, making for a bouncy, energetic run in the mid-distance range. And if the weather proves particularly inclement, the line of tops from soarrunning.com are practical but better still, good looking and beautifully made. Work out like the pros with the innovative infrared compression gear from Kymirasport.com. Based on the use of infrared radiation created by body energy, Kymira is used by a range of international and Olympic athletes, aiding both performance and recovery. Sleekly well-made, the compression tops and bottoms are cutting-edge: there is a noticeable decrease in the intensity of muscular ache when they are used. Keep track with the Kalenji Kiprun GPS 550 wrist monitor. Boasting full GPS and a built-in heart rate monitor, all the usual activity tracking is here with a compatible app, programmable training, lap time, pace time and VO2 max calculation. The Kalenji is also competitively priced at £89.99 from Decathlon.co.uk. Cyclists can ride for a good cause with the HelpForHeroes.org kit, designed by Rio Paralympic medal-winner Jaco Van Gass and Invictus gold medallist Andy Perrin, who were both medically discharged from the armed forces due to injury. The shorts and jerseys are designed to the highest technical standard in a royal blue with a union jack motif. Profits go to the charity. Comfort, style and eco-awareness combine in the NimbleActivewear.com range, made from recycled plastic bottles. The All Day High Rise leggings and matching tank top are beautifully made and everything in the Australian company’s MoveLite and Compresslite range is made from discarded bottles. For listening on the go, at the match or while working out, there are two newly released standouts. The Vista in-ear bluetooth headphones are light, compact and waterproof and a snug fit for the most intense activity from Jaybirdsport.com. The sound quality is strong, ideal for running. Mifo.co.uk have equally impressive tech with their new 05Plus earbuds. Sleek and good looking, they boast similar features, including waterproofing and top sound but the Mifo have an 8 hour battery capacity plus 100 hours charging-case time, four times more than almost all alternatives. As a very special present for any motor racing fan, look no further than the exquisite handmade track art from Racecutz.com. Tom White from Blackpool cuts and paints each of these wall-hanging track layouts that are visually arresting and distinctive pieces of racing sculpture. Beautifully made, they can include the track name or simply the circuit itself. Better still, use the contact link online and Tom will build any circuit in the world to order. Smaller but perfectly formed is the 2020 F1 season on a tea towel from the well-named boxboxbox.co. Lords.org have a range of flag balls representing different nations that fans can enjoy even if they remain unbowled. Making it personal, Thegiftexpereince.co.uk will take a dressing room designed mug, and insert your name alongside the real players of a selected team. Stronger brews can be enjoyed in the football-shaped beer glasses from thepresentfinder.co.uk. Finally for a sweet finish Yumbles.com will make a set of cupcakes topped with a team logo: a proper Christmas indulgence.