Lazio came from behind to beat Juventus 3-1 and hand the Turin side their first defeat of the season on Saturday, scoring the two decisive goals in the final 20 minutes after their opponents had Juan Cuadrado controversially sent off. Juve, who had gone their first 19 games under new coach Maurizio Sarri unbeaten, went ahead with a Cristiano Ronaldo goal in the 25th minute but Luiz Felipe levelled for Lazio in first-half stoppage time. The game turned in the 69th minute when Cuadrado clattered into Manuel Lazzari after he was sent clear by Luis Alberto’s pass and the referee dismissed the Colombian after viewing the incident on the pitchside monitor. Five minutes later, Sergej Milinkovic-Savic latched on to Luis Alberto’s cross to put Lazio in front. Ciro Immobile had a penalty saved before substitute Felipe Caicedo scored a third goal in stoppage time. Troubled Napoli extended their winless run to nine matches in all competitions, piling more pressure on their beleaguered coach, Carlo Ancelotti, when they were held to a 1-1 draw by lowly Udinese in Serie A. Seven of those matches have been in the league, making it their longest run without victory in Serie A since early 2010. It was a typical performance by Napoli, who dominated the match but struggled to turn their 64 per cent of possession into clear-cut chances, with Piotr Zielinksi’s 69th-minute equaliser saving them from defeat after Kevin Lasagna opened the scoring in the 32nd minute. Napoli, runners-up in three of the last four seasons, are eight points adrift of the top four, where they would need to finish to qualify for the Champions League next season. “In football, when you do well, it’s thanks to the players and, when you do badly, it’s because of the coach,” Ancelotti said. “I’m focused of trying to get us out of this spell.” “There was a good reaction in the second half which could be a good sign. I try to be optimistic and the team showed they can get out of this situation. In the first half we were slow and had no bite.” Atalanta’s Berat Djimsiti scored in the last minute to grab a 3-2 win at home to Verona as they twice came from behind in a see-saw Serie A match. Equalising goals from Ruslan Malinovskyi and Luis Muriel and the 85th-minute sending-off of Verona’s Pawel Dawidowicz set the stage for the Albanian’s dramatic late winner three minutes into stoppage time. Borussia Mönchengladbach’s Ramy Bensebaini scored twice, including a stoppage-time penalty, for a 2-1 comeback home win over the champions, Bayern Munich, on Saturday which kept his team top of the Bundesliga. The Algeria international converted from the spot after Javi Martínez had been sent off for bringing down Marcus Thuram in the box. Bensebaini had levelled on the hour with a header to cancel out Ivan Perisic’s 49th-minute opener for Bayern. Gladbach are on 31 points while Bayern, who suffered their second consecutive league defeat, drop to sixth on 24. RB Leipzig are second on 30 after beating Hoffenheim 3-1 while Borussia Dortmund crushed Fortuna Düsseldorf 5-0 to move up to third place on 26, with Marco Reus and Jadon Sancho scoring two each. Paris St Germain’s formidable attacking trio sprung into life after the break to give the Ligue 1 leaders a 3-1 comeback win at 10-man Montpellier. Neymar, Kylian Mbappé and Mauro Icardi found the back of the net in the space of eight minutes after Montpellier’s Pedro Mendes was sent off in the 72nd minute as the French champions extended their lead over second-placed Marseille to eight points. PSG have 39 points from 16 games after a match that was interrupted for a few minutes when their goalkeeper Keylor Navas was hit on the head by a bottle thrown from the stands. Montpellier, who opened the scoring in the first half through a Leandro Paredes own goal, are eighth on 24 points from 17 games. PSG’s captain, Thiago Silva, admitted the French champions needed to be more consistent. “I think individual talent and our mental strength made the difference,” the Brazil defender said. “We should be like we were in the second half for the whole game. We reacted well anyway.”