Justin Bieber has announced his first new album in five years – and teased a new song called Yummy. The 25-year-old pop star unveiled the news to his 123 million Instagram followers on Christmas Eve. He shared the hashtag #Bieber2020, which could indicate the name of the album, his fifth, although the star did not confirm this. The album’s first single, Yummy, will be released on 3 January, and fans were treated to a snippet of the song in the video, in which Bieber is seen walking across a desert-like landscape featuring a handful of buildings and a petrol station. In a voiceover, he says: “As humans, we are imperfect. My past, my mistakes, all the things I have been through. I believe I am right where I am supposed to be and God has me right where he wants me. “I feel like this is different from previous albums just because of where I am in my life. I’m excited to perform on the tour. “We all have different stories, I’m just excited to share mine. It’s the music that I’ve loved the most out of anything I’ve done.” #BIEBER2020 super-trailer on youtube now A post shared by  Justin Bieber (@justinbieber) on Dec 24, 2019 at 9:13am PST Bieber will embark on a US tour in support of the new album, between July and September 2020. He did not, however, announce any UK dates. It comes after the singer heavily teased the announcement on social media. On Monday he posted two pictures of the word “Tomorrow” in pink writing and also shared a black and white image of himself. All three posts were captioned: “December 24, December 31, January 3 … 2020.”Bieber, who is married to model Hailey Baldwin, has not unveiled a new album since Purpose in 2015. In October he promised to release a new album before Christmas if his latest Instagram post received 20 million likes. The post has since been deleted. In 2017, Bieber took a break from the music industry, cancelling the final 14 dates of a world tour, and earlier this year worked with Ed Sheeran on a track on the British singer’s album No 6 Collaborations Project.