If success in modern rugby union is entirely down to money it has an odd way of showing it. Look no further than the current Premiership table. Stuck in the bottom four along with Saracens, still deep in the minus numbers following their salary cap defrocking, are Leicester, Wasps and Bath. It is a bit like discovering Lord Grantham preparing his own breakfast in the pantry. All three of the aforementioned clubs are traditionally more accustomed to the high life, albeit in contrasting settings. Leicester have the highest average attendance in the league, Wasps’s move to Coventry was only meant to bring milk and honey and this coming April will mark the 10th anniversary of the purchase of Bath by their multimillionaire owner, Bruce Craig. The solitary trophy during his tenure to date is the reserve A league title in 2014-15. Saracens have been rather more successful but Nigel Wray’s estimated £50m investment in his local club is presently yielding only trouble and strife. Over in France, meanwhile, Mourad Boudjellal has sold his controlling share in Toulon, with the club looking to replace their galactico policy with a more homegrown squad. Admittedly the World Cup winner Eben Etzebeth has just arrived in the south of France but the winds of change are whipping in off the Mediterranean. In many ways it is welcome news. How dull would it be if there were no salary cap and the richest side romped away with the silverware year after year? Leaving aside the Saracens saga, the most significant English club rugby story of the last decade has been the ascent of Exeter Chiefs from a Championship side to English champions and beyond. Imagine how one-sided the title race would have been in recent seasons had there been no promotion to the Premiership and they had been required to stay where they were? True, Bristol Bears’ stirring ascent owes much to Steve Lansdown’s huge personal investment while the Top 14 leaders Lyon have also spent big. The World Cup has also skewed early season results but, even so, the moral of the story remains clear enough. There is significantly more to being a consistently successful rugby team than mere wealth alone. To be at Bath last Friday night was to be confronted with a good example. They may have the most incredible training ground in rugby at Farleigh House, where Lord Grantham would feel instantly at home, but the pitch at the Rec is the worst in the league. Walking across the dead-ball area behind the posts brought to mind Grimpen Mire, the fictional bog which featured heavily in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s famous Sherlock Holmes tale, The Hound of the Baskervilles. One false step and it felt you might be sucked into its mysterious depths forever. Of course it has been wet and the neighbouring River Avon is just a stone’s throw away but let’s just say it was not a total surprise to watch Bath’s backs apparently running through treacle. Maybe that is how certain players prefer it: Clermont will certainly be slowed down when they visit this Friday. Attempting to weave pretty patterns on it between November and February, however, would be tricky even if your backline contained Christian Cullen, Cheslin Kolbe and Danny Cipriani combined. Which brings us back to Craig. I well remember him showing me around Farleigh House in 2010 and gesturing towards an antique table on the first floor. “The next time you come and interview me hopefully we’ll have the European Cup and the Premiership trophy on there,” he murmured. In fairness, he also made the point shortly afterwards that it was not absolutely guaranteed to happen. “It’s a fallacy that if you throw a lot of money at it, you’re going to get a winning team. It doesn’t work like that.” How prophetic those words have proved. There is, to be clear, absolutely nothing wrong with ambition. Club rugby has also been fortunate to attract the number of investors it has but, ultimately, it is judgment, enlightened coaching, shrewd recruitment and intangibles like team spirit and togetherness that separate the sheep from the goats. Look at the transformation in Northampton’s fortunes under Chris Boyd and his assistant coaches this season, achieved with many of the same players he inherited. Look at how far Pat Lam’s Bristol, even with a couple of marquee signings, have come in the past 12 months? As John Paul Getty once said: “My formula for success is to rise early, work late and strike oil.” Money can definitely help – of course it can – but in rugby it is only part of the solution. Talk to the people who run the Premiership and they breezily dismiss the idea of a British and Irish League, formed by the amalgamation of 14 English clubs with the 10 leading sides from Ireland, Scotland and Wales, from 2022 onwards. With the private equity firm CVC Capital Partners having now invested in both the Premiership and the Pro14 there is theoretically more of a business case for a two-tier competition, but only if it offers more attractive entertainment than currently exists. Cross-border games are more popular in Wales and the leading Irish provinces would be more than competitive but, with a vibrant domestic league and a European competition already available, it looks destined to be a much harder sell in England. This is the 25th anniversary season of the first European Cup and there will be a presentation to Munster, as one of the original competing sides, before their home game against Saracens this weekend. Once the whistle goes the visitors will also be swiftly reminded that in Munster they relish a big European game more than almost anywhere else on the continent. Sarries had it tough against Racing 92 in Paris last month but, if the hosts get ahead early, it could prove a walk in the parc compared with Limerick this Saturday.