Moscow has been so warm this December that the government has resorted to sending trucks filled with artificial snow to decorate a new year display in the city centre. Videos of the delivery for a snowboarding hill went viral on social media as observers noted the irony of bringing snow to a city that spends millions each year on its removal. “This is all the snow there is in Moscow. It’s being guarded in Red Square,” one Instagram user wrote, accompanied with a photograph from near the Kremlin. Это весь снег, который есть в Москве. Его охраняют на Красной площади 😂 #москва#декабрь#краснаяплощадь#гум#снег#погода#тепло#скороновыйгод#moscow#instamoscow#december#redsquare#gumstore#nikolskaya#snow#weather#warm#soonnewyear#city#cityscape#citylife#photographylover#photography#photooftheday A post shared by  Maria☀️ (@mariksa_10) on Dec 27, 2019 at 9:53pm PST The Moscow region is in the throes of one of its warmest winters in 140 years, when temperatures were first systematically recorded. The temperature in the Russian capital rose to 5.4C on 18 December, topping the previous record for the month set in 1886. The abnormally warm temperatures come as concern grows about the effect of global climate change on Russia. Permafrost under the country’s northern towns is slowly melting, and receding Arctic ice is driving hungry polar bears to forage in urban areas. ФОТОФАКТ! Москва вывозит в регионы мусор, а ввозит - снег. #Абсурдистан pic.twitter.com/x2vKuWkkPl The balmy December weather has interrupted hibernation at Moscow zoo and caused crocuses, lilac and magnolias at Moscow State University’s apothecary garden to flower early. Zoo officials said that they had put five jerboas, a type of hopping rodent with long hind legs, into specially refrigerated enclosures to encourage them to hibernate. The most visible impact, however, has been the lack of snow, which usually begins blanketing Russia in October or November. Light flurries have fallen in Moscow and its parks are dusted white, but most of the snow in the city centre has melted. City officials said the artificial snow had been brought in for a snowboarding demonstration planned for the holidays, which will begin on New Year’s Day. It is produced by cutting ice for a local skating rink, said Alexei Nemeryuk, the head of Moscow’s trade and services department. “The machines are cutting snow anyway and some remains. It is usually melted down, but in this case we have used it again,” he told theGovorit Moskva radio station. Russia is a signatory to the Paris Agreement to combat climate change, and Vladimir Putin said during a televised press conference last week that the crisis was a direct threat to Russia. The country was warming 2.5 times faster than the average for the planet, he noted. He also shed doubt on the science behind climate change, however, and omitted any discussion of greenhouse gases. He suggested the climate could be changing because of a shift in the earth’s axis. “Nobody really knows the causes of climate change, at least global climate change,” he said. Nonetheless, “we should make our best efforts to prevent dramatic changes in the climate.”