An absolute sensation was caused in racing’s corner of Twitter on Thursday by the victory of Little Rory Mac at Market Rasen and the before and after comments of a Twitter account belonging to the horse’s owner, Adam McCormack. Little Rory Mac was sent off as the 15-8 favourite after opening on course at 13-8 but won like an odds-on shot by an easy seven lengths. That provoked complaints from some who had backed the horse when he last ran, at Warwick last month, when he was settled out the back and ran on to be a never-nearer sixth. Liam Heard received a 10-day suspension from the stewards that day “for failing to ride his mount in such a way that he could be seen to ask for real or substantial effort to obtain the best possible placing”. In victory at Market Rasen, Little Rory Mac received a more positive ride from Nathan Brennan in what may well have been a weaker race and the difference in outcome was stark. What grates with me is that the Rasen stewards do not appear to have asked a single question about the improvement in form. Certainly there is no evidence of any such questions on the BHA website. Little Rory Mac travels all over his rivals to get off the mark in the Download The @MansionBet App Conditional Jockeys' Handicap Hurdle.Congratulations @HJOliverRacing and @nathanb56351245 pic.twitter.com/lMA1w5rEgU I do not say that asking those questions would have led to any further action. I think we’re all familiar by now with the dance; a horse shows improved form, the stewards ask why, the explanations are noted and nothing else happens. But if you don’t even ask the question, you’ve given up hope of running the game as it should be run and you cannot expect to convince others that you are being vigilant. Meanwhile, McCormack had a jolly time through Twitter, suggesting before the race that he might have a small each-way bet and that the horse was too short in the betting at 13-8. After Little Rory Mac’s success, he boasted of winning “30 large” though he also pointed out that he was merely reclaiming what he had lost through other betting activity. He mocked those who complained about the Warwick ride by briefly changing his avatar to a picture of a handbrake. He posted a picture, since deleted, of a large amount of cash he had apparently won. “I understand, as an owner, I shouldn’t be acting that way on social media,” McCormack told me on Friday morning. “But the stick that I got for the Warwick race – people were calling me a cheat and all sorts. It was just a bit of fun, what I was doing yesterday, but some people have obviously taken it the wrong way.” McCormack insists he would not have backed Little Rory Mac, had he remained at 13-8 throughout. But, he says, when he could get 2-1 within the last 10 minutes before the race, he decided to bet and it ended up as a big day for him. His view is that the horse responded well to more positive tactics in a weaker race, which the stable had won the previous year. I can’t say I enjoyed his Twitter output on Thursday and I’d prefer followers of racing to be treated with more respect. But it is much more concerning to me that the stewards took no interest. People will stop betting on horse racing if they see it as a lawless world. I’ve asked the British Horseracing Authority for an explanation and will post it on here if I get one. There’s been plenty of support for the nap, Espoir De Guye (2.35), a Venetia Williams youngster. He showed a lot of promise on his reappearance at Chepstow, when chasing home Simply The Betts, who has won again since, as has the third. Espoir De Guye is just 1lb higher, should be sharper this time and will relish the extra half-mile. But he is just even money. At Sandown, Cesar Collonges (1.20) has attracted support and is now 8-1 for a handicap chase. From Evan Williams’s yard, he has hit the target second time out in each of the last two seasons and it is easy to forgive his reappearance flop over hurdles on heavy going at Lingfield at a trip that stretches him. He remains on a beatable rating. Good old Loose Chips (2.55) is a drifter at 12-1 for the amateur riders race but he has one of the more capable pilots on offer in Zac Baker. Excuses can be made for his two recent defeats and he’s 10lb below the mark from which he won here a year ago. At Sedgefield, Ratfacemcdougall (2.45) is of interest at 6-1 on his first start for Graeme McPherson, having shown some promise on his first try over fences in May. He won an Irish point last year and is not harshly treated. Sedgefield 12.05 Wor Verge 12.35 Dakota Beat 1.05 Raashdy 1.40 Agamemmon 2.15 Minella Trump 2.45 Ratfacemcdougall 3.20 Western RunExeter 12.25 Bluebell Sally 12.55 Sporting John 1.30 Kateson 2.05 Those Tiger Feet 2.35 Espoir De Guye (nap) 3.05 Holdbacktheriver 3.40 CourtlandSandown 12.45 Goshen 1.20 Cesar Collonges 1.55 Paint The Dream 2.25 Overthetop 2.55 Loose Chips 3.30 Sunrise RubyNewcastle3.15 Sunhill Lad 3.50 Secret Diary 4.25 Wallgate 5.00 Brushwork 5.30 Insurplus 6.00 Dawry 6.30 Summer Daydream 7.00 Eleuthera (nb)