Makes 2–2½ cupsPrep and cooking time 30 minutes If you’re making this custard to accompany a particularly sweet dessert, use ¼ cup of sugar instead of ⅓ cup. You can substitute tapioca flour for the cornflour if that’s what you have. Tapioca flour is highly treated to avoid the starch granules bursting (thus releasing moisture) so this can be helpful if you’ve ever noticed your custard thinning as it cools. A whisk is necessary to combine the mixture in the initial stages, but switch to a silicone spatula or wooden spoon thereafter. Custard cooks more quickly closer to the heat source, so it’s important to constantly scrape the bottom of the pot to avoid a clumpy custard. For a creamy option1 ½ cups full cream lactose-free milk½ cup lactose free cream5 yolks from extra large eggs¼ cup - ⅓ cup caster sugar (depending on your penchant for sweetness)1 tbsp gluten free cornflour or tapioca flour1 tsp vanilla bean paste For a lighter, all milk option2 cups full cream lactose-free milk5 yolks from extra large eggs¼ cup - ⅓ cup caster sugar 1 tbsp gluten free cornflour or tapioca flour1 tsp vanilla bean paste For a dairy free option2 cups plant based milk (I used Bonsoy soy milk)5 yolks from extra large eggs¼ cup - ⅓ cup caster sugar1 tbsp gluten free cornflour or tapioca flour1 tsp vanilla bean paste Place the milk in a medium saucepan over a low heat. Warm until the milk is just below scalding, around 5 minutes. Remove from the heat. While it is heating, gently whisk the eggs, sugar, vanilla bean paste and cornflour together in a medium sized mixing bowl. Secure the mixing bowl with a tea towel underneath. Pour the hot milk into the egg mixture in a thin stream, whisking constantly. This process gently heats the egg without scrambling it, so it is important to do it gradually. Continue until all the milk is incorporated. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and place over a low heat. Stir the mixture with a spatula constantly for 10 minutes, or until it has thickened enough to coat the back of a spoon: dip a spoon into the custard and run your finger through it – the line made by your finger should stay when the custard is ready. Remove from the heat as soon as it has thickened to your liking. Custard overcooks very easily. You can minimise the risk by transferring the finished product to a mixing bowl in an iced water bath immediately after cooking. You can also strain the custard to remove any errant lumps. Do this while it is still warm. Allow the custard to cool for 7-10 minutes at room temperature before transferring to the fridge, covered or uncovered. You can pour it into a jug and cover it, or leave it uncovered and eat the custard skin later. If something’s gone wrong, you can use an immersion blender (or at my house, soup stick) to revive a curdled or grainy custard. Only blend it for just enough time to make the custard smooth – any longer and it will start to thin. Food processors or blenders aren’t suitable, as they will whip too much air into the custard. Makes 8-10 large slicesPrep 1 hourInactive time OvernightCooking time 2 hours 30 minutes This pudding is Fodmap-friendly, low lactose, fructose-friendly, and is grain and gluten free. It does contain nuts. You can use whichever alcohol you prefer for this recipe. I like Campari for the citrus bitterness, but more traditional liquors such as brandy would also work. Japanese and Kent pumpkin varieties are more Fodmap friendly than butternut, which is why I have specified them in the recipe. For the mince500g Kent or Japanese pumpkin, chopped into roughly ½ cm cubes1 ⅓ cups (275g) caster sugar5 tbsp fresh lemon juice5 tbsp fresh orange juice2 tbsp Campari (or liquor of choice)2 tsp cinnamon 2 tsp nutmeg 1 tsp ground cloves1 tsp vanilla bean paste20g cubed ginger (optional)1 sprig of rosemary (optional) For the puddingFruitless fruit mince3 tbsp dark brown sugar2 tbsp Campari or other liquor1 tsp nutmeg1 tsp cinnamon½ tsp ground cloves3 extra large eggs1 cup (100g) almond meal¾ cup (75g) tapioca flour75g butter, melted and cooledPinch of fine salt For the mince The night before making your pudding, combine all ingredients for the fruit mince and allow to sit in a non-reactive bowl in the fridge overnight. This will begin the process of flavouring and candying the pumpkin. The next day (or at least three to four hours later) pour the mixture into a large saucepan or skillet. Place over low-medium heat, and allow to cook for around 30 minutes, stirring intermittently. The slower you cook the mixture, the softer the pumpkin will be, so if you have the time you can cook it low and slow for up to an hour. The mixture should bubble throughout the cooking process. Eventually, a thickened syrup will form while the pumpkin pieces remain intact but soft. Once that syrup is sufficiently thick, remove the mince from the heat and allow to cool completely. If you have used the rosemary sprig, gently remove it and discard. For the pudding Just fill the bottom of a large soup pot with water. Place something waterproof and crack-proof in the base so that the pudding is elevated just above the water. I used an inverted steel pie tin. Grease your pudding bowl liberally. You can line the circular base of the pudding bowl as an insurance policy, if you like. Mix together all the ingredients for the pudding and stir thoroughly to combine. Pour the mixture into the pudding tin. You can place a piece of baking paper on the bottom of the pudding too – this will stop any rogue water getting in but also result in a smooth base. Layer two pieces of foil over the pudding and secure tightly with string. Place the pudding on the little island you’ve created and pop the lid on. Turn the heat to a low-medium, and set the timer for two hours. Check the water level regularly. Once the two hours are up, open the pudding carefully (so you can continue to cook if necessary, but also so you don’t get a steam burn). If there is a bit of squishiness when you press the centre of pudding, cook in additional 15-minute increments until the centre feels completely firm. Allow to cool a little before gently running a knife around the edge (if necessary) and inverting onto a plate. Serve with lactose free custard or ice cream and some berries. This pudding keeps well in the fridge and can be made a day in advance. Makes 12 small mince piePrep 1 hourInactive time Overnight This recipe is gluten free, nut free, dairy free and fructose friendly. You can buy all of these flours at the supermarket, but I recommend sourcing the white rice flour from a health food store if you can. They’re generally a lot finer in texture and taste a lot better. Both the pastry and the fruit mince can be made a few days ahead of time and stored in the fridge. If you don’t need the mince to be fruit free, you can substitute regular mince pie fillings and just make the gluten free pie crust as per the instructions. I don’t recommend using light sour cream for this recipe. Because it contains a higher water content than the full fat version, it results in a less flaky crust. If you don’t want to use Campari, you can use any alcohol you like (I have even used mezcal). For an alcohol-free option, simply add an extra tablespoon of lemon juice and one of orange juice. For the mince500g Kent or Japanese pumpkin, chopped into roughly ½cm cubes1 ⅓ cups (275g) caster sugar5 tbsp fresh lemon juice5 tbsp fresh orange juice2 tbsp Campari (or liquor of choice)2 tsp cinnamon 2 tsp nutmeg 1 tsp ground cloves1 tsp vanilla bean paste20g cubed ginger (optional)1 sprig of rosemary (optional) To finish2 tsp tapioca flour For the pastry1 cup (130g) fine white rice flour¼ cup (25g) glutinous rice flour (otherwise known as sticky rice flour)¼ cup (25g) tapioca flour2 tbsp caster sugarPinch of fine salt100g cold butter, cubed100g full fat sour cream, chilled2 tsp vanilla bean paste (I use Queen brand – they vary in thickness)Chilled vodka, as needed (or water) To finish1 beaten egg, for egg-washSugar, for sprinkling (optional but delicious) For the mince Follow the instructions in the Christmas pudding recipe, above. For the pastry Combine the flours, sugar and salt in a large mixing bowl, stirring to combine. Rub in the cubes of flour, using your forefinger and thumb to gradually press the butter and flour together. The end result should have the consistency of slightly damp sand, with small but visible pieces of butter throughout the mixture. These will form the flakiness of the pastry, so it’s important they don’t melt. Add the cold sour cream and vanilla bean paste and use a spoon to stir most of the way. Once it has been mostly incorporated, use your hands to bring the dough together. The aim is to create a ball of dough that is smooth and easy to handle – not too craggy and dry, but also not so wet that it sticks to your hands. To that end, add vodka by the teaspoon and only as necessary – even if it’s just a teaspoon to bring it all together. Once the dough is in a ball, wrap it in beeswax wrap or cling film and place in the fridge for around 30 minutes. For the mince pies Preheat the oven to 180C (365F), and grease your cupcake tray liberally with butter. Liberally sprinkle a large piece of baking paper with tapioca flour on a dry, clean bench. Place the dough on the sheet and liberally flour the top. Cut off about ¼ of the pastry to set aside for the tops of the pies. Roll the remaining pastry into a large rough rectangle, about ½cm thick. If the pastry keeps cracking, allow it to warm up a little. If it’s too soft to handle, pop it in the fridge for five minutes. Use a circular cutter significantly larger than your cupcake tray holes to cut the bases for the mince pies. Lower each pastry round into a cupcake tray hole, gently pressing it flush against the sides, without stretching the dough. Any tears can easily be patched up with your fingers, and excessive dough around the edges can be neatly trimmed. Continue this process until you have lined 12 cupcake holes. Stir the tapioca flour into the fruit mince until it’s well combined. This will thicken it a little and ensure it doesn’t seep out and create soggy pastry. Fill the pastry with the fruit mince and place in the fridge while you make the lids. Roll the reserved pastry out into a ¼-½ centimetre rectangle, flouring liberally whenever necessary. Use a cutter the same size or a little bigger than the tin holes to cut out circles or stars for pastry lids. Continue until you have 12. Remove the pie bottoms from the fridge. Use the egg to lightly egg wash the sides of the pies, and then press the lids gently but firmly atop to secure. Paint the tops of the pies with the egg wash, and then sprinkle over the sugar, if you’re using it. Place the pies in the preheated oven for 20 minutes, or until they smell fragrant and have coloured lightly. Turn the grill function on and continue to cook the pies for another couple of minutes, watching closely. Remove them when they are golden brown on top. The pies can be served warm or cold, and keep well in an airtight container for up to a week. Georgia McDermott’s food-intolerance-friendly recipes can be found at Georgeats.com and on Instagram @georgeats; her book FODMAP Friendly is available now.