When it comes to throwing parties, the world falls into two quite distinct camps: those who love to do so, and those who would rather do almost anything else. Since Christmas has a mysterious way of conjuring up parties regardless, you may be looking at a fast approaching soirée with nervous excitement or abject terror. Getting organised early is key, and finding a few delicious recipes to start the proceedings will amuse your guests while you try to keep the show on the road. Good luck! These drinks are a refreshing alternative to booze, but also make a delicious mixer for a tequila or gin-based cocktail. Prep 20 minCook 30 minMakes 6 mocktails and 500g nuts For the nuts500g skin-on almonds8g fennel seeds50g honey1 heaped tsp paprika10g salt1 tbsp olive oilZest of 1 lemon and juice of half For the mocktailsJuice of 5 large pink grapefruits3 juicy limes100ml raw cider vinegarSoda water, to top For the sugar syrup8 cardamom pods200g caster sugar Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/gas 4 and lay the nuts out on a baking tray. Toast in the oven for seven to eight minutes, until beginning to colour. Mix all the remaining nut ingredients, apart from the lemon juice, in a bowl and, once the nuts are ready and still hot, tip them into the bowl and mix to coat. Line the tray with baking paper, tip in the coated nuts and spread them out in an even layer. Return to the oven for eight to 10 minutes more, until they feel dry and not too sticky. Take out of the oven, and immediately squeeze over the lemon juice. Taste, season with more salt, if needed, and leave to cool. To make the sugar syrup for the mocktails, finely grind the cardamom seeds and put in a pan with the sugar and 200ml water. Bring to simmering point and simmer until the sugar has dissolved. Take off the heat and set aside. In each tumbler, measure 75ml grapefruit juice, the juice of half a lime, 30ml (two tablespoons) of the sugar syrup and a tablespoon of cider vinegar. Top with soda water and taste – you may want more sugar syrup; I find this is a matter of personal taste. Serve over plenty of ice and with a bowl of the nuts. Use any leftover grapefruit to make a fun granita spiked with Campari or tequila – it makes a delicious palate-cleanser. You can also use leftover lemon, orange, clementine and pink grapefruit skins to make candied peel; coated in chocolate; they make beautiful presents and excellent after-dinner treats.