When I first started my vegan column, I gave myself a month before I’d have to hand in my notice. As an omnivore (admittedly one that ate little meat but a lot of dairy and eggs), I just couldn’t imagine writing recipes week after week with such a strict set of rules, let alone enjoy eating plant-based food on a regular basis. But then, something wonderful happened. Taking meat, fish, dairy or eggs out of cooking became a catalyst for creativity, forcing me, and many other chefs and food writers, to think in new and interesting ways about how to extract the most flavour and pleasure from the same old characters in the vegetable drawer. I discovered that the Asian larder, replete with its fermented and pickled ingredients such as kimchi and miso, could add flavour to meals in an instant. I reacquainted myself with the thrill of pulses and turning dry beans into nourishing meals, and I realised that cakes can be just as rich and fluffy and velvety without dairy and eggs. During the two and a half years that I’ve been writing the column, the innovation in plant-based food in recipe-writing, restaurant menus and even ready meals has been of an unprecedented breadth and scale. Vegan food is an exciting, easier and more delicious way to eat than ever. I am doing Veganuary this year in the main because I want to show you how enjoyable it can be. But also, because what we choose to put on our plates undeniably impacts the world around us. You, however, might be doing it because you feel bloated after the annual Christmas meat-fest or because it’s cheaper than eating meat, for reasons of animal welfare or just because Natalie Portman does it. For whatever reason, I’m here to help you through the next weeks with my meal plans. A few tips. The best advice I can give you is to make a plan of all the things you want to eat. Perhaps write them down here then make a shopping list based on that. If time is not on your side, focus on dinner. Breakfast could be cereal and lunch a throw-together affair involving pitta bread, jarred antipasti and a dollop of hummus. And finally, if a piece of ham should accidentally fall into your mouth this week, get back up and keep on going. I can’t promise a new you after a week, but you might think, like I now do, that plant-based is both achievable and delicious – and that thought may give you the freedom of choice over what you eat, which might just make you feel alive, well and hungry for more. Breakfast is easy – just be sure to stock up on some good vegan milk. My preference is for Oatly because it’s great in tea, coffee and porridge. Anna Jones has your back with this DIY instant porridge (below) or if you’ve got no time in the morning, try making Felicity Cloake’s bircher muesli the night before. Or else, buy granola. No one’s judging and besides, Dorset Cereals make a great one. On the weekend, try a tofu scramble, which is not by any means a substitute for egg, but a serious contender. Yotam Ottolenghi has a harissa recipe and I have a Parsi-style akuri, made using tomatoes, chilli and ginger. These days, every supermarket, food chain and cafe has as many chickpea wraps, soups and salads as you can shake a celery stick at. But if you want to make your own, the easiest route is to make extra at dinner and pack leftovers. Or, for a quick from-scratch throw-together option, consider Rosie Birkett’s broccoli and peanut noodles or her orzo and roast cauliflower salad. When you’re hangry, it is easy to fall off the vegan wagon (vagon?) so don’t underestimate the power of a good vegan snack. My tummy rumblings are easily sated with salted almonds and a few squares of 70% dark chocolate (Lindt and Land make great ones). For something more substantial, buy good bread, great hummus and shop-bought (or homemade) sundried tomato meze – a mix of chopped sundried tomatoes, capers and olives in oil to throw over the top. More time to make your own? Try some apple, apricot and hazelnut bars. I’d suggest starting with a big pot of delicious beans so there’s something in the fridge this week. Try either my Iraqi white bean stew or this satisfying coconut dal with lime kale and some boiled rice alongside. During the week, you need meals built with speed in mind, but without compromise on flavour. How about this wild mushroom ragout with ziti by David Tanis, or Nigel Slater’s purple sprouting broccoli with cashews and tofu? Feeling the need for something fresh? This rice noodle salad with cucumber and poppy seeds ought to do the job. Friday night is curry night in the Sodha household. Might I recommend my Thai green curry? Feel free to play around with the vegetables, and don’t let the list of ingredients fool you – most get thrown into a blender and whizzed up into a quick curry paste. Welcome to the weekend. Treat yourself to these Anna Jones instant tacos and pop Ottolenghi’s ultimate tray bake ragu in the oven. Sweet tooth? This carrot, apple and orange cake from Gaz Oakley looks perfect, or these raspberry and coconut thumb print cookies from Ruby Tandoh. Now sit back, relax and congratulate yourself for getting to the end of the first week. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.