The 2010s was a turning point in LGBTQ+ history. The UN, for the first time, formally condemned discrimination based on sexuality. Countries across the world, from Greenland to Bermuda, legalised same-sex marriage. And in May this year, the World Health Organization reframed “gender identity disorders” as “gender incongruence”, sending a clear message that being trans is not an illness that needs curing. Alongside these legal and social changes, LGBTQ+ entertainers have gained a foothold in the mainstream. In truth, they were always there: Dusty Springfield, Sylvester and George Michael, just to name a few – and that’s not to mention the countless LGBTQ+ songwriters and producers who have worked behind the scenes. But in the 2010s, greater acceptance and legal protections have made it possible for LGBTQ+ artists to come out earlier in their careers, tell explicitly queer stories in their music, receive respect from the press, present authentically, and speak directly to their communities. It’s also become easier than ever for queer fans to connect with queer artists, thanks to streaming. Today, a young queer person can get on Spotify and discover queer artists in every genre, as well as specially curated playlists, from Queer As Folk for acoustic songs, to Transcend, a playlist that’s populated with trans and gender nonconforming artists. So before we step forward into 2020, let’s look back at some of the defining artists, moments and movements that have soundtracked a decade of change. Out at the Oscars: Sam SmithAn out-and-proud queer person, Sam Smith has not just written, but performed a Bond theme song (Writing’s on the Wall) – and then gone on to win an Academy Award for it. With millions of streams, three Brit awards, and a Golden Globe too, Smith is arguably the biggest UK queer star of the decade (in any industry) – their voice can be heard on wedding playlists, playing in the background of reality shows, and on TV ads. And Smith has also sparked headline-grabbing dialogue about LGBTQ+ issues, particularly with their recent revelation that they identify as non-binary – showing how LGBTQ+ artists have become shining lights in even mainstream entertainment. Listen to some of Sam Smith’s favourite tracks on their Out Now Spotify playlist. The French connection: Christine and the QueensAnother beacon of mainstream queer success is French pansexual artist Chris, of Christine and the Queens. An artist with a mission to challenge expectations, her masculine aesthetic is a deliberate, daring “playing around with the male gaze”. Her refusal to submit to the binary has left her misunderstood in France, by her own admission, but in the UK she has been welcomed with open arms. In 2019, her Glastonbury set – praised by critics and adored by the crowd – was soaked in the cheeky, energetic masculinity that she has become known for. Perhaps Chris’s mainstream success in the UK is indicative of audiences wanting a departure from conformity – something challenging, brave and confident, far removed from the entertaining but soapy pop that dominated much of the early noughties. Listen to Christine and the Queens and other queer alternative artists on Spotify’s Alternative Pride playlist. Made in the USA: transatlantic queer popThe US too has seen more LGBTQ+ artists welcomed into the mainstream in the 2010s. And, thanks to streaming and social media, they’re accessible to the UK, and everywhere else. Earlier this year, Lil Nas X became the first out black gay artist to score a US No 1, with Old Town Road, which then went on to become the longest-running No 1 in US history, in large part due to his streaming success. With success came his admission that he used to “pray and pray” that being gay was just a phase – a sobering reminder that, even in an era of heightened acceptance, there’s a long way to go. He’s perhaps the most viral LGBTQ+ artist in the US currently, but he’s by no means the only one. Janelle Monáe and Frank Ocean, two artists respected for their creativity and storytelling, are fierce queer advocates. Then there’s RuPaul and his army of Drag Race alumni, for whom infectious music is just one weapon in their culture-bridging entertainment arsenal. The RuPaul effect has been felt keenly in the UK this year, with Break Up (Bye Bye), the viral single from the show’s inaugural UK season, clocking up more than a million streams on Spotify. Listen to RuPaul and queens from Drag Race UK and US on Spotify’s Fierce playlist. Small but fierce: the innovative sound of independent queer musicIn a world defined by social media and streaming, you don’t have to be signed to a major label to be acclaimed; this decade, independent queer artists in the UK have been able to reach fans and build their own communities. A variety of acts – from dream-pop artist Leo Kalyan, to acerbic electro princess Girli, to the critically acclaimed Rina Sawayama – are challenging the pop star template and creating representations for LGBTQ+ fans who have historically not seen themselves reflected in art and culture. And in the process, they are inspiring queer people of all walks of life to stand tall. Listen to Leo Kalyan on Spotify’s Work it, Own it playlist. All this activity in the 2010s is a glorious indication of things to come and a testament to the resilience and creativity of LGBTQ+ artists. With the advent of online streaming, listeners are empowered to find music they can connect with. Progress is not guaranteed, but with music consumption as it now is, it feels unlikely that we could ever go back to a period where LGBTQ+ people can’t listen to music from people who are like them, on demand. Which is exactly as it should be. To celebrate the end of the decade, Spotify is unlocking 10 years of your streaming data. Get your Wrapped now and relive the music that mattered to you.