Scores of serving and former Labour officials have given sworn statements about antisemitism in the party as part of evidence submitted to the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s investigation into the issue. James Libson, a lawyer representing the Jewish Labour Movement, confirmed he has prepared 70 testimonies from current and former staffers as part of the inquiry. One staff member was ordered to give details of complaints about antisemitism to Jeremy Corbyn’s office, despite Labour insistence that the office has not interfered, according to testimony seen by the Times. Libson, a partner at the law firm Mishcon de Reya, said interference in cases had become institutional. “Institutional in the sense that people affiliated with the leader’s office – and now in the actual unit that are investigating – and that at a more basic level, information is passing between the leader’s office and investigating unit,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He added: “Passed by USB sticks, by WhatsApp groups, secret WhatsApp groups.” When asked whether Corbyn’s assertion that every case of antisemitism had been dealt with was incorrect, Lisbon replied: “Very much so.” Libson added: “There are many, many outstanding complaints, many examples of interference and many examples of double standards in the way in which complaints are processed.” On Tuesday Corbyn apologised for antisemitic incidents that involved Labour members and said he was dealing with the issue. “Obviously I’m very sorry for what has happened,” he after being asked to apologise directly in an interview on ITV’s This Morning programme. On Thursday, the shadow housing secretary, John Healey, insisted that Labour had “toughened up” its approach to tackling antisemitism. He told Today: “Having been too slow and too weak at the start, the action being taken now has been toughened up. “An in-house lawyer, special appeal panels to deal with complaints, new fast-track expulsion powers that are being used. I’m confident that cases coming in are being dealt with and if they are coming in they will be dealt with.” Healey apologised to the Jewish community who he said “feel let down” by the way the Labour has handled cases of antisemitism in the party.