Ole Gunnar Solskjær says he does not fear the sack as Manchester United manager despite Unai Emery, Quique Sánchez Flores and Mauricio Pochettino recently being removed from their jobs. Solskjær has won only four of 14 league matches this season in United’s worse start since 1988-89. The Norwegian was asked whether, given the removal of Emery by Arsenal, Flores by Watford and Pochettino by Tottenham, he was concerned he could follow. “No, it doesn’t make me more concerned,” he said. “I’m just focusing on my job and that’s doing as well as I can [and] look forward to the next game, and look at long-term planning things with the board. It’s that time of year – never nice to see your colleagues lose their job in a very short space of time. “We’ve had too many draws [six] for my liking, defeats [too] of course. But draws we should have turned into wins and football is a results business. We’re not happy; we can do better and are working hard. The work we do is always geared on us improving but we’re not getting all the results we’ve deserved.” United have 18 points, eight behind fourth-placed Chelsea and sixth above Southampton in the final relegation berth. Yet Solskjær said he had not sought reassurances from Ed Woodward, the executive vice-chairman. “We speak all the time, so it’s not like knee-jerk suddenly now we need to talk,” he said. “So it’s [about] continually progressing, the plans we’ve put in place, the rebuilding we know we started. We made some decisions that were necessary and now of course we’re not happy where we are but will continue working.” José Mourinho returns to Old Trafford on Wednesday as manager of Tottenham and Solskjær believes his predecessor will receive a warm welcome. “A very good reception,” he predicted. “That’s just a testament to this club and these supporters, remembering he was here for two and a half years and won trophies, I’m 100% sure out fans, staff and club will welcome him.” Paul Pogba is not fit to face Spurs as he continues recovering from an ankle injury. “He’s still a bit away but working hard so let’s see – he’s out on the grass,” the manager said. Scott McTominay and Nemanja Matic may also still be unavailable because of injuries. Solskjær said they were “touch and go”.