What were you hoping for?What we all hope for: romance and a good time with a hot stranger. First impressions?You’re not a stranger! What did you talk about?How weird it was that we had been paired with someone we already knew, and the clearly quite impressive matchmaking skills of the Blind Date team. Any awkward moments?When he asked why I never messaged him back after he asked me out for a drink a few months ago (he was very understanding). Also, the gay couple who hit on us in the bar afterwards, and then heckled us in the street. Good table manners?Admirable. Best thing about Robbie?His laid-back and fun nature – and that he sneezes when he’s full. Would you introduce him to your friends?Well, he already knows a couple. So why not the rest? Describe Robbie in three wordsBig, fun, energy. What do you think he made of you?A tall, giggly, Scottish idiot with a passion for shopping Did you go on somewhere?A bar in Soho for a few more drinks. And… did you kiss?Yes, for the whole of Soho to see – stunning. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That the custard buns ended up in my bag. I could’ve really used one to soak up the booze on the way home, or to snack on as I write these answers. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Sure thing, it would be a waste not to. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?Please not someone I’ve chatted to on the apps before. First impressions?It’s Sam from Tinder! What did you talk about?Our mutual friend Nancy, Quorn picnic eggs, Drag Race UK, Scotland. Any awkward moments?The couple next to us asking us incredibly awkward questions about sex. Good table manners?Sam was the perfect pescatarian sharing partner. Best thing about Sam?He’s an absolute smiler. Would you introduce him to your friends?He already knows a few, but definitely. Describe Sam in three wordsCute, chatty, confident. What do you think he made of you?Tiny, funny, easy to chat with. Did you go on somewhere?A local gay bar for a drag show. And… did you kiss?A snog outside the tube. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Softer lighting in the restaurant. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Absolutely. • Robbie and Sam ate at Bun House, London WC2 Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com