On Thursday, after the 16-year-old environmental activist Greta Thunberg was crowned Time Magazine’s Person of the Year, Donald Trump tweeted in less than encouraging terms. He said it was “so ridiculous” and said Thunberg, a teenager who has an autism spectrum diagnosis, needed to work on her “anger management problem”. Sexism and ableism all rolled into one – and who said men couldn’t multi-task? So ridiculous. Greta must work on her Anger Management problem, then go to a good old fashioned movie with a friend! Chill Greta, Chill! https://t.co/M8ZtS8okzE The Merriam-Webster dictionary definition of a bully is: a blustering, browbeating person, especially: one who is habitually cruel, insulting, or threatening to others who are weaker, smaller, or in some way vulnerable. Perhaps it’s just jealousy: Thunberg, while still a minor, has earned herself a Time cover – something Trump and at least one of his recruits have only managed to achieve through faking. Whatever you might call it, Melania Trump’s initiative as first lady is the anti-bullying campaign “Be Best”. The White House website for the initiative states: “Mrs Trump believes that children should be both seen and heard, and it is our responsibility as adults to educate and reinforce to them that when they are using their voices – whether verbally or online – they must choose their words wisely and speak with respect and compassion.” We have contacted the Be Best team for comment about Trump’s treatment of Thunberg. It is yet to respond. Of course, Thunberg has no problem handling Trump herself. In September, Trump mocked her after she gave an impassioned speech at the UN climate action summit. He made a sarcastic jab about how happy she seemed – although her speech, in which she spoke about her dreams and her childhood being stolen, suggested the opposite. She seems like a very happy young girl looking forward to a bright and wonderful future. So nice to see! https://t.co/1tQG6QcVKO Thunberg responded by quoting Trump in her Twitter bio as a badge of honor. Similarly, when President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil referred to Thunberg as a brat, she updated her bio to read “Pirralha” – the Portuguese word for brat. Today Thunberg changed it again to read: “A teenager working on her anger management problem. Currently chilling and watching a good old fashioned movie with a friend.”