UK inflation remained at the lowest level in three years in November despite rising prices for hard-pressed households across a variety of goods, including chocolate, concert tickets and package holidays. The Office for National Statistics said the consumer price index (CPI) held steady at 1.5% last month, the same level recorded in October, as the annual jump in some prices was offset by falling prices elsewhere, including for cigarettes and hotel rooms. The latest snapshot comes as rate-setters at the Bank of England prepare to meet on Thursday amid mounting speculation they will cut interest rates soon, as the British economy falters and inflation remains below the Bank’s 2% target. Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee was divided last month over whether to lower borrowing costs, with two of the nine-strong team voting for a 0.25% cut from the 0.75% base rate. City economists are anticipating the same outcome again on Thursday. David Cheetham, chief market analyst at the online financial trading firm XTB, said: “There are growing calls that the Bank may be set to loosen policy in the coming months, although the key determinant will likely be how they view the election result and what this means going forward.” Growth in the British economy has stalled in recent months amid intense Brexit uncertainty and political gridlock in the run-up to the election. Although stock markets initially roared ahead after Boris Johnson’s landslide victory, City investors have grown more cautious as the prime minister sets a hardline stance over agreeing a trading relationship with the EU within a year. Business leaders have warned the deadline for the transition period at the end of December 2020 would represent another Brexit cliff edge likely to deter business investment in Britain; holding back an economic recovery. UK house price growth slowed to its lowest annual rate in more than seven years, dragged down by falling prices in London. House prices continued to grow across Northern Ireland, Wales and Yorkshire. According to the ONS, the price of an average home in Britain rose by 0.7% over the year to October to £233,000, the weakest growth rate since September 2012.