Mackenzie Crook plays a slightly terrifying live-action version of Barbara Euphan Todd’s scarecrow in this modernised two-part adaptation of her children’s books. When two unsuspecting foster kids arrive on Scatterbrook Farm, they join forces with Gummidge to ensure the late harvest arrives, enlisting the help of the imperious Green Man (Michael Palin) in the process. Crook also writes and directs in this comforting CBBC-style drama. Continues tomorrow. Ammar Kalia Michael Morpurgo introduces this animated adaptation of his contemporary children’s classic about a shy girl from a mountain village who embarks on a perilous journey to reunite a baby dragon with its fearsome mother. An original score by Rachel Portman makes this a festive treat. Ellen E Jones Mathematician Hannah Fry delivers this year’s Royal Institution lectures on the hidden numbers that govern our lives. This first lecture concerns luck, and Fry enlists probability and game theory to investigate whether we can use maths to make our own destinies that much more predictable. AK The name’s Bond, Michael Bond: this profile of the creator of Paddington – presented by Hugh Bonneville with the help of many celeb fans and a very game Peruvian ambassador to the UK – is a sweet tribute to a gentle writer who spread goodness around like marmalade. Graeme Virtue The Woman in Black author Susan Hill adapts her 2010 novel The Small Hand in this feature-length one-off. Douglas Henshall plays an antique book dealer who takes a wrong turn and comes upon an old Edwardian house where he is soon haunted by the ghost of a young boy. A twisty saga that keeps you guessing. AK Best known for his starring roles in Ghost and Dirty Dancing, Patrick Swayze was the screen icon who, while maybe not an A-lister, was always a fan favourite. This feature-length US doc – with contributions from Rob Lowe, Demi Moore, his widow Lisa and many more – comes 10 years on from his death from pancreatic cancer. Hannah J Davies Lucy, 11.40pm, Film4 With its trashy concept, punchy action and ferocious heroine, this is a return to the Nikita days for director Luc Besson. Scarlett Johansson makes the most of her Avengers workouts as Lucy, who ingests a weird new narcotic and can access cerebral powers: messing with the cosmos, terminating drug dealers and all. Paul Howlett International Cricket: South Africa v England 7am, Sky Sports Cricket. The first day of the first Test at Supersport Park, Centurion. Premier League Football: Manchester Utd v Newcastle Utd 5.30pm, Amazon Prime Video. A United clash from Old Trafford. Premier League Football: Leicester City v Liverpool 8pm, Amazon Prime Video. The division’s form teams meet.